                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE DIFFUSION OF INNOVATIONS:
                    A METHODOLOGICAL REAPPRAISAL



                        Manuel Trajtenberg
                         Shiomo Yitzhakj



                      Working Paper No. 1008



               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                           October 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                        NBER Working Paper #1008
                                                             October 1982




              THE DIFFUSION OF INNOVATIONS: A METHODOLOGICAL REAPPRAISAL



                                       Abstract




             Studies   of diffusion have traditionally relied on specific     distribu-
tions ——     prinRrily   the logistic —-   to   characterize and estimate those processes.
We   argue   here that such approach gives rise to serious problems of comparability

and interpretation, and may result         in large biases in   the estimates of the para—
meters of interest. We propose instead the Ginits expected mean difference
                                                                           as a
measure of diffusion speed, discuss its advantages over the traditional

approach, and tackle with it the problems of truncated
                                                                processes, inter—group
comparisons, and related issues. We also elaborate on the use of the hazard

rate, and suggest some possible extensions. The diffusion of CT scanners is

presented as an illustration.




Manuel Trajtenberg                                   Shlomo Yitzhaki
National Bureau of Economic      Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                            Falk Institute of Economic Research
                                                     Hebrew University, Mt. Scopus
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  Jerusalem 91905
Tel: (617) 868—3980
 1. Introduction


          One of the main difficulties hindering the
                                                       study of technological
 change is the lack of good empirical counterparts to —— and hence of measures

 of —— many
            of the concepts that figure prominently in the theoretical analysis

 (e.g. "knowledge", "quality", "appropriabjlity", etc.). The area of diffusion

 of innovations has been relatively fortunate
                                                in that respect, at least since the

 publication of Griliches' pathbreaking work on hybrid corn [101. Indeed, much

 of the appeal of that paper stemmed from its having brought diffusion into the

 realm of the en-ipiricaliy measurable, i.e. from its having shown a way     to   quan-
tify the phenomenon, and capture its essentials with the aid of just a few

parameters (that could in turn be related to optimizing behavior). Yet, and not-

withstanding the prolonged success of the paradigmatic approacti established by

 110], some basic methodological issues (primarily those associated with the

reliance on specific distributions, most commonly   the   logistic) have not been

satisfactorily resolved, and hence a reexamination is called forth.         That is,
for the most part, the task to be undertaken here, i.e. the dominant concerns in

this paper are, once again, the definition of the concepts to be measured in

diffusion, how to measure them, and how to illuminate and expand the analysis of

the phenomenon with the aid of such measures. The focus is on "aggregate"

diffusion, i.e., the pattern followed by the cumulative percentage of adapters

over time, rather than on the underlying behavioral ——    or   "micro" ——   aspects of
the piocess (in Section 8,   though, the relationship between the two levels of
analysis is briefly discussed). Within that context we concentrate on diffusion

speed, which is the parameter that has commanded the nist attention in the

literature.
                                        —2—



                                                                     in Section 2, we
           Following a critical review of current methodolo
pursue in Section 3 the prime objective of the paper, namely to put forward the

Gini's expected mean difference ("Gini" hereafter) as a convenient measure of

diffusion speed, elaborate on its meaning and implications, and outline its con-

ceptual and methodological advantages over traditional measures.            Section

deals with an intricate problem often encountered in diffusion studies:            the

measurement of     diffusion   speed of truncateU processes. We develop a procedure

based  on the Gini that allows us to accurately measure the diffusion speed of
just the observed segment of the process, and to compare processes that have
been   truncated at different levels, andlor estimated with different methods.

Noting that it is often of interest to partition the universe of adopters into

sub—groups, we present in Section 5 a way of assessing the impact of diffusion

within each group on the diffusion speed of the aggregate process. In Section 6

we elaborate on (and advocate for) the use of the "hazard ratet' as a simple yet

incisive tool to probe further into the nature of diffusion processes.

              The actual implementation of these ideas is illustrated in Section 1

via    selected results from a case study on the diffusion of CT scanners —— a

major innovation in medical technoloy ——        in   US hospitals. Finally, Section 8

sketches two possible extensions, linking diffusion with other topics in the

economic and statistical literature.

              To repeat, our interest throughout the paper centers on measurement

 issues, reflecting not only an obvious       concern with "measuring    things right",

but    also   the belief that good measurement can breed good theory (the converse is

 usually taken for granted). In       that vein,   it sens that the replacement of pre-

 vailing ad hoc ——     or   distribution—specific ——   estimates   by a well—defined

 measure having general applicability, can only foster the much needed upgrading

 of diffusion theory.
                                              —3—


 2.     A Critique of Current Methodology

            ypicafly, empirical       studies of diffusion of innovations have assumed
 that these processes follow a logistic pattern, i.e., that the cumulative
 distribution of adopters as a function of time is:'3

 (i)             F(t)    = 1 / Ii +
                                      exp -   (+ t)I
 and proceeded to estimate the logit transform, using            weighted   or unweighted LS:


 (2)             in IF(t)/(l —   F(t)]   =    &+    t
            Attention    is focused   on the estimate         which, being the coefficient
of tine, is obviously related to some notion of speed of diffusion C aF(t)/ a > o

and hence the larger is          the faster will be     the   diffusion process).
Different    diffusion processes can thus be compared in terms of this           coefficient,
and    often an attempt is made to explain the observed differences in           diffusion

speed    by regressing the estijnated i3's on measures of profitability,           size of

investment, etc. In       almost all such studies, LS estimates of equation (2)

'       Historically, the use of the logistic in diffusion studies is a clear case of
        methodological "spill—over&' from other disciplines, primarily from Biology
        (e.g., bio—assay) and Population Studies.

3.     More generally, F(t) = K/Il + exp — (z +t)1 , where 0 < K < 1 is the
       effective ceiling. We assume for the time being that K = 1 ; in Section 4
       we discuss the case of K < 1

4.     The intercept     has been, for the most part, dismissed as irréle'iant,
       except for its role in setting an "origin", as defined in Griliches [loj.
       Whereas it is true that, being a constant of integration (to be precise,
       the constant of integration is exp     ),    does not affect the shape of
       the distribution, it does convey an important piece of information: it can
       easily be shown that _ct/ is the mean adoption time.
result in very high R2t5 (usually better than .90) and, notwithstanding the

voicing of some reservations (e.g., Griliches [io, p. 5051, Mansfield [i6,

p.    i4i1 ),   that is taken as evidence upholding the logistic specification.

            Now, if it could be safely assumed that most diffusion processes of

interest do correspond to the logistic distribution (or, that even if they do

not, that the resulting mispecification biases in the estimates were negli-

gible), then no major objections could be raised against the received methodo-

logy.     But, as we shall argue below, the fact is that there are neither

compelling a priori reasons to sustain this particular specification, nor does

the available empirical evidence provide stron support to it. The reliance on

(2) and on the estimate              is therefore called into question.

             As to theoretical considerations regarding the shape of aggregate dif-

fusion processes:5           Diffusion has been until very recently one of those rare

cases     in Economics     where,   for better and for worse, the bulk of research was
devoted     to empirical studies rather than to theory. Thus, one can hardly          expect
to    find theoretical results that will provide decisive support for              par-

ticular specification.

                The   conventional wisdom underlying most empirical studies had it that,
due primarily to information—spreading and uncertainty—reducing mechanisms, the
probability of adoption at any tixi            t would   be related to the proportion of
 individuals       that have already adopted by t (this is       often   referred to as the

 "epidemic" or "contagion" effect). Or, more precisely, that the "hazard rate"

 (to borr the term from Reliability Theory), defined as



 5.      A full discussion of the subject is beyond the scope of this paper —— here
         we shall content ourselves with sketciiirig the main arguments.
                                                            —5—




     ()                h(t)
                                      f(t)
                                1.-F(t)          ,   f(t)       =   (t)
     would be a positive function of F(t)                   .       In   particular, it has been assumed that
     the relationship is linear, leading to the differential equation


      )                f(t) =   (t)1i        -   F(t)]

 which solution is the logistic function (1). Notwithstanding
                                                               some attents to
 derive it more rigorously,6
                             it is apparent that this amounts to no more than

 moving the assumption one step back. To be sure, (4) has sensible —
                                                                                                 if too
 vague —         behavioral
                    underpinings (i.e., the "contagion effect") whereas (2) by
 itself has none, but the fact remains that it is an ad hoc
                                                            assumption rather
 than a result stemming from theoretical
                                                                analysis.

                 Recently, though, various attexrts have been made to model formally the

 behavioral phenomena underlying
                                                 diffusion (see primari].y Fakes 1181, Jensen

 112,13], and Reinnum [19]). The main ingredients of these modelsI
                                                                   and, for
that matter, of any plausible theory of diffusion, are: (a) a model of
decision akin regarding the adoption of the innovation by the
                                                                individual; (b)
the identification of those attributes of individuals that, in the
                                                                                              context of



6.        See,
          h(t)
                 for
                 =
                     exple,nsfield 1i6J           he postulates the general relationship
                       [F(t),   xl, where x is a vector of explanatory variables  (in-
          cluding prinErily      profitability and size
          with                                     of investment), approximates cg.)
               a Taylor expansion and, by dropping terms as necessary, arrives_at
          an equation similar to (4), except that it includes the effect of
                                                                                                   x on
7.
          Except for Reinganum [19], where diffusion is the result of strategic beha-
          vior rather than differences
                                       among individuals. The problem there is that
          there is no mechanism to determine
                                             a unique ordering of adoption dates (as
          reflected in the fact that these are  n! equally likely Nash equilibria,
          n being the number of adopters),
                                            which is precisely the question that a
          behavioral model of diffusion is supposed to answer.
                                          —6—

(a), result in their having different resonses at different tines; (c) conjec-

tures regarding the distribution of those attributes; (d) the specification of

the "trigger mechanism", i.e., of the endogeneous or exogenous changes over time

that activate the adoption decision. Clearly, this framework contains too many

degrees of freedom for the ensuing theoretical analysis to be able to generate

universal a priori restrictions on the shape of the aggregate diffusion process.

Crucial in this respect is (c): As Fakes [181 has suggested, almost any dif-

fusion curve can be arrived at by specifying suitable distributions of attri-

butes. What theory can be expected to do is to provide a mapping of basic as-

                                                                                    S—
sumptions regarding (a) —   (d)   to broad families of diffusion patterns (e.g. ,

shaped vs. concave, symmetric vs. asymmetric, etc.), but this remains to be done.

         Now to the empirical evidence. To begin with, although being the most

popular, the logistic has not been the only specification used in studies of

di'fusion. Examples   to the   contrary include: Bain [2], lognornal; Coleman

et al. [6], both logistic and exponential;8 Dixon [7'], Gonertz; etc.        More

importantly, in those cases where the logistic was used, it is unwarranted

to infer from the high R2's obtained that the logistic is in fact the

"correct" specification. The econometric arguments stating the limitations of

the H2's as a statistic to assess the functional form are well known and will

not be repeated here. And, as was forcefully argued by Feller 181 long ago,

there is an even more pervasive problem regarding the inferential value of good-

ness of fit measures of the logistic (or any other) distribution. To quote from

Feller's later restatement [9,     pp.   52—531:

          ...an unbelievably huge literature tried to establish a transcen-
          dental "law of logistic growth"; measured in appropriate units, prac-
          tically all growth processes were supposed to be represented by a
          [logistic] function....The only trouble with the theory is that not



 8.   Coleman, et al. did not estimate these functions but used them to repre-
      sent, algebraically and graphically, different diffusion processes.
                                                    —1—


              only the logistic distribution, but also the normal, the Cauchy, and
              other distributions can be fitted to the same material with the same
              or better goodness of fit. In this competition the loistic distribu-
              tion plays no distinguished role whatever; most contradictory theoreti-
              cal models can be supported by the same observational material.

 The crucial point is that the observed distribution will always fulfill, by

 necessity, the restrictions that characterize theoretical distributions,
                                                                                               namely
 0 <   F(t)   < 1   ,   and   F(tt ) >   F(t)   for all t' >   t   .
                                                                        Moreover, in most actual
 diffusion patterns studied, the data show strict concavity in its upper ranbe

 and strict monotonicity all along, two of the properties exhibited by most

 distributions, and certainly by all those comiinly used in this context.                      Thus,
y functional form of that nature will offer a good fit and result, inter
                                                                                                alia,
 in a high R2. Yet, and contrary to what one may               be      led to believe from the

 forgoing discussion, the specification choice is by no means inconsequential for

the issue of concern here, i.e., for the quality of the estimate of diffusion

speed, vided of course that diffusion speed has been clearly defined in

vance, independently of any particular distribution.

              In order to gain some notion of the magnitude of the problem, we ran

simulations in which the estimated equations were
                                                                   systematically misspecified,

obtaining in all cases very good fits, but also large biases in the estimates of

diffusion speed as it is defined in Section 3. The following is a typical



                                  e
example: Data were generated by an exponential distribution,

(5)                 F(t) = 1 -

for various values of I and time lengths, but a logistic (the logit transform)

was estimated instead; the R25 ranged from .95 to .99, but the biases in the

estimates of diffusion speed were on the order of                          Not surprisingly,


9.     It is worth presenting explicitly one of these simulations: the distribu-
       tion used to generate the observations was F(t) = 1 —
                                                              e—0.3t, tell, 25] in
       intervals of .5; the estimated equation was: logit = —0.62 + 0.33t,
       r2 = 0.99. As shown below,
                                    should be compared to 21 ,
       indicating a downward bias of almost 5Oo.                                i.e.,
                                                                      0.33 to .6,
                                                —8—


the Durbin—Watson statistics were very low (.12 —                .18),   reflecting the extent

and nature of the niisspecification.

          Thus, the logistic can by no means be presumed to be the universal,

or most accurate representation of diffusion processes and, if used indis—

crixuinatingly, the estimates may be seriously biased. The alternative is to

search in each case for the most appropriate specification, but then the

question is how to compare between different diffusion processes, keeping in

mind that an important goal of these studies is in fact to be able to make con-

sistent and systematic comparisons. This poses a problem because nowhere in the

literature is there to be found a well defined concept of speed of diffusion

that could readily be computed for any distribution. As said,
                                                                                      —   in   (2) —   is
taken as the appropriate measure in the case of the logistic but, what are the

equivalent parameters in, say, the noriial or the log—normal distributions to

which       should be compared? On the same note, studies using the logistic have

not succeeded in providing        with a clear—cut meaning that will have conceptual

and descriptive appeal (calling it the "rate" of diffusion is of no help): they

 only indicate a way of using to calculate the time that the diffusion process

takes to go from F1 to F2, these being two arbitrarily chosen points on the

 distribution.]-0 It is rather unsatisfactory that this parameter, which had

 occupied such a prominent role in diffusion, cannot be grasped in its own terms

 and depends upon an element of.arbitrariness for interpretation.



 10. This is done as follows:
                                            F         (1—F)
           t(F2) —   t(F1)
                             =   ln   L(1
                                                            ]-

                                                                         (F1, F2).
                                            —F2)       F1
        For example, if F2 =     .8 and F1 = .2         ,    l()   =   2.77;   thus it can be

        stated that it took 2.7T/ years for diffusion to go from 20% to 80%.
             The issue of comparability arises vividly in Dixon [71.            He reexamined
 Griliches' study of hybrid corn and concluded, inter alia, that the appropriate

 specification for the majority of states was the Gompertz distribution, defined
 as

                   F(t) =    abt

 rather than the logistic, as assumed by Griliches. He observes that in b

 "performs a similar role to the b I            in our notation] coefficient in the
 logistic function, in that it determines the rate at which
                                                                           [ F(t) in our
 notation] approaches the ceiling value" [1,          p.   1456]. That is so but, more
 significantly in this context, the parameters             and in b are in fact not exactly
uivalent (that is shown in Section 3)11
                                                     and therefore what is gained in pre-
 cision (of the specification) is lost in comparability.




3. The Gjnj's Mean Difference as a Measure of Diffusion S4


            As stated in the Introduction, the main
                                                            purpose of this paper is to
propose the Gini's expected mean difference
                                                     as a highly convenient summary para-
meter of diffusion processes. We contend that this statistic exhibits definite

conceptual and methodological advantages over traditional measures, allowing it
to overcome the difficulties described
                                       above, and to further extend the study of
diffusion. The Gini is defined asl2


11. Apparently, Dixon was aware of this fact, for he ran two separate
     regressions of diffusion parameters on
            one                             prof itability variables IT, Table
     Iv],         for the states esti.inated with the
                                                Gompertz, and a second for those
     estimated with the logistic, whereas the
                                              preferred procedure (both from a
     concept1 and econometric viewpoint) would have been to run
     regression for all states.                                     single  a
12. Given that (6)      is   a double integral but
    case to the sane variable t
    "double counting".
                                        ,   it has to x1 and x2 correspond in this
                                                      be divided by 2 so as to avoid
                                                    —10—


                      =   1/2
(6)               F                      x1 —   x2    f(x1) f(x2) dx1 dx2


where x1 and x2 are two independent, identically distributed random vari-

ables (or equivalently, two random realizations of the same variable x ).                                      In

the context of diffusion the variable of interest is obviously tiiI, t1 and

t2 being the dates of any two adoptions.                      Writing (6)               in   a slightly different

way,


()                F =
                           —j       (t —
                                     2
                                           t f(t f(t
                                            1
                                                )
                                                      2
                                                          )
                                                                1
                                                                    )   dt 2   dt
                                                                                    1
                                1

its meaning becomes transparent: the Gini measures the expected time difference

between any two adoptions over the whole diffusion process. Or to put it dif-

ferently, it is the expected 'waiting time' of a random potential adopter at a

random point in time (within the relevant time period).13 This constitutes a

well—defined notion of speed of diffusion, and has generally applicability,

i.e. ,   is   not contingent on specific distributions or any other pecularitieS of

the processes studied.

              Before turning to a more general measurement procedure, it is worth

showing what the Gini is for those distributions commonly used in diffusion.

This will not only help estimate the Gini in those cases where the underlying


 13. In order to understand the precise meaning of the measure, it may be help-
      ful to think of it as follows: a store announces a new product, to be sold
      on a first—come, first—serve basis, and all potential buyers (adopters)
      line    up in a queue and wait for their turn. At regular time intervals a
      statistician calculates the expected waiting tii for those still in the
      queue, and at the end computes the overall average, which is exactly the
         Gini.

 14. "Speed" is commonly defined in terms of distance per unit tiixe, except when
      the distance is a given, in which case the reciprocal (i.e., time per unit
      distance) is most often used (e.g., in foot races, or in describing the
      speed of a photographic camera). In diffusion the distance is indeed given
      by the unit interval, and hence it makes more sense to define speed in
         terms of F rather than 1/F .                 Moreover, the denominator of F is not
         absolute distance but differences between any two points, making it hard to
         define speed as 1/ F
                                                                      —11—


 distribution is known, but it also will allow to bring the results obtained in

 previous studies to a common denominator.

        (i) The logistic distribution. A straightforward way to proceed in this

 case is to start up with ()                           rather      than (2), and to use a suitable transfor-
 mation of (6),15


 (5)                  r=          j   F(t) i -          F(t)]         at


 Integrating      p4),


 (9)                      j   f(t)dt       =
                                                       (t)         Ii      - F(t)]dt   =



But the left hand of (9) equals                             1,   and    therefore

 (io)



       (ii)    The exponential distribution. Substituting (5)                                in   (8),


 (11)                     = e (1 —                 e')           dt


(12)                  r   =   1/21
The Ginj for the normal and log—normal are well—known, and that for the Goirertz

is derived in the Appendix. Thble I shows them in a condensed form.

               In view of these results, we can now reexamine the problem in Dixon's

work referred to above: the equivalent parameters there are not
                                                                                                         (from the
logistic) and in b (from the Gompertz), but i and                                          in b/.7 (more precisely,
their reciprocals). The diffusion processes of all states can be thus compared,

regardless of which distribution was                               fitted.       Likewise, there is no longer need


15.     This   is done by substituting

                  —                            2
                              =                    —
                      t2               2               mm
                                                                 (t1, t2) in (6).
        See Kendall and Stuart [l4] and Lomnicki 1151.
                                                 —12—

                                                Table I

                         The Gini for Various Distributions




                   Distributiona                              Gini




1. Logistic:          F(t) =   [1       +   e1      -1


2.    Exponential:          e'
                      F(t) = 1      —
                                                               1/21
3.    Norxnal:b       t N( ,)                                        a
4.    IQgnormal       mt                    )             e   [2 (—)—i1

5.     Gompertz:      F(t) =   abt                            O.7/ln b


     aFor convenience, we avoid writin6 explicitly the cumulative distributions for
      the normal and lognormal.

     b Nair [iii.
     cSee Aitchison and Brown [1]; 4 stands for the standard normal.
                                                                —13—


  to split the states into two groups in order to assess the effect of profitabil-

  ity variables on interstate differences in diffusion
                                                                                        speed, but a single regres-
  sion having the Gini as dependent variable will do.

                 As we argued before, though, in most cases there is no good prior

 regarding the specific form of the underlying distribution, and the search for

 the correct specification can be cumbersome, and often inconclusive. In this

 respect as well the Gini proves to be highly                             advantageous,        for it is possible to

 construct a simple, distribution—free measure of it.
                                                                                        Integrating equation (8)
 by parts,


                      F =               F(t) [i -     F(t)1    dt


 define

                     u =    t       ,   v = F(t)     Ii —   F(t)1   ,   v'   =   f(t)   [1 —   2F(t)]    >


 (13)                F =    tF(t)         1 -      F(t)]        -       jtf(t)     i -   (t)]      dt



But the first—hand term vanishes, and rearringing the second term,



(1k)                 r= 2 JtIF(t) - 0.5] f(t)dt


Noting that dF =            f(t)dt        ,   and changing variables accordingly,


                                1
(15)                F = 2 j t(F)(F — 0.5) dF = 2
                                                                        Coy (t, F)
                                0

since F distributes unifornilly along the interval Eo,ij .
                                                                                                 If detailed infor—
xnation on each adoption is available,
                                                              i.e., if the data consists of the vector

(t1 ,   t2   ,   ..., t)        where t is the adoption date of individual                              i ,   then
(15) can be computed simply                   by
(i6)             I' = 2 Coy (, t)

            R.
where F =        ,    and.               is the rank of tj .         But,    the data are often agre—


gated in discrete time periods, in which case the integral in (15) has to be

approximated linearly,


                               n
(17)             1'        2         t
                                         1   1
                                                 — 0.5)   £.1
                               i=1


                      1
                          = (t.1   +     t.i+1 )!   , F.1 = (F.1 + F.i+1 )/2     '
                                                                                     £*'. =
                                                                                       1
                                                                                              F.
                                                                                               i+1
                                                                                                     — F.
                                                                                                        1


Thus, it is altogether unnecessary to resort to ad hoc assumptions or engage in

specification search: the speed of diffusion, defined as the expected time dif-

ference between adoptions, can be computed readily f roa the original data by

the covariance defined in (i6), or by (ii).




4• Estimating the Speed of Diffusion of Truncated Processes


           We have assumed up to now that the diffusion process is observed in its

entirety, i.e., that the data comprises the whole distribution 0                                      F(t)    1.


In many actual cases, though, F(T) = p < 1 , where T is the last date for

which data are available. Now, if it cxild be safely assumed that the process

is near completion by T , i.e., that F(t) = K =                          p   +       , where          is a small
                                                            t +
fraction   of K , then it is possible to estimate K (usually referred to as the

effective ceiling) along with the other diffusion parameters. That necessarily

entails the making of assumptions regarding the overall course of the process,

most likely on the basis of its observed behavior up to T , e.g., assuming a

logistic distribution and estimating it using maxiimim                            likelihood       or other
                                        —15—

  nonlinear methods.16 The
                            quality of the estimates so obtained will obviously
  depend on the validity of the behavioral assumptions (and thus be subjected to

 the same reservations rised above) and on how small              isJT
            It is worth pointing out
                                       that, in fact, what this case implies is that
 the population of potential
                                adopters was not correctly identified at the outset:
 the (l—K)% that did not and
                                  presumably will not adopt must have some distinc-
 tive characteristics that set them apart in term of their behavior vis a vis

 the innovation. Thus, what is ultimately important is to identify those charac-

 teristics and delimit accordingly the "right" population set: a finding that
 K < 1 does not resolve the issue,
                                    only indicates that we have insufIicient
 information, 18

           A more serious difficulty arises when there is no indication that the

 process is near completion by T (that in turn implying that p << 1             and that
there is no reason to believe that, if K < 1
                                                    ,   (K — p)   is small) and no prior
regarding the shape of the whole distribution.19
                                                         Obviously, the only safe ——   if
16.   See for example Jarvis 1111; a further issue dealt with there is that k
      is not necessarily
                         constant, but may vary over time as a function of exo-
      genous variables, such as prices.

iT. It is important to note that the estimate of
     tive to K , and therefore the relative size of          in the logistic is sensi-
                                                                is crucial for the pre-
     cision of the former as much as for the latter.

18. This links     back to the opening assumption "that the process is near coiiiple—
      tion":   if that was actually known  with a high degree of certainty —— such
      knowledge presumably stemming from having information on the relevant
      characteristics of the population ——
      value of K as well, and therefore
                                               it
                                              would imply knowing the approximate
                                         its actual estimation can only improve
      its accuracy, but not render new information. If, on the other hand, there
      is not factual basis to assess the
                                           sta€e at which the process stands at T
      then the estimate of K can only be regarded as highly tentative, rein-
      forcing the need to look closely at the attributes of the population.

19. As was already argued, the lack of good priors is the prevalent situation
     in most diffusion studies, but the probl is obviously aggravated when we
     observe a truncated distribution:  the shorter is the range of the observed
     distribution, the less will be our ability to discriminate between alter-
      native specifications, and hence the more arbitrary the      choice becomes (and
      Obviously the less reliable the estimates will be).
                                        —16—


trivial ——   solution   is to wait until more data become available. But, this just

evokes a basic tension that arises only too often in empirical research having a

claim for "relevance": the longer the wait and hence the more complete and

accurate the data, the more removed the study will turn out to be from current

concerns, be them policy—oriented, or simply    part   of the quest to understand

better   the "here and now". And   there certainly are plenty of concerns of that

nature   regarding   diffusion, ranging from general issues such as: the extent to

which the current productivity slowdown is related to a failure in the incen-

tives to adopt innovations rather than to the drying up of inventive activity;

whether there are structural differences between different sectors of the eco-

nomy in that respect; to more specific, policy related issues such as the impact

of government regulations on the diffusion of medical technologies. Moreover,

the dilemma is made particularly acute in view of the long time span of most

diffusion processes (10—30 years).

           Clearly, any attempt to estimate the parameters of diffusion in these

circumstances will render less than satisfactory results. The main contribution

of the Gini in this respect is that it allows to accurately measure the speed of

diffusion of the observed segment of the process, independently of any assunip—

tions (implicit or explicit) regarding its future trajectory. Clearly, that is

not possible if, instead, a particular distribution is assumed and estimated on

the basis of the truncated distribution.20 Partitioning the overall time span

 into two periods, the observed (—, T) , and the unobserved (T, °) , (8) can

be rewritten as:


 20. One could assume that K = p    and estimate, say, the logistic; but that
      would entail an internal contradiction: if the tn.ie distribution —— having
      an unknown K* > p —— is really logistic, then it cannot be true that the
      truncated distribution also corresponds to a logistic with K = p , and
      thus the estimates will be necessarily biased.
                                                              —11—



                              T
 (18)                  r= j       F(t)[1-F(t)jdt          +    j F(t)j1-F(t)dt           I +    jil
                                                              T

 Integrating        10 by parts as in (13):

                                                                      T
 (19)                     =   t F(t) [1-F(t) I           T
                                                              +2           t[F(t) -   0.5]    f(t)    dt =


                          = p(1-p)T + 2p2                              —   2 t)          dt    =


                                                     1                                         T
                          =   p(1-p)T + 2p2 j t(P*)(F*_o.5)dF*                  -
                                                     0                              p(i-p)      j   t f*() dt

where * indicates              that the distribution has been nor1ized (i.e.                               F   = F
                                                                                                       ,


              f                           T
and f* =          ),   and        =
                                              tf(t)dt is the average time of the observed period.
Thus ,21


(20)                   10 =   p2r*    +   p(1-p)(T—t)

where f*          2 Cov(F*,-t) is the Gini of the observed segment, calculated as if

it were a complete process in itself (which is the inlication                                   of having      nor—
nialized   the    distribution), i.e., it measures the speed of diffusion among those

that adopted up to T              ,   ignoring       the fact that they are only a subset of the

population of potential adopters. What 10 does is to correct for that fact,

thus measuring the contribution of the                         p x n initial adopters to the Gini of



21. Ivbre generally,

                                  ro(K) =
                                                K2
                                                     Ip       + p(K-p) (T- I

        given that       r*    is     independent of K ,             this   allows to easily conute 0
        under different assumptions regarding the ceiling. Note also
                                                                     that (20)
        one of the many forms that the decomposition of the Gini can take: see,
                                                                                                                  is
        for example, Yitzhaki [26j.
                                         —18—



the   entire process. This is as much as the data can tell without imposing addi-

tional structure on it and, as shown below, there are a variety of ways in which

these partial measures can be used for comparative purposes. However, if there

exists additional information that allows to form priors regarding the unob-

served segment of the process (i.e., regarding '           ), then   the Gini of the

entire process, r , can be readily obtained by simply adding the prior to

The   advantage of this procedure over the fitting of a particular distribution to
the whole process, is that it keeps observed phenomena strictly separate           from

conjectures   (or projections), thus allowing to ascertain       in a straightforward

manner the effect on         of different sets of     assumptions regarding the

remaining diffusion path, without these distorting the iasure of the observed

segment.

           An assumption often made in these circumstances is that the process

will exhibit in the future the same behavior —— on average —— as it did up to T

(we call this the "uniformity assumption") or, more precisely, that


                        T'
 (21)            ,',     fF(t)I1—F(t)ldt      =   r              —T
                                                      for all T' >
                FT;

It    is easy to show that this property holds for the logistic, but for our pur-

poses we need not assume that F(t) corresponds to that distribution over its

 entire range, only that (21) holds on average over the period following T

 The estimate of       under this assumption is simply:


 (22)              =    = p1   +   (l-p)(T-)

 Note that (21) and (22) have important implications for comparing the partial

 measure        to the existing    body of   results from past diffusion studies, which
                                               —19—



 constitutes the only readily available and natural reference group. Given that
 in most cases the original data used in those studies are not available, but
only the published estimates of the diffusion parameters (and therefore '0

cannot be computed for them), and that in all of them the estimates refer to

whole prosesses (either because the data were indeed complete or because the

truncation problem was assumed away), it is imperative to bring these estimates

and j0 to common grounds. This involves using the published estimates to eva—

                             T'
luate the integral           j    F(t)[l—F(t)Jdt   ,   T'T(p)   .        As suggested above, if the

estimated distribution was a logistic, then this integral is simply                             (it is
  2
       in the case of an exponential distribution), but other distributions require

that the integral be evaluated numerically. Thus, I can be compared to, say,

without this requiring any assumptions regarding                    1'    •   This   simple result

greatlyfacilitates the required comparisons, nre so in view of the fact that
most previous studies did in fact use the logistic.
             Noting that comparing 1 to                 is formally equivalent to comparing
—
10
        1'   to   i , it
                  —        could be argued that there is in fact no way of escaping the
p
uniformity        assumption. But this is not so: the comparison of 1° to
places the uniformity assumption (i.e., "the burden of the proof") on the other
process (the one which              corresponds    to), and that represents no extra
restriction:        the assumption, justified or not, was there to begin with, implied
in    the fitting of a logistic distribution.

             A different case arises when original data (i.e., the vectors F(t),t)

for all the processes to be compared are actually available. This is the likely

situation when the diffusion of a particular innovation is being studied, but

the total population of adopters is divided into subsets, each generating its

own   process,     and the objective is to compare between them (e.g., Griliches'

study of hybrid corn, by geographical areas). Suppose that there are m such
                                                       —20—


processes, and that they have reached levels p1 , p2                         ,    ..., p
T .    As before, if reasonable conjectures can be made on the 's ,                                  then   the

processes can be compared in terms of their estimated 1•'s                               (       + 1 ) , where

the              are calculated using all the data available for each process.

Otherwise, the processes have to be truncated at the sane cut—off level:

p0 =   Mm                  p       ),   arid the '?'s             (in which terms the comparisons are to
            (p1, p2, ..,
be made)22 are calculated using only the p0 x n initial observations of each

process. This entails loosing information at the upper end of those processes

with relative high p. 's , which is the cost to be paid for not resorting to
                           1

assumptions regarding the unobserved segnnt of the process. There is no way to

avoid this trade—off, and no dominant strater: the course of action to be

taken will depend upon the particulars of each study.

            It is important to stress again the partial and hence tentative nature

of all these comparisons: as more data become available the measures ought to

be revised and the comparisons redone.

            Finally, it should be clear that the procedures described here apply to

any case in which sorr part of the distribution is missing, and not just its up-

per end. In Russell [201 for example, the data on the initial stages of two of

the innovations studies are severely lacking (one starts at 19% and the other at

148%), which is not an uncommon situation: data on diffusion are often gathered

only after the innovation has become important enough and hence widely spread.



 22Note that truncating the process at a common level p0 usually implies
   T T. and t. t. , and that these are in fact parameters of interest
       1    J          1       3
      in themselves. Now, if (T. —
                                           1
                                                 t.)
                                                  1
                                                         (T —
                                                              j
                                                                    t),
                                                                     j
                                                                          i,j =   1,   ..., in   ,   then
            p2 1' + c ,where c =               0(i — p0)(T —            , and    hence there is no need to

      compute P? , but                  —— which enjoys some advantage in interpretation ——

      suffices   for comparative purposes.
                                                           —21—


 5. Decomposition by Groups


               As mentioned in Section 4, it is often of interest to divide the popu-

 lation of adopters into sub—groups, and do a comparative study of their diffu-

 sion processes. A related issue is to investigate the impact of each group on

 the aggregate process, i.e., the extent to which diffusion within each
                                                                        group
 accelerates or slows down overall diffusion.
                                                                      Formally, this involves decom-
 posing the "overall" Gini into group—specific
                                                                      components that capture the rela-
 tive size of each group, and the
                                                  similarity of its process to (or its correla-
 tion with) the aggregate process.

               Let F.(t) be the diffusion process and n1 the size of group i
        1,   ..., m.       The aggregate process will then be

                                        m                                 m
 (23)              F (t) = —
                       o           Nii n.
                                       1 F1(t)         ,          N   =     n.
                                                                          i=l1
and the overall Gin±,


(24)                        = f1—F(t)]F(t)dt
Substituting (23) for F                     in (24),

                               m
(25)               ro =            r
                              i=l 0.1

where

(26)               F. =
                                       _     [1—F(t)}F.(t)dt      ,       i=    1,   •.., m


              The .'5 are              the magnitudes of interest: the larger the correla-
tion between the diffusion process in group
                                                                      and the aggregate process (i.e.,
the larger is the integral in (26)), the larger F
                                                                          0.1    is, and hence the more
group         will slow down aggregate diffusion (the same holds, mutatis mutandis,
                                                        —22--




for the relative size of group i ,                   n./N).     For comparative purposes, though, it

is more convenient to use the shares:

                                                         m
(21)               1
                       =    r0.1•/r0 ,                   w.        = 1



which meaning is immediate: w.                     is simply    the      fraction of the overall Gini

accounted for by group i or, in other words, it is the percentage contribution

of the diffusion process in group i to the averae waiting time between adop-

tions in the total population.

          The actual computation of (21) is done as follows: let to be the vec-

tor of adoption times of the aggregate process, and t the analogous vector

for group i     .        Define a new vector t. for each group i , so that its th

element is:

                               (t.
                                 03
                                    if t.t.
                                       03  1
                ••             <
                    13                        if t.t.     1

thus,    t =   t.
               i=11
                           ,
                                   1'   =
                                                   03
                                            2 Coy (F , t
                                                    0   0 )   = 2
                                                                       in

                                                                       i1   Coy   (F ,
                                                                                   0
                                                                                         -
                                                                                         1


and
(28)            w, = Coy (F ,
                 1         0                  tj/Cov
                                               1       (F ,
                                                         0
                                                              t0   )




          Finally,         it is worth noting that the decomposition here is formally

similar   to the    one performed in the context of the familiar CAPM: the groups in

diffusion can be thought of as different stocks, and aggregate diffusion as the

market   portfolio. As shown in Shalit and Yitzhaki [231, the r    —— properly               •'
 normalized —— are analogous to the 's in CAPM, a fact that facilitates the

 interpretation of these measures, and may prove                            useful to further explore the

 links between diffusions by groups and aggregate diffusion.
                                            —23—


 6. The     Adoption Rate


               So far we have been concerned exclusively with the measurement of the

 speed of diffusion, as a one—parameter representation of the diffusion process.

 The next question is whether it is possible to learn more about the process

 itself, still within the same restrictive framework, i.e., having data only on

 adoption dates (or percentages of adopters in discrete time periods), and

 without imposing additional structure on it. The answer is a qualified yes:

 there are obviously numerous properties of the observed diffusion process that

 could be sought, and at least as many statistical tests that could be applied to

 them. &it, apart from purely descriptive purposes, it is worth investigating a

 characteristic only in so far as it enhances the understanding of diffusion as a

 socio—economic phenomenon, or if it gives some indication for further research.

Of course, it is theory's customary role to provide guidance in that respect

but, as stated before, the results are wanting.         Thus, any further step taken in
this direction will be necessarily tentative, and no general conclusions can be

expected.

            We want to suggest the behavior over time of the hazard rate (which

could be appropriately relabeled in this context the "adoption rate") as a

likely candidate for investigation. To recall, the adoption rate is formally
defined as23


                   h(t) =     f(t)
                            1 — F(t)

By    analor                  Reliability Theory, h(t) can be interpreted here as
               to its meaning in

the   conditional probability of adoption at t , having been a "hold—out" until
23.    For a description of the properties of   the hazard rate, see Barlow    and
       Prochan 131. The relationship between       the hazard rate and the Gini is
       discussed   in Chandra and Singpurwalla 151.
                                       214-.


then. Now, if h(t) =      I i.e.,
                            ,       if the conditional probability is constant over

time, then the underlying distribution is necessarily exponential, suggesting

that the "contagion effect" (that is, the direct influence of previous adopters

on would—be adopters) is not the predominant force driving the diffusion pro-

cess. On the other hand, if h'(t) > 0 ,        the   corresponding distribution is

likely to be S—shaped, and the contagion effect           be at work, but no solid

inferences   can be drawn without further information (the case of h' (t) <      0

does not seem to be relevant in diffusion).
          A good   example is provided in the study of Coleman et. al. [61 on

the diffusion of the use of a new drug among physicians. They use the adoption

rate (without referring to it as such) in order to distinguish between what they

call "snowball" vs. "individual" diffusion processes. The nest telling finding

is that the adoption rate of socially integrated doctors increases sharply over

time, whereas that of isolated doctors oscillates without displaying a trend.

Thus, they conclude that the contagion effect ——        associated with h'(t) > 0    ——   is
at work in the former case but not in the latter, for which h'(t) = 0         •2 Note

that what allows the authors to draw these conclusions is not just the sign of

h'(t) ,   but   the fact that adopters were separated into subgroups according to

 variables reflecting the extent of their social integration, which has a direct

 bearing on the plausibility of the contagion effect.

           The simplest procedure will thus be to regress h(t) on t (and/or on

 F(t) ) and test for the significance of the slope coefficients. But, this test

 will be meaningful only if the diffusion process displays a uniform behavior

 over time. In some cases, though, the observed distribution results from the

 concatenation of different sequential processes, each initiated in response to


 24. Following the same reasoning, they characterize the diffusion process among
      socially integrated doctors as logistic, and that of isolated doctors as
      exponential.
                                         —25—


 discrete changes in the exogenous variables governing the adoption decision

 (e.g., major technological improvements in the innovation, jumps in prices,

 changes in government policies, etc.). This sort of phenomena cannot be cap-

 tured in the simple correlation between h(t) and t ,        but will nst likely
 show—up in a plot of h(t) on t         as will become apparent in the empirical

 illustration below, the visual inspection of such plots can be highly infor-

 mative, and provide the researcl-ier with much needed guidance     for   measuring and
 analyzing the diffusion process.




 7. An Empirical Illustration: The Diffusion of CT Scanners


            The approach laid out in the preceeding sections can be best appraised

by applying it to a concrete case, for which purpose we have chosen the diffu-

sion of CT   Scanners   in U.S. hospitals. CT (Computed Tomography) is a revolu-

tionary diagnostic technolo that produces highly        detailed   and accurate pic-
tures of thin "slices" of any section of the human body, using a sophisticated
configuration of x—rays, detectors and computers. Developed in the late six-
ties, the   first operational prototype as built by the British firm EMI in 1971,

and the first commercial installation in the U.S. took place in June 1973. It

has commanded,   a great deal of public attention   ever since, partly because of its
scientific merits, but also because of growing concerns that this kind of expen-

sive advances in medical technologies y have been fueling the rapid rise in

health care costs. Acting on this belief, the governnnt enacted a series of

regulations designed to slow—down the diffusion of CT scanners. It is still a

matter of controversy whether diffusion was indeed "too fast", and whether those

regulations have had a noticeable effect on it. Thus, the interest in the case

is not only academic, but has policy implications as well.
                                          —26—



         The data used in this study consist of the adoption dates (nnth, year)
of' all first scanners (some medical institutions have acquired more than one)

installed in community hospitals during the period 6/13 —        12/81,25 and supplemen-

tary information from the American Hospital Association (AHA) Annual Surveys of

Hospitals. Table II shows the distribution of' hospitals and adopters by bed—size

category. Given that only 1.2% of hospitals with less than 100 beds had CT

scanners, we decided to exclude them from the study. Still, the diffusion pro-

cess for community hospitals with beds > 100          (hereafter referred to just as

"hospitals") is far    from complete (p = .39     )   and therefore the   methods deve-

loped in Section   4   for   truncated distributions are called into action.

          The previous statement implies having an idea of the value of K ; and

indeed, although it is hard to predict at this stage what will be the precise

ceiling for CT scanners, it can       be safely assumed   that it will not surpass the

ceiling reached by Diagnostic Hadioisotopes, a previous innovation in imaging

techno1or,26 shown in Table III. Thus, most of the calculations will be done

for K = .81k , but lower ceilings will be considered as well (K = .1 and K = .6            ; it


is highly implausible that K will be less than 60%). We            discuss below "overall"
diffusion   (i.e., diffusion among all hospitals), diffusion by bed—size groups, and by

type of control.




25.    These data were collected by the first author as part of a much wider
       research project on CT scanners. We report here only partial results that
       have a bearing on the methodological issues addressed in this paper.
 26.   This conjecture is based on information regarding the relative prices of
       the two systems, the availability of competing technologies along the dif-
       fusion path, etc.
                                           —27—

                                          Table   II


          Distribution of Comirunity Hospitalsa and Adopters

                            of CT Scanners by Bed—Size


                                 (1)                    (2)             ( 3)

       Number            Total Number             Hospitals with         p:
       of Beds           of Hospitals             CT Scanners         (2) *    (1)
       up to 99                2,848                      34            .012

       100 — 199               1,417                     181            .132
       200 — 299                  7l                     285           .396
       300 —    99                384                    254           .662
       400 — 499                  244                    201           .824

       500+                       314                    275           .876


       TOTAL                   5,926                   1,236           .209
       100+                    3,078                   1,202           .390



aThe definition of "community hospitals" used by the AHA is:
                                                              "Non—federal,
 short—term general and other special hospitals, excluding hospital units of
 institutions". This excludes approxinte1y 1,200 long—terre and/or federal
 hospitals, of which only 37 had CT scanners.




                                        Table III

                     Ceilings for Diagnostic Radioisotopes


    Bed—size:          100—199            200—299              300+      All
    Ceiling:             70%                92%                98%       84%



    Source: AHA 1977 Survey.
                                            —28—




7.1    Overall Diffusion

           The objective here is to estimate the diffusion speed of CT scanners

so as to coirxpare it with other innovations. To recall, if we want to avoid

making   assumptions about the       future course of the process, the comparisons     are
to be   based on the partial measure 1'o         (see equation (20)) which, allowing for

different K's can be written as:


(29)
                   (f.)
                           =     [       1° +   (i —)(T —t) I

           The availability of very detailed data allowed us to compute           r*   using
                                                                             =   12.89
(16) rather than (17) (i.e., using ranks), rendering a value of

i.e., the average time difference between           arw two adoptions for the set of
hospitals that adopte3. CT scanners up to T = 12/81           was of slightly nre than a

year.27 Plugging it in (29), 1 was computed for the various K's , and the

results are presented in Table IV.




                                            Table   IV

                                        Estimates of

                                                               .6

                      in nnths           i1.o6      15.20    15.77
                      in years            1.17       1.27     1.31




27'.    The time unit of the data and hence of the estirites is months (         t
                                                                            is the
        number of months elapsed since Nov. 1972, the date when the innovation was
        first announced and displayed in the U.S.). For some comparisons, though,
        the estimate will be transformed into years.
                                               —29--



          We want now to compare these with estimates of the diffusion speed of

 20 innovations reported in the literature (see Table v).             All of them were esti-

 mated using the logistic specification and, as shown in Section 4, the tranfor—

 mation of the reported 's that allows comparability with our results is

 simply   10 () =        .       Figure   1 summarizes the results: The diffusion of

 CT scanners was indeed quite fast, i.e., it belongs to the fastest third of the

innovations studied. Moreover, it was more than 3 tirrs faster than the dif-

fusion of the other two reported innovations in diagnostic
                                                                      technologies

 (electroencephalograph and diagnostic radioisotopes). As Figure 1 makes clear,

the conclusions hold for the three alternative ceilings considered.



7.2 The Adoption Rate

          We examine now the bahavior of the adoption rate which, as argued in

Section 6, nay provide some insight into the nature of the process. Regressing

it on time and on Ft),,28
(30)           h =   0.00    +   0.90008   t           r2 = .20
                     (3.5)        (4.9)



(31)           h =   0.004 + 0.01 F(t)                 r2 =   .19
                      ()     (4.)

          These results are informative only in a "negative" sense:            (31) makes

it highly unlikely that the process as a whole corresponds to the logistic,

because (a) the very low r2, which indicates that h(t)              was not smoothly increas-
ing with F(t), as it should have been if the underlying distribution was a

logistic, and (b) the very small coefficient of F(t) which, appropriately trans-

formed, renders an estimate of diffusion speed 3 times larger (i.e., 3 times

slower) than that calculated with the Gini in Table IV (for K =            .84).   Likewise,
(30) rules out the possibility that the process conforms to an exponential—type


28. These calculations have been done for K = .814.
                                        —30—



                                        Table       V

                                                                    a
                          and I°(K)     for   Twenty Innovations



                                              (1)          (2)            (3)      (4)


                                        Reported        I°(K=.84)       i°(K=.1)   1°(K=.6)
Innovation

Griliches 1101
                                              0.54         0.86           1.03      1.20
   1.    Hybrid comb
Jarvis    [n]
                                                           0.84           1.01      1.18
   2. Improved pastures in UruguayC           0.55
Mansfield 1161
 Bituminous coal mining:
                                              0.32         1.45           1.74       2.03
   3. Shuttle Car
                                              0.32         1.45           1.74       2.03
   4. Trackless mobile loader
                                                           0.95           i.i4       1.33
   5. Continuous mining loader                0.49

 Iron    and Steel:
                                              0.17         2.13           3.28       3.82
   6.    By—product coke oven
   1.    Continuous wide—strip mill           0.34         1.31           i.64       1.91
   8.    Continuous annealing line
                                              0.11         2.73           3.28       3.82
          for tin plate

 Brewing:                                                                 1.01       1.18
   9.    Pallet
             loading machine                  0.55         o.84
                                                                                     0.27
  10. Tin container                           2.40         0.19           0.23
                                              0.36         1.29           1.55       1.81
  11. High-speed bottle filler
 Railroads:
  12. Diesel locomotive                       0.20         2.32           2.79       3.25
  13. Centralized traffic control             0.19         2.44           2.93       3.42
  14. Car retarders                           0.11         4.22           5.06       5.91

Romeo [221
   15. Numerically controlled                                                        i.86
        machine_toolsb                         0.35         1.33           1.59

Russell
                                               0.31         1.50           1.80      2.10
   16.   Post operative recovery room
                                               0.30         1.55           1.86      2.17
   17.   Intensive care unit
                                               0.12         3.87           4.64      5.42
   18.   Electroencephalograph
                                               0.13         3.57           4.29      5.00
   19.   Diagnostic radioisotopes
                                               0.141        1.13           1.36      1.59
   20.   Respiratory therapy
                                        —31-.



Table    V, continued

Footnotes
  aThe   's are the logistic coefficients
  (the time unit is years).
                                          reported in thetudies listed here
                              In columns (2) to (14), the 's are transformed
  into the partial measure I'°(p/K) for different K's, so as to enable com-
  parisons with CT scanners. To recall, if F is logistic then:


                10(p/K)    JTtF(1F)dt     p/Ku      ,         T'     T(p/K)
  According to Table II,   p =   .39, hence   10   = .39/Ks
        all
         these cases we have taken the average of the group coefficients:
  states in
            Griliches, industries in Romeo, and different classes of hospitals
  in Russell (the estirrates for hospitals with beds <
  This is not equivalent to the coefficient of the aggregatewere excluded).
                                                                   100
  is a good enough approxinEtion for our
                                                             process, but it
                                                purposes.
 CJarvis tried several specifications, but the coefficients did not vary much:
  the range was .51 —  .59 with an average of .55, which is the figure
  reported here.
                                                   —32—




                                                 Figure 1


            The Frequency Distribution of F°(K) for 20 Innovations




                                           CT Scanners
        4
K .6
        2




             CT Scanners


        4
K:.7                                  /    /

        2
                                          /.
                           -   -l
                                                     I      I    I          1                 1

                        1.27


        6
                                          CT Scanners
        4
K:.84                                                                 Other Diagnostic
                                                                         Te cnn o I g I e s
        2


               0.5   1,0            1,5        2.0 2.5      3.0 3.5   4.0 4.5        5.0 5.5 F(K)
                      1:17


Sources: Table 4, and Table 5, Columns (2 )-(4)
                                             —33—


 (30) rules out the possibility that the process conforms to an exponential—type

 distribjtjon, because the time      coefficient,   although very small, is nevertheless

 significant. Thus, a more complex pattern is suggested instead. The plot of

 h(t) on time (see Figure 2) clarifies the issue: there was                  a   sharp discon-
 tinuity midway along the diffusion path (in the third quarter of 1911), the pro-

 cess behaving very differently before and after. In the first period h'(t) >>
 0   ,   suggesting an S—shaped distribution (and the "contagion effectt), whereas
 afterwards    there is a drop   in the   level of h(t)    , and    h' (t)       0 , inJ.ying a
 slow—down in the process and an exponential—like pattern thereafter. Following
this lead we computed separate 's for each period, and found that the first
was faster than the second by a factor of 2.
                                             Furthermore, the logistic fits
well     the first period, rendering an estimate of diffusion speed consistent with

the partial Gini. A discussion of the causes underlying this rather dramatic

change is beyond the scope of this paper; suffice it to say here that it was due

primarily to the implementation of government
                                                     regualtions, and prior expec-
tations in this regard.
             The important point is that, had we proceeded according to the
received methodoloy, we would have probably overlooked this crucial feature of
the diffusion process (as can be seen in Figure 3, the plot of F(t) —— often
shown in diffusion studies —— does not reveal it          either)   and assuming a par-
ticular     distribution would have resulted in biased estimates. To illustrate, we

estimated the logistic for the whole period (and different K's ).
                                                                                    Comparing
the results in Table VI to those in Table
                                                IV, the logistic overestimates the
speed of diffusion by 50_80%.29



29. According to the logistic estimates, CT scanners would have been the second
     fastest innovation, the first being tin containers in Mansfield's study
     (which is a puzzling outlier).
h(   i)
 0.045



 0.040


 0.03 5

                                                                           -1
                                                                           CD
 0.030
                                                                           0
                                                                           0
                                                                           -o
                                                                            -4.
 0.025                                                                     0

                                                                           0
                                                                           -4.
 0.020                                                                     CD

                                                                           0-4.
                                                                           C)
 0.015                                                                         -1
                                                                               (n
                                                                               C-,
                                                                               0
 0.010
                                                                               CD

                                                                               U,
                                                                                     a
 0.005


     o.00
                                                                t (quarters)
          9T3   1914         1915   1916   1918   1980   1981    Years
       aAssuminq K     .84
F(t)
  0.45


  0.40


                                                                                               —1
  035

                                                                                               a
  A7f
  v.Jv                                                                                         C
                                                                                               U)
                                                                                               0
  025


                                                                                               0




  E
                                                                                               I
 0.05



 0.00
                                             1
         UllIl!      Ull]Y      ]IflI]V                                      Iii iii
   1973       1914       1975         1976       1917   1918   1919   1980     1981    Years
°Assuming K=.84
                                         —36—




                                      Table VI

                                 Logistic Estimates




1.3 Diffusion by Bed—Size Groups

          As shown in Table II, the percentage of hospitals that adopted CT scan-

ners by 12/81, p. ,   varies   a great deal across bed—size groups, ranging from

.132 for hospitals with 100 < beds < 199        to .876   for   the largest hospitals.

The question is how to compare them in terms of diffusion speed, in view of

these disparities in the proportion of the process that is observed. It was

argued in Section IV that there are two alternative ways to proceed:               (a) trim—

cate the processes at the same cut—off level (minimum p. ),           or   (b) make assump-

tions   regarding 1 •   In   this case (a) has to be discarded because it will

                                                                                        not
imply doing away with most of the available data. On the other hand we do
have specific priors regarding the unobserved segnnt of each group's process,

and hence the only alternative left is to resort to the uniformity assumption,

i.e., to estimate equation (22)    for   each group. This is certainly troublesome

in   the case of small hospitals in view of their very low p ,             and   hence the
estimates for them should be regarded accordingly.
                                                 —37—



            Table VII   presents both the estimates                  and their cosonents so as to
provide a better idea of the nature of these calculations. Except for hospitals

with   200—299 beds versus those with 100—199 beds, diffusion speed increases sub-
stantially   with bed size, a result consistent with previous studies (e.g.,

Russell 1201). But, a closer look at the table indicates that the intra—group

behavior of adopters was fairly similar across groups (as evidenced by the

small variation in             ),   and that the observed differences in speed were due

mostly to differences in p/K and in the mean adoption time. To illustrate the

point: suppose that the total number of hospitals with 100 < beds < 199 was

much smaller, so that p/K was equal to that of the largest hospitals; in that

case diffusion in small hospitals would have been faster than in the 500+

group, because of the high               (i.e., small (T —      t)        )    of   the former, i.e.,

because the process was "crammed" in the later period. This underscores the

fact   that diffusion speed as defined here and elsewhere is only a measure of


                                               Table VII
            Estimates of Diffusion Speed under the Uniformity                         Assumption




   Bed—size             P/Ka            f'          (T —   t)        i:
                                                                              (months)      r (years)

   100 — 199            .189          11.089        30.872                    27.14           2.26
   200 — 299            .30           12.346        39.839                    28.01           2.33
   300 — 399            .676          11.982        42.732                    21.96           1.83
   1400 —   499         .841          11.866        146.891                   17.44          1.145

   500+                 .894          11.476        57.527                    16.36          1.36



 aThe p's are taken from Table II and the K's from Table III.
                                              —38—




dispersion,   and by   no means   the   ony relevant aspect of diffusion: the location

in time of the process is at least as ixrortant, for which the mean adoption

time, t ,     is   in fact an appropriate measure.3°


7.14 Decomposition by Type of Control

           The objective here is to illustrate the procedure developed in Sec-

tion 5 for assessing the contribution of different grips to the Gini of the

overall process. We have chosen for that purpose to partition the hospitals by

type of control, as shown in Table VIII.

           In view of the fact that there are no wide differences in the i's ,

it is appropriate in this case to truncate the processes at in                =



                                           Table VIII


                     Distribution of Hospitalsa b Type of Control



                                                 Number of   Number of
Type of Control                                  adopters    Hospitals


Investor—owned/for profit (FP)                        102        3142         .30

Government, non—federal (GNF)                         188        576          •33

                                                      912      2,160          .142
Not—for—profit (NFP)


   TOTAL                                             1,202     3,078          .39




  aComnity hospitals with beds > 100




30. The "origin"       in   Griliches [101,defined as (—2.2 —      )/ , is precisely
     the   mean adoption tine      as estinted by the logistic (—        /)       an
                                                                              , plus
     arbitrary constant.
                                         —39—


computing the f*'5 for the .3x (number of hospitals in class i )
               1                                                      initial
observations of each group. The resulting figures are presented in Table IX and

the decomposition in Table X (see equations (25) through (28)).



                                    Table IX

                    Diffusion Parameters by Type of Control,

                       With Common Cut—off Level (p =    .3)

                        (1)       (2)
  Control
                                                 (3)       (14)      (5)
                       ri.
                        1         n./N
                                   1                        T
                                                   i

  FP                   102         .11

  GNF                  173         .19           11.12         98    58.35
  NFP                  68          .70           8.14          8     51.62
  All hospitals        923        1.00           955a      108       514.69


  aJTh5 figure corresponds to 1' in equation (21).
                               0


                                    Table X

                  Decomposition of the Gini by ¶Ipe of Control


                                         (1)                ( 2)
        Control                           r
                                          o.i               w
                                                                i



        FP                              3.8143

        GNF                             3.322                  .35
        NFP                             2.384               .25


        Total                        9.5149               1.00
                                         _140_


           The findings can be summarized as follows: Not—for—profit hospitals
were the   fastest to adopt, followed by government non—federal and investor—

owned   (Table IX, column (3)).   In   spite of NFP being the largest group (10%),
its   diffusion process was the least correlated with the overall process, and the

opposite is true for FP hospitals (Table X, column (1)). As to the net effect

on aggregate diffusion, NFP hospitals accounted for 25% of the overall Gini, GNF

for 35% and FP for )40% (Table X, column (2)).




8. Extensions


           One of the main methodological advantages of studying diffusion with

the aid of tools that are well known and widely applied (rather than issue—

specific), is that the analysis of the phenomenon can be readily extended by

drawing from the literature in which these and related tools play a key role.

The Gini is certainly a tool of that nature, and it opens up numerous possibi-

lities for   further research. We would like to suggest two such extensions: the
first   links diffusion with stochastic dominance, and the second with rank—order

tests of linear hypotheses. Both topics require careful elaboration, but that

lies beyond the scope of this paper; thus, we shall limit ourselves here to

introducing the issues.

           Although the treatment of diffusion has been carried out almost exclu-

sively in positive terms, there is certainly a normative aspect to it namely,

the assessment of the relative desirability of alternative diffusion process, in

view of the costs and benefits of delaying adoption, and society's time
 preferences.31 The following high si1ified forilation of this issue

 suggests a line of inquiry that may                          prove   fruitful.

                  Assume that the net social loss due to postponing the adoption of the

 innovation until time t is v(t)                          ,   exhibiting    the properties: v(O) = 0
 v'   >   0       and v" < 0        ,   and that the objective is to minimize the
                                                                                  expected value
 of the loss, E[v(t)1                   ,   for   all t       (o,°°) .   This is in fact analogous to the
 problem dealt with in the literature on stochastic
                                                                              dominance: As shown in
 Yitzhalcj [27J, given two diffusion
                                                          processes F1(t) and F2(t)         ,   the


          l
 necessary conditions for second order stochastic dominance are:
                                                                                                 <        and
      —                           , where
               I 2 —                                is the expected adoption ti and                   the Gini
 of F•        ,
                    =   1,2   .    Sufficient       conditions can also be derived for distributions
that intersect at most once, with the aid of the extended Gini. If the factors

affecting the value of these parameters were known (e.g., the effect of tax

incentives, regulation, market structure, etc.), then it could be possible to

design optimal or second best diffusion policies.

                  The   second extension has to do with an issue                  of prime concern in dif-
fusion studies: the identification of the variables that affect the decision to

adopt, and the timing of adoption. This has been approached in various ways in

the literature: linear probability models
                                                                      (Russell [211 ), discrete choice

models (Somnrs 125]), simple regressions with the estimated 's
                                                                                                 as the
dependent variable (Griliches 1101, Mansfield [161), etc. Consider now the

following linear model:



31.    The most serious difficulties of this kind of welfare analysis are the
       identification of those costs and benefits, and the modelling of the dyna-
      mic interactions between the expectations and
                                                    consequent decisions of indi-
      vidual adopters, and the evolution (pricewise and technological) of the
      innovations over time.
                                               _14 2—




                        J
(32)                =    L . X.JJ   + C.
                                       1   ,       .=1   ..., N
                1
                        j=l  J



where   t is the time of the 1th adoption, x ,              j     =   1,   ...,   J   are the vari-

ables presumed to affect the adoption decision (e.g., the characteristics of the

individual adopters or of grxips of adopters, time—dependent attributes of the

innovation and of the environint, etc.), and C. is the error term assumed to

be i.id. but not necessarily noriiially distributed. Substituting (32) for t

in (15),
                                               J
(33)            F = 2 Cov[t,F(t)i = 2          L    . Covix.,   F(t)1 + 2 CoviC         ,   F(t)1
                                           j=1

where 2 Cov[x F(t)1 is the contribution of the th variable to the Gini,

and 2 Covie ,   F(tfl       is its unexplained portion. If instead of estimating (32)

we substitute F. =           for    t (where H. is the rank of t ), we obtain in

fact Bennett's model 141 for non—parametric tests of linear hypotheses.32

I.e., this specification allows to perforxii               tests of the null hypothesis

Ho:         •.. =       = ... =      = 0 , L < J , which meaning can be best understood
in the context of (33).

           Although the relative merits of this approach vis a vis those mentioned

above are yet to be examined, it is worth noting some of the features that make

it attractive: it provides with a direct way for assessing the effect of exoge-

nous variables on the diffusion process (rather than indirect or two—stage pro—

cedures as in Griliches and Mansfield), it does not require restrictive assump-

tions regarding the distribution of the error term, and it enhances the coher-

ence and scope of the xnethodolor presented here for the stuiy of diffusion.




 323ee also Shirley [241 for a description of the model.
                                                         _143_


                                                    Appendix


                                The Gini of the Goxnpertz Distribution


 Let t be a random variable having a Gompertz distribution:

                   t
 (Al)     F(t) = ab


 Inverting it,


 (A2)     t(F) =       (1/in     b) in (in F/in a)


Applying equation (15):


                   2        1
          r   =
 (A3)
                       b j0     in (in F/in a)(F -         0.5) dF =

                   2        1
              =
                  in b               in   Fl   —
                                                   inJ   in aj )(F —   0.5) dF   >



                            1
(An)          =
                  in   b
                            0
                                ml in Fl (F —0.5) dF



Evaiuating numerically the integrai in (A)-),


         1
(A5)     j
         0
              ml in        FL (F —   0.5) dF        0.35



Thus,


(A6)     F        0.7/in b
                                 References


1. Aitchison, J. and J.A.C. Brown: The Lognormal Distribution. Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press, 1963.

2. Bain, A.D.: The Growth of Television Ownership in the United Kingdom since the
        War: A Lognormal Model. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1964.

3. Barlow, R.E. and F. Proschan: Statistical Theory of Reliability and Life
        Testing. New York: Bolt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1975.

4. Bennett, B.M.: "Rank—Order Tests of Linear Hypotheses," Journal of the Royal
        Statistical Soci    Series B, 30 (1968), 483—489.

5. Chandra, M. and N.D. Singpurwalla: "Relationships between son Notions which
       are Common to Reliability Theory and Economics," Mathematics of Operations
       Research, 6 (1981).

6. Coleman, J.S., E. Katz and H. Menzel: Medical Innovation: A Diffusion Study.
        Indianapolis: Bobs-Merrill, 1966.

7. Dixon, R.:    "Hybrid Corn Revisited," Econometrica, 148 (1980), 1451—114b1.

8. Feller, W.:   "On the Logistic Law of Growth and its Empirical Verification in
        Biolor," Acta Biotheoretica, 5 (1940), 51—65.

9. Feller, W.: An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, Vol. 2,
        2nd edition. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1971.

10. Griliches, Z.: "Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological
         Change," Econometrica, 27 (1957), 501—522.

11. Jarvis, L.S.: "Predicting the Diffusion of Improved Pastures in Uruguay,"
         American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 63 (1981), 1495—502.

12. Jensen, H.: "Innovation Adoption and Diffusion when there are Competing Innova-
         tions," Working Paper No. 71, Departsnt of Economics and Mershon Center,
         Ohio State University, April 1981.

13. Jensen, R.: "Adoption and Diffusion of an Innovation of Uncertain Profitabi-
         lity," Journal of Economic Theory, 1982 (forthcoming).

14. Kendall, M. and A. Stuart: The Advanced Theory of Statistics, Vol. 1, 4th ed.
         London: Griffin, 1977.

15. Lomnicki, Z.A.: "The Standard Error of Gini's Mean Difference," Annals Math.
         Statist., 23 (1952), 635—631.

16. Mansfield, B.: Industrial Research and Technological Innovation. New York
         Norton, 1968.

17. Nair, U.S.: "The Standard Error of Gini's Mean Difference," Biometrika, 28
         (1936), 428—1436.
                                             —4 5—



 18. Pakes, A.:    "A Simple Aggregate Diffusion Model, Estimation Techniques, and a
         Case Study in a Secondary Country," Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation,
         Chapter )4, Department of Economics, Harvard University, 1978.

 19. Reinganuni, J.F.: "Market Structure and the Diffusion of New Technology," The
          Bell Journal of Economics, 12 (1981), 618—621..

20. Russell, L.B.: "The Diffusion of Hospital Technologies: Some Econometric
          Evidence," The Journal of Human Resources, 12 (1977), 1482_502.

21. Russell, L.B.: Technology in Hospitals: Medical Advances and their Diffusion.
        Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1979.

22. Romeo, A.: "Interindustry and Interfirm Differences in the Rate of Djffusjo of
          an Innovation," The Review of Economics and
                                                        Statistics, 57 (1975), 311—319.
23. Shalit,   H. and S. Yitzhaki: "Mean—Gini, Portfolio Theory and The
          Risky Assets," Discussion Paper No. 820I, The Center for      Pricing   of
                                                                   Agricultural
          Economic Research, Rehovot, Israel, 1982.
2I.   Shirley, E.A.: "A Distrithtjon_free Method for Analysis of Covariance Based on
          Ranked Data," ppl. Statist., 30 (1981), 158—162.
25. Sonmiers,   P. "The Adoption of Nuclear Power Generation," The Bell Journal of
          Economics,   12 (1981), 293—291.

26. Yitzhaki, S.: "Relative Deprivation and Economic Welfare," European Economic
         Review   17 (1982), 99—113.
27.   Yitzhaki, S.: "Stochastic Dominance, Mean Variance and Gini's Mean Difference,"
          American Economic Review, 72 (1982), 178—185.
