NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INEQUALITY AND TRADE
Devashish Mitra
Vitor Trindade
Working Paper 10087
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10087
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2003

We thank Jim Anderson, Dan Black, Mike Conlin, Kala Krishna, Nuno Limao, Mary Lovely, Arvind
Panagariya, Dave Richardson, Stuart Rosenthal, and seminar participants at the Econometric Society Summer
Meetings (2003, Evanston), Pennsylvania State University, Syracuse University, University of Maryland, and
West Virginia University, for very useful comments and suggestions. The standard disclaimer applies. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Devashish Mitra and Vitor Trindade. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Inequality and Trade
Devashish Mitra and Vitor Trindade
NBER Working Paper No. 10087
November 2003
JEL No. F1
ABSTRACT
We incorporate demand-side considerations in trade in a systematic but straightforward way. We
do so by focusing on the role of inequality in the determination of trade flows and patterns. With
nonhomothetic preferences, when countries are similar in all respects but asset inequality, we find
that trade is driven by specialization in consumption, not production. These assumptions allow us
to generate some interesting international spillover effects of redistributive policies. We also look
at the effects of combining inequality and endowment differences on trade flows, and see that this
has implications for “the mystery of the missing trade.” We then study a model of monopolistic
competition, and find a novel V-shaped relationship between the ratio of inter-industry to intraindustry trade and a country’s inequality. Finally, we look at how international differences in factor
endowments affect this relationship between the ratio of inter- to- intra-industry trade and inequality.
Our theory formalizes as well as modifies Linder’s conjecture about the relationship between
intraindustry trade and the extent of similarity between trading partners.
Devashish Mitra
Department of Economics
The Maxwell School of Citizenship and
Public Affairs
Syracuse University
133 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244
and NBER
dmitra@maxwell.syr.edu

Vitor Trindade
Department of Economics
The Maxwell School of Citizenship and
Public Affairs
Syracuse University
133 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244
vmtrinda@maxwell.syr.edu

1

Introduction

International trade thinking has been dominated in the past few decades by supply-side
theories, which place their focus squarely on diﬀerences in factor endowments or diﬀerences
in production technologies across countries.1 This theoretical bias stands in contrast to a
number of empirical studies, which find that demand diﬀerences also matter for the determination of trade. The reason for the theoretical bias stems, in our view, from the diﬃculty
in saying something systematic about how diﬀerences in consumption impact trade. For
instance, assuming at the very outset diﬀerences in tastes across countries may make the
analysis trivial, and a formal model redundant.
In this paper, we incorporate demand-side considerations in a systematic but straightforward way, by focusing on the role of inequality in the determination of trade flows and
patterns. As we shall see, inequality has intuitive consequences for international trade that
provide empirically verifiable hypotheses. Another reason to concentrate on the impact of
inequality on trade is its virtual absence from previous theoretical work.
The intuition for our model can be simply explained. When preferences are assumed to be
nonhomothetic (in such a way that income expansion paths are actually curved), aggregate
demand for each good depends not only on aggregate income, but also on the distribution of
that income.2 But if income distribution is a determinant of aggregate demand, then it must
1

The few exceptions to this rule only seem to confirm it. See the paper by Markusen (1986), in which
he considers nonhomothetic tastes as part of the explanation for the volume of trade, but calls his approach
“eclectic.”
2
With linear income expansion paths, preferences are nonhomothetic if the expansion paths do not pass
through the origin. An example of this case (in which preferences are called quasi-homothetic) can be found
in the aforementioned paper by Markusen (1986). The linearity of the income-expansion path excludes a
role for income distribution. For our purposes, then, we assume that the income-expansion paths are strictly
curved.

1

be a determinant of trade, which is nothing but the excess demand vector for the economy.
More specifically, consider a model with two goods: manufactures are a “luxury,” and food
is a “necessity,” in the sense that, as consumers become richer, they allocate larger shares
of their budgets to manufactures. There are two countries: the East and the West, with
the East having a more equitable distribution of income than the West. The two countries
are assumed to have the same factor endowments and technology, and therefore their supply
schedules are identical. However, the demand for food is lower in the West, because the
rich are richer in the West and therefore they demand disproportionately less food. When
the two countries open to trade, the world price lies between the two autarky prices, which
causes the East to import food and to export manufactures.
Note that in this simple inter-industry model we get the exact opposite of the standard
reason for trade. Given common world prices and identical technology and endowments, the
two countries (assumed for simplicity to be the same size) produce the same quantities of
food and manufactures. But given their diﬀerent inequality levels, they consume the two
goods in diﬀerent proportions. Therefore, the gains from trade are due to specialization in
consumption, not in production.
In this paper, by considering the impact of demand on trade, we also revisit some earlier
insights from trade theory - while at the same time extending them and making them more
precise. We emphasize especially the work of Linder (1961), who used demand-side considerations to explain the large volume of intra-industry trade between developed countries.
Linder began by assuming that consumers earning similar incomes have similar demands. If
firms respond first to consumers in their own country, firms in each of the developed countries

2

end up producing goods adapted to the tastes not only of their own consumers, but also of
the consumers in all other developed countries, thus enhancing intra-industry trade among
such countries.
Of course, Krugman (1979), Helpman (1981) and Helpman and Krugman (1985) also oﬀer
an explanation for intra-industry trade, and they do rely on demand-side considerations, in
that they assume a taste for variety on the part of consumers. However, as Markusen (1986)
in his seminal paper points out, Helpman and Krugman’s work omits Linder’s important
intuition that consumers earning similar incomes consume similar baskets of goods. This
intuition, which is sometimes called the Linder hypothesis, can only be understood using
a model with nonhomothetic preferences, which is precisely the driving assumption in this
paper.
The relevance of using nonhomothetic preferences in trade models can only be evaluated
in the context of the existing empirical evidence. Thursby and Thursby (1987) find that
countries with similar per capita incomes trade more. They explicitly consider the similarity
in per capita incomes to be a measure for similarity in tastes, and therefore to be a test
variable for Linder’s hypothesis. Hunter and Markusen (1988) estimate a linear expenditure
system for aggregate demand across thirty four countries and eleven industries and find that
tastes deviate from homotheticity in a statistically significant way. Furthermore, Hunter’s
(1991) counter-factual exercise suggests that net trade volumes would increase by as much as
a quarter if tastes were homothetic. In a diﬀerent approach, Tchamourliyski (2002) extends
Anderson and van Wincoop’s (2003) model of gravity and trade costs to allow for nonhomothetic tastes, and estimates it for bilateral trade data in 1996. He rejects at any conventional

3

significance level the hypothesis that tastes are homothetic. None of the aforementioned
papers looks for income distribution as a determinant of trade, the empirical support for
which has been provided by Francois and Kaplan (1996) and more recently by Dalgin, Mitra
and Trindade (2003).3
We begin our analysis in the next section with a simple Heckscher-Ohlin framework.
Contrary to standard trade models, which usually assume “disembodied” capital and labor,
we explicitly assume an ownership structure for the factors of production. For given factor
rewards, this determines an income distribution, which in turn aﬀects the pattern of consumption in the aggregate. Thus, our paper shares Grossman and Maggi’s (2000) concern
with the distribution of factor endowments, while being quite diﬀerent due to our emphasis
on the demand-side consequences of such a distribution. It is interesting to note that, in
autarky, two countries with the same aggregate endowments but diﬀerent asset distribution
have diﬀerent product (and therefore factor) prices. With the additional assumption that
the necessity (food) is the labor-intensive good,4 we find that trade leads to incomplete
convergence in income distribution: it reduces inequality in the more unequal country and
increases it in the more equal country.
We also obtain what constitutes to us a novel eﬀect in the literature: the international
transmission of redistributive policies. Suppose that one of the countries enacts a policy of
asset (or income) redistribution from the poor to the rich, thereby increasing the inequality
3

Using Japanese regional data, Davis et al (1997) lend support to the hypothesis of homothetic tastes.
However, as they point out, theirs is only a consistency test. Their results can alternatively be explained if
income distributions and incomes per capita do not vary suﬃciently across Japanese regions to “reveal” the
nonhomotheticity in tastes.
4

This assumption implies that poorer countries specialize in necessities, a finding that is empirically
supported by Dalgin, Mitra and Trindade (2003).

4

within the country. In the standard model this has no impact on world product or factor
prices, and therefore has no impact on the distribution of income in the other country. When
we recognize the nonhomothetic nature of preferences, however, we see that the redistributive
policy, which raises the demand for manufactures, reduces the world wage rate and raises the
return on capital, thereby resulting in a more unequal distribution of income in all countries.
Although we begin by allowing no diﬀerences in factor proportions across countries, we
subsequently ask how their introduction aﬀects the results. If both relative endowments and
inequality are diﬀerent across the two countries, it is possible that the predicted volume
of trade is smaller than under a model with homothetic tastes. This outcome arises when
the capital abundant country is also more unequal and the impact of nonhomotheticity on
demand is not large enough to reverse the pattern of trade.5
We study in section 3 a model of intra-industry trade. This provides a tighter link between
nonhomothetic tastes, demand, and Linder’s hypothesis. Holding the West’s asset inequality
constant, and increasing the East’s, we show that the volume of intra-industry trade increases,
while the ratio of inter-to intra-industry trade decreases, eventually achieving zero when the
East is as unequal as the West. If we increase the inequality in the East beyond that in the
West, then both the ratio of inter-to intra-industry trade and the volume of inter-industry
trade increase. One of the reasons that this result is interesting is that it formalizes, and at
the same time amends, Linder’s intuition. While Linder argued that there should be more
intra-industry trade between similar countries, we find that it is really the proportion of
5

A much more complete analysis of the implications of nonhomothetic tastes for the “missing trade”
can be found in Chung (2000). Note that he abstracts from distributional considerations by assuming quasihomothetic preferences. In our paper, the result on missing trade is a by-product of the overall theory of
inequality and trade. However, it is important insofar as it lends further support to the use of inequality in
trade theory.

5

intra-industry in overall trade that is high between similar countries, while the measure of
similarity should be not only the similarity of incomes per capita, but also the similarity in
distribution. We provide further precision to Linder’s conjecture by looking simultaneously at
the role of international diﬀerences in inequality and factor endowments in the determination
of inter- versus intra-industry trade.
A few recent theoretical papers incorporate nonhomothetic preferences into their analysis
and, as expected, they are similar to our paper in some respects. There are quite a few
important diﬀerences as well. We already mentioned Markusen (1986) and Chung (2000),
both of whom are mainly interested in explaining the volume of trade, the latter in the
context of Trefler’s (1995) results on the “missing trade.” We also discuss the assumption of
homotheticity as a possible cause for over-estimating the predicted volume of trade, but we
add income distribution and especially focus on it as a possible determinant of the pattern and
volume of trade. Income distribution is excluded by the assumption of quasi-homotheticity in
both Markusen and Chung. Ramezzana (2002) also studies the impact of per capita income
on world trade, but restricts his analysis to the case where there is perfect equality within
each country.
A few theoretical contributions have explored, just as we do here, the link between nonhomothetic preferences, income distribution, and aggregate demand. A first strand does so
in the context of general equilibrium closed economy models, and is most concerned with the
process of industrialization. Examples of this are Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1989), and
Krishna and Yavas (2001). The second segment deals with open economy models where the
income distribution is exogenously given. See for instance Matsuyama’s (2000) Ricardian

6

model. In his framework it is not possible to ask our question of the impact of one country’s
redistributive policy on another country’s distribution. Furthermore, Matsuyama is mainly
interested in examining the asymmetric impact of population and productivity growth on
the terms of trade between developed and developing countries.6
One further diﬀerence between our work and all the papers mentioned above is that,
to the extent of our knowledge, no other work considers nonhomothetic preferences and
asset distribution within a model of monopolistic competition, increasing returns and intraindustry trade.
One additional contribution is that we study the eﬀect of asset inequality on factor
prices, both in the presence and in the absence of international trade. Thus, what is really
novel in this paper, besides the study of distributional diﬀerences as a basis for comparative
advantage and trade, is the direct and indirect eﬀects (through the impact on factor prices)
of asset inequality on income inequality.

2

A Two by Two Model

A. Production and consumption
There are two goods, food (F ) and manufactures (M ). There are also two factors of pro6
Johnson (1959) is another theoretical paper that attempts to capture the impact of inequality on aggregate
demand and trade flows. In his model, there are two classes of consumers, namely capitalists and workers,
with diﬀerent marginal propensities to consume any given good, the diﬀerence in propensities not being
formally modeled. Under these conditions, trade impacts aggregate demand through its impact on factor
rewards, which in turn aﬀect the relative weights given to the tastes of the two groups in deriving national
demand. Johnson argues that a country’s oﬀer curve may as a consequence have backward bending portions,
giving rise to possible multiplicity and/or instability of equilibria. Our paper goes beyond Johnson’s work in
several dimensions: we model the importance of distribution based specifically on nonhomothetic tastes; in
the context of the perfectly competitive model (the only one that Johnson studied), we apply the model to
missing trade, to the international transmission of redistributive policies, and to the comparative statics of
changing the degree of asset inequality (fixed in Johnson); most importantly, we also examine a model with
imperfect competition.

7

duction, capital and labor. In this section, we assume that the production functions for food
and manufactures exhibit constant returns to scale. We further assume that manufactures
are the capital intensive good and that there are no factor intensity reversals.
Since these are the assumptions of the standard 2x2 model, it is not surprising that we
reproduce the results from that model. In particular, we will be interested in how factor
prices change with goods prices. We begin with the zero-profit conditions:

pF = cF (w, r),

pM = cM (w, r),

(1)

where cF and cM represent the unit costs of food and manufactures, pF and pM are their
prices, w is the wage, and r is the rental price of capital.
Total diﬀerentiation of equation (1), use of Shepard’s lemma, and some transformation,
yield:7
 







b
w
 θMK −θF K   pbF 
 = 1 
 ,
  |θ| 
 
rb
−θML θF L
pbM

where the caret denotes the usual Jones proportional change (for example: w
b=

(2)

dw
w ).

Letting

Ki and Li (i = F, M ) be the amount of capital and labor used in the production of one unit
of good i, then θiL ≡

wLi
ci

is the cost share of labor in good i, with an analogous definition

for θiK . In the expression above, |θ| = θF L − θML = θMK − θF K > 0, the last inequality
following from the assumption that manufactures are capital-intensive. We now assume that
food is the numeraire good (and therefore pbF = 0). Denoting the price of manufactures by
p, for pb > 0, equation (2) implies:
7

Here, we follow Feenstra’s (2003) textbook.

8

w
b=−

θF K
pb < 0,
θMK − θF K

which is the Stolper-Samuelson eﬀect.

rb =

θF L
pb > pb,
θF L − θML

(3)

We model any individual j’s consumption of food and manufactures, respectively, in the
following way:
CFj (p, I j )

¡

j

¢

j

= [1 − φ p, I ]I ,

j
CM
(p, I j )

¡
¢
φ p, I j I j
,
=
p

where I j is her income and φ(p, I j ) is the share of income that she spends on manufactures.
We model the nonhomotheticity in tastes explicitly by assuming that this share is a function
of income. The central case in our analysis will be the one in which the capital-intensive
good (manufactures) is also the luxury. That is, we assume that φ is an increasing function
of I j . Figure 1 depicts a typical income expansion path, in the case where ∂φ/∂I j > 0, for
all I j > 0. The reverse case can easily be analyzed without any diﬃculty.
The economy consists of two groups of people, each of mass one: the rich (R) and the
poor (P). Both groups possess equal amounts of labor,

L
2

each, but the shares of R and

P in the economy’s capital stock are σ and 1− σ respectively, with
inequality increases with σ. If σ =

1
2 (σ

1
2

≤ σ ≤ 1. Thus asset

= 1), there is perfect asset equality (inequality).

Incomes of groups R and P are given by:

I R = rσK +

wL
,
2

I P = r(1 − σ)K +

wL
.
2

(4)

R + C P , where C J ≡
Total consumption of manufactures can be written as CM = CM
M
i

Ci (p, I J ) denotes consumption of good i by group J = R, P . Total consumption of food is
written as CF = CFR + CFP .
9

B. Changes in income caused by changes in price
Given this paper’s focus on inequality, a natural question to pose is how the incomes of
the rich and of the poor change, as goods prices change. Diﬀerentiating equation (4), we
obtain:

where η R
K =

rσK
IR

IbR = η R
b + ηR
b
K r
L w,

is the share of capital income in the total income of the rich, and ηR
L =

wL/2
IR

is the share of labor income (analogous definitions apply to the poor). Substituting from
R
equation (3), and using θF L = 1 − θF K and η R
K + η L = 1 (and repeating the procedure for

I P ), we get:

ηR − θF K
pb,
IbR = K
θMK − θF K

ηP − θF K
IbP = K
pb.
θMK − θF K

(5)

Consider now a shock to prices, such that pb > 0. The following Lemma shows what happens
to the incomes of the two groups.

Lemma 1. Suppose that pb > 0. Then there are two cutoﬀ values for σ, defined
as:

σR =

1 KM /LM
1 KF /LF
, σP = 1 −
.
2 K/L
2 K/L

The assumption that manufactures is the capital intensive good immediately implies that σ R , σ P > 12 . The following implications hold:

(i)

1
2

< σ < σ R ⇒ 0 < IbR < pb.
10

(ii) σ R < σ < 1 ⇒ 0 < pb < IbR .

(iii)

1
2

< σ < σ P ⇒ 0 < IbP < pb.

(iv) σ P < σ < 1 <⇒ IbP < 0 < pb.

(v) IbR > IbP .

Proof. We shall only show the first two conditions, as the remaining ones are
analogously proved. First note that equation (5) implies that the condition IbR >

0 is equivalent to ηR
K > θ F K , given that θ MK − θ F K > 0. After substituting
from the definitions of ηR
K and θ F K this is equivalent to

Further manipulation yields σKLF > KF

L
2,

or σ >

rσK
rσK+wL/2

1 KF /LF
2 K/L

>

rKF
rKF +wLF

.

, which is always

true, because (assuming both goods are produced in equilibrium)

KF /LF
K/L

< 1

and σ > 12 . Therefore, IbR > 0 is true always. The condition IbR > pb, in turn,
is equivalent to η R
K > θ MK .

This yields σKLM > KM

L
2,

or σ > σ R . which

completes the proof of conditions (i) and (ii) above.

In words, Lemma 1 says that as inequality increases (σ goes up), the rich become more
identified with capital, while the poor become more identified with labor (see equation 4).
Therefore a “Stolper-Samuelson-like” result obtains for high levels of inequality: IbP < 0 <

pb < IbR . For lower levels of inequality, the real incomes of both groups measured in food

units rise, while they fall when measured in units of manufactures. Thus, a suﬃcient amount
of inequality is required for the two groups to have diﬀerent preference orderings over goods
prices or terms of trade, a conclusion that may have applications for political economy.

11

C. Closed economy equilibrium
We begin our analysis of the equilibrium in a closed economy by showing two properties
of the total consumption of manufactures. First, assume that inequality increases, through a
redistribution of assets from the poor to the rich. All else equal, it is intuitive that aggregate
demand for manufactures should increase. The rich increase their demand, and the poor
decrease it, but the former dominates, because the rich’s marginal demand for manufactures
is higher than the poor’s.
Next, consider an increase in the price of manufactures. Note that, besides the normal
substitution and income eﬀects, price impacts consumption in two additional ways: first,
through the extra income eﬀect of the income redistribution itself (since I changes with p);
and second, through the separate impact of income on consumers’ consumption mixes. The
first eﬀect is due to our assumption of an ownership structure for the factors of production.
The second eﬀect is due to our assumption of nonhomothetic tastes. It can be shown that a
suﬃcient condition for total consumption in manufactures to go down with its price is that
these two eﬀects be suﬃciently small. In other words, we require that our assumptions do
not overturn the standard results from trade theory, but simply add to them. Lemma 2
establishes the two properties of the demand for manufactures.

Lemma 2. At any given price, total consumption of manufactures increases
with an increase in the inequality, that is,
the following condition holds:
and income I J , where

dI J
dp

p dφ
φ dp

and

dφ
dp

+

∂CM
∂σ

p dI J
I J dp

(=

∂φ
∂p

+

> 0. Furthermore, suppose that

< 1 (J = R, P), for any price p
∂φ dI J
∂I J dp

) are total derivatives with

respect to p. Then, total consumption in manufactures decreases with the price

12

of manufactures, that is,

dCM
dp

< 0.

Proof: We can use Figure 1 to show that

∂CM
∂σ

> 0. Note that for both groups

(J = R, P), as income goes up, relative consumption of manufactures must
increase. More formally,

J
∂ CM
∂
= J
∂I J CFJ
∂I

because

∂φ
∂I J

·

¸
φ(p, I J )
> 0,
p (1 − φ(p, I J ))

> 0, by assumption that manufactures are the luxury good. This

implies that the income expansion path is convex. We assume that it is strictly
convex, as shown in the figure. When σ increases by ∆σ, the changes in the
incomes of the rich and the poor are: ∆I R = −∆I P = rK∆σ. The figure depicts
the initial budget constraints for the rich (the solid line marked I R ) and for the
poor (the solid line marked I P ). The dashed lines are the budget constraints
R + ∆C P > 0,
after the increase in σ. It is then geometrically obvious that ∆CM
M

therefore

∂CM
∂σ

> 0. This leaves out the possibility of an income expansion path

that is not strictly convex, that is, that has some linear sections. In that case,
all that we need to assume is that the budget lines of the rich and the poor cross
diﬀerent linear sections of the income expansion path, and the result follows.8
Suppose now that the suﬃcient condition holds. It is straightforward to show that
¶
µ
φ(p,I J )I J
/dp < 0, for any income and price, thereby guaranteeing
it implies d
p
8

The case of quasi-homothetic preferences that dominates the previous literature happens for example if
there is a minimum subsistence level of food, with Cobb-Douglas preferences above that minimum. Consumers
have consumption expansion paths with the shape of “launching ramps”: horizontal from the origin, thereafter
a straight line at some slope up. If all consumers are in the inclined portion, a small income redistribution
does not change aggregate consumption, and inequality does not play a role. We exclude such a possibility
here.

13

that an increase in price makes all consumers decrease their consumption of
manufactures. Thus aggregate consumption goes down.9

The suﬃcient condition in lemma 2 can be violated, if the eﬀects studied in this model
are “too” strong, a theoretical possibility on which we do not focus.10
Figure 2 depicts the markets for manufactures in two countries: the East and the West.
The East has a more equal asset distribution than the West (σ E < σ W ), the two countries
being otherwise identical. The curve labeled CW (YW ) represents total demand (supply) for
manufactures in the West, with analogous curves for the East.11
The two countries have identical factor endowments, therefore, if there is trade, it cannot
be due to Heckscher-Ohlin eﬀects. In particular, the two supply curves are identical. The
CW curves take into account both the direct eﬀect of a change in p on consumption, as well
as the impact of p on nominal income. From now on we assume the suﬃcient condition of
lemma 2, and draw the demand curves as downward sloping.
Since

dCM
dσ

> 0, the demand curve for the East lies below that of the West. In autarky,

9

The relationship between consumption of manufactures (and food) and the distribution of either assets
or income is not specific to our simple modeling of inequality. For example, our model generalizes to a
uniform discrete distribution of assets, and therefore of income. In such a case, arrange the N individuals in
an economy in ascending order of their incomes. We can increase inequality (holding the mean and therefore
aggregate income constant) by redistributing equal amounts from individual 1 to individual N, 2 to N - 1, 3
to N - 2 and so on. Given the assumed curvature of the income expansion path, as described above, we obtain
the same relationship between consumption of manufactures and inequality as in lemma 2.
Assume utility U = (F − F0 )β M 1−β . It is Cobb-Douglas, except for the minimum subsistence level
only food. The demand functions
for¢
F0 in food. Assume that I¡R > F0 ¢> I P , so that the poor
¡ R consume
¢
¡
R
M
=
(1
−
β)
I
the rich are: F − F0 = β I R − F0 and
−
F
0 /p. Therefore, φ = (1 − β) 1 − F0 /I
³
´
¢ R
¢
¡ R
¡
R
R
R
R
p I / I − F0 Suppose that σ < σ < 1. Lemma 1 implies
and (p/φ) dφ/dp + p/I dI /dp = Ib /b
³
´
¢
¡ R
R
R
that Ib /b
p I / I − F0 > 1 (which violates our suﬃcient condition), meaning that the rich increase their
demand of manufactures as p increases. Since the poor cannot decrease their consumption of manufactures
below zero, this implies that aggregate consumption of manufactures goes up with price.
10

11
CW is the same as CM , but for one country (the West) only. To avoid clutter, we omit the subscript M,
but do write the subscripts W and E to denote the West and the East, respectively.

14

therefore, pW > pE and CW > CE . Since r increases and w decreases with p (see equation
3), we have wW < wE and rW > rE . In other words, the wage is higher in the more equal
country, while the rental price is higher in the more unequal country. If we think of capital
to be human capital, then a more unequal asset distribution leads to a higher ratio of skilled
to unskilled wages, i.e., to higher wage inequality.
Let us define income inequality, σ I , as the share of the income of the rich in total income:
σI =

rσK+w(L/2) 12
rK+wL .

It is easy to see that:


rK
dp
∂σ
∂σ
dσ I
I
I
=
+
w0 (p) +
r0 (p)
> 0.
dσ
rK + wL
∂w (−)
∂r (+) dσ
(+)

The first term,

rK
rK+wL ,

(−)

(+)

(+)

is the standard eﬀect of an increase in asset inequality on income

inequality, which is also present under homothetic preferences. The second term is a consequence of nonhomotheticity, and it represents the additional adverse eﬀect on income inequality of the increase in the rental price and the reduction in wages, when asset inequality
goes up.13 Thus, we have the following proposition:
Proposition 1 With nonhomothetic preferences, if the luxury good is capital intensive, the
autarky wage rate decreases with asset inequality, while the rental price increases. This
implies that the eﬀect of an increase in asset inequality on income inequality is magnified by
the change in the relative factor rewards.

D. Open economy equilibrium
Suppose now that the two countries open up to free trade in goods. In figure 2, define
the curve Y as the average supply (that is, Y =

YW +YE
)
2

and curve C as the average demand

12

This measure relates in a monotonic way to more conventional measures of inequality. For example, it
is straightforward to show that the Gini index equals σI − 1/2, and that the ratio of the incomes of the top
income quintile to the bottom income quintile equals σI /(1 − σI ).
13

The inequalities
σ ≥ 1/2.

∂σ I
∂r

≥ 0 and

∂σ I
∂w

≤ 0 can be seen by writing σI =

15

1
2

+

σ−1/2
1+wL/rK ,

and by recalling that

(C =

CW +CE
).
2

Since the the two countries’ supply curves coincide, they coincide with the

average supply. Free trade price and quantity are given by the intersection of the world
average supply with the world average demand: pF T and CF T .14 After opening up to trade,
manufactures become cheaper in the more unequal country (the West), and more expensive
in the more equal country (the East). At the common world price pF T , the West exports the
labor intensive good (food) and imports the capital intensive good (manufactures). Thus,
the West becomes a net importer of capital services and a net exporter of labor services.
Moreover, since the wage rate decreases and the rental rate increases with the relative price
of manufactures, the wage rate rises (falls), while the rental rate falls (rises), in the West
(East) to converge to common world levels. Income inequality goes down in the more unequal
country and rises in the more equal country. Thus, there is convergence in income inequality,
although it is only partial, since asset inequality diﬀers across the two countries. This gives
us the following proposition:
Proposition 2 With nonhomothetic preferences, if the luxury good is capital intensive, free
trade between two countries that diﬀer only in their asset inequality results in an increase
(decrease) in the wage rate, a reduction (increase) in the rental and a reduction (increase)
in income inequality in the more (less) unequal country. The more (less) unequal country is
an importer of the luxury good (necessity) and a net importer of capital (labor) services.

Again, we emphasize that the only reason to trade (and for there to be gains from trade)
is the diﬀerence in the asset inequalities of the two countries, since everything else (factor
endowments, technology, and tastes) is the same.
14

Equilibrium in the market for manufactures insures equilibrium in the market for food, through Walras’
law and the fact that all prices are strictly positive.

16

E. Transmission of inequality under free trade
Suppose that one of the two countries implements a redistributive tax policy. For instance,
a tax cut that eﬀectively redistributes income from the poor to the rich will shift that
country’s (and therefore the world’s) C curve to the right. pF T goes up and so w falls and
r rises. Therefore, income inequality rises in the whole world, while in the country with the
tax cut it rises more than what it would in the presence of constant factor prices (as would be
the case under homothetic preferences). Similarly, an exogenous increase in asset inequality
in one country will increase income inequality in both countries. Thus income inequality in
the two countries is positively correlated.
We see then that fiscal policy can have an impact on trade patterns and can have terms
of trade eﬀects, something that is clearly absent under homothetic preferences. This leads
to the interesting conclusion that fiscal policy can be a way of protecting one of the two
industries. We summarize this discussion in the following proposition.
Proposition 3 With nonhomothetic preferences, if the luxury good is capital intensive, free
trade between two countries results in the international transmission of shocks to income
inequality that happen through changes in asset inequality in one country.

F. Diﬀerent factor proportions
The focus so far has been on the impact of income inequality on trade, abstracting from
supply determinants of comparative advantage. Thus, we defined a generalized comparative
advantage, determined by diﬀerences in income distribution.
However, it turns out to be instructive to consider the interaction between our model
and the standard Heckscher-Ohlin model. To that purpose, we now assume that the two
countries have diﬀerent factor proportions. As we shall see, we obtain surprising results,
17

with a bearing on factor content studies. In particular, the next proposition shows that an
economist that does not take demand eﬀects into account must make one of two possible
mistakes: either she will get the direction of trade wrong; or she will over- or under-predict
the volume of trade, leading her in the first case to conclude that there is “missing trade.”
Proposition 4 When the diﬀerence in demand due to nonhomothetic tastes is not taken
into account, and the world average demand (in terms of expenditure share) is assumed to
be each country’s demand schedule, then:
I. If the more unequal country is the capital abundant country (the “Northern” case),
either of two errors will occur:
(i) The predicted direction of trade is the reverse of the actual direction of trade.
(ii) The predicted volume of trade is larger than the actual volume of trade.
II. If the more unequal country is also the labor abundant country (the “Southern” case),
the following error will occur, if the diﬀerence in per-capita incomes between the two countries
is suﬃciently small:
(iii) The predicted volume of trade is smaller than the actual volume of trade.15

Figure 3 illustrates what we call the “Northern” case of proposition 4, in which the more
unequal country (the West) is also the capital abundant country (compare, say, the US
with Europe).16 Here, we draw the supply and demand curves in terms of GDP shares. In
other words, while the demand curve shows the share in GDP of consumption expenditure
on manufactures (and is denoted by sC
i , i = E, W ), the supply curve shows the share of
manufacture output in overall GDP (and is denoted by sPi , i = E, W ). Note that the sC
W
must lie to the right of sC
E : the West’s share of consumption in manufactures must be higher,
given its higher inequality and higher GDP per capita. Given that the West is more capital
abundant, its production of manufactures as a share (sPW ) of its GDP must also lie to the
15

The reason why this “case of excessive trade” is not quite as well-known as its cousin, the “case of the
missing trade,” may have to do with the fact that labor abundant countries that are very unequal tend to be
less developed countries, and they trade relatively little.
16

Note that in this section we allow for diﬀerences in the sizes of the overall population of the two countries
and assume aggregate capital and labor endowments in two countries to be such that the West is more
capital-abundant and has a higher per-capita GDP than the East.

18

right of the East’s (sPE ).
Consider panel 3a. The world value of the output of manufactures as a share of world
GDP is sP . It is a GDP-weighted average of sPW and sPE and so lies between the two.
We denote the world price by PF T , as before. Given the world price, the volumes and
directions of trade are uniquely determined (shown as tW GDPW /p = −tE GDPE /p).17 Note
also that the GDP of each country, given its factor endowments, is only a function of the
world relative price of manufactures. To show the direction of trade, each vector points
from production to consumption, such that a vector pointing to the right indicates imports.
Compare the direction of trade with a prediction based on homothetic tastes. An empiricist
who assumes homothetic preferences constrains the world and country-specific expenditure
shares on manufactures to be identical when countries face the same world price. This is
precisely what factor content studies do: they assume that all countries’ consumption levels of
each good are proportional to world consumption (the constant of proportionality being the
ratio of country GDP to world GDP) and predict trade based solely on diﬀerences in factor
endowments. But if that is the case, our empiricist would assume curve sC for both countries’
shares of consumption in manufactures. Thus, she would predict a reverse pattern of trade
(shown as τ W GDPW /p = −τ E GDPE /p, where Greek letters will denote the predictions
based on homothetic tastes), thereby committing error (i). Note that we are assuming that
the empiricist can only observe the current level of world production of each of the two goods
(assumed to be equal to world consumption) and the current world price.
In sum, when the diﬀerence in the supply schedules of the two countries is minimal,
17

Note that the formula above clearly means that, generally, tW will not equal tE (and τ W and τ E , defined
later, will not equal each other) in absolute value unless the two countries have the same aggregate GDP.

19

predicating the pattern of trade on supply alone leads to a wrong ranking of the autarky
prices of the two countries, and thus to the wrong direction of trade. The true autarky prices
are marked pW and pE , for the West and the East respectively, while the prices based on
homothetic tastes are marked π W and π E , respectively.
The opposite situation is considered in panel 3b, where the diﬀerence in the two countries’
supplies dominates the diﬀerence in demand. Here, the correct ranking of the autarky prices
obtains. However, the reader can easily convince himself that forcing each country’s demand
schedule to coincide with the world demand (in terms of GDP shares) will always result in
an overestimate of the volume of trade: thus, while tW and tE point in the same direction
as τ W and τ E , it must be that |τ W | > |tW | and |τ E | > |tE |. Therefore, a researcher would
in this case avoid error (i) only at the cost of incurring error (ii).
Similarly, we can analyze error (iii) in case (II) mentioned in proposition 4 above.

3

A Model with Inter- and Intra-Industry Trade

A. Model set-up and autarkic equilibrium
We now modify the model from the previous section to introduce monopolistic competition, product diﬀerentiation and increasing returns to scale. As we shall see, this will
provide precision to Linder’s hypothesis about the link between demand similarities and
intra-industry trade.
We assume that, within the manufacturing sector, a number of varieties are produced
and consumers exhibit a “love for variety.” More specifically, an individual’s utility function
µ³
¶
´ ε
ε−1
Pn
ε−1
ε
is written in the form: U
(d
)
,
d
Mi
F , where dMi stands for the individual’s
i=1

consumption of the ith variety of manufactures; n is the number of varieties consumed; ε
20

is the elasticity of substitution between diﬀerent varieties; and dF is consumption of food.
³P
´ ε
ε−1
ε−1
n
ε
Here the sub-utility function pertaining to manufactures,
(d
)
is of the DixitMi
i=1

Spence-Stiglitz form.

As before, we specify that the individual’s budget share of manufactures is an increasing function of income. However, we now write a group’s (rich or poor) expenditure on
¡
¢
manufactures as share of income as φ P, I J , where the “price index” P is defined as

P =

¡Pn

1−
i=1 pi

¢ 1−1

, pi being the price of variety i.18

Let µM (w, r) denote the marginal cost of producing any variety of manufactures. We
assume that there is a fixed cost with the same capital intensity as the marginal cost and
can thus be denoted by αµM (w, r), for some α > 0.19 We shall as before assume that
manufactures are the capital intensive good, and that there are no factor intensity reversals.
From now on, we use the symmetry among varieties to assume the equilibrium result
that all varieties have the same price and are produced in identical quantities. The total cost
of producing a representative variety equals αµM (w, r) + µM (w, r)xM , where xM is output.
Thus the average cost is given by
cM (w, r, xM ) =

αµM (w, r)
+ µM (w, r).
xM

As before, we denote the average cost of food by cF (w, r).
18
That φ is a function of the price index only (and not separately of the price of each variety) can be
seen from a two-stage optimization.
It
a standard
result that a consumer with second-stage budget φI for
¡
Pis
n
1−ε ¢
manufactures consumes dM i = p−ε
φI
of variety i. Introducing these demands into the utility
/
(p
)
i
i
i=1
function, yields, after some transformation, U = U (φI/P, (1 − φ)I). It is apparent that, when optimizing
this indirect utility for φ in the first stage, the consumer obtains a solution that is a function of P and I only.
19

Equivalently, as in Ethier (1982), we could think of this as a two-step technology: first, “factor bundles”
are produced using capital and labor with a constant-returns-to-scale technology; second, the factor bundles
are used to produce output in a linear fashion. In this version, µM (w, r) is the cost of the marginal factor
bundle input. Furthermore, the technology specifies that α times this marginal factor bundle input is used
up at the beginning of production, resulting in the fixed cost αµM (w, r). In other words, output is linear in
factor bundles, with a positive horizontal intercept and a positive slope.

21

Profit maximization equates marginal revenue to marginal cost:
¸
·
1
= µM (w, r),
p 1−
ε
where p stands for the price of a representative variety, and we use the well-known approximation (exact in the limit of infinite varieties) that the elasticity of substitution between
varieties (ε) is the elasticity of demand for each one.20
Free entry in manufactures implies that price equals average cost:
p = cM (w, r, xM ).

(6)

The last three equations imply:
¸ ·
¸−1
·
α
1
=
+1
,
1−
ε
xM
which in turn gives us:
x∗M = (ε − 1)α.
Thus, the equilibrium output of each variety is completely determined by the parameters ε
and α.
There is also a zero-profit condition for food:
cF (w, r) = 1.

(7)

Note that the zero profit equations (6) and (7) essentially reproduce their counterparts
in the previous section (equation 1). In particular, the dependence of equation (6) on xM
can be ignored, since xM is fixed by the parameters of the model. We can therefore recover
20
This approximation holds in our setting as well due to the separability of the utility function in food and
manufactures, which in turn allows for two-stage budgeting.

22

the derivation of the Stolper-Samuelson results from the previous section (equation 3). The
crucial step in that derivation was Shepard’s lemma, which does not require constant returns
to scale.
We can now write the resource constraints for the economy:
LM (w(p), r(p))
LF (w(p), r(p))
CM +
CF
L
L

= 1,
(8)

KM (w(p), r(p))
KF (w(p), r(p))
CM +
CF
K
K

= 1,

where we recall that L and K denote the economy’s labor and capital endowments; LF ,
KF are unit labor and capital inputs in food; while Ci denotes total consumption (and
production) of good i. Here, LM and KM are the unit factor inputs in the typical variety
of manufactures at xM = x∗M . As we shall see, equation (8) defines a relationship between p
and n.
We obtain another relationship between p and n, based on demand. Noting that, in the
p

symmetric case, P =
n

1
−1

, we can write:

φ
DM (p, n, σ) ≡

µ

p
n

1
−1

µ
¶
, IR IR + φ
pn

p
n

1
−1

¶
, IP IP

= x∗M ,

(9)

where the first equality defines DM (p, n, σ), the total demand for one variety of manufactures.
The next lemma establishes under which circumstances equation (8) defines a direct
relation, and equation (9) defines an inverse relation, between p and n.

Lemma 3. Equation (8) defines an increasing relation between p and n. Equa-

23

tion (9) defines a decreasing relation between p and n21 if the following two
conditions hold for any I J , p and n:
(i)

P dφ
φ dP

+

P dI J
I J dP

< 1 (for fixed n).

∂φ
< ε − 1.
(ii) − Pφ ∂P

Proof: We first show that, given fixed parameters in the model, equation (8)
is a relationship only between p and n. Note that the total consumption of
manufactures is given by CM =

Pn

i=1 DM

= n x∗M , where x∗M is fully determined

by α and ε. We assume as before that equations (6) and (7) can be inverted
to yield w and r as a function of p. Therefore, the only endogenous variables
in equation (8) are p, n and CF . Using (in principle) one of the equations to
substitute CF out, we would get a relationship between p and n. To show that this
is an increasing relationship between p and n, we first write the total derivatives
of the unit factor inputs with respect to price:
dLi
dp

=

dKi
dp

=

∂Li
∂Li
w´(p) +
r´(p) > 0,
∂w (−)
∂r (+)
(−)

(+)

∂Ki
∂Ki
w´(p) +
r´(p) < 0, i = M, F
∂w (−)
∂r (+)
(+)

(−)

Suppose that p increases in equation (8). This increases the Li ’s and decreases
the Ki ’s, forcing CM and CF to adjust to recover equality. Note that, in the
resource constraint for labor (top line), the weight on CM is a relatively small
number, while the weight on CF is a relatively large number, compared to the
21
This is the same condition in Helpman and Krugman (1985) that says that the combinations of p and n
are such that the share of food in spending is equal to its share in gross domestic product.

24

weights on CM and CF in the constraint for capital (bottom line). Therefore, the
only way to decrease the top line, while increasing the bottom line, is to increase
CM = n x∗M and decrease CF .22 Since x∗M is determined by α and ε, the increase
in p leads to an increase in the number of varieties n.
We can analogously see that equation (9) is a relationship only between the two
endogenous variables: p and n. Next, we show that condition (i) implies that
the middle term decreases with p, at constant n. A suﬃcient condition is that
it does so for any consumer (rich or poor). Rewrite the demand of the rich as
φ(P,I R )I R
,
P nε/(ε−1)

and let us increase p without changing n. We need to show that

φ(P,I R )I R
P

decreases (and analogously for the poor). This is formally analogous

to lemma 2, and therefore it is not surprising that the suﬃcient condition (whose
more rigorous proof is straightforward) also looks formally the same, except that
it has P instead of p.
Therefore, to establish that equation (9) defines a decreasing relation between p
and n, it suﬃces to prove that the middle term decreases with n, at constant
p. Again, it will be suﬃcient that it does so for any consumer. For the rich, for
µ µ
¶ ¶
p
∂
R
example, it is suﬃcient that ∂n φ
/n < 0. It is straightforward to
1 ,I
n 1−

show that this condition is implied by condition (ii).

The intuition for the suﬃcient conditions in lemma 3 is as follows. First, we expect that
22
For a more analytical proof, it suﬃces to multiply the top and bottom line of equations (8) by L and
K, respectively, then to total diﬀerentiate the resulting expressions with respect to p, which after use of
Cramer’s rule and simplification yields: (KM LF − KF LM )dCM /dp = −CF LF dKF /dp − CM LF dKM /dp +
CF KF dLF /dp + CM KF dLM /dp, which is a positive expression, given how the Ki ’s and Li ’s change with p.
Since KM LF − KF LM > 0, by virtue of manufactures being the capital-intensive good, dCM /dp > 0.

25

when the price of manufactures goes up (at fixed n), demand for them goes down. Condition
(i) in the lemma ensures this, and it plays a role analogous to the condition in lemma 2.
On the other hand, if the number of varieties increases (at fixed p), we also expect the
demand for each variety to decrease, which is guaranteed by condition (ii). It is possible,
however, that consumers increase their consumption of each variety as n goes up, if the
following two conditions hold. First, consumers’ response to the decrease in the price index
needs to be very strong, that is,

∂φ
∂P

needs to be negative and large. Note that P decreases as

n increases, which by itself makes consumers increase consumption of all varieties combined.
Second, the elasticity of substitution between varieties needs to be very small (ε very close
to 1), which makes consumers less inclined to substitute away from the original varieties, as
n increases. These conditions would tend to generate the unintuitive result that as n goes
up, consumers demand more of each variety. They also tend to violate suﬃcient condition
(ii) in the lemma, which therefore is there simply to rule out this unintuitive possibility.
In sum, as before, the suﬃcient conditions in the previous lemma ensure that the distributional and demand considerations in this paper are not so strong as to overturn the
standard results, but simply add to them.
The relationship established by the resource constraints (equation 8) is captured by the
R curve in figure 4, while the D curve depicts the relationship based on demand (equation
9). The point of intersection between the R and the D curves gives us the equilibrium p∗
and n∗ .
An increase in the inequality parameter σ increases demand for manufactures (that is,

26

the middle term in equation 9) for given p and n.23 This means that for a given p, a larger
n is needed for markets to clear, shifting the D curve to the right (to D’). As a result of this
increase in inequality, the equilibrium p∗ and n∗ are higher, and Stolper-Samuelson eﬀects
lead to an increase in the rental price r and a reduction in the wage w, which as in the
previous section further worsens income inequality.

B. Trade when countries diﬀer only in inequality
Next, we look at the eﬀect of the integration of two identical economies with the same
factor endowments, preferences and inequality. This doubles the size of the economy. Both
capital and labor are doubled, which in turn implies that for any given p the number of
varieties n consistent with full employment of factors is double of its original value (see
equation 8, and recall that CM = nx∗M ). Thus, the R curve shifts to the right in such a
way that n doubles for any given p. When preferences are homothetic, and more specifically
Cobb-Douglas in manufactures and food, the total expenditure on all varieties for a given
price of the representative variety does not depend on the number of varieties. In that case,
n corresponding to each p on the new D curve would be double of that on the old D curve.
However, with nonhomothetic preferences, we can show that the number of varieties n on
the new D curve more than doubles.24
We depict in figure 5 the integrated world economy, in which we again allow only inequal£ ¡
¢¤
With fixed p and n, P is fixed, and the expression φ(P, I J )/ p 1 − φ(P, I J ) , which is the ratio of
manufactures to food consumption for type J = R, P, can only change as I J changes with σ . We can use
the proof of lemma 2 to show that when σ increases, demand for manufactures increases with σ.
23

24
When we integrate two identical economies, DM (p, n, σ) in equation (9) doubles at fixed p and n, as the
numerator now has two extra terms identical to the two terms shown. At fixed p, suppose that n doubles.
DM (p, n, σ) goes down, as guaranteed by the proof of lemma 3, but by less than one half. (If the numerator
were constant, DM (p, n, σ) would decrease in half. However the numerator does go up with n.) Therefore n
must increase by more than double, to bring DM (p, n, σ) further down, and equate it with x∗M .

27

ity to diﬀer between the two countries. Because of lower inequality in the East, the East’s D
curve (labeled D(E)) lies to the left of the West’s (labeled D(W)). On the other had, the two
countries’ R curves (labeled R(E) and R(W), respectively) are the same. Next we draw the
D and R curves for an East with twice the size (labeled 2E) and a West with twice the size
(labeled 2W). As discussed above, when we double the size of the economies, the D curves
more than double, while the R curves are exactly doubled. The combined D and R curves
for the integrated world composed of a West and an East are given by D(W+E), which lies
between D(2W) and D(2E), and R(W+E)=R(2W)=R(2E), respectively.
In the figure, the number of varieties n∗ more than doubles, compared to the autarky
level for the East, while it is less than double for the West. It is easy to see that an increase
in asset inequality in any one of the two countries shifts the D(W+E) to the right, thereby
increasing p. The rental r increases and w decreases, increasing the overall income inequality
in both countries, as in the previous section. The number of varieties produced in both
countries goes up.
E nW of manufactures, and imports D W nE . We will let the
The West exports a volume DM
M
E is the total demand for one variety, as
superscripts denote either country. For example, DM

defined by equation (9), but from consumers in the East only. nE is the number of varieties
E + D W = x∗ . Taking into account that
produced in the East. Thus, n = nE + nW , and DM
M
M

nE = nW = n/2 (since the two countries’ R curves are the same and both countries face the
same price of a representative variety), the total flow of trade in manufactures can therefore
be written:
M f g = nx∗M /2.

28

This increases with the inequality of either country (as n increases both with σ E and σ W ).
When the West is a net importer of manufactures (which is the case when the West
is more unequal but has the same factor endowments as the East), inter-industry trade
W nE − D E nW ), in units of M . Again taking into account that in this case
equals 2(DM
M

nE = nW = n/2, this equals:
¢
¡ W
Inter = 2DM
− x∗M n.

¡ W
¢
By assumption, 2DM
− x∗M > 0, with the equality sign holding when σ E = σ W , since in

that case the two countries are identical. In the relevant range

1
2

≤ σ E ≤ σ W ≤ 1, the

W and n increase with σ W .25 The
volume of inter-industry trade increases with σ W , since DM
W
relationship between this volume and σ E is ambiguous, since while n increases with σ E , DM

decreases.
The volume of intra-industry trade is simply twice the West’s exports in manufactures
and can thus be written as
E
Intra = DM
n.

This is the part of trade that is balanced within the manufacturing sector. Clearly, both
E and n increase with σ E . Therefore, the volume of intra-industry trade increases with
DM
E is decreasing but n
the inequality of the less unequal country. With respect to σ W , DM

is increasing, and therefore the impact of the inequality of the more unequal country on
intra-industry trade is ambiguous.
W
E
Recall that DM
+ DM
= x∗M where x∗M is already completely determined by α and ε. When we change
W
E
indirectly, through the change in DM
, since in that case inequality
σ , it is best to check the change in DM
W
¢ ¡ E
¢
¡ E
¢¡
¢¡
dDM
W
− ∂DM /∂n dn/dσ W > 0.
does not change in the East. Thus, we can write dσW = − ∂DM /∂p dp/dσ
25

W

(−)

(−)

In other words, demand for one variety in the East goes down because of higher number of varieties and higher
prices, while the increase in σW insures that demand in the West goes up.

29

In spite of the ambiguities noted above for both inter- and intra-industry trade, we find
that there is no ambiguity in their ratio, which we write as:

¡ W
¢
E
W
E
Inter/Intra = 2DM
− x∗M /DM
= DM
/DM
− 1.

(10)

This is clearly increasing with respect to σ W and is decreasing with σ E , assuming σ E <
σW .
From this analysis, we can describe trade between any two countries A and B that
are identical in all respects other than inequality, with the aid of figure 6. Measuring the
inequality of country A along the horizontal axis, and holding B’s inequality constant, the
volume of intra-industry trade is increasing in σ A until σ A = σ B , beyond which the curve
can take any shape. The volume of inter-industry trade reaches a minimum of zero when
σ A = σ B , and increases once σ A crosses that point. When σ A < σ B , we can argue by
continuity that inter-industry trade must decrease with σ A in the neighborhood of σ B , but
outside that neighborhood it can take any shape, as shown. We also see that the ratio of interindustry to intra-industry trade (and therefore to total trade) has a V-shaped relationship
with inequality, reaching a minimum when the two trading partners have the same inequality.
Thus intra-industry trade as a proportion of total trade is high when the trading partners
are similar in this respect.
The following proposition summarizes the discussion above.
Proposition 5 Countries that are the same in all respects, but diﬀer in their levels of asset
inequality, engage in both inter- and intra-industry trade when they open up. An increase in
any country’s asset inequality always leads to an increase in the volume of trade in varieties
within the manufacturing sector, and to an increase in the relative price of a representative
variety (and thus to an increase in the rental price and a reduction in the wage). Interindustry trade increases with a country’s inequality, as long as it is greater than the partner
30

country’s inequality; while intra-industry trade increases with a country’s inequality, as long
as it is less than the partner country’s inequality. The ratio of inter-industry to intra-industry
trade has a V-shaped relationship with respect to a country’s inequality, reaching a minimum
of zero when it equals its trading partner’s inequality, in which case all trade is intra-industry.
Intra-industry trade as a proportion of total trade is high when trading partners are very
similar in their asset inequality.

C. Trade when countries diﬀer both in factor endowments and inequality
We now look at trade between two countries that diﬀer from each other both in inequality
and factor endowments. We assume the West to be more unequal as well as more capitalabundant than the East. Our expressions for inter- and intra-industry trade now become
the following:
¯
¯ W E
E W¯
W E
E W
n − DM
n , Intra = 2 Min[DM
n , DM
n ].
Inter = 2 ¯DM

Note that depending on the result of the opposing eﬀects of higher inequality and higher
capital abundance, the West can be a net exporter or importer of manufactures and therefore,
the ratio of inter- to intra-industry trade in this case is given by
W E
E W
W E
E W
n )/(DM
n )] − 1 when DM
n ≥ DM
n
Inter/Intra = [(DM
E W
W E
W E
E W
= [(DM
n )/(DM
n )] − 1 when DM
n < DM
n .
W /D E is increasing
It is easy to see, as in the case of identical factor endowments, that DM
M

with respect to σ W , and decreasing with σ E . If we assume that the two countries have the
same endowments of labor but the West has more capital than the East, it is straightforward
to obtain from the solution to the resource-constraint equations that
nE
kE − kF (p)
< 1,
=
nW
kW − kF (p)
31

where k i (i = E, W ) is the ratio of capital to labor endowment in country i. kF is the capitallabor ratio used in the production of food and it is the same for the two countries, due to
the common relative price that they face under free trade. Thus, we have
³ E´
∂ nnW
kF´(p)(kE − kW ) ∂p
=
> 0, for i = E, W.
∂σ i
(kW − kF (p))2 ∂σ i
In words, an increase of inequality anywhere induces an increase in total number of varieties
n = nE + nW . Since nE < nW , the proportional increase is larger for nE .
W nE ≥ D E nW ,
Thus when the West is a net importer of manufactures, i.e., when DM
M

the ratio of inter- to intra-industry trade is clearly increasing in the inequality of the West.
However, in this case, the eﬀect with respect to the inequality of the East turns out to be
W /D E ) dominates the eﬀect on
ambiguous. If the eﬀect on relative demand per variety (DM
M
³ E´
the relative output of varieties nnW in the two countries, we clearly recover the V-shaped

curve we saw above. Given that the latter eﬀect is zero in the identical factor endowment case,

we should expect by continuity that, for suﬃciently small relative endowment diﬀerences,
the former eﬀect dominates and the V-shaped relationship again obtains. This is confirmed
by our simulations described below.
We assume for the simulations a utility function given by U =

·³
Pn

i=1 (dMi )

ε−1
ε

´

ε
ε−1

¸1/2

+

log dF , where we pick ε = 3. Furthermore, we make α = 2 in the cost function for manufactures, that is, the first two units produced are thrown away. The average variable cost is
constant and is based on a Cobb-Douglas production with output elasticities with respect to
capital and labor equal to 0.8 and 0.2, respectively. Food is produced under constant returns
to scale using a Cobb-Douglas production function with output elasticities with respect to
labor and capital of 0.5 each. The labor endowments in each country are held at 1000 units
32

throughout.
As seen in figure 7 (lower left panel), the ratio of inter- to intra- industry trade is again
V-shaped with respect to country B’s inequality, holding constant the capital stocks of the
two countries and inequality in country A (whose values are shown). Increasing country B’s
capital stock shifts the entire curve to the right. This means that if we concentrate just
on the downward sloping branch (or exclusively on the upward sloping branch) of the V, a
given value of the inter/intra ratio for a higher value of country B’s capital stock requires
a higher level of B’s inequality. This can be seen directly by plotting the inter/intra ratio
as it changes with KB at fixed values of σ B , which is shown on the lower right panel. The
relationship is again V-shaped and the entire graph shifts to the right as a result of increases
in σ B .
This positive relationship between KB and σ B for given inter/intra ratio is shown in the
top panel of the figure. It plots the level sets corresponding to a three-dimensional plot of the
inter/intra ratio with respect to σ B on the horizontal axis and KB on the vertical axis. Level
sets that are further away from the inequality and capital-endowment combination of country
A (σ A , KA ) show increasing amounts of inter-industry trade. Thus, the three-dimensional
plot would be a valley stretching from the Southwest to the Northeast. The intuition behind
the upward sloping level sets is simple: while consumption of manufactures relative to food
increases with inequality (at a given price), production of manufactures relative to food is
positively dependent on capital abundance (also at a given price). Moreover, inter-industry
trade is positively related to the divergence between the two and therefore to maintain a
constant level of intra-industry trade relative to overall trade, some measure of this divergence

33

should be maintained. This, in turn, requires that as inequality increases, capital abundance
must increase. Finally, note that for each value of the inter/intra ratio there are two level
sets, one to right of the point representing country A and another to its left. In one case,
country A is the net exporter of manufactures and in the other case, it is the net importer.
Another interesting aspect of the simulations, which can be easily seen from figure 7,
is that a pair of countries with larger diﬀerences in factor endowments can have a smaller
ratio of inter-industry to overall trade than a country pair which is more similar in factor
endowments than the first. Furthermore, in the extreme case at the bottom of the valley
(that is, on the level curve that passes through σ A , KA ), two countries with diﬀerent factor
endowments do not have any inter-industry trade at all.

4

Implications for Trade Theory and Future Research

We incorporate demand-side considerations into the theory of international trade, by focusing on the role of inequality in the determination of trade flows and patterns. This requires
a model with nonhomothetic preferences, and we begin this concluding section by summarizing how the standard 2 x 2 model of international trade is amended when preferences are
nonhomothetic.
Inequality as a determinant of trade. When all else is equal (namely factor endowments
and technology), countries trade, and gain from trading, if their degrees of inequality are
diﬀerent. We get the exact opposite of the standard reason for trade: the gains from trade
are due to specialization in consumption, not in production.
Heckscher-Ohlin theorem. When all else is the same, the most equal country exports
the luxury, and imports the necessity. If the luxury good is capital-intensive, then the most
34

equal country exports capital services. When there are diﬀerences in factor endowments,
diﬀerences in inequality (and therefore diﬀerences in demand) interact with the standard
Heckscher-Ohlin diﬀerences in supply, to define a generalized comparative advantage.
International transmission of redistributive policies. The Stolper-Samuelson theorem can
be used to prove a new result: a redistributive policy in one country has, through demand
eﬀects and their impact on factor prices, an eﬀect in the same direction in the other country.
Missing trade. The interaction between demand-eﬀects (the impact of inequality on
comparative advantage) and supply-eﬀects (the impact of factor endowments on comparative
advantage) may lead to over- or under-predictions in the volume of trade.
In the second model in this paper, we change the nature of “manufactures” to being differentiated and produced under increasing returns and monopolistic competition. Perhaps
the most novel result is the V-shaped relationship between the ratio of inter- to intra-industry
trade and a country’s inequality. This ratio reaches a minimum of zero when the two countries’ inequality levels are the same (in which case all trade is intra-industry). Thus we can
restate Linder’s proposition more precisely and accurately than Linder himself: Intra-industry
trade as a proportion of total trade is increasing in the similarity of trading countries, with
“similarity” defined to include similarity in asset distribution. We provide further precision
to Linder’s conjecture by looking simultaneously at the role of international diﬀerences in
inequality and factor endowments in the determination of inter- versus intra-industry trade.
We mention briefly some implications of this paper for future research.
First, and most obviously, the assertion that inequality is a determinant of trade is an
empirically verifiable hypothesis. Such an empirical application is a project already under

35

way (see Dalgin, Mitra and Trindade 2003). An additional application would be to check
the role of inequality more specifically on inter- versus intra-industry trade.
Second, our results may have a bearing on the trade and wages literature, and specifically
on the factor content approach. With the assumption that luxuries are the capital-intensive
good, the most unequal country (the West) tends to import capital services. If the factor
content of trade were perfectly measured, this would not be a problem. However, one needs
to realize that what constitutes an “industry” is always the result of the aggregation of
more finely-defined industries. Assume complete specialization among these sub-industries,
such that some are exportables, and some are importables, in the West. Because the former
tend to be more labor-intensive, when one uses the input-output matrix to estimate the labor
input for the aggregate industry in the West, one over-estimates the labor content of imports,
and under-estimates their capital-content.26 A careful empirical analysis of the impact of
international trade on wages that takes demand eﬀects into account - of which the story
above is only an example - is still lacking.
Third, a dynamic version of our model may generate interesting results. Take Mani’s
(2001) paper, which also uses the working assumptions that tastes are nonhomothetic and
necessities are (low-skilled) labor intensive. In her model, an initial high level of inequality
reduces the demand for (low-skilled) labor, thereby perpetuating the inequality level. Conversely, an initial lower level of inequality may produce a virtuous cycle that further reduces
the inequality. In the context of an open economy model, one result is that one country’s
redistributive policies may have a permanent impact on the inequality in its trading partner.
26

An analogous, and more detailed, reasoning may be found in Davis and Weinstein (2001), on which this
discussion was inspired.

36

Furthermore, any changes in factor rewards change the relative incentives for factor accumulation, with potentially important consequences for (standard) comparative advantage, and
for the composition of trade.27
Fourth, we already noted, based on the results in lemma 1, that the rich and the poor
in one country may have the same or diﬀerent preference orderings over the terms of trade,
depending on the level of inequality. This may have implications for political economy. If,
for instance, the preference orderings of the rich and the poor in the West are diﬀerent, but
they are the same in the East, the two countries may have diﬀerent negotiating power in an
international setting.
One last application may be for taxation policy.28 When both capital and labor are
taxed, there are two ways to enact a regressive distribution policy. The first is the policy
assumed in the main text: a transfer of assets from the poor to the rich, or, equivalently, a
transfer of income. The second would be a lower tax on capital, and a higher tax on labor,
which impacts the relative income of the rich and the poor through factor rewards. The
question then is whether the rich or the poor prefer one or the other mechanism. In the open
economy, one could ask the same question of the rich and the poor in the other country.
27

We are grateful to Nuno Limao for these suggestions.

28

We are grateful to Mike Conlin for this idea.

37

References
Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop, 2003. “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution
to the Border Puzzle.” American Economic Review, 93, 1 (March), 170-192.
Chung, Chul, 2000. “Factor Content of Trade: Nonhomothetic Preferences and ‘Missing
Trade.’” Georgia Institute of Technology manuscript.
Dalgin, Muhammed, Devashish Mitra and Vitor Trindade, 2003. “Inequality, Nonhomothetic Preferences and Trade: a Gravity Approach.” Syracuse University manuscript.
Davis, Donald R., David E. Weinstein, 2001. “An Account of Global Factor Trade.”
American Economic Review 91, 5 (December), 1423-1453.
Davis, Donald R., David E. Weinstein, Bradford, Scott C. and Shimpo, Kazushige,
1997. “Using International and Japanese Regional Data to Determine When the Factor
Abundance Theory of Trade Works.” American Economic Review 87, 3 (June), 421446.
Ethier, Wilfred J., 1982, “National and International Returns to Scale in the Modern
Theory of International Trade,” American Economic Review 72, June, 950-959.
Feenstra, Robert C., 2003. Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Francois, Joseph F. and Seth Kaplan, 1996. “Aggregate Demand Shifts, Income Distribution, and the Linder Hypothesis.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, 2 (May),
244-250.
Grossman, Gene M. and Giovanni Maggi, 2000. “Diversity and Trade.” American Economic Review 90, 5 (December), 1255-1275.
Helpman, Elhanan, 1981. “International Trade in the Presence of Product Diﬀerentiation, Economies of Scale, and Monopolistic Competition.” Journal of International
Economics, 11, 3 (August), 305-340.
Helpman, Elhanan and Krugman, Paul R., 1985. Market Structure and Foreign Trade:
Increasing Returns, Imperfect Competition and the International Economy. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Hunter, Linda C., 1991. “The Contribution of Nonhomothetic Preferences to Trade.”
Journal of International Economics 30, 345-358.
Hunter, Linda C. and James R. Markusen, 1988. “Per-Capita Income as a Determinant
of Trade.” In Robert C. Feenstra, ed., Empirical Methods for International Trade. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Johnson, Harry G., 1959. “International Trade, Income Distribution, and the Oﬀer
Curve.” Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies, 27, 241-260.
38

Krishna, Kala and Cemile Yavas, 2001. “Wage Equality in a General Equilibrium Model
with Indivisibilities.” Pennsylvania State University manuscript.
Krugman, Paul R., 1979. “Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition, and International Trade.” Journal of International Economics 9, 4 (November), 469-479.
Linder, Staﬀan, 1961. An Essay on Trade and Transformation. Almqvist and Wicksell,
Stockholm.
Mani, Anandi, 2001. “Income Distribution and the Demand Constraint.” Journal of
Economic Growth, 6, 2 (June), 107-133.
Markusen, James R., 1986. “Explaining the Volume of Trade: an Eclectic Approach.”
American Economic Review, 76, 5 (December), 1002-1011.
Matsuyama, Kiminori, 2000. “A Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods under
Nonhomothetic Preferences: Demand Complementarities, Income Distribution, and
North-South Trade.” Journal of Political Economy 108, 6 (December), 1093-1120.
Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, 1989. “Income Distribution,
Market Size, and Industrialization.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104, 3 (August),
537-564.
Ramezzana, Paolo, 2002. “Per Capita Income and Industrial Demand in Economic
Development and International Trade.” University of Virginia manuscript.
Tchamourliyski, Yuriy, 2002. “Distance and Bilateral Trade: the Role of Nonhomothetic Preferences.” Boston College manuscript.
Thursby, Jerry G. and Marie C. Thursby, 1987. “Bilateral Trade Flows, the Linder
Hypothesis, and Exchange Risk.” Review of Economics and Statistics 69, 3 (August),
488-495.
Trefler, Daniel, 1995. “The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries.” American
Economic Review, 85, 5 (December), 1029-1046.

39

M

Income
Expansion
Path

IR

IP
∆CMR

∆CMP
F
Figure 1

p
YW=YE=Y

pW
pFT

CW

pE
C
CE

CE

CFT
Figure 2

CW

C,Y

p

sE P
sP
sW P

πE

pFT

pW
πW

pE

sWC
sC
sEC

tE

τE

τW
Figure 3a

tW

sP,sC

sE P
p
sP

sWP

πE
pE

pFT
pW
πW

sWC
sC
sEC

tE

tW
τE

Figure 3b

τW

sC,sP

D'
p

R

D

p*'
p*

n*

n*'
Figure 4

n

D(2W)
D(W+E)
R(W)=R(E)
D(2E)

p

D(W)
D(E)
R(2W)=R(2E)=R(W+E)

p*(W)
p*(W+E)
p*(E)

n*(E)

n*(W)

n*(2E)

Figure 5

n*(W+E)

n*(2W)

n

Inter,
Intra

Inter/ Intra

Inter

Inter/ Intra

Intra

σB

σA
Figure 6

σB

σA

1001.5

KB

.

1000

(σA,KA)

Level Curves for
Inter/Intra

999
0.5

0.75
0.0025

1

σB = 0.65

0.0012

σA= 0.75, KA= 1000

Inter/Intra

σA= 0.75, KA= 1000

σB

0.001
0.002

σB = 0.75
0.0008

0.0015

0.0006
0.001

KB = 1000.5

0.0004

KB = 1000

0.0005

0.0002

σB = 0.85

KB = 999.5
0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

σB

999.5

Figure 7

1000

1000.5

1001

KB

1001.5

