                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                         GLOBAL SOURCING

                                               Pol Antràs
                                            Elhanan Helpman

                                          Working Paper 10082
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10082


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2003




Antràs thanks the Bank of Spain and Helpman thanks the NSF for financial support. We have received very
helpful comments from Gene Grossman, Nancy Stokey, two anonymous referees, and from seminar
participants at Tel Aviv University, Bocconi University, the CIAR meeting in Santiago de Compostela,
Princeton University, New York University, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of
Munich, Columbia University, Penn State University, and Boston College. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Pol Antràs and Elhanan Helpman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Global Sourcing
Pol Antràs and Elhanan Helpman
NBER Working Paper No. 10082
November 2003
JEL No. D23, F12, F14, F23, L11

                                           ABSTRACT

We present a North—South model of international trade in which differentiated products are

developed in the North. Sectors are populated by final-good producers who differ in productivity

levels. Based on productivity and sectoral characteristics, firms decide whether to integrate into the

production of intermediate inputs or outsource them. In either case they have to decide from which

country to source the inputs. Final-good producers and their suppliers must make relationship-

specific investments, both in an integrated firm and in an arm’s-length relationship. We describe an

equilibrium in which firms with different productivity levels choose different ownership structures

and supplier locations, i.e., they choose different organizational forms. We then study the effects of

within-sectoral heterogeneity and variations in industry characteristics on the relative prevalence of

these organizational forms. The analysis sheds light on the structure of foreign trade within and

across industries.

Pol Antràs
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
pantras@fas.harvard.edu

Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02135
and NBER
ehelpman@harvard.edu
1     Introduction
A …rm that chooses to keep the production of an intermediate input within its bound-
aries can produce it at home or in a foreign country. When it keeps it at home, it
engages in standard vertical integration. And when it makes it abroad, it engages in
foreign direct investment (FDI) and intra-…rm trade. Alternatively, a …rm may choose
to outsource an input in the home country or in a foreign country. When it buys
the input at home, it engages in domestic outsourcing. And when it buys it abroad,
it engages in foreign outsourcing, or arm’s-length trade. Intel Corporation provides
an example of the FDI strategy; it assembles most of its microchips in wholly-owned
subsidiaries in China, Costa Rica, Malaysia, and the Philippines. On the other hand,
Nike provides an example of the arm’s-length import strategy; it subcontracts most
of its manufacturing to independent producers in Thailand, Indonesia, Cambodia, and
Vietnam.
    Growth of international specialization has been a dominant feature of the inter-
national economy. Amongst the many examples that illustrate this trend, two are
particularly telling. Citing Tempest (1996), Feenstra (1998) illustrates Mattel’s global
sourcing strategy in the production of its star product, the Barbie doll. “Of the $2
export value for the dolls when they leave Hong Kong for the United States,”he writes,
“about 35 cents covers Chinese labor, 65 cents covers the cost of materials,”— which
are imported from Taiwan, Japan, and the United States — “and the remainder covers
transportation and overheads, including pro…ts earned in Hong Kong”(pp.35-36). The
World Trade Organization provides another example in its 1998 annual report. In the
production of an “American” car, 30 percent of the car’s value originates in Korea,
17.5 percent in Japan, 7.5 percent in Germany, 4 percent in Taiwan and Singapore,
2.5 percent in the U.K., and 1.5 percent in Ireland and Barbados. That is, “...only 37
percent of the production value... is generated in the United States”(p.36).
    The increasing international disintegration of production is large enough to be no-
ticed in aggregate statistics. Feenstra and Hanson (1996) use U.S. input–output tables
to infer U.S. imports of intermediate inputs. They …nd that the share of imported in-
termediates increased from 5.3% of total U.S. intermediate purchases in 1972 to 11.6%
in 1990. Campa and Goldberg (1997) …nd similar evidence for Canada and the U.K.
(but not for Japan). And Hummels, Ishii and Yi (2001) and Yeats (2001) show that
international trade has grown faster in components than in …nal goods.
    But how important is intra-…rm relative to arm’s-length trade in intermediate in-


                                           1
puts? A …rm-level data analysis is needed to answer this question, and no such analysis
is available at this point in time. And despite the fact that the business press has
stressed the spectacular growth of foreign outsourcing, Hanson, Mataloni and Slaugh-
ter (2002) document an equally impressive growth of trade within multinational …rms.
Nevertheless, the fact that according to BEA data imports from foreign a¢ liates of
U.S.-based …rms has fallen from 23.9% of total U.S. imports in 1977 to 16.1% in 1982,
and remained roughly at this level until 1999, suggests that the growth of foreign
outsourcing by U.S. …rms might have outpaced the growth of their foreign intra-…rm
sourcing.
   Other studies have documented a rise in the prevalence of domestic outsourcing by
U.S. …rms. The Economist (1991), Bamford (1994) and Abraham and Taylor (1996),
all report rising subcontracting in particular industries or activities. A systematic
analysis of this trend is not available. Nevertheless, Fan and Lang (2000) provide indi-
rect evidence of a decline in vertical integration. According to their data, the average
number of four-digit SIC segments in which a U.S. publicly-traded manufacturing com-
pany operates, declined steadily from 2.72 in 1979 to 1.81 in 1997. This suggests that
U.S. manufacturing …rms have become more specialized over time.
   To address issues that arise from the choice of outsourcing versus integration and
home versus foreign production, we need a theoretical framework in which companies
make endogenous organizational choices. We propose such a framework in this paper
by integrating two recent strands of the literature.
   Melitz (2003) and Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2003) have studied the e¤ects
of within sectoral heterogeneity on the decisions of …rms to serve foreign markets. By
allowing productivity to di¤er across …rms, they show that low-productivity …rms serve
only the domestic market while high-productivity …rms also serve foreign markets.
Allowing for horizontal foreign direct investment, Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple also
show that, amongst the …rms that serve foreign markets, the more productive ones
engage in foreign direct investment while the less productive …rms export, and a¢ liate
sales relative to exports are larger in sectors with more productivity dispersion. Their
approach emphasizes variations across …rms within industries, without addressing the
organizational choices of …rms that need to acquire intermediate inputs.
   Grossman and Helpman (2002) address the choice between outsourcing and integra-
tion in a one-input general equilibrium framework, assuming that all …rms of a given
type are equally productive. Their …rms face the friction of incomplete contracts in
arm’s-length relationships, which they weigh against the less-e¢ cient production of in-


                                           2
puts in integrated companies. As a result, some sectors have only vertically integrated
…rms while others have only disintegrated …rms. Grossman and Helpman identify sec-
toral characteristics that lead to one or the other equilibrium structure. This approach
has been extended by Antràs (2003a) to a trading environment, by introducing two new
features. First, the friction of incomplete contracts also exists within integrated …rms,
and — as in Grossman and Hart (1986) — integration provides well de…ned property
rights. However, these property rights may or may not give integration an advan-
tage over outsourcing. Second, there are two inputs, one controlled by the …nal-good
producer, the other by another supplier, inside or outside the …rm. The relative inten-
sity of these inputs turns out to be an important determinant of the choice between
integration and outsourcing.
   By embodying this structure in a Helpman and Krugman (1985) style two-sector
general equilibrium model of trading countries, Antràs shows that the sector that is
relatively intensive in the input controlled by the …nal-good producer integrates, while
the sector that is relatively intensive in the other input outsources. As a result, in
the former sector there is intra-…rm trade in inputs, while in the latter sector there is
arm’s-length trade.
   Building on this literature, we develop a theoretical model that combines the within-
sectoral heterogeneity of Melitz (2003) with the structure of …rms in Antràs (2003a).
The …nal-good producer controls the supply of headquarter services while a supplier of
intermediate goods controls the quality and quantity of the intermediates. This allows
us to study the impact of variations in productivity within sectors and in di¤erences in
technological and organizational characteristics across sectors on international trade,
foreign direct investment, and the organizational choices of …rms. In this framework
trade, investment and organization are interdependent. The incentives created by
di¤erent organizations, di¤erences in their …xed costs, and wage di¤erentials across
countries shape the equilibrium organizational structure.
   We show that in a world of two countries, North and South, in which …nal-good pro-
ducers are based in the North, …nal-good producers who operate in the same sector but
di¤er by productivity sort into integrated companies that produce inputs in the North
(do not engage in foreign trade in inputs), integrated companies that produce inputs in
the South (engage in FDI and intra-…rm trade), disintegrated companies that outsource
in the North (do not engage in foreign trade in inputs), and disintegrated companies
that outsource in the South (import inputs at arm’s length). Moreover, we show that
in sectors with low headquarter intensive …rms do not integrate; low-productivity …rms


                                           3
outsource in the North while high-productivity …rms outsource in the South. In sectors
with high headquarter intensity all four organizational forms may exist in equilibrium,
and, as in sectors with low headquarter intensity, high-productivity …rms import inputs
while low-productivity …rms acquire them in the North. However, amongst the …rms
that acquire inputs in the same country, the low-productivity …rms outsource while
the high-productivity …rms insource. This implies that the least-productive …rms out-
source in the North while the most productive …rms insource in the South via foreign
direct investment.
    We use the model to study the relative prevalence of di¤erent organizational forms.
We show how prevalence depends on the wage gap between the North and the South,
the trading costs of intermediate inputs, the degree of productivity dispersion within a
sector, the distribution of bargaining power, the size of the ownership advantage (which
may be di¤erent in the two countries), and the intensity of headquarter services. Our
model predicts that relatively more …nal-good producers rely on imported intermediates
in sectors with higher productivity dispersion or lower headquarter intensity. And in
sectors with integration and outsourcing, which are the sectors with high headquarter
intensity, industries with higher productivity dispersion have relatively more …nal-good
producers who integrate. This is true for a comparison of integration versus outsourcing
in each of the countries. As a result, such sectors have more intra-…rm trade relative to
arm’s-length trade. These results illustrate the types of issues that can be addressed
with our model.
    Our model is developed in the next section. In section 3 we characterize an indus-
try’s equilibrium. Then, in section 4, we describe the equilibrium sorting of …rms into
di¤erent organizational forms, and we study in section 5 the prevalence of each mode
of organization. This is also the section that examines the e¤ects of variations within
and across sectors on the relative prevalence of organizational forms. Section 6 o¤ers
a short summary with concluding comments.


2     The Model
Consider a world with two countries, the North and the South, and a unique factor
of production, labor. The world is populated by a unit measure of consumers with




                                           4
identical preferences represented by:

                                              1X
                                               J
                                 U = x0 +              Xj , 0 <              < 1,
                                                 j=1


where x0 is consumption of a homogeneous good, Xj is an index of aggregate consump-
tion in sector j, and        is a parameter. Aggregate consumption in sector j is a CES
function                               Z                   1=
                               Xj =         xj (i) di           , 0<          < 1,

of the consumption of di¤erent varieties xj (i), where the range of i will be endogenously
determined. The elasticity of substitution between any two varieties in a given sector
is 1=(1          ). We assume that          >    , so that varieties within a sector are more
substitutable for each other than they are substitutable for x0 or for varieties from a
di¤erent sector. This leads to the inverse demand function for each variety i in sector
j:
                                                                     1
                                       pj (i) = Xj          xj (i)       .                      (1)

         Producers of di¤erentiated products face a perfectly elastic supply of labor in each
one of the countries. We denote by wN the wage rate in the North and by wS the wage
rate in the South. These wage rates are …xed and wN > wS . The assumption of …xed
wage rates and a higher wage rate in the North can be justi…ed in general equilibrium
by assuming that w` is the productivity of labor in producing x0 in country `, ` = N; S,
and that labor supply is large enough in every country so that both countries produce
x0 .
         The demand parameters        and       are the same in every industry, which helps to
focus attention on cross-sectoral di¤erences in technology and organizational costs. Our
aim is to explore how di¤erences in technology interact with organizational choices in
shaping industrial structure, trade ‡ows and FDI.
         Only the North knows how to produce …nal-good varieties. To start producing a
variety in sector j a …rm needs to bear a …xed cost of entry consisting of fE units of
Northern labor. Upon paying this …xed cost, the unique producer of variety i in sector
j draws a productivity level          from a known distribution G ( ).1 After observing this
     1
    To be more precise, the unique producer of variety i draws a particular realization (i) from the
distribution G ( ). However, we drop the variety index i from (i) in order to simplify the notation.
For the same reason we drop the sectoral index j from the …xed cost variable fE and the distribution
function G ( ).



                                                       5
productivity level, the …nal-good producer decides whether to exit the market or start
producing; in the latter case an additional …xed cost of organizing production needs to
be incurred. As discussed below, this additional …xed cost is a function of the structure
of ownership and the location of production.
   Production of any …nal-good variety requires a combination of two variety-speci…c
inputs, hj (i) and mj (i), which we associate with headquarter services and manufac-
tured components, respectively. Output of every variety is a sector-speci…c Cobb-
Douglas function of the inputs,
                                                      1
                                hj (i)   j
                                             mj (i)       j

                  xj (i) =                                    ;   0<   j   < 1,            (2)
                                   j         1    j


where the productivity parameter         is …rm speci…c while the parameter       j   is sector
speci…c. The larger is    j   the more intensive is the sector in headquarter services.
Headquarter services hj (i) can be produced only in the North, with one unit of labor
per unit output, while intermediate inputs mj (i) can be produced in the North and in
the South, with one unit of labor per unit output in each one of the countries.
   There are two types of agents engaged in production: …nal-good producers who
supply headquarter-services and operators of manufacturing plants who supply in-
termediate inputs. We use H to denote a …nal-good producer and M to denote a
supplier of intermediate inputs. Every …nal-good producer H needs to contract with a
manufacturing-plant operator M for the provision of components. We allow interna-
tional fragmentation of the production process, so that H can choose to transact with
a manufacturing-plant operator M in the North or in the South.
   It follows from our assumptions that all …nal-good producers locate in the North.
Upon paying the …xed cost of entry wN fE and observing the productivity level , the
unique …nal-good producer H of variety i in sector j seeks out a supplier of components
M in the North or in the South. Simultaneously, H chooses whether to insource or
outsource intermediate inputs. The joint management costs of …nal and intermediate
goods production, such as supervision, quality control, accounting and marketing, de-
pend on the organizational form and the location of M . All these costs, the sum of
which we term …xed organizational costs, are in terms of Northern labor. We denote
them by wN fk` , where k is an index of the ownership structure and ` is an index of the
country in which M is located and the manufacturing of components takes place.
   The ownership structure takes one of two forms: vertical integration V or outsourc-
ing O. The location of M is in one of two sites: in the North N or in the South S.


                                              6
Therefore k 2 fV; Og and ` 2 fN; Sg. An organizational form consists of an ownership
structure and a location of M .
   We assume that the …xed organizational costs are higher when M is located in the
South regardless of ownership structure, because the …xed costs of search, monitoring,
and communication are signi…cantly higher in the foreign country. Namely, fkS > fVN
and fkS > fON for k = V; O. We also assume that, given the location of M , the …xed
organizational costs of a V -…rm are higher than the …xed organizational costs of an
O-…rm. Namely, fV` > fO` for ` = N; S. We make this assumption in order to avoid
a taxonomy of cases. There exists a tension between two considerations that a¤ect
the ranking of fV` and fO` . On the one hand, the need to supervise the production of
intermediate inputs in addition to other managerial tasks raises managerial overload
and the …xed organizational costs of a V -…rm relative to an O-…rm. On the other hand,
economies of scope in the management of diverse activities reduce the …xed organiza-
tional costs of a V -…rm relative to an O-…rm. Our ordering amounts to assuming that
managerial overload is more important than managerial economies of scope. Although
we believe this assumption to be appropriate in many instances, and we therefore main-
tain it in the main analysis, we shall point out how some of the results change when
fV` < fO` . As a result of these assumptions the …xed organizational costs are ranked as
follows:
                                  fVS > fOS > fVN > fON .                             (3)

   The setting is one of incomplete contracts. Final-good producers and manufacturing-
plant operators cannot sign ex-ante enforceable contracts specifying the purchase of
specialized intermediate inputs for a certain price. In addition, the parties cannot
write enforceable contracts contingent on the amount of labor hired or on the volume
of sales revenues obtained when the …nal good is sold. One can use arguments of the
type developed by Hart and Moore (1999) and Segal (1999) to justify this speci…cation.
Namely, that the parties cannot commit not to renegotiate an initial contract and that
the precise nature of the required input is revealed only ex-post, and it is not veri…able
by a third party. To simplify the analysis, we just impose these constraints on the
contracting environment.
   Because no enforceable contract can be signed ex-ante, …nal-good producers and
manufacturing-plant operators bargain over the surplus from the relationship after the
inputs have been produced. We model this ex-post bargaining as a Generalized Nash
Bargaining game in which the …nal-good producer obtains a fraction         2 (0; 1) of the



                                            7
ex-post gains from the relationship.2
       Following the property-rights approach to the theory of the …rm, we assume that
ex-post bargaining takes place both under outsourcing and under integration. The
distribution of surplus is sensitive, however, to the mode of organization. More speci…-
cally, the outside option of H is assumed to be di¤erent when it owns the manufacturing
plant than when it does not. In the latter case, a failure to reach an agreement on
the distribution of the surplus leaves both parties with no income, because the inputs
are tailored speci…cally to the other party in the transaction. However, by vertically
integrating the production of components, H is e¤ectively buying the right to …re M
and seize the inputs mj (i). If there were no costs associated with …ring the operator
of the manufacturing plant, the …nal-good producer would always have an incentive to
seize the inputs mj (i) ex-post, and M would have an incentive to choose mj (i) = 0
ex-ante (which of course would imply xj (i) = 0). In this case integration would never
                                                                                                       `
be chosen. We therefore assume that …ring M results in a loss of a fraction 1
of …nal-good production, because H cannot use the intermediate inputs without M
                                                                                            N      S
as e¤ectively as it can with the cooperation of M .3 We also assume that                               .
This captures the notion that a contractual breach is likely to be more costly to H
when M is in the South. More …guratively, we think of this assumption as re‡ecting
less corruption and better legal protection in the North. As is clear from the weak
                                                         N       S 4
inequality, however, our results still hold when             =    .
       The location of M and the mode of ownership are chosen ex-ante by H to maximize
its pro…ts. There is an in…nitely elastic supply of M agents in each one of the countries.
H o¤ers a contract that seeks to attract a plant operator M . The contract includes
an upfront fee for participation in the relationship that has to be paid by M . This fee
can be positive or negative, i.e., the operator can make a payment to the …nal good
producer or vice versa. The purpose of the fee is to secure the participation of M in
the relationship at minimum cost to H. When the supply of M is in…nitely elastic,
M ’s pro…ts from the relationship net of the participation fee are equal in equilibrium
to its ex-ante outside option. For simplicity, we set M ’s ex-ante outside option equal
to zero in both countries. It is, however, easy to extend the analysis to cases in which
these outside options are positive and di¤erent in the North and in the South.
   2
     This speci…cation is similar to Grossman and Helpman (2002) and Antràs (2003a,b).
   3
     The fact that the fraction of …nal-good production lost is independent of j greatly simpli…es the
analysis, but it is not necessary for the qualitative results discussed below.
   4
     We maintain a distinction between N and S in order to show in Section 5 that these two
parameters a¤ect the relative prevalence of di¤erent organizational forms in distinct ways.



                                                  8
3     Equilibrium
Consider the payo¤s in the bargaining game for a pair of agents H and M in sector
j. Since from now on we discuss a particular sector, we drop for simplicity the index
j from all the variables. If the parties agree in the bargaining, the potential revenue
from the sale of the …nal goods is R(i) = p(i)x(i), which, using (1) and (2), can be
written as
                                                                          (1   )
                                                     h (i)        m (i)
                              R(i) = X                                             .                        (4)
                                                                  1
If they fail to agree, however, the outside option of M is always 0 while that of H
varies with the ownership structure and the location of components manufacturing.
    When H outsources components, its outside option is also 0 regardless of the loca-
tion of the manufacturing plant. In this event H gets R(i) while M gets (1                              ) R(i).
    Following Grossman and Hart (1986), we assume that the …nal-good producer has
more leverage under vertical integration. When the parties fail to reach an agree-
                                         `
ment, H can sell an amount                   x(i) of output when its manufacturing plant is in
country `, which
            h     yieldsi the revenue ` R(i). The ex-post gains from trade are
                    `
in this case 1           R(i). In the bargaining, H receives its outside option plus
                                                  h         i
a fraction of the quasi-rents, i.e., ` R(i) +       1    `
                                                              R(i), while M obtains
        h        i
              `
(1     ) 1         R(i).
    Notice that the payo¤s in the bargaining game are proportional to the revenue.
                 `
Denoting by      k R(i)   the payo¤ of H under ownership structure k and the location of
                                             N       S
M in country `, the assumption                           implies that

     N       N                    N              S        S               S            N       S
     V   =        +       1                      V   =        +    1               >   O   =   O   = .      (5)

That is, …nal-good producers are able to appropriate higher fractions of revenue under
integration than under outsourcing, with this fraction being higher when integration
takes place in the North. As in Grossman and Hart (1986), integration gives H residual
rights of control that allow it ex-post to use the inputs produced by M , which in turn
enhances H’s bargaining position. As a result, H gets a higher fraction of the revenue
under integration.
    Since the delivery of the inputs h (i) and m (i) is not contractible ex-ante, the parties
choose their quantities noncooperatively; every supplier maximizes its own payo¤. In
                                                                                                       `
particular, H provides an amount of headquarter services that maximizes                                k R(i)
                                                                                                   `
wN h (i) while M provides an amount of components that maximizes 1                                 k    R(i)

                                                         9
w` m (i). Combining the …rst-order conditions of these two programs, using (4), the
total value of the relationship, as measured by total operating pro…ts, can be expressed
as:
                         `                                              =(1         )   `
                         k    ( ; X; ) = X (            )=(1       )
                                                                                        k   ( )           wN fk`                   (6)

where
                                                          `                         `
                                  `          1            k       + 1               k   (1            )
                                  k   ( )=                                                  =(1       )
                                                                                                           .                       (7)
                                                                                1
                                                 1   wN                w`
                                                      `                     `
                                                      k            1        k


                                                                                                  `
Note that among the arguments of the pro…t function                                               k   ( ; X; ), the …rst one is
…rm-speci…c while the others are industry-speci…c. Moreover, while                                                     is a parameter
measuring the intensity of headquarter services, the consumption index X is endoge-
nous to the industry but exogenous to the producer of a speci…c variety of the …nal
good.
      Our assumptions imply that the …nal-good producer chooses the organizational
                              `
form that maximizes           k   ( ; X; ). To see why, recall that ex-ante, before a relationship
between H and M has been formed, H o¤ers a contract designed to attract an M agent
whose ex-ante outside option is zero, and the contract includes a participation fee, say
t ? 0, that has to be paid by M . Under these circumstances the …nal-good producer
                                                                        `                   `
of brand i expects to earn operating pro…ts                             Hk      =           k R(i)    +t            wN h (i)   wN fHk
                                                                                                                                   `
                                                                                                                                      ,
       `
where fHk represents the component of the …xed costs that H has to bear when M is
located in ` and the ownership structure is k. On the other hand, M expects to earn
                         `                   `
operating pro…ts         Mk    = 1           k   R(i)         t        w` m (i)              wN fM
                                                                                                 `
                                                                                                   k from the relationship
               `
with H, where fM k represents the component of the …xed costs that M has to bear.
               `     `      `
By de…nition, fHk + fM k = fk . Next note that H has an incentive to raise t as much
                                                                                    `
as possible, as long as the participation constraint                                Mk        0 is satis…ed, because once a
relationship between H and M is formed, the participation fee has no further e¤ects on
                                                                                                               `
the outcomes. As a result, the equilibrium value of t satis…es                                                 Mk   = 0, which implies
         `
that     Hk   = R(i)     wN h (i)         w` m (i)            wN fk` : It follows that in a subgame perfect
                `         `
equilibrium     Hk   =    k   ( ; X; ).
      Upon observing its productivity level , a …nal-good producer H chooses the own-
ership structure and the location of manufacturing that maximizes (6), or exits the
industry and forfeits the …xed cost of entry wN fE . It is clear from (6) that the latter
occurs whenever is below a threshold , denoted by 2 (0; 1), at which the operating
pro…ts
                                                                                    `
                                      ( ; X; ) =              max                   k   ( ; X; )                                   (8)
                                                     k2fV;Og;`2fN;Sg


                                                              10
equal zero. Namely,           is implicitly de…ned by

                                                ( ; X; ) = 0:                                        (9)

This threshold productivity level depends on the sector’s aggregate consumption index
X, i.e., (X).
      In solving the problem on the right-hand-side of (8), a …nal-good producer e¤ec-
                                   `    `   `
tively chooses the triplet         k ; w ; fk   that maximizes (6). It is straightforward to see
         `
that     k   ( ; X; ) is decreasing in both w` and fk` . For this reason …nal-good producers
prefer to organize production so as to minimize both variable and …xed costs. On
account of variable costs, Southern manufacturing is preferred to Northern manufac-
turing regardless of the ownership structure (because wN > wS ). On account of …xed
costs, however, the ranking of pro…t levels is the reverse of the ranking of …xed cost
levels in (3).
      Next note that if the …nal-good producer could freely choose its fraction of revenue
 `                                                           `
 k,   it would choose         2 [0; 1] that maximizes        k   ( ). This fraction is
                                                 p
                               (   +1       )           (1   ) (1        )(    +1        )
                    ( )=                                                                     .      (10)
                                                         2   1
                          `
Although a higher         k   gives H a larger fraction of the revenue, it also induces M to
produce fewer components. As a result, the …nal-good producer trades the choice of a
larger fraction of the revenue for a smaller revenue level.
      The function       ( ) is depicted by the solid curve in Figure 1. It rises in ;           (0) = 0
and       (1) = 1.5 To understand these properties, notice that in the ex-post bargaining
neither H nor M appropriate the full marginal return to their investments in the supply
of headquarter services and components, respectively. This leads them to underinvest
in the provision of these inputs. Each party’s severity of underinvestment is inversely
related to the fraction of the surplus that it appropriates. Ex-ante e¢ ciency then
requires giving a larger share of the revenue to the party undertaking the relatively
more important investment. As a result, the higher the intensity of headquarter services
(the larger is ), the higher is the pro…t-maximizing fraction of the surplus accruing to
the …nal-good producer (the higher is              ).
      Following Grossman and Hart (1986), we do not allow a free ex-ante choice of the
division rule of the surplus. The choice of ownership structure and the location of
  5
      Notice also that it does not depend on factor prices and that it is less nonlinear the higher is .



                                                     11
                        β * (η )

                        1




                       β VN
                       β VS
                       β




                                                                                  η
                            0         ηM                      ηH             1


            Figure 1: Distribution of Revenue that Maximizes Joint Pro…ts


the manufacturing of components are the only instruments for a¤ecting the division
                                                                                          `
rule, in the sense that the …nal-good producer is constrained to choose a                 k   in the set
  N    N    S    S                                                   `
  V;   O;   V;   O   . When        is close to 1, higher values of   k   yield higher pro…ts. Given
the ordering in (5), this implies that H would have chosen domestic integration if there
were no other di¤erences in the costs and bene…ts of the competing organizational
                                                                         `
forms. Conversely, when            is close to 0, lower values of        k   yield higher pro…ts, and
H would have chosen outsourcing in the absence of other di¤erences in the costs and
bene…ts of the organizational forms. Naturally, there are other di¤erences in the costs
and bene…ts of various organizational forms. As a result, the pro…t-maximizing choice
of an ownership structure and the location of the manufacturing of components depends
on a …rm’s productivity level.
   Free entry ensures that, in equilibrium, the expected operating pro…ts of a po-
tential entrant equal the …xed cost of entry. From the discussion above, a …rm that
draws a productivity level below           (X) chooses to exit, because its operating pro…ts
are negative. On the other hand, …rms with                  (X) stay in the industry, and they
choose organizational forms that maximize their pro…ts. Under the circumstances the




                                                  12
                Outsourcing    Outsourcing                         Outsourcing Integration Outsourcing Integration
        Exit    in N           in S                           Exit in N        in N        in S        in S (FDI)
                                                  θ                                                                   θ
    0                                                     0
               Component-Intensive Sector                                 Headquarter-Intensive Sector


                                      Figure 2: Organizational Forms


free-entry condition can be expressed as
                                      Z      1
                                                 ( ; X; ) dG ( ) = wN fE .                                           (11)
                                          (X)


This condition provides an implicit solution to the sector’s real consumption index
X. Using the sector’s consumption index, it is then possible to calculate all other
variables of interest, such as the threshold productivity level of surviving entrants, the
organizational forms of …nal-good producers with di¤erent productivity levels, and the
number of entrants.


4        Organizational Forms
The choice of an organizational form faces two types of tensions. First, variable costs
are lower in the South, but …xed costs are higher there. Second, insourcing gives H
a larger fraction of the revenue, but it has higher …xed costs. And moreover, because
giving H a higher fraction of the revenue raises its incentive to supply headquarter
services but reduces M ’s incentive to supply components, H does not always bene…t
from a higher fraction of the revenue. These tradeo¤s are the central considerations in
the choice of an organizational form.
    To simplify the discussion, we examine in this section organizational forms in only
two types of sectors: those with relatively high headquarter intensity and those with
relatively low headquarter intensity. Intermediate cases can be similarly analyzed.
We show below that …rms sort into organizational forms according to the patterns
depicted in Figure 2. First, in component-intensive sectors (i.e., low ) …rms do not
integrate; high-productivity …rms outsource components in the South, low-productivity
…rms outsource them in the North, and the least productive …rms exit. On the other


                                                        13
hand, integration takes place in headquarter-intensive sectors (i.e., high ). The most
productive …rms integrate in the South while somewhat less productive …rms outsource
in the South. Firms with even lower productivity acquire components in the North, and
amongst them the more productive integrate while the less productive outsource. The
least productivity …rms exit. Note that surviving …rms with the lowest productivity
outsource in the North in all sectors. And more generally, less productive …rms acquire
components in the North while more productive …rms acquire them in the South.
      We now derive these results. First consider a sector with low headquarter intensity
                                 N       S
 , such that             ( )<    O   =   O   = ; we refer to it as a component-intensive sector.
This case is depicted in Figure 1 by                    =         M,      where the arrows indicate the direction
                                                            `                                                 `
in which pro…ts rise with changes in                        k,   i.e., the pro…t function                     k   ( ) is decreasing
       `
in     k.       In this type of sector H prefers outsourcing to insourcing in every country
`, because outsourcing has lower …xed costs and it gives H a lower fraction of the
revenue. Under these circumstances integration is not an optimal strategy. In choosing
between domestic and foreign outsourcing, however, H trades-o¤ the lower variable
costs of Southern manufacturing against the lower …xed organizational costs in the
North. Depending on whether the cross-country di¤erence in the wage rate is small
or large relative to the cross-country di¤erence in the …xed organizational costs, the
resulting equilibrium can have outsourcing in both countries or outsourcing in the
South only.
      Figure 3 depicts the …rst case, in which the wage di¤erential is small relative to
                                                                                  (1        )= (1    )                          =(1    )
the …xed-cost di¤erential, i.e., wN =wS < fOS =fON                                                       . The variable
is measured along the horizontal axis while operating pro…ts are measured along the
                                                                                                                   `
vertical axis. It is evident from (6) that the operating pro…t function                                            k   ( ) is linear in
     =(1    )
                and it has the intercept         wN fk` . The slope of this function is proportional to
 `                                                      S                                                                             N
 k    ( ). It follows that the pro…t line               O   in Figure 3 is steeper than the pro…t line                                O,
because wages are lower in the South.
      Firms with productivity below               M     expect negative pro…ts under all organizational
                                                                                                                                   N
forms. Therefore they exit the industry. Firms with productivity between                                                 M   and   MO
attain the highest pro…ts by outsourcing in the North while …rms with productivity
                N
above           MO   attain the highest pro…ts by outsourcing in the South. The cuto¤s                                         M   and
 N
 MO        are given by                                                                              9
                                                        h             i(1    )=
                                                            w N fO
                                                                 N                                   >
                                                                                                     >
                                 M   = X(        )=
                                                              N                      ;               =
                                                              O( )

                                                                 wN (fO
                                                                                       (1     )=                                   (12)
                                                                         O)
                                                                                                    : >
                                                                      S fN
                                 N
                                 MO   =X     (     )=
                                                                 S          N
                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                      ;
                                                                 O(   )     O(   )




                                                                 14
                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                πO
                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                πO




                0
                                                                                                     θ α /(1−α )
                                          α /(1−α )
                                         θM                          N )α /(1−α )
                                                                  (θ MO


        − w N f ON




        − w N f OS



                 Figure 3: Equilibrium in the Component-Intensive Sector


   It also is clear from Figure 3 that the intersection point of the two pro…t lines takes
place at a negative pro…t level when the …xed organizational costs of outsourcing in
the South are close to the …xed organizational costs of outsourcing in the North, i.e.,
                                    (1    )= (1   )
when wN =wS > fOS =fON                                . In this case the threshold productivity level                   M
                                                                                       S
is de…ned by the point of intersection of the pro…t line                               O   with the horizontal axis.
As a result, all …rms with productivity below this threshold exit while all …rms with
higher productivity levels outsource in the South. This describes the second type of
equilibrium, in which no …rm outsources in the North.
   We shall treat the equilibrium with outsourcing in both countries — depicted in
Figure 3 — as the benchmark case. In this event the free entry condition (11), together
with (6) and (8), imply

                                    N              N                              S                   N
                                    O    ( ) V     MO            V(    M)    +    O(   ) 1     V      MO
     wN X (          )=(1   )
                                =                                                                           ,         (13)
                                    fE + fON      G NMO            G(      M)    + fOS 1       G     N
                                                                                                     MO


where                                                  Z
                                                                 =(1   )
                                           V ( )=            y             dG(y).
                                                         0
                                                                                                           N
Equations (12) and (13) provide implicit solutions for the cuto¤s                               M    and   MO      and for


                                                             15
                                                                                                             π VS
                                                                                                             π OS

                                                                                                             π VN




                                                                                                             π ON




                     0      θ αH /(1−α )
                                                                                                                    θ α /(1−α )
                                              N α /(1−α )    N α /(1−α )
            − w N f ON                     (θ HO )        (θ HV )                  (θ HO
                                                                                      S
                                                                                         )α /(1−α )
            − w N f VN

            − w N f OS




             − w N fVS




                  Figure 4: Equilibrium in the Headquarter-Intensive Sector


the aggregate consumption index X.
                                                                                                                                             N
   We next consider a sector with high headquarter intensity , such that                                                          ( )>       V.
We refer to it as a headquarter-intensive sector. A sector of this type is represented by
                                                                                                 `
 =    H   in Figure 1. In this sector pro…ts are increasing in                                   k,       as shown by the arrows
in the …gure. In a headquarter-intensive sector the marginal product of headquarter
services is high, making underinvestment in h especially costly and integration espe-
                                                                                                                                         `
cially attractive. This is re‡ected in the slopes of the pro…t lines in Figure 4;                                                        V   is
                    `                                             `           `
steeper than        O    for ` = N; S, because                    V   ( )>    O   ( ).
                                                        N             S
   Next compare the slopes of                           V   and       O.   On the one hand, integration gives the
                                                                                                      N
…nal-good producer a larger fraction of the revenue, making                                           V    steeper. On the other
                                                                                                            S
hand, variable production costs are lower in the South, making                                              O   steeper. For these
reasons the pro…t line of outsourcing in the South can be steeper or ‡atter than the
                                                                               S
pro…t line of integration in the North. That is,                               O(     ) can be larger or smaller than
 N                                S                   N                                               1                N
 V(   ). In particular,           O(        )>        V(    ) if and only if wN =wS                         >          V;         = ( ; ),




                                                                      16
where6
                    ( ; )   f1            [    + (1         ) (1        )]g(1      )=
                                                                                             (1        )1    :

       First consider the case in which the wage di¤erential is large relative to the di¤erence
              N                       S               N
between       V   and , so that       O(       )>     V(   ). Under these circumstances

                                     S              S              N              N
                                     V(       )>    O(   )>        V(   )>        O(    ).                                  (14)

Given the orderings in (3) and (14), the orders of the intercepts and the slopes of the
pro…t functions are as depicted in Figure 4. Moreover, the …gure depicts our benchmark
case for headquarter-intensive sectors, in which all four organizational forms exist in
equilibrium, with outsourcing and insourcing taking place in both countries. Firms
with productivity below          H   exit the industry, those with productivity between                                 H   and
 N                                                                                                N              N
 HO     outsource in the North, those with productivity between                                   HO   and       HV   integrate
                                                                        N               S
in the North, those with productivity between                           HV       and    HO   outsource in the South,
                                                   S
and those with productivity above                  HO    integrate in the South (engage in vertical FDI).
       It is easy to see that either one of the …rst three organizational forms may not
exist in equilibrium, but that the last one always exists in the absence of an upper
bound on the support of G ( ). That is, there always exist high-productivity …nal-
good producers who choose to insource components in the South. And more generally,
the organizational forms that survive in equilibrium attract …rms according to the
sorting pattern described in Figure 4. If, for example, integration in the North and
outsourcing in the South are viable, …rms that outsource in the South have higher
productivity than …rms that insource in the North. But insourcing in the North would
not be viable if its …xed organizational costs were too high.
       In the next section, where we study variations in the relative prevalence of di¤erent
organizational forms, we focus on the benchmark case depicted in Figure 4, for which
   6                                                                    N    1
     In component-intensive sectors the inequality wN =wS        >      V ;   = ( ; ) always holds,
because in these sectors ( ; ) is declining in , and therefore the right-hand side is smaller than
one (recall that N V > ). On the other hand, in headquarter-intensive sectors the right-hand side is
larger than one, because in such sectors ( ; ) is increasing in . Therefore the inequality holds only
if the wage rate is su¢ ciently higher in the North.




                                                           17
the cuto¤s are given by
                                                        h              i(1       )=                   9
                                                            w N fON
                                                                                                      >
                              H    = X(        )=
                                                              N                          ;            >
                                                                                                      >
                                                              O (  )                                  >
                                                                                                      >
                                                                                         (1   )=      >
                                                                                                      >
                                                              wN (fVN fO
                                                                       N
                                                                         )                            >
                              N
                              HO    = X(           )=
                                                                 N             N                    ; >
                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                      =
                                                                 V (   )       O(    )

                                                              wN (fO
                                                                                         (1   )=                                  (15)
                                                                      V )                             >
                                                                   S fN
                              N
                                    =X    (        )=                                                 >
                                                                                                      >
                              HV                                 S
                                                                 O(    )       N
                                                                               V (   )                >
                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                      >
                                                              wN (fVS fO
                                                                       S
                                                                         )
                                                                                         (1   )=      >
                                                                                                      >
                              S
                              HO    =X    (        )=
                                                                 S
                                                                     ( )       S                    : >
                                                                                                      ;
                                                                 V             O(    )


We can also use the free entry condition (11) to derive an equation that is analogous
to (13). This equation together with (15) can then be used to solve for the cuto¤s and
the consumption index X.
                                                                                                                              1
       Next consider the case in which the wage di¤erential is small, so that wN =wS                                                   <
       N                                                                                                       N
       V;     = ( ; ) in the headquarter-intensive sector. In this event                                       V    is steeper than
 S
 O     and the ordering in (14) is not preserved. In this case there are two possibilities
                  S           N               S                  N                       N              S           S             N
only: either      V(   )>     V(   )>         O(    )>           O(        ) or          V(   )>        V(    )>    O(   )>       O(   )
               S       N
(because       O ( ) > O ( )).
                S       N            S                      N
       When     V( ) > V ( ) >       O(       )>            O(       ), integration in the North dominates out-
                                                                           N
sourcing in the South, because the pro…t line                              V   in Figure 4 has a higher intercept and
                         S
a larger slope than      O.   As a result, at most three organizational forms exist in equi-
librium: outsourcing in the North, chosen by low-productivity …rms; insourcing in the
North, chosen by intermediate-productivity …rms; and insourcing in the South, chosen
                                                                                                   N           S           S
by high-productivity …rms. On the other hand, when                                                 V(   ) >    V(   ) >    O(     ) >
 N
 O(     ), integration in the North dominates outsourcing and insourcing in the South, in
which case there is no international trade in intermediate inputs. As a result, at most
two organizational forms can exist in equilibrium: outsourcing in the North, chosen
by low-productivity …rms, and insourcing in the North, chosen by high-productivity
…rms.7
   7
    Our analysis has so far assumed that the ordering of the …xed costs (3) is satis…ed. Now suppose
instead that the …xed costs of outsourcing are higher than the …xed costs of integration in each one
of the countries, but that the …xed costs of integration in the South are higher than the …xed costs
                                    S
of outsourcing in the North, i.e., fO > fVS > fO  N
                                                    > fVN . In addition, suppose that the ranking of
the slopes of the pro…t functions (14) holds. Then, in a headquarter-intensive sector integration
dominates outsourcing in both countries, because the …xed costs of integration are lower than the
…xed costs of outsourcing and the pro…t line of an integrated …rm is steeper than the pro…t line of
an outsourcing …rm. As a result, no …rm outsources and at most two organizational forms exist in
equilibrium: low-productivity …rms insource in the North while high-productivity …rms insource in
the South. On the other hand, in a component-intensive sector all four organizational forms can exist
in equilibrium. In such an equilibrium the least productive …rms insource in the North, some more


                                                               18
    We have shown that in our benchmark cases the equilibrium organizational forms
follow the patterns depicted in Figure 2. This sorting pattern di¤ers from the sorting
pattern derived by Grossman and Helpman (2003) for organizational structures that
use managerial incentives à la Holmstrom and Milgrom (1994).8 Contrary to our
results, in their model surviving low-productivity …rms acquire components in the
South. Within this group less-productive …rms outsource while more-productivity …rms
insource. While no one outsources inputs in the North, there exist modestly-high
productive …rms that integrate in the North. However, the most-productive …rms,
like the least-productive …rms, outsource in the South. Evidently, these alternative
theories of the …rm predict di¤erent sorting patterns. Empirical evidence is needed to
discriminate between them, but no such evidence is available for the time being.9


5     Prevalence of Organizational Forms
Our model predicts variations in organizational forms across …rms and industries. In
the previous section we examined variations across …rms. Now we ask, How does the
prevalence of organizational forms vary across industries? To answer this questions, we
use the fraction of …rms that choose a particular organizational form as the measure
of prevalence. We show in the appendix, however, that using instead the market share
of these …rms as a measure of prevalence yields similar results.
    Following Melitz (2003) and Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2003), we choose G ( )
to be a Pareto distribution with shape k, i.e.,
                                                     k
                                                b
                               G( ) = 1                  for   b > 0,                            (16)

where k is large enough to ensure a …nite variance of the size distribution of …rms. In
productive …rms outsource in the North, still higher-productivity …rms insource in the South, and the
most productive …rms outsource in the South. These results illustrate the in‡uence of …xed costs on
the sorting patterns. Note, however, that independently of whether the …xed organizational costs of
insourcing are higher than the …xed organizational costs of outsourcing, integration is more prevalent
in headquarter-intensive sectors.
   8
     They did not distinguish between component- and headquarter-intensive sectors, however, al-
though one can interpret their production technology as having = 0, i.e., a zero output elasticity
with respect to headquarter services. For this reason a comparison of the cross-section variation of
organizational forms that is based on the component-intensive and headquarter-intensive distinction
cannot be made with their work.
   9
     The empowerment of workers may also be an important determinant of the structure of …rms.
Puga and Tre‡er (2002) and Marin and Verdier (2003) have developed general equilibrium frameworks
in which every …rm chooses endogenously the structure of authority within the organization.


                                                    19
this event the distribution of sales is also Pareto, which is consistent with the evidence
(see Axtell (2001) and Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2003)). For concreteness we
discuss only the benchmark cases of component- and headquarter-intensive sectors as
de…ned in Section 4.


5.1        Component-intensive sector
Recall that in a component-intensive sector no …rm integrates. In the benchmark case
depicted in Figure 3, …rms with productivity below                              M   exit the industry, those with
                                       N
productivity between         M   and   MO       outsource in the North, and higher-productivity
…rms outsource in the South.
                 `
       Denote by M O the fraction of active …rms that outsource in country `. Then
 S
 MO = 1      G N   MO  = [1 G ( M )] and N  MO = 1
                                                       S
                                                       M O . The Pareto distribution
                        S            N   k
(16) then implies that M O = M = M O . Substituting (12) into this expression yields

                                       S             N                              k(1    )=
                            S          O(   )        O(       )         fON
                            MO   =              N
                                                                                                .               (17)
                                                O(   )            fOS         fON

                                       S                                             S      N
As is clear from equation (17),        M O is only a function of the ratio of slopes O ( )= O ( )
and the ratio of …xed costs       fOS =fON . In order to study how the di¤erent parameters of
the model a¤ect the relative prevalence of foreign outsourcing it is therefore su¢ cient
to analyze their e¤ect on these ratios.
       First consider the Southern wage rate. A lower wage in the South raises the prof-
                                                                        S           N
itability of outsourcing in the South, i.e., raises                     O(    )=    O(    ). As a result, outsourcing
                                                          S
in the South becomes more prevalent, i.e.,                MO       increases. In addition, it can be shown
that     M   rises in the industry equilibrium, leading to exit of a larger fraction of …rms.
       The model can easily be extended to incorporate transport costs for intermediate
inputs. If the shipment of components is subjected to melting-iceberg-type transport
costs, then a fall in transport costs is very similar to a decline in the Southern wage
rate. It follows that, as in Melitz (2003), lower transport costs lead to more exit of
low-productivity …rms, and to more prevalence of foreign outsourcing.
       Second, consider an increase in the dispersion of productivity, which is represented
by a decline of k. Since the expression in the brackets on the right hand side of (17)
                                                N
represents the ratio of the cuto¤s          M = MO        and this ratio is smaller than one, a rise in
dispersion raises the fraction of …rms that outsource in the South.10
  10
       This is similar, in terms of the mechanism at work, to the …nding in Melitz (2003) that more


                                                         20
     Third, note that the headquarter intensity also a¤ects the prevalence of outsourcing
                                                  S               N                                     (1        ) =(1     )
in the two countries. Since                       O(     )=       O(    ) = wN =wS                                              , it follows that foreign
outsourcing is less prevalent in sectors with higher headquarter intensity, because the
less important are components in production the less important are the cost savings
from outsourcing in the South compared to the higher …xed organizational costs of
foreign outsourcing.
     Finally, we have assumed for simplicity that an outsourcing …nal-good producer H
appropriates a fraction                         of the surplus from its relationship with an input supplier
M , irrespective of whether M is in the North or in the South. Imagine, however, a
situation in which this fraction can di¤er across countries, and that H now gets a
smaller fraction of the surplus from outsourcing in the South, but still higher than
     ( ), so that the sector remains component-intensive. This decline in H’s bargaining
power raises the pro…tability of outsourcing in the South, making foreign outsourcing
more prevalent.


5.2      Headquarter-intensive sector
Four organizational forms exist in the benchmark case of a headquarter-intensive sector.
Ordered from low- to high-productivity, these are: outsourcing in the North, insourcing
in the North, outsourcing in the South and insourcing in the South (see Figures 2 and
                              `
4). We denote by              Hk        the fraction of …rms that choose the organizational form (k; `),
where k is the ownership structure and ` is the location of M . Using the Pareto
distribution (16) and the cuto¤s (15), these fractions are
                          h       N             N          N
                                                                   ik(1          )=                                                            9
          N
               =1                 V (   )       O(   )   fO
                                                                                          ;                                                    >
                                                                                                                                               >
          HO                         N
                                     O( )
                                                        N
                                                       fV fO N                                                                                 >
                                                                                                                                               >
                 h                                        ik(1          )=            h                                         ik(1    )=     >
                                                                                                                                               >
                      N             N                N                                        S         N             N                        >
                                                                                                                                             ; =
          N           V (     )     O( )           fO                                         O(   )    V (   )      fO
          HV   =              N                 fVN fON                                            N               fO fVN
                                                                                                                    S
                              O(    )                                                              O(   )
                 h                                        ik(1         )=         h                                         ik(1       )=           (18)
                                                                                                                                             ; >
                      S             N              N
                                                  fO                                      S             S             N
                                                                                                                     fO
          S           O(      )     V (     )                                                 ( )       O(    )                                >
          HO   =              N                 fO fVN
                                                 S
                                                                                          V
                                                                                                   N                S
                                                                                                                   fV fOS                      >
                                                                                                                                               >
                              O(    )                                                              O(   )                                      >
                 h                                       ik(1          )=                                                                      >
                                                                                                                                               >
          S
               =
                      S
                      V   ( )       S
                                    O(      )      N
                                                  fO
                                                                             :                                                                 ;
          HV                  N                  S
                                                fV fOS
                              O(    )


     We again …rst consider a lowering of the wage rate in the South. Lower wages in
the South raise the pro…tability of foreign sourcing. In particular, (7) implies that
 S              S                                             N                       N
 V   ( ) and    O(    ) increase while                        V   ( ) and             O(           ) do not change. It then follows from
               N                                                   N
(18) that      HO   does not change while                          HV        declines. The reason is that low-productivity
dispersion raises the share of exporting …rms in domestic output, and the …nding in Helpman, Melitz
and Yeaple (2003) that more dispersion raises horizontal FDI relative to exports.


                                                                             21
…rms that outsource in the North are too far from productivity levels that make foreign
sourcing pro…table. As a result, small changes in the pro…tability of foreign sourcing
do not make the acquisition of inputs in the South attractive to these …rms. On the
other hand, amongst the integrated producers in the North the most productive are
indi¤erent between integration in the North and outsourcing in the South. Therefore,
for these …rms a decline in the South’s wage rate tilts the balance in favor of foreign
                                N                      S
outsourcing. As a result,       HV   declines and      HO   rises.11 Finally,   S
                                                                                HV    rises. Naturally,
a decline in the cost of Southern labor induces a reorganization that favors foreign
sourcing. But the model also predicts that the e¤ect is disproportionately large on
foreign outsourcing relative to FDI. At the same time the unfavorable e¤ect on the
acquisition of inputs in the North falls disproportionately on integration. It follows
that outsourcing rises overall relative to integration.
       A fall in transport costs of intermediate inputs has the same e¤ects as a fall in wS .
It is interesting to note that the recent trends described in the introduction are in line
with the model’s predictions about falling costs of doing business in the South. Feenstra
and Hanson (1996) point out that transport costs have declined and foreign assembly
has increased both in-house and at arm’s length. Furthermore, the BEA data suggest
that the growth of foreign outsourcing might have outpaced that of foreign direct
investment. Finally, as predicted by the model, U.S. domestic outsourcing seems to
have increased relative to U.S. domestic insourcing.12
       Second, we examine a decline in k, which represents an increase in the dispersion
of productivity across …rms. It is evident from (18) that a decline in k reduces the
fraction of …rms that outsource in the North and increases the fraction of …rms that
insource in the South. The e¤ect on the share of …rms that insource in the North or
outsource in the South is ambiguous, however. Yet the share of …nal-good producers
who import components from the South rises, and so does the prevalence of FDI relative
                                                    S    S
to outsourcing in the South (i.e., the ratio        HV = HO ) and the prevalence        of integration
relative to outsourcing in the North (i.e.,       the ratio N     N
                                                             HV = HO ).
       Third, we consider variations in headquarter intensity. In sectors with higher head-
quarter intensity domestic outsourcing is favored relative to foreign outsourcing and
                                                                                  N          S
integration is favored relative to outsourcing. That is, the ratios               O   ( )=   O   ( ) and
  11
     This is easy to see from (18) by noting that the ratio SV ( )= SO ( ) is independent of the wage
rate wS .
  12
     As in the a component-intensive sector, lower labor costs in the South or lower transport costs of
intermediates increase the cuto¤ productivity level below which …nal-good producers exit the industry
in a headquarter-intensive sector. This implies a higher proportion of exiting …rms.



                                                  22
 `          `
 V   ( )=   O   ( ) are higher in both countries in sectors with higher values of (see Antràs
(2003a)). Equations (18) then imply that the fraction of …rms that outsource in the
North falls with        while the fraction of …rms that insource in the North rises. Moreover,
the sum of these two shares goes up, implying that a larger                           reduces the fraction of
…rms that import components. As for the composition of imported inputs, we cannot
sign the e¤ects of           on the fraction of …rms that insource in the South. Nevertheless,
                                           S    S                                    S
(18) implies that the ratio                HV = HO    rises and, hence, that         HO      falls. Namely, FDI
becomes more prevalent relative to arm’s-length imports. It follows that in a cross-
section of headquarter-intensive sectors integration is more prevalent and outsourcing
is less prevalent the more headquarter-intensive is the sector. This prediction is in line
with the …ndings of Antràs (2003a), who shows that in a panel of 23 manufacturing
industries and four years of data, the share of intra-…rm imports in total U.S. imports
is signi…cantly higher, the higher the R&D intensity of the industry.
                                                           `                                      S
     Fourth, consider the revenue shares                   V,   ` = N; S. An increase in          V,   which can
result from a reduction in corruption or an improvement in the legal system in the
                                                          S
South, raises the slope of the pro…t line                 V   without a¤ecting the slopes of other pro…t
lines. Equations (18) then imply that the shares of …rms that source components in
                 N               N
the North,       HO    and       HV ,   do not change. In this event, the fraction of …rms that source
components in the South does not change, except that amongst them the fraction of
outsourcing …rms declines while the fraction of insourcing …rms rises.
                             N
     An increase in          V   makes integration in the North more pro…table, thereby raising
                                          N
the slope of the pro…t line               V.   It then follows from (18) that the fraction of …rms that
outsource in the North declines, the fraction of …rms that insource in the North rises,
the fraction of …rms that outsource in the South declines, and the fraction of …rms
that insource in the South does not change. Here the interesting implication is that a
shift that makes integration more attractive in the North changes the composition of
foreign sourcing in favor of FDI.
     Finally, consider an increase in the primitive bargaining-power parameter . It can
                                                     S          `             N          `
be shown that it reduces the ratios                  V   ( )=   O   ( ) and   V   ( )=   O   ( ) for ` = N; S as
            N          S
well as     V   ( )=   V   ( ). The reason is that an increase in                 shifts the bargaining power
in favor of H, regardless of ownership structure. As a result, outsourcing becomes
more attractive to H. In this event the fraction of …rms that outsource components
rises in each one of the countries. On the other hand, the share of …rms that insource
components declines in each one of the countries. Moreover, the fraction of …rms that
import components rises. That is, the fraction of …rms that outsource components


                                                           23
in the South rises more than the fraction of …rms that insource components in the
South declines. It follows that an increase in   biases the acquisition of inputs towards
imports on the one hand and towards outsourcing as opposed to integration on the
other.


6     Concluding Comments
We have developed a theoretical framework for studying global sourcing strategies.
In our model, heterogeneous …nal-good producers choose organizational forms. That
is, they choose ownership structures and locations for the production of intermediate
inputs. Headquarter services are always produced in the home country (the North).
Intermediate inputs can be produced at home or in the low-wage South, and the pro-
duction of intermediates can be owned by the …nal-good producer or by an independent
supplier.
    Final-good producers and suppliers of components make relationship-speci…c in-
vestments, which are governed by imperfect contracts. In choosing between a domestic
and a foreign supplier of parts, a …nal-good producer trades o¤ the bene…ts of lower
variable costs in the South against the bene…ts of lower …xed costs in the North. On
the other hand, in choosing between vertical integration and outsourcing, the …nal-
good producer trades o¤ the bene…ts of ownership advantage from vertical integration
against the bene…ts of better incentives for the independent supplier of parts. These
tradeo¤s induce …rms with di¤erent productivity levels to sort by organizational form.
We show that the equilibrium sorting patterns depend on the wage di¤erential between
the North and the South, on the ownership advantage in each one of the countries, on
the distribution of the bargaining power between …nal-good producers and suppliers of
components, and on the headquarter intensity of the technology.
    A key result is that high-productivity …rms acquire intermediate inputs in the South
while low-productivity …rms acquire them in the North. Amongst …rms that source
their inputs in the same country, the low-productivity …rms outsource while the high-
productivity …rms insource. In sectors with a very low intensity of headquarter services
no …rm integrates; low-productivity …rms outsource at home while high-productivity
…rms outsource abroad.
    We also show how the prevalence of organizational forms, measured by the frac-
tion of …rms that organize in the same way, depends on industry characteristics that
shape the sorting pattern and on the degree of productivity dispersion across …rms.


                                           24
Two results stand out. First, sectors with more productivity dispersion rely more on
imported inputs, and within the group of headquarter-intensive sectors integration is
more prevalent in sectors with more productivity dispersion. Second, the higher a sec-
tor’s headquarter intensity the less it relies on imported inputs, and within the group
of headquarter-intensive sectors integration is more prevalent in sectors with higher
headquarter intensity.
   Our model has also interesting implications for a widening of the wage gap between
the North and the South, or a reduction of the trading costs of intermediate inputs
(both changes produce similar results). As one would expect, reducing the costs of for-
eign sourcing raises the fraction of …rms that import intermediate inputs. In addition,
however, it raises the fraction of …rms that outsource in each one of the countries. As
a result, arm’s-length trade rises relative to intra-…rm trade.
   As is evident from these results, our model provides rich predictions about patterns
of foreign trade and investment. Since we laid out the empirical motivation for this
study in the introduction, it su¢ ces to point out in these concluding comments that
our approach helps to better appreciate the complexity of trade and investment in a
world in which …rms choose endogenously their organizational forms. It also should
help in designing empirical studies of the ever evolving world trading system.




                                           25
References
 [1] Abraham, Katharine G., and Susan K. Taylor (1996), “Firms’ Use of Outside
    Contractors: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Labor Economics, 14:3, pp. 394-
    424.

 [2] Antràs, Pol (2003a), “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure,”Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, forthcoming.

 [3] Antràs, Pol (2003b), “Incomplete Contracts and the Product Cycle,”mimeo Har-
    vard University.

 [4] Axtell, Robert L. (2001), “Zipf Distribution of US Firm Sizes”, Science, 293, pp.
    1818-1820.

 [5] Bamford, James (1994), “Driving America to Tiers,”Financial World, November
    8, pp. 24-27.

 [6] Campa, Jose and Linda S. Goldberg (1997), “The Evolving External Orientation of
    Manufacturing Industries: Evidence from Four Countries,” Federal Reserve Bank
    of New York Economic Policy Review, 4, pp. 79-99.

 [7] The Economist (1991), “The Ins and Outs of Outing”, August 31, pp. 54-56.

 [8] Fan, Joseph P. H., and Larry H. P. Lang (2000), “The Measurement of Relatedness:
    An Application to Corporate Diversi…cation,”Journal of Business, 73:4, pp. 629-
    660.

 [9] Feenstra, Robert C. (1998), “Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Production
    in the Global Economy,”Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12:4, pp. 31-50.

[10] Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson (1996), “Globalization, Outsourcing,
    and Wage Inequality,”American Economic Review, 86:2, pp. 240-245.

[11] Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart (1986), “The Costs and Bene…ts of
    Ownership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political
    Economy, 94:4, pp. 691-719.

[12] Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman (2002), “Integration vs. Outsourcing
    in Industry Equilibrium,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117:1, pp. 85-120.


                                          26
[13] Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman (2003), “Managerial Incentives and
    the International Organization of Production,” Journal of International Eco-
    nomics, forthcoming.

[14] Hanson, Gordon H., Raymond J. Mataloni, Jr., and Matthew J. Slaughter (2002),
    “Vertical Specialization in Multinational Firms,” manuscript, University of Cali-
    fornia, San Diego.

[15] Hart, Oliver D. and John Moore (1999), “Foundations of Incomplete Contracts,”
    Review of Economic Studies, 66:1, Special Issue: Contracts, pp. 115-138.

[16] Helpman, Elhanan, and Paul R. Krugman (1985), Market Structure and Foreign
    Trade (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press).

[17] Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple (2003), “Export versus
    FDI with Heterogeneous Firms,”American Economic Review, forthcoming.

[18] Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom (1994), “The Firm as an Incentive System,”
    American Economic Review, 84:4, pp. 972-991.

[19] Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi (2001), “The Nature and Growth of
    Vertical Specialization in World Trade,”Journal of International Economics, 54:1,
    pp. 75-96.

[20] Lipsey, Robert E., Magnus Blomstrom, and Eric Ramstetter (1998), “Internation-
    alized Production in World Output,”in Baldwin, Lipsey,and Richardson, eds., Ge-
    ography and Ownership as Bases for Economic Accounting, University of Chicago
    Press.

[21] Marin, Dalia and Thierry Verdier (2003), “Globalization and the Empowerment
    of Talent,”manuscript, University of Munich.

[22] Melitz, Marc J. (2003), “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and
    Aggregate Industry Productivity,”Econometrica, 71:6, pp. 1695-1725.

[23] Puga, Diego, and Daniel Tre‡er (2002), “Knowledge Creation and Control in
    Organizations,”NBER Working Paper No. 9121.

[24] Segal, Ilya (1999), “Complexity and Renegotiation: A Foundation for Incomplete
    Contracts,”Review of Economic Studies, 66:1, Special Issue: Contracts, pp. 57-82.


                                         27
[25] Tempest, Rone (1996), “Barbie and the World Economy,” Los Angeles Times,
    September 22, A1 and A12.

[26] World Trade Organization (1998), Annual Report 1998 (Geneva: World Trade
    Organization).

[27] Yeats, Alexander J. (2001), “Just How Big Is Global Production Sharing?” in
    Arndt, Sven W. and Henryk Kierzkowski, eds., Fragmentation: New Production
    Patterns in the World Economy, Oxford University Press.




                                       28
A          Appendix
In the main text, we measured the relative prevalence of di¤erent organizational forms with
the fraction of …nal-good varieties produced under each type of organization. In this appendix
we show that the use of other measures yields similar results.
    First consider the case of market shares, i.e., the fraction of industry sales captured by
each organizational form. It is straightforward to show that …rm revenues can be expressed
as:
                                          X(   )=(1  ) =(1    ) `
                                                                k( )
                        Rk` ( ; X; ) =         `            `
                                                                       .
                                        1      k + 1        k (1     )
Therefore in the benchmark component-intensive sector, the market share of foreign out-
sourcing is
                S                  1 V N    MO
                                                   S ( )
                                                   O
                MO =                                                   .           (19)
                       1 V N  MO
                                   S ( )+ V
                                   O
                                                 N
                                                 MO      V ( M) NO ( )

where
                                                                  "                                        1
                                                                                                                   #   =(1   )
                               `
       `                      ( )
                               k                                      1    wN                    w`
       k   ( )=       `                 `
                                                              =                 `                     `
                                                                                                                                 :     (20)
                  1   k    + 1          k       (1      )                       k            1        k


When the productivity index is drawn from a Pareto distribution with the shape parameter
k, the distribution of …rm sales is also Pareto with the shape parameter k         = (1 ).
Making use of the properties of the Pareto distribution, (19) can be expressed as:

                      S                                               1
                      MO   =        "                                                             #                .
                                                N                         k(1       )=   1
                                                O( )   (fOS    N
                                                              fO )                                        N(   )
                               1+               S        N                                       1        O
                                                                                                          S(
                                            [   O( )     O(   )]fO
                                                                 N
                                                                                                          O    )



Because N         S                     N       S         N        S           S
            O = O = , it follows that O ( ) = O ( ) = O ( ) = O ( ), and M O is increasing
in SO ( ) = N O ( ). This implies that, as in the main text, the prevalence of Southern out-
sourcing is decreasing in the Southern wage rate, in transport costs, and in the importance
of headquarter services as measured by . Furthermore, because N      M O > M , it is straightfor-
ward to show that an increase in dispersion (a fall in k) raises the market share of …nal-good
producers outsourcing in the South. Finally, a fall in the South’s bargaining power increases
  S            S
  O ( ) and O ( ) when      < , a condition that may or may not be more restrictive than
the condition that de…nes the component-intensive sector (i.e.,       ( ) < ).13 When < ,
a fall in the bargaining power in the South raises the market share of Southern outsourcing.
When, instead, > , the e¤ect is ambiguous.
                                                                                   ) =(1    )b
    In the benchmark headquarter-intensive sector, sale revenues are X (    )=(1             R ( ),
  13
     The inequality < holds true in the low-tech sector when                             < 1=2. This follows from                    ( )>
if and only if   ( ) < 1=2 (see equation (10)).




                                                              29
      b ( ) is given by:
where R

              b( ) =
              R           V     N
                                         V(    H)
                                                    N
                                                            ( )+ V              N
                                                                                         V        N         N
                                                                                                                ( )+
                                HO                  O                           HV                HO        V
                                  S              N              S                            S         S
                          + V     HO      V      HV             O   ( )+ 1           V       HO        V   ( ),                (21)

and    `   ( ) is de…ned in (20). The market share of each type of organizational form is then:
       k
                                                                                         9
                              N
                                   = V        N
                                                        V(      H)
                                                                        N        b( );
                                                                            ( ) =R       >
                                                                                         >
                              HO              HO                        O                >
                                                                                         >
                                                                                         >
                              N
                                   = V        N
                                                        V        N                 b( ); >
                                                                            N ( ) =R     =
                              HV              HV                 HO         V
                                                                                                                               (22)
                              S
                                   = V        S
                                                        V        N          S    b( ) >
                                                                            ( ) =R    >
                              HO              HO                 HV         O         >
                                                                                      >
                                                                                      >
                                                                                      >
                              S
                                   = 1    V        S            S        b
                                                                    ( ) =R ( ) :      ;
                              HV                   HO           V


As is clear from equations (21) and (22), each market share is now a function of all four
cuto¤s H , N           N         S
               HO , HV , and HO . This complicates the analysis relative to the main text, but
the results are similar.
     First, a fall in the Southern wage or in transport costs increases SO ( ), SV ( ), SO ( ), and
  S ( ), while leaving the ratios S ( ) = S ( ) and S ( ) = S ( ) una¤ected. It is straight-
  V                                  O        V            O      V
forward to check that, as in the main text, the ratios SHO = SHV , SHV = N                  N
                                                                                HO , and HO = HV
                                                                                                   N

all increase. It follows that global production sharing, as measured by the sum SHO + SHV ,
increases, as does outsourcing relative to integration in each one of the countries. This implies
that SHO rises and N                                      N         S                            b
                         HV falls. The overall e¤ect on HO and HV depends on whether R ( )
increases or decreases. If > and wN =wS is high enough, it can be shown that not only
  S          S           N         N               S         S        N        N     14 In this case
  V ( ) > O ( ) > V ( ) > O ( ), but also V ( ) > O ( ) > V ( ) > O ( ).
Rb ( ) rises when Southern wages or transport costs fall. As a result,       N
                                                                             HO falls, whereas the
e¤ect on SHV remains ambiguous. If instead , , and wN =wS are such that R           b ( ) falls, then
        N           S
both HO and HV rise when Southern wages or transport costs decline.
     Second, it is straightforward to show that an increase in the degree of dispersion reduces
the market share of …rms outsourcing in the North and increases the market share of …rms
integrating in the South. Furthermore, as in the main text, SHO + SHV , SHV = SHO , and
  N     N
  HV = HO are decreasing in k.
     Third, an increase in the output elasticity of headquarter services, , increases N             S
                                                                                         O ( )= O ( )
and `V ( ) = `O ( ) for ` = N; S, as well as N           S           `      `
                                                 O ( ) = O ( ) and V ( ) = O ( ) for ` = N; S. As
in the main text, the relative prevalence of domestic integration increases, both in absolute
terms and relative to domestic outsourcing, while the relative prevalence of foreign outsourc-
ing falls, both in absolute terms and relative to foreign integration. Furthermore, under mild
assumptions, the market share of …rms that import components falls.
  14                                      S             S                   N            N                  S          N
    In particular,    >   ensures that    V(       )>   O(      ) and       V (   )>     O(   ), while      O(    )>   V (   ) holds
true as long as:
                                          1
                                                                !                   !1
                                                            N                   N
                                    wN                      V         1         V
                                                   >                                     .
                                    wS                                 1



                                                            30
     Fourth, consider the e¤ect of `V , ` = N; S. An increase in SV raises SV ( ) without a¤ect-
ing the slopes of the other pro…ts functions. Furthermore, if is high enough, namely > SV ,
                                                                                  S
this also increases SV ( ) relative to SO ( ), N             N
                                                V ( ), and O ( ). In this case HV increases and
  S                               N     N
  HO declines, while the ratio HO = HV does not change. The only di¤erence with the main
text is that the market share of …nal-good producers who use imported components is now
a¤ected by SV . The e¤ect depends again on whether R         b ( ) increases or decreases with S .
                                                                                                 V
As before, if > and wN =wS is high enough, then SV ( ) > SO ( ) > N             V ( ) >  N ( ), and
                                                                                         O
Rb ( ) is raised by an increase in S . In this case the market share of importers is increasing
                                      V
in SV .
     An increase in N  V a¤ects prevalence similarly to the the main text when           > N V . In
this case domestic integration gains market share relative to both domestic outsourcing and
foreign outsourcing. As a result, the prevalence of vertical integration relative to outsourcing
rises in both countries. As in the main text, N                           N
                                                   HV is increasing in V , whereas the e¤ect on
the other market shares depends on whether R      b ( ) is increasing or decreasing in N .
                                                                                         V
     Finally, as in the main text, an increase in the primitive bargaining power reduces the
ratios SV ( ) = `O ( ), N           `
                           V ( ) = O ( ), and
                                                 N         S
                                                 V ( ) = V ( ) for ` = N; S. Moreover, it also
reduces the ratios SV ( ) = `O ( ), N         `            N        S
                                      V ( ) = O ( ), and V ( ) = V ( ) for ` = N; S. As a result,
the market share of …rms outsourcing in each country increases relative to the market share
of …rms integrating in the same country, just as in the main text. The e¤ect on the market
share of …rms that import components ( SHO + SHV ) is, however, ambiguous.
     Using output of each organizational form as a measure of relative prevalence also yields
similar results. In particular, it can be shown that equations (19)-(22) apply to this case,
                        1=
with e`k ( ) = `k ( )        replacing `k ( ). The comparative statics are therefore similar to
those for market shares.




                                                31
