                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       ZVI GRILICHES’ CONTRIBUTION TO THE THEORY OF HUMAN CAPITAL

                                             Reuben Gronau

                                         Working Paper 10081
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10081


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2003




Prepared for the Paris Conference on R&D, Education and Productivity in Memory of Zvi Griliches. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Reuben Gronau. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Zvi Griliches’ Contribution to the Theory of Human Capital
Reuben Gronau
NBER Working Paper No. 10081
November 2003
JEL No. B3, C4, C5, I2, O4

                                            ABSTRACT

The paper discusses Zvi Griliches' contribution to the estimation of the earning function. The topic
was the central theme of Griliches' research agenda during the 70s. Griliches played a major role in
the ability- schooling controversy of the time. He was instrumental in repelling the attack of the
"revisionists" on the Theory of Human Capital, and the claim that the schooling effect in the earning
function is merely an artifact of the true "ability" and "family background" effects. Griliches lacked
at the time the proper data to prove unequivocally that the ability bias plays only a minor role in the
estimation of the rate of return to schooling. He was, however, able to show that the seemingly
foolproof evidence of his opponents suffers from serious biases due to the endogeneity and the
measurement errors in the schooling variable. His assertion that the standard OLS estimator is biased
downward, rather than upward, has been shown true by future research.

Reuben Gronau
Department of Economics
Hebrew University
Mount Scopus, Jerusalem 91905
Israel
and NBER
msreuben@mscc.huji.ac.il
            Zvi Griliches’ Contribution to the Theory of Human Capital


A. Introduction

  The acquisition and dissemination of knowledge were the central theme of Zvi

Griliches’ research agenda. Early in his career he stood beside Ted Schultz when

Schultz ushered in the human capital revolution. He helped Schultz (1960) in his

first forage in search of a solution to the “residual” puzzle (together with Gary

Becker and Albert Rees), and, in turn, served on Gary Becker’s NBER reading

committee that approved the 1964 Human Capital manuscript. Thirty years later, at

the 1993 memorial conference to his close friend Yoram Ben Porath, Griliches

summarized in “Education, Human Capital and Growth − a Personal Perspective”

(1997) his own venture into the field.

    The reviewer of Zvi Griliches’ contribution to the theory of Human Capital

faces, therefore, a dual challenge. On the one hand, almost every paper Griliches

has ever written bears on what he called “Knowledge Capital”. To summarize his

contribution implies, therefore, summarizing his career. On the other hand,

Griliches on several occasions (Griliches, 1977 and 1997, Krueger and Taylor,

2000) provided a detailed and accurate summary himself. The escape route chosen

by this reviewer is to narrow down the definition of the theory − focusing on

Griliches’ contribution to the estimation of the earning function, replacing the

personal perspective with the perspective of a (hopefully) objective onlooker, with

the hindsight of forty years.




                                         3
  Griliches’ prime interest lay in the social returns to learning. He was mainly

interested in the role of education in the aggregate production function and its

contribution to the explanation of the residual in growth accounting. He entered the

field of earning functions only in order to improve his measure of “labor quality”.

The wage function to him was the analogue of a hedonic price function from which

he can derive the proper weights to be used in computing the “quality index” used

in the estimation of the aggregate production function (1970). Griliches joined the

heated “schooling-ability” controversy of the 70s almost inadvertently. He was

trying to get a better estimate of the relative contribution of schooling and ability to

growth, feeling uncomfortable with the conventional Denison split of two to one,

and its implication that the gross earning differential due to schooling overstates

the “true” schooling effect by almost one half (Denison ,1964).

  But if his entry into this skirmish was unintentional, his students drew him into it

even further. William Mason’s Ph.D. dissertation led to their joint study of

“Education, Income and Ability” (1972), which in turn led to the first confrontation

with the Pennsylvania “revisionists.” Gary Chamberlain’s dissertation (1975) led to

the second round, the debate focusing on the conclusions that can be drawn from

the economic success of brothers (Chamberlain and Griliches 1975). The debate

gave birth to his Presidential address at the 1975 Third World Congress of the

Econometric Society, and to the follow-up “Sibling Survey” (1979).

  When the dust settled, Griliches’ interest in the problems of the estimation of the

earning function waned. He returned to his pastimes in the fields of productivity,

R&D, patents and hedonic prices. He revisited the earning function only once more



                                          4
    in the mid 80s (together with John Bound and Bronwyn Hall, 1986) in a partly

    successful attempt to test whether families and schools treat brothers and sisters

    symmetrically.1

      At the end of the day, Griliches always believed in measurement. If one looks for

    a measure of the relative importance of the research on earnings function in

    Griliches’ research agenda, a crude measure would be the number of papers he

    wrote on the topic, relative to his total academic output. Browsing through his July

    1998 CV, I found 11 out of 129 papers, which dealt directly with the estimation of

    the earning function. This is by no means a large fraction of the outpour of papers

    and ideas that characterized his career. Being one of the first experts on

    unobservables, and a pioneer of hedonic price functions Griliches would have

    certainly complained that the crude counting measure does not give proper weight

    to the aspect of quality. As, perhaps, the world’s leading expert on economic gossip,

    Griliches would have consulted the index of citations, to find that only three of his

    22 “golden hits” (papers cited more than one hundred times) are devoted to the

    discussion of earning functions (the 1971 ability paper with Mason, the

    Econometric Society Presidential Address (1977), and the Sibling Model survey

    (1979)). Neither can rival the popularity of his greatest hits, the 1957 Econometrica

    Hybrid corn paper, the 1967 Econometrica Distributed Lags survey, his 1967 paper

    with Dale Jorgensen on the measurement on sources of measured productivity

    change, and the 1984 Econometrica paper on Econometric Models for Count Data.

      Given these crude measures, one may wonder whether the term “contribution” is

    justified in the context of the theory of human capital? Griliches himself never

1
Also in this case was the study instigated by a student Ph.D dissertation (Shackett, 1981).

                                                  5
    claimed that he contributed to the development of the theory of human capital

    (definitely not if one uses the narrow definition of theory adopted in this paper).

    Still I am going to claim the Griliches played a crucial role in the development of

    the theory, just by being the right person, at the right time, at the right place.

       To support this claim, I will provide a brief description of the state of the Theory

    of Human Capital in the 60s and early 70s. I will proceed describing Griliches’

    contribution. The fourth section will describe the aftermath of the big controversy

    of the 70s, and the paper will close with some concluding comments.

       This paper, by no means, attempts to serve as a survey of the literature on earning

    functions.2 It suffers from an intentional selection bias, focusing on Griliches’

    contribution, all other contributions serving as backdrop scenery.



    B. Earning Functions − Childhood and Early Adolescence.

The earning function is clearly not a new subject to economics. Its birth preceded that

of the Theory of Human Capital. Clark (1937) analyzed the lifetime earnings of

selected occupations in the 30s, Friedman and Kuznets (1954) analyzed the earnings of

independent professions, and Blank and Stigler (1957) did it for scientific personnel.

Houthakker (1959) analyzed the earning differentials associated with schooling based

on the 1950 census of population.

         In 1960 Miller published his paper, “Annual and Lifetime Income in Relation to

Education: 1938−1959.” The analysis was based on the 1940 and 1950 U.S. Census of


2
  Several surveys have been written on the topic over the years. It is worth noting that this is the only topic that
the editors of the Handbook of Labour Economics chose to survey twice. The first edition (1986) contained an
extensive survey by Robert Willis, and the 1999 third volume contained a survey of recent developments by
David Carol.


                                                          6
Population and on 1947, 1957 and 1959 Current Population Surveys. The paper was,

perhaps, the last comprehensive study of earning in the U.S. that was not couched in

the Theory of Human Capital jargon, and it is worth, therefore, reciting some of its

results. 3

In the introduction to the paper Miller sounds almost apologetic: “Although the

material gains of an education have been selected for study, the intent has not been to

slur the more subtle satisfactions that come with greater educational attainment. The

cultural and social advantages associated with more schooling may well be worth

their cost in time, money, and effort, even if the economic advantages cease to exist.”

(p. 962). When presenting his results on the schooling-earning differentials, he is

cautious to warn that “there is a always the possibility, indeed the probability, that the

higher incomes of those with more years of schooling are due in part to differences in

intelligence, home environment, family connection and other factors which result from

individual differences in ability and opportunity. Therefore, to some extent, the

observed relationship between schooling and earnings may be a spurious one. It is, of

course, difficult if at all possible to measure the extent to which these extraneous

factors enter this relationship.” (p.964).

        Miller’s empirical findings, such as the “sheepskin” effect and the constant

earnings differentials between high school and college graduates, have become the

stylized facts of future research. His explanations do not sound outdated even today.

According to these explanations the “sheepskin” effect reflects “selection in terms of

ability”; and the constant earning differential since the pre-war era, in spite of the fast

3
 Miller was familiar with T.W. Schultz’s writings and with early versions of Becker’s theory (Becker,
1960).


                                                  7
increase in the supply of college graduates, can be attributed to an increase in demand

for college-labor driven by technological change.4

The fact that Miller’s research has never come close to the popularity of Becker’s and

Mincer’s work can be traced to the novel theoretical framework presented by Becker,

and the imaginative interaction between theory and empirical tools which characterizes

Mincer’s studies.

Becker was naturally aware of the criticism that his estimates of the rate of return to

college education are biased because of differences in ability between college and

high-school graduates. He was the first to admit that a large fraction of the high school

vs. elementary school earning differential should be attributed to differences in ability.

Becker, however, went through an extensive analysis, citing several sources of data, to

show that the ability bias in the estimate of the rate of return to college education is

minor (1964, pp. 79−88). Among other pieces of evidence , he shows that if rank in

class is used as a measure of ability the bias is of the order of magnitude of 12

percent.5

Most skeptics seemed to be convinced by the Becker analysis. The only opposing

view was that of Denison (1962, 1964). Following Schultz, Denison tried to separate

the unexplained “growth residual” into its components. Examining the same data

surveyed by Becker, he concluded that about one third of the schooling effect should

be attributed to ability. In spite of this dissenting view, most Labor Economics

4
  Some of the insights in Miller’s paper, for example, the changing composition of the “ability pool” of
different schooling groups over time, are popular topics of research even today.
 5
  Another piece of evidence is based on the comparisons of high school graduates with college
dropouts, since the two groups seem to have similar class ranks in high school, and similar scores on
IQ tests. Comparing the rates of return to college dropouts and college graduates the bias is estimated




                                                   8
practitioners accepted Becker’s conclusion that “it may be concluded that, even after

adjustment for differential ability, the private rate of return to a typical white male

college graduate would be considerable” (1964, p. 88).

        The following decade can be considered as the heydays of the Theory of

Human Capital, and the earning function estimates. Ben Porath (1967) employed an

elegant optimum control model to explain the concavity of the age-earning profile.

Mincer (1962, 1974) demonstrated how the on-the-job training model could serve as a

powerful tool in analyzing the earning distribution. Becker (1967) presented a more

comprehensive model where the demand for schooling and the supply of funds

determine simultaneously the level of schooling and earnings. In this model “ability”

explains the interpersonal variation in demand, and “opportunities” explain the

variation in supply. The covariation of these factors determines the distribution of

earnings. Parsons (1972) borrowed the concept of “specific human capital,” to explain

mobility patterns and the unemployment structure. Each of these studies gave rise to

additional studies, building on the foundations of their predecessors, leading an even

“jaundiced” critic such as Mark Blaug to admit “that the human-capital research

program has displayed a simply amazing fecundity, spawning new research projects in

almost every branch of economics.” (1976, p. 833).

The “ability bias” issue remained dormant for the rest of the 60s. The major reason for

this loss of interest was, perhaps, the dearth of data. The only two new samples that

included direct measures of ability were clearly non-representative, and could not shed




to be about one-third. In an early paper on the social rate of return to college education (1960) Becker
concludes that ability differentials account for 2 out of the 11 percentage points return.


                                                    9
any new light on the phenomenon.6 It was Griliches who reawakened the issue when

he tried to “appeal” Denison’s conclusions.7 His 1970 survey signaled a new wave of

studies focusing on the ability-schooling interaction. This wave was rekindled by the

availability of new sources of data containing direct observations on IQ test scores,

schooling, and earning. Some of these studies were written by Griliches himself (with

collaborators), but many came from other directions.

The first of these studies were John Hause’s. In his 1972 paper he examined four

bodies of data, finding strong evidence of complementarity between ability, schooling

and post-school experience. Ability differentials have no effect on earnings at the

lower schooling levels, but have a significant effect at higher schooling levels, this

effect becoming more pronounced the larger the worker’s labor force experience.

Consequently, the ability bias in the estimate of the rate of return of college education

is insignificant, when the earnings are observed at the early stages of one’s career, and

are of moderate importance (3−18 percent) when one examines the earnings of prime

age workers.

One of the bodies of data surveyed in the Hause 1972 paper was the NBER-Thorndike

sample. The sample consisted of World War II U.S. Air force volunteers who were re-

interviewed in 1955 by Robert Thorndike and Elizabeth Hagen. The 1943 data

containing the scores on a battery of 17 tests was complemented in 1955 by additional

tests and data on earnings. Paul Taubman and Terence Wales who discovered the data


6
  Ashenfelter and Mooney (1968) used a sample derived from the upper tail of the ability distribution
(Woodrow Wilson Fellowship holders) only to find that the ability bias is miniscule. Hansen,
Weisbrod and Scanlon (1970) derived their sample from the opposite tail of the distribution (sampling
military rejects) and found that introducing AFQT scores into the (linear) wage equation reduces the
schooling coefficient significantly.
 7
  See next section.


                                                  10
enlisted the help of the National Bureau of Economic Research to re-interview about

6,000 of these men in 19698. The sample’s selection criterion resulted in an over-

representation of high ability − highly educated men, but it was at the time, both in

terms of quality and in terms of size, by far superior to any other similar body of data9.

Taubman and Wales analyzed their sample and reach somewhat different conclusions

from those reached by Hause. Like Hause, they found that ability has little effect on

starting salaries but that its effect grows over time; growing, perhaps, even more

rapidly for those with graduate training and high ability. However their estimate for

the ability-bias was significantly higher than that of Hause10. They found a bias of 15-

25 percent. When one controls also for age, the ability bias increases to 30-35 percent.

Though this estimate was arrived controlling for age rather than work-experience, this

is the estimate Taubman chose as the “true” ability-bias.11 Not less disturbing to the

standard theory was the conclusion that “it is almost certain that, for those in this

cohort who are at least high-school graduates, ability is a more important determinant

of the range of the income distribution than is education” (1974, p.9).

To an innocent bystander like Clark Kerr12,“potentially even more damaging to

human-capital theory (was) the Taubman-Wales finding that, for those with some


8
   Paul Taubman and his collaborators were pioneers in the field of primary data collection, preceding
by more than a decade the wave of the data collection of the 90’s.
 9
  The Taubman-Wales sample consisted of 4,440 observations. John Hause used a sub-sample of 2,300
observations.
10
    The Taubman-Wales analysis differs from the Hause study in several respects: 1) it uses a larger
sample, including self-employed; 2) the “ability” variable is defined differently; and 3) it uses a
different mathematical specification of the earnings function.
 11
    See Taubman’s comments on the Griliches-Mason paper (1972), and Juster’s summary of the
Taubman-Wales findings (1974).
12
   Clark Kerr, the ex-chancellor of the University of California, was the Chairman of the Carnegie
Commission on Higher Education that co-sponsored the Taubman-Wales study. The citation is taken
from his introduction to the book (1974).


                                                  11
college or a B.A., a substantial part of the earnings advantage associated with

education was attributable to “screening,” that is, the requirements or preferences of

employers for those with a college education”. It is doubtful whether the supporting

evidence for this far-reaching conclusion- the over-representation of college graduates

in the better paying occupations- would, today, be regarded as a threat to the Theory

of Human Capital. What seemed threatening at the time was the avalanche of elegant

theoretical paper relating to schooling as a signaling device.

This fad started with Spence’s Ph.D. dissertation (1973, 1974) followed by Arrow

(1973), Stiglitz (1975), and Riley (1975, 1979). The common feature of these models

is the argument that schools do not “produce” any “market-oriented skills”, but just aid

employers who try to screen their workers according to “ability.” The more “able”

workers are also more efficient at producing “schooling,” and hence will “purchase”

more “schooling” to signal their higher ability. The perplexing feature of this theory is

that its empirical implications are almost indistinguishable from the “traditional”

theory of Human Capital. Taubman and Wales, however, claimed that their results

could serve as support of the “Screening Theory,” and a refutation of the traditional

theory.

       To better understand the importance and timeliness of Zvi Griliches’

Presidential Address, it is worth reproducing some of the points of criticism raised by

Mark Blaug in his “slightly jaundiced” survey of “The Empirical Status of Human

Capital Theory” written on the eve of the Econometric Society meeting. Blaug

reserved special scorn to the estimation of the standard Mincer-type earning function.

       “ No wonder the bulk of empirical work inspired by the human-capital
       framework has taken the form of regressing the earnings of individuals on such


                                           12
       variables, as native ability, family background, place of residence, years of
       schooling, years of work experience, occupational status, and the like − the so-
       called “earnings function.” It is sometimes difficult in all this research to see
       precisely what hypothesis is being tested, other than that schooling and work
       experience are important and that native ability and family background are
       not”. (1976, p.832).


In his summary Blaug has to admit

        “We must give credit where credit is due. The human-capital research
        program has moved steadily away from some of its early naive formulations,
        and has boldly attacked certain traditionally neglected topics in economics,
        such as the distribution of personal income. Moreover, it has never entirely
        lost sight of its original goal of demonstrating that a wide range of apparently
        disconnected phenomena in the world are the outcome of a definite pattern of
        individual decisions, having in common the features of forgoing present gains
        for the prospect of future ones. In so doing, it discovered novel facts, such as
        the correlation between education and age-specific earnings, which have
        opened up entirely new areas of research in economics. Whether this
        momentum can be maintained in the future is, of course, anybody’s guess, but
        it is noteworthy that the screening hypothesis first emerged in the writings of
        adherents to the human-capital research program, and to this day the most
        fruitful empirical work in the testing of credentialist hypotheses continues to
        emerge from the friends rather than the enemies of human-capital theory.”

But this did nothing to dampen his criticism

        “We are thus condemned to judge the human-capital research program
        largely in its own terms, which is strictly speaking impossible − even the flat-
        earth research program, judged in its own terms, is not faring too badly!
        There are certainly grounds for thinking that the human-capital research
        program is now in something of a “crisis…. Its rate-of-return calculations
        repeatedly turn up significant, unexplained differences in the yields of
        investment in different types of human capital, but its schooling-model
        explanation of the distribution of earnings nevertheless goes on blithely
        assuming that all rates of return to human-capital formation are equalized at
        the margin. Worse still, is the persistent resort to ad hoc auxiliary assumptions
        to account for every perverse result, culminating in a certain tendency to
        mindlessly grind out the same calculation with a new set of data which are
        typical signs of degeneration in a scientific research program.”


The Presidential Address did not try to cope with all the points of criticism raised by

Blaug. It focused on what Griliches regarded as the greatest empirical challenge − the


                                           13
most recent estimates of the ability bias, in the hope that disproving the “revisionists”

on this critical issue will dispel at least some of the felling of “crisis.”

       By the time Griliches delivered his Presidential Address, the “revisionists” were

already preparing their next “assault,” introducing into the “battlefield,” what they

must have considered the “ultimate weapon” − the twin data. Twin data were not alien

to social scientists. Jensen and his co-authors were using this type of data almost a

decade before (1967) to isolate the role of heredity, environment and luck. Taubman

and his coauthors stumbled on the NAS-NRC sample of twins almost accidentally. But

once their students awakened them to the existence of the data, they realized

immediately their importance to the ongoing debate.

       Taubman published his first paper on the topic in 1976, and the summary of his

study in 1980. A new term was introduced into the econometric and the labor

economists’ jargon-kinometrics, and in 1977 the first conference was held on the

findings and the econometrics of sibling data.

       The implicit assumptions driving the twin model were simple. In its simplest

version (Willis, 1986) the twin model assumes that the unobservable variables can be

divided into two parts: “heredity” (or, “genetic”) variables and “environmental”

variables. Identical twins (MZ) share the same hereditary and environmental variables.

Hence, running the earning regression “within” MZ cells (where the dependent

variable is the difference in earnings and the explanatory variable the difference in

schooling) one can isolate these effects, and generate the “true” schooling effect.

Moreover, since non-identical twins (DZ) share only the same environmental

variables, the same “within” regression run in the DZ sample will generate a schooling



                                              14
coefficient that reflects both the “true” schooling effect and the hereditary effect. A

comparison with the MZ results yields, therefore, the net hereditary effect. Finally, the

comparison of the standard regression for unrelated workers with the DZ regression

allows the isolation of the environment effects.13

       A sub-sample of the twin sample used by Taubman et al, contained direct

information on the respondents’ cognitive skills. Controlling for this variable in a

standard earning-schooling regression for mature workers reduced the schooling

coefficient by 35 percent. Rerunning the regression for the whole sample on the

individual data (not controlling for cognitive skills), the crude schooling coefficient

was found to be 0.08. Controlling for observed family background variables, the

coefficient declined to 0.07. The “within” DZ regression, controlling for unobserved

common environment, yielded a coefficient of 0.06, and the “within” MZ regression

yielded an estimate of the “true” schooling coefficient of 0.025. According to these

findings, the “true” ability bias was, therefore, about two- thirds of the standard

estimate!

       Taubman and his co-authors (Behrman et al., 1980) were quick to draw their

policy recommendations. They concluded “ that policies to equalize schooling will

have little effect on inequality of earning or status. Family plays a major role in

generating inequality of education, occupational status and earnings. It appears,

however, that most of the family effects arise out of genetic endowment; thus, policies

designed to equalize opportunity defined solely in terms of family environment will

leave substantial inequality of outcomes within a generation.” (p.32). The only

13
  More complex models and their implicit econometric assumptions are discussed in Goldberger
(1977).


                                               15
message of hope the authors had for their readers was in terms of intergenerational

mobility: Eliminating all environmental differences should eliminate almost the whole

intergenerational correlation in earning. For most readers that would be a small solace!



C. Griliches Steps In.

       Griliches opened his academic career with a series of blockbusters − his studies

  of hybrid corn (1957, 1958). As he tells his story (Krueger and Taylor, 2000) he

  knew relatively little about agriculture, but he learned from his personal experience

  the importance of learning. The problems associated with diffusion of new

  knowledge were hand-tailored for his talents. From there, it was only a small step to

  a series of studies in which he tried to isolate the contribution of education and

  investment in R&D to measured productivity in agriculture (1963a, 1963b, 1964).

  The major finding of these studies was that the “labor quality” measure (i.e., the

  education of farm labor) enters the aggregate agriculture production function with a

  coefficient which is not significantly different from that of the labor variable.

  Hence, one can combine both the quantity and quality dimensions of labor into one

  variable. He also found that though the elasticity of output with respect of R&E

  expenditures (research and extension services) is rather low (about 5 percent), the

  social rate of return to these expenditures is extremely high (about 300 percent).

       The next natural step was a territorial expansion into manufacturing (1967a,

  1968), and his work with Dale Jorgensen (1966, 1967b). In 1968 when the National

  Board of Economic Research convened its annual conference on Income and

  Wealth, focusing on the topic of “Education, Income and Human Capital,” Griliches



                                           16
     was the natural candidate to present the survey on the “Role of Education in

     Production Functions and Growth Accounting” (1970).

         After discussing the different ways “quality” can be introduced as a parameter

     in the production function, the paper discusses to the problems of aggregation. The

     search for a common denominator of the different kinds of labor (distinguished by

     occupation, schooling, race, gender, location, etc.) lead Griliches to conclude: “the

     next small step is obviously not in the direction of a very large number of types of

     labor, but rather towards the question of whether there are a few underlying

     relevant “dimensions of labor,” which could explain, satisfactorily, the observed

     diversity in the wages paid to different “kinds” of labor. The obvious analogy here

     is to hedonic or characteristics approach to the analysis of quality change in

     consumer goods… One can identify the “human capital” approach as a one-

     dimensional version of such an approach” (1970, p. 90).

         In his basic equation

         (1) wi = w0 + r H i + u

     the wage of (wi ) consists of the remuneration for “raw labor” (w0 ) and the “rental

     value of units of human capital (r H). The problem, of course, with this analysis is

     that whereas car fins and engine power are measurable, human capital units (Hi) are

     unobserved.14

         The next section is named “ability”. Surprisingly, this section, which is

     somewhat tangential to the issues of growth accounting, turns out to be the central


14
   Griliches was, of course, aware of this distinction. He even suggested that “if one is willing to
assume that the implicit prices (w0 and r) are constant, and one has repeated observations for a given
(observation), one can use such a framework to estimate the unobserved “latent” (Hi) variable”
(ibid.)


                                                  17
part of the survey, occupying almost one-third of its length. What must have

triggered the analysis was Denison’s 1964 suggestion that about one-third of the

observed income-by-schooling differential should not be attributed to learning but

to natural talent. Griliches resented this assertion not just in the context of the

secular contribution to growth, but primarily because of its implication for the

estimates of the rate of return to schooling derived from cross-section surveys.

     Griliches’ starting point is the standard model

(2) y i = β 0 + β1 Si + β 2 A i + u ,

where y denotes income, S – schooling, A – ability, and β1 and β 2 are assumed to

be positive. The crude schooling regression coefficient (bys) is upward biased as

long as the correlation between schooling S and the omitted variable A is positive.

(3) E b ys = β1 + β 2 b AS > β1 ⇔ b AS > 0 .

But is this so? Griliches had his doubts about the direction and size of the bias, and

its interpretation. As he phrased it: “Much of measured ability is the product of

“learning” even if it is not the product of “schooling.” Often what passes as

“ability” is actually some measure of “achievement,” and the argument could be

made that it, in turn, is determined by a relation of the form

(4) A = α 0 + α 1 S + α 2 QS + α 3 LH + α 4 G + v ,

where S is the level of schooling, QS is the quality of schooling, LH are the learning

inputs at “home,” and G is the original genetic endowment.” Here in a nutshell are

the four factors the search for whom will preoccupy Griliches throughout the

coming decade.




                                               18
The total effect of “reproducible” human capital (including the quality of schooling

and learning at home) equals

(5) β1 + β 2 (α1 + α 2 b QS.S + α 3 b LH.S ) ,

where the b-terms in the parentheses are the regression coefficient of school quality

(QS) and home-learning (LH) on years of schooling (S). Comparing equation (2)

with equation (4), it is not clear whether the simple regression coefficient bys does

in fact overstate the total effect.

     Griliches had also his doubts about the relative magnitude of the auxiliary

regression coefficient bAS . Ability may interact with schooling and have a

significant effect on earnings at high level of schooling, but bAS itself may be quite

low. Furthermore, the interaction between schooling and ability (or measured

intelligence) is not a one-way relationship. It can be affected by schooling and the

person’s environment, and, in turn, it affects the amount of learning achieved in a

given schooling situation. The more intelligent student is endowed with a greater

initial endowment of knowledge and is more efficient in acquiring additional

knowledge. “One might venture to define the gross output of the schooling system

as ability,” and at least part of the apparent returns to ability should be imputed to

the schooling system. This part should be quite large assuming, as Griliches did,

that ability is not the binding constraint in the determination of schooling levels.

     Griliches returned to the data examined by Denison and could not find evidence

to justify the large correction recommended by him. A large fraction of Denison’s

ability correction is ascribed to father’s occupation and regional income




                                                 19
     differentials,15 and “ less than one-third of the “one-third” adjustment is related

     conceptually to ability per se.” (ibid., p. 103). Griliches stuck to this estimate of a

     “10 percent adjustment” throughout his career!

     To support his own argument concerning the small magnitude of the ability bias he

     cites a Swedish study (Husen 1968).The study included, in addition to the data on

     the earnings at the age of 35 by schooling, the IQ tests at the age of 10 of the men

     interviewed. It showed that, though the IQ explained almost 25 percent of the

     variance of log earnings, the bias introduced by its omission is minimal (4 percent).

         For the next round, the 1971 University of Chicago workshop on “Investment

     in Education: The Equity-Efficiency Quandary,”16 Griliches came already equipped

     with the data he was looking for. The data were based on a 1964 sample of U.S.

     military veterans.17 The 1964 CPS data on earnings and schooling were collated

     with their military records containing information on their pre-military schooling

     levels, and their scores on the Armed Forces Qualification Tests (AFQT), and

     socio-economic background. The sample consisted of about 1500 fully employed

     men in the age group 21 to 34.

         About one-third of the men in the sample continued their schooling after the

     military career. The variable ‘years studied after the military’ played a major role in

     the analysis because it allowed the authors to break the alleged simultaneous

     relationship between ‘ability’ and ‘schooling’. Since ‘ability’ (i.e., AFQT scores)

15
    Denison’s conclusions are based on tables where the proxy for ability is father’s occupation.
Griliches argues that father’s occupation is positively correlated with more learning at home and with
a higher quality of schooling. At least the second factor should be subtracted from the schooling effect.
 16
    An early version of the paper was presented in a conference on Structural Equation Models in
Madison (Wisconsin) in November 1970.




                                                   20
     was measured prior to the military career, and schooling related to post-military

     schooling, the direction of the causality is unambivalent. Griliches and Mason noted

     that introducing the AFQT scores into the log-linear equation reduced this

     schooling coefficient by 10 percent. The introduction of post-military schooling,

     together with father’s occupation and pre-military region of residence, reduced the

     coefficient by 12 percent.

         Using as a measure of schooling the variable ‘total schooling’ (rather than

     ‘post-military schooling’), the ability bias increases considerably.18 To explain the

     sensitivity of the results to the measure of schooling, the authors enlisted an error of

     measurement model, where “education” is measured with an error

         (6)     S i = S i' + S i" , and cov ( S i' , S i" ) = 0 ,

     where S’ is measured schooling and S” is the measurement error. The authors called

     this error ‘schooling quality’ and assumed cov (S”, A) > 0, i.e., the more able

     enjoy higher school quality. The partial regression coefficient of earnings on

     measured schooling, controlling for ability, equals

         (7)     BY S ' A = β 1 [1 − ( bS " A b   AS '   ) / (1 − rAS
                                                                   2
                                                                      ' )]
                     ..




     Thus, if the assumption that b S" A > 0 holds, the partial regression coefficient will

     understate the “true” schooling coefficient β1 . The risk of this bias is reduced if




17
   The data were provided by his collaborator, William Mason, who used them in his (sociology) Ph.D.
dissertation.
18
   28 percent where both ‘ability’ and family background are omitted from the equation, and 15 percent
when only ‘ability’ is omitted.


                                                                 21
     one uses as the schooling variable − ‘incremental schooling’ (post-military

     schooling) instead of ‘pre-military’ or ‘total schooling’.19

            The authors expanded the model to incorporate errors of measurement in

     ability, embedding them in a framework of a recursive model. In this model

     measured “background factors” and unobservable heredity feed into ability and

     ‘initial schooling’, ‘initial schooling’ and ‘initial ability’ determine the changes in

     ability, which, in turn, determines earning. The more complex model and estimation

     procedure (two-stage-least-square) did not, however, lead to any additional insights

     into the schooling-ability relation.

            The discussant of the Griliches – Mason paper at the Chicago workshop was

     Paul Taubman. This was the beginning of a decade that can only be characterized

     by the words of the song “Everything You Can Do − I Can Do Better!”

            Taubman thought his work with Wales had not been given sufficient credit, and

     he regarded (rightly) his NBER-Thorndike data to be superior to those used by

     Griliches and Mason. However, the only explanation he could provide for the

     difference in the findings was the linearization of the schooling variable (i.e., the

     use of a continuous schooling variable instead of dummy variables) and the use of

     the total AFQT scores rather than the individual tests20.

            The next round was again set by one of Griliches’ students. This time it was

     Gary Chamberlain, and his Ph.D. dissertation, “Unobservables in Econometric

19
  The authors ignore the possibility that the pre-military AFQT score affects the draftee’s millitary
career and his decision to continue his schooling. Thus even if b S"A is smaller for incremental
                 2
schooling, rS'A can be larger.
     20
          The Griliches – Mason AFQT variable did not contain the breakdown for the different tests.




                                                      22
     Models” (1975). One way to isolate the unobservable variables requires the use

     “multi-dimensional” data. The standard procedure would be the use of panel data,

     where the time dimension allows for the isolation of the unobservable “individual”

     effects. Panel data in the early 70s were still rare, and covered only a short-time

     span. Perhaps more important, panel data do not contain, in general, sufficient

     temporal variation in schooling − the variable the research focused on.

         Chamberlain and Griliches (1975) reverted, therefore, to siblings’ data as a

     source that will allow them, hopefully, to control for family environment. The idea

     of choosing brothers to get a better measure of the effect of schooling was not

     novel21, what was novel was the set of econometric tools brought to the analysis.

         Two fundamental changes were introduced in the model. Whereas, in the 1970

     paper ‘ability’ was defined as the endogenous variable − being the “gross output of

     the schooling system,” in the 1975 schooling is affected by ability. Equation (3) is

     replaced by an equation of the type

         (8)    S =γ 0 + γ 1 A + w;

     making S an endogenous variable. The “repeated” observations (i.e., the

     observation for the two brothers) are the basis of the variance-components model

         (9)    A ij = f i + a ij ,

where i denotes the family, j the sibling, fi is the family component and of aij the

individual component.




21
  The Gorseline data used by Chamberlain and Griliches had already been discussed by Becker
(1964).


                                                23
        Unfortunately, the data used by Chamberlain-Griliches (1975) could not bear

the weight of the econometric method. To demonstrate the usefulness of their new

tool, the authors reverted to a small sample of brothers (127 pairs) already analyzed by

Gorseline (1932). The limitations of the data forced Chamberlain and Griliches to be

very careful in the phrasing of their conclusion “that at least in 1927, in Indiana,

differences in parental background were not an important source of bias in the

estimated returns to schooling” (1975, p. 429). An even more elaborate estimation

method led to a similar conclusion – i.e., that the unobserved variable affected income,

but had only a negligible effect on schooling.22 The authors are forced, therefore, to

sum up this empirical attempt with a retraction: “So our prior expectation that the

unobservable which we call “ability” would be an important determinant of schooling

and interpretable as IQ or family wealth is not born out by the data.” (ibid.,p.431).

Additional toying with the model led only to new question marks,23 generating a

typical Griliches summary: “From a substantive point of view, the new econometric

methods did not produce results which differed greatly from those based on simpler

methods. This is either satisfying or disappointing, depending on one’s point of view.

An elaborate procedure, designed to detect possible sources of bias, yielded little

evidence of such bias. It is quite likely that important unobserved variables have been

left out from our schooling-achievement model, but they are not of the type one usually

associates with notion of intellectual “ability.”

22
 This was true both for the magnitudes of the coefficients and to the fit of the equations.
23
  The initial variance-component model relied heavily on the assumption that economic success (y in
equation 1) has two independent manifestations: income and occupational status (i.e., the random
components (u) in the two structural equations for y are uncorrelated). The lack of correlation was the




                                                   24
        The contribution of the Chamberlain-Griliches 1975 paper is, therefore, confined

mostly to the econometric technique, and little insights were gained concerning the

ability-schooling interaction. The same can be said about its twin − the Chamberlain-

Griliches 1977 paper at the conference of Kinometrics.24 While Chamberlain and

Griliches were toying with their poor quality sample of brothers, Taubman came up

with his sample of twins (1976, and Behrman et al. 1980).

        Griliches chose the state for the next confrontation with the “revisionists.” It was

the Third World Congress of the Econometric Society, which convened in Toronto in

August 1975. Zvi Griliches delivered the Presidential Address. He was the first

economist engaged in the “new” Labor Economics research to be elected as President

of the Society,25 and the stature of the presidency clearly added weight to the message.

        The recursive model presented in the paper was a combination of the Griliches-

Mason and the Chamberlain-Griliches models. Given the limitations of the data (the

NLSY sample26), the conclusion that the “overall direct contribution of “ability,” as

measured by test scores, to the explanation of the variance of individual expected

earnings is quite small, on the order of .01,” has to be treated with care.

        More important was the digression to the topic of errors of measurement in

schooling and their impact on the estimated rate of return. Griliches had already


identifying assumption for the error component σ f / σ a . The data clearly rejected the independence
                                                   2    2


assumption forcing the authors to replace the estimate of σ g / σ a with simulations.
                                                            2    2

24
    In the 1997 paper Chamberlain and Grilishes used a sample, employed by Griliches before (1976) of
282 brothers derived from the 1966-69 rounds of the NLSY (the National Longitudinal Survey of
Young Men). In contrast to the Gorseline data this survey had direct observations on the IQ scores (it
even had the scores of tests conducted at two different points of time), but it lacked data on the most
important variable − earnings, because most brothers were still too young to participate in the labor
force. The authors had, therefore, to replace this crucial information with imputations.
 25
    The only other President of the Society who contributed to Labor Economics is Marc Neslove.
26
     See footnote 23.


                                                   25
touched upon this topic before, in his paper with Mason,27 but here, for the first time,

he demonstrated that under reasonable assumption concerning the magnitude of the

ability effect and the schooling-ability correlation, the downward bias due to

measurement errors, when one controls for ability, can be as large as the upward bias,

when ability is omitted from the equation

     (10)        − λβ1 / (1 − rAS
                               2
                                  ' ) ≅ β 2 b AS'



where λ = σ S2" / σ S2 is the error component in schooling, and the β i are the schooling

and ability effects (see equation 1). Additional variables in the earning function can

exacerbate this problem.

     The final section of the paper discussed the endogeneity of the schooling variable.

The problem itself was not new to readers of Griliches’ earlier papers (see equation 7),

or to practitioners in the field.28 The Presidential Address helped in moving the

problem to the center-stage.29 Griliches mentions two sources of this endogeneity:

a. The positive correlation between the ex-post random component in earnings and the

ex-ante random component in anticipated earnings that affect the schooling decision.

b. The effect unobserved ability has on both schooling and earnings. Citing Rosen,

Griliches showed that one could not rule out the possibility that ability has a negative

effect on schooling, and that the simple OLS schooling coefficient suffers, therefore,

from a serious downward bias30.



27
   In the Griliches-Mason (1972) paper the authors preferred to call the error “school quality”.
28
   Griliches himself attributes the discussion to his readings in Becker and Mincer and his discussions
with Sherwin Rosen.
29
   Endogeneity is the central theme of both surveys on the earning function in the Handbook of Labor
Economics (1986, 1999), attesting to its importance.
30
   If the more able are endowed with a higher initial stock of human capital they may spend fewer
years in school. This may also be true if the more able are faster learners.


                                                    26
    The Presidential Address did not cope directly with the challenge posed by the

Taubman twin studies. In the 1977 conference on Kinometrics it was Goldberger who

carried the skeptics’ flag. It took Griliches another two years to prepare his response

(1979). The Sibling Models “Partial Survey” is a scathing attack on the “within”

family regression as a device to neutralize family effects. Griliches goes through a

series of examples where a “within” family regression may inflate biases instead of

eliminating them. The most serious of these cases is again the case of errors of

measurement in the schooling variable. The lengthy list of possible biases and

identification problems can be regarded as aimed at Taubman and his co-authors, but it

contains more than a grain of self-criticism: “In short, one cannot really hope to

estimate very complicated models, which allow for a variety of unmeasured influences.

Either one has better data in which the errors-in-variables problem does not arise, or

one has to limit oneself to a very short and specific list of left-out variables and ways

in which they affect the model. Latent-variable models and estimation techniques are

no substitute for good data and substantive restrictions” (1979, p. S48).

    His criticism of the “twin models” echoes that of Goldberger:

        “On observed variables, MZs (identical twins) are more similar than DZs
        (fraternal twins). On the latent variable, genotype, it is known that MZs are
        more similar than DZs. On the latent variable, environment, it is not known
        whether MZs are more similar than DZs. Assume that they are not. Then
        attribute the excess observed resemblance of MZs to their excess genetic
        resemblance, thus estimating the role of heredity.
        That is the gist of the twin method. Since the equal-environmental-correlation
        assumption is questionable, the estimates produced by the method should be
        viewed skeptically” (Goldberger ,1997, p. 299).

    The final section of the survey emphasizes the importance of family decisions as a

determinant of siblings’ schooling and intra-family inequality in earning. Griliches



                                            27
expressed his belief that families act as income equalizers, but admits that much more

has to be learned in order to understand the effect of family background on their

children’s economic success.31

       The survey’s “Provisional Summary” reads as Griliches’ summary of his ten-year

excursion into the field of earnings functions. It is worth citing it verbatim:

       “The following appears to be a fair summary of the state of our knowledge on this

topic: Measured parental characteristics (except for race and region) appear to affect

earnings primarily via their effect on the level of achieved schooling. The market does

not appear to pay for them directly. Unmeasured “family” characteristics have a

substantial though not large effect on the variance of earnings (10−15 percent), but

their interpretation is obscure. In particular, they cannot be interpreted as reflecting

“visible” parental status effects such as wealth, which were already proxied to some

extent by the measured demographic variables. They consist of all the influences on

which brothers are “closer” to each other than a randomly drawn pair from the same

population. But such influences include race, region, spatial proximity, similarity in

the school system and peer groups of origin, similarity in the cultural environment,

which includes influences which extend far beyond the original “family” boundaries,

and similarity in subsequent environments. They should not be interpreted, except

tautologically, as reflecting the force of family influences. They reflect the force of

accidents of birth into a family, race, region, city, ethnic group, and more, and the fact

that spatial and social mobility within half a generation is not perfect. Even with much

mobility, people on average move only some distance from their original location in


31
     Michael made a similar comment at the Kinometrics conference (1977).


                                                  28
geographic and social space. The correlation between brothers’ earnings reflects this

and should not be interpreted as being solely the effect of “family,” or “class,” nor as

implying that there is no escape from ones “background.” Note that all the

background (and “foreground”) measures taken together do not explain much more

than about 30 percent of the observed variance of log earnings. If one were to make a

major adjustment for the effect of transitory earnings, one would still be left with the

conclusion that the inequality (opportunity?) within families is about as large as that

between families. Whether the glass is half full or half empty depends on the point of

view of the observer….

    I have not tried to break down the family effect into “genetics” versus

“environment,” since even if were possible, it is not clear that it would give us any

more handles on the problem without a fuller understanding of the mechanism by

which these forces exert their influence. Some genetic differences might be corrigible

(e.g., by enzymes), while for some environmental influences, such as cultural

background, there are not effective intervention methods known.

    Whether unmeasured common-to-brothers effects bias significantly the schooling

coefficient is not clear. The direct evidence if ambiguous. If some weight is given to the

possibility of errors of measurement and endogeneity of schooling, then much of the

asserted bias disappears.

    What good then are sibling data if by solving one problem (omitted familial

variables) they aggravate other problems? While no panacea, they do provide us with

a richer set of observational data and allow us to complicate our models and ask for

more detailed answers. In econometric terms, they give us a larger set of instrumental



                                            29
variables, but only at the cost of explicit restrictions on the structure of our models.

Something more is learned, but as is often the case in science, much of what is learned

extends the dimensions of the unknown (Griliches 1979, pp. S59-S60).



D. Earning Functions − Maturity

    The early 80s witnessed the subsidence of the ability-schooling controversy. In his

survey for the Handbook of Labor Economics (1986), Willis when discussing the

ability-bias, adopts the stand Griliches took in his summary of the 1979 survey:

       “The literature surveyed can be characterized as ranging between two extreme
       positions, one saying that family effects are various and many and that they
       lead to serious overestimation solely from differences between siblings,
       preferably MZ twins. The other extreme would take the position that family
       effects work almost entirely via schooling and hence cause little bias in the
       estimate of its coefficient, and that the decline observed in within-sibling
       estimates is the result of the aggravation of other problems, such as errors in
       measurement and simultaneity and not the reflection of true family effects. The
       evidence at this point is ambiguous. Some sibling studies show little change in
       the schooling coefficient, some show much. The latter can be explained by
       reasonable rates of measurement error, but this the leaves the former
       unexplained. Unfortunately, data are not currently available which would allow
       the estimation of a metamodel nesting both of these positions within it.”
       (Griliches 1979, pp. S81).


       Willis himself expanded the simple ability-schooling model, when in his paper

with Rosen (1979) he allowed for two different types of abilities. The model allowed

for specialization according to comparative advantage, the person self-selecting into

college and high school depending on his type of ability and rate of interest he faces.

The Willis-Rosen model allows the estimation of both “ability-free” rates of return to

schooling, and the sensitivity of college enrollment to wage differentials. In many




                                            30
respects it comes close to the model Griliches was outlining in his 1977 Presidential

Address.

      Subsequent research (Lillard, 1977) confirmed Hause’s findings that the

Griliches data were flawed because ability differences hardly show up at the early

stages of one’s work career and their effect on earnings becomes more pronounced

only as the person grows older. This finding could not have caught Griliches by

surprise, because, as we have seen, he was aware of the weakness of his data. On the

other hand, the passage of time has shown him to be right on the effect of many of the

latent variables that preoccupied him during the stormy 70s.

The analysis of twin data remained dormant for more than a decade. The inactivity

was not due to exhaustion but due to the lack of new data. Then in 1994, fifteen years

after the Sibling Survey, the “fight’ was resumed. By now Griliches was out of the

game, and his position was taken up by two newcomers to the field - Ashenfelter and

Krueger (1994). Following Taubman and his collaborators, Ashenfelter and Krueger

did not wait for the data to come to their doorstep, but went looking for it as the 1991

Twinsburg Twins Festival. Their results (1994) seemed to vindicate Griliches’

assertions. Correcting for the measurement error in schooling, they find that previous

estimates of the rate of return to schooling were downward biased. Their estimate (12-

16 percent) was twice as large as previous estimates and higher than the original

estimates obtained when ability and measurement errors were not controlled for.

Following Griliches they could not find a significant effect of ability on schooling, but

that measurement errors in schooling introduce a significant downward bias in the rate




                                           31
of return estimate.32 The authors used the schooling of the twin reported by his

brothers as an instrumental variable to correct for errors of measurement, and found

that the corrected coefficient exceeds the standard “within” regression coefficient by

over 80 percent!

     Almost at the same time Behrman, Rosenzweig and Taubman (1994) published

their most recent findings based on their new samples. The NAS-NRC Twins sample,

used in their original study, was supplemented by the Minnesota Twin Registry. Their

analysis was not confined to the effect of “natural endowments” on schooling and

earnings, but was expanded to the marriage market, to explore the impact of

endowments and schooling on assortive mating. The authors reiterate their previous

conclusion that the rate of return to schooling is about 4 percent. Allowing for

measurement errors in the schooling variable ( instrumenting the own reported

schooling variable by the variable reported by the person’s child) increases the

estimate to 5 percent. The 30 percent bias was well bellow the Ashenfelter- Krueger

estimate.

       Subsequent rounds of the Twinsburg Twins sample have shown that

Ashenfelter- Krueger first round results suffered from a sampling error. The June 1999

issue of the Economics of Education Review 33 served as the stage of the last round of

the twin controversy. Rouse (1999) summarized the results of the first four rounds of

the Twinsburg sample. She finds a rate of return to schooling of 10 percent, but she

also finds, using within twins regressions, that the standard cross-section OLS

estimates suffer from a small upward bias (about 6 percent).

32
  The error component constituted about 10 percent of the measured variance of schooling − the
estimate used by Griliches.


                                                 32
         Griliches’ students extended his old stand: Neumark (1999) argued that the

within-twin IV estimator amplifies the bias from any omitted ability difference

between twins, relative to the standard within-twins estimator. Bound and Solon

(1999) argued that one cannot relate to the schooling differential of the identical twins

as exogenous. The differential in schooling in this case is clearly not random, and the

within-twin estimation is vulnerable, therefore, therefore, to the same endogeneity

bias as the cross-section estimates.

          Behrman and Rosenzweig (1999) use a resurvey of the Minnesota twins to show

that the upward bias in the OLS cross-section estimate is statistically significant. The

authors are also careful to point out that the source of this bias need not be the direct

effect of ‘natural endowments’ on schooling, but may originate from the correlation of

this variable with other family characteristics that affect schooling, and, hence, may

vary from one sample to the next. The reader cannot but notice that the authors’ most

recent estimate of the bias –12 percent- is almost exactly the size of the bias assumed

by Griliches and by Becker, when they started this journey.

            One of the first to follow Griliches’ advice to incorporate a direct measure of

school quality in the earnings function was Behrman. In his study with Birdsall (1983)

of earnings in Brazil he uses the schooling level of the teachers as a measure of school

quality. The authors argue that since quantity and quality of schooling are positively

correlated (as assumed by Griliches and Mason), the omission of the quality variable

leads to an upward bias in the estimate of the returns to years of schooling, and can

explain in many cases the observed differential in the rate of return among individuals,


33
     A journal that did not even exist at the time of the first round of this controversy.


                                                            33
and between different regions. From a policy point of view the investment in school

quality may yield higher returns than those from investing in quantity.

The 90s witnessed a reawakening of interest in this issue. In their survey Card and

Krueger (1996) tend to confirm Griliches’ assertion − school resources have a positive

effect on future income, but they are careful to warn that the evidence is not always

conclusive. Griliches assumed that the quality effect is additive (see equation 4). In the

Card and Krueger model34 the effect is more complex: it increases the slope of the

schooling-earning gradient (since each year of schooling “produces” more human

capital, the higher the school’s quality), but it may also affect the intercept (because of

self-selection − students attending better schools decide to invest more in schooling).

Reduced form regressions show that a 10 percent increase in school resources increase

the future income of students by 0.4-1.1 percent.

           The Presidential Address in 1975 played an important role in highlighting the

importance of the simultaneity problem in the estimation of the rate of return to

schooling. Griliches traced the simultaneity to ability and expected earnings affecting

actual earnings, while affecting also schooling demand. Subsequent research returned

to the structural equations framework outlined in Becker’s Woytinsky Lecture (1967).

Several studies tried to identify this structure of demand and supply of schooling by

using institutional features of the education system (for example, distance to college)

as identifiers of the demand side, and as instruments in the estimation of the ability-

schooling interaction. On the 23rd anniversary of Griliches’ Presidential Address,




34
     The Card- Krueger model is very similar to that used by Behrman and Birdsall (1983).


                                                        34
David Card delivered the Fisher-Schultz Lecture at the 1998 Meeting of the European

Econometric Society. In his lecture, he summarized these attempts (2001):

    “A supply and demand framework leads to a somewhat richer econometric model

for schooling and earnings than is usually adopted in the applied literature. In

particular, the implied data generation process for earnings has both a random

intercept (reflecting differences across individuals in the amount they could earn at

every level of schooling) and a random education slope (reflecting differences across

individuals in the marginal return to education). Although one can still estimate a

standard human capital earnings function by standard OLS or IV methods, the

parameter estimates must be interpreted carefully. Even IV estimation based on ideal

instruments (observable factors that are by assumption independent of individual

abilities) will typically recover a weighted average of returns to education for people

whose education choices were affected by the instrument, rather than the average

marginal return to education in the population.

    The recent literature that uses supply-side features to instrument schooling

choices tends to find IV estimates of the return to schooling that at least as big and

sometimes substantially bigger than the corresponding OLS estimates. In many cases

the IV estimates are relatively imprecise, and none of the empirical strategies is based

on true randomization. Thus, no individual study is likely to be decisive in the debate

over the magnitude of ability biases in OLS estimates of the return to schooling. Taken

as a whole, however, the findings from the recent IV literature are remarkably

consistent with Griliches’ (1977) assessment of a much earlier set of studies, and point

to a causal effect of education that is as big or bigger than the OLS estimated return,



                                            35
at least for whose schooling choices are affected by the supply-side innovations that

have been studies so far.” (2001, p. 1158).

Griliches was aware of the limitations of the panel data he was using, and in his

Presidential Address he expressed his hope that “Advantage should be taken of the

time series nature of the various survey panels that have become available. All of the

studies mentioned, including my own, have yet to approach such data from a truly

dynamic point of view” (1977, p.17). Wolpin and the “structural empiricists” took up

this challenge. The “structuralists” combined the Willis-Rosen comparative advantage

model (1979) with a Mortensen-style search model to create a complex model

describing the sequential schooling- market work decision. According to this

approach, the parameters of the wage function are affected not merely by the skill

production function, but also by the search technology and the opportunity cost of

time35.



E. Summary – Zvi Griliches’ Contribution to the Theory of Human Capital

At the turn of the millennium Jacob Mincer’s earning function is alive and well.

Attesting to its robust health is the extensive discussion of the increasing earning

differentials in the U.S. and U.K. in the 90s that was conducted fully in the vernacular

of the Human Capital Theory36. The ability-schooling controversy is by now part of

the history of economic thought.




35
 For a recent summary of this literature see Wolpin (2003).
36
 For a summary of this literature see the survey by Katz and Autor in The Handbook of Labor
Economics (1999).



                                                36
At the end of the day one may ask: what was Zvi Griliches’ contribution to the

flourishing of this field? At the outset we had to admit that Griliches did not contribute

to the development of the theory. His forte’ was in measurement. He and his

collaborators brought to the field a set of new econometric tools, which allowed more

precise answers to the problem. As a result we have gained a better understanding of

the role of unobservables in the schooling-earning interaction. Ironically, Griliches

may have entered the field prematurely. There was a jarring gap between the crudeness

of his data and the sophistication of his econometric tool-kit. The data that could show

his virtuosity were, unfortunately, in the hands of his “opponents.”

As a result Griliches’ role was confined to repelling the opponents’ attack. In this

position he had no rival. The forefathers of the earning-function did not seem to share

the feeling of “crisis”. Becker was basically a theorist, and his discussion of empirical

results in the Theory of Human Capital (1964) was an exception, rather than the rule.

Mincer was preoccupied with his own research agenda, and was never disturbed by

critics. At the time none of the younger labor economists had the reputation of

Griliches. So it fell to him (with the aid of Goldberger) to face the “onslaught”.

       His penetrating analysis of his opponents’ data and methodology pointed out

the loopholes in their seemingly foolproof arguments. Though he lacked the

appropriate data, most of his assertions have proven to be correct.

Blaug concludes his 1976 survey paper:

           “Nothing is easier than predicting the future course of scientific
           development − and nothing is more likely to be wrong. Nevertheless, let me
           rush in where angels fear to tread. In all likelihood, the human-capital
           research program will never die, but it will gradually fade away to be
           swallowed up by the new theory of signaling, the theory of how employees,
           and indeed all buyers and sellers select each other when their attributes


                                            37
           matter but when information about these attributes is subject to uncertainty.
           In time, the screening hypothesis will be seen to have marked a turning
           point in the “human investment revolution in economic thought,” a turning
           point to a richer, still more comprehensive view of the sequential lifecycle
           choices of individuals.” (1976, p. 850).


       Griliches’ timely intervention was crucial in turning the tide. Once again it was

shown that economic forecasting should be left to the angels!



       As I come to the end of this survey I would like to introduce a personal note.

The reader of this survey may be left with a lingering puzzle: What led Zvi, who was,

after-all, interested in the measurement of the social contribution of “knowledge” to

economic growth, to devote a decade of his research to a problem whose main

implications relate to the private returns of education? I don’t think that Zvi took up

the fight to defend the purity of econometric identification methods, or to impress his

readers with a new elegant recursive model. He took up the fight because he was an

ardent believer that (as he put it) “our findings concerning the earnings functions (of

siblings and others) should not be interpreted as being solely the effect of “family” vs

“class,” nor as implying that there is no escape from one’s “background”.” Zvi, the

immigrant who arrived on the shores of Palestine at the age of 17 with no

“background,” and who later arrived in the U.S. with only the human capital he

accumulated in a crash program in Israel to his name, truly believed schooling was the

main channel for social and economic mobility.




                                           38
        In his interview with Krueger and Taylor (2000) Zvi was asked about the

concluding section of his Presidential Address citing The House of Pooh Corner.37 But

if I had to remember Zvi for this paper, I would not have cited A.A. Milne but rather

Zvi’s own words:” It is a sad fact that in doing empirical work we must continuously

search for the passage between the Scylla of biased inferences due to left out and

confounded influences, and the Charybdis of overzealously purging our data of most

of their identifying variance, being left largely with noise and error in our hands.” I

believe that this is the way Zvi wanted us to remember him, as a Ulysses, in his

sailor’s cap, who took the helm of the boat at a critical moment to navigate it to quieter

waters. He stopped at the Island of Human Capital for ten years, only to continue his

long voyage home.




37
  “How would it be,” said Pooh slowly, “if, as soon as we’re out of sight of this Pit, we try to find it
again?”
        “What’s the good of that? Said Rabbit.
        “Well, said Pooh, “we keep looking for Home, and not finding it, so I thought that if we
looked for this Pit, we’d be sure not to find it, which would be a Good Thing, because then we might
find something that we weren’t looking for, which might be just what we were looking for, really.”
        “I don’t see much sense in that,” said Rabbit.
        “No,” said Pooh humbly, “there isn’t. But there was going to be when I began it. It’s just that
something happened to it on the way.” A.A. Milne, The House at Pooh Corner



                                                   39
References:



Ashenfelter, Orley and Alan B. Krueger (1994), "Estimates of the Economic Return to
Schooling from a New Sample of Twins," American Economic Review, 84(5): 1157-
73.

Ashenfelter, Orley and Joseph D. Mooney (1968), “Graduate Education, Ability and
Earnings.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 50: 78-86.

Becker, Gary S. (1960), “Underinvestment in College Education,” American
Economic Review, 50 (Proceedings): 346-54.

______________(1967), “Human Capital and the Personal Distribution of Income,”
Woytinski Lecture No. 1. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

_______________(1964), Human Capital, 1st ed. New York: Natural Bureau of
Economic Research.

Behrman, Jere T., Paul Taubman, Terrence Wales and Zdenek Hrubec (1980),
Socioeconomic Success: A Study of the Effects of Genetic Endowment, Family
Endowment, and Schooling, Amsterdam: North- Holland.

Behrman, Jere T., and Nancy Birdsall (1983), “The Quality of Schooling”, American
Economic Review, 73 (5):928-946.

Behrman, Jere T., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Paul Taubman (1994), “Endowments and
the Allocation of Schooling in the Family and the Marriage Market: the Twins
Experiment”, The Journal of Political Economy, 102 (6): 1131-1174.

Behrman, Jere T., Mark R. Rosenzweig (1999), “ ‘Ability’ Biases in Schooling
Returns and Twins: a Test and New Estimates”, Economics of Education Review, 18
(2):159-167.


Ben-Porath, Y. (1967), “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of
Earnings,” Journal of Political Economy, 75: 352-365.

Blank, D.M. and G.J. Stigler (1957), The Demand and Supply of Scientific Personnel,
Princeton.

Blaug, Mark (1976), “The Empirical Status of Human Capital Theory: A Slightly
Jaundiced Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature, 14: 827-55.




                                         40
Bound John, and Gary Solon (1999), “Double Trouble: on the Value of Twin-Based
Estimation of the Returns to Schooling”, Economics of Education Review, 18 (2):169-
182.


Card, David (1999), “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings,” in O.C.
Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds. Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. III.

_________ (2001), “Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Progress on some Persistent
Econometric Problems”, Econometrica,69 (5): 1127-1160.

__________ and Alan B. Krueger (1996), "School Resources and Student Outcomes:
An Overview of the Literature and New Evidence
from North and South Carolina," Journal of Economic Perspectives,10 (4):31-50.

Chamberlain, G. (1975), “Unobservables in Econometric Models,” unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

Clark, H.F. (1937), Life Earnings in Selected Occupations in the United States, New
York.

Dension, Edward F. (1962), The Sources of Economic Growth in the United States and
the Alternatives before Us. Supplementary Paper No. 13. New York: Committee
Economic Development.

________________(1964), “Measuring the Contribution of Education,” In The
Residual Factor and Economic Growth, pp. 13-55, 77-100. Paris: Organization
Economic Co-operation and Development.

Friedman, M. and S. Kuznets (1945), Income from Independent Professional Practice,
New York: NBER.

Gorseline, Donald E. (1932), The Effect of Schooling upon Income, Bloomington:
Graduate Council, Indiana University.

Griliches, Zvi (1957),"Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of
Technological Change," Econometrica,. 25(4): 501-522.

___________ (1958),"Research Cost and Social Returns: Hybrid Corn and Related
Innovations," Journal of Political Economy, 66(5): 419-431.

 ___________ (1963a),"Estimates of the Aggregate Agricultural Production Function
from Cross- Sectional Data," Journal of Farm Economics, 45(2): 419-428.

____________ (1963b), "The Sources of Measured Productivity Growth: U.S.
Agriculture, 1940- 1960," Journal of Political Economy, 71(4): 331-346.


                                         41
____________ (1964),""Research Expenditures, Education, and the Aggregate
Agricultural Production Function," American Economic Review, 64(6): 96l-974.

_____________(1967), “Production Functions in Manufacturing: Some Preliminary
Results,” in M. Brown, ed., The Theory and Empirical Analysis of Production, NBER,
Studies in Income and Wealth, New York: Columbia University Press, Vol. 31: 275-
340.

____________ (1968), “Production Functions in Manufacturing: Some Additional
Results,” Southern Economic Journal, 35(2): 151-156.

_____________ (1970), “Notes on the Role of Education in Production Functions and
Growth Accounting,” in W. Lee Hansen, editor, Education, Income and Human
Capital, NBER, Studies in Income and Wealth, New York: Columbia University
Press, Vol. 325.

_____________ (1976), "Wages of Very Young Men," Journal of Political Economy,
84(4), part 2: S69-S85.

______________ (1977), "Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric
Problems," Econometrica, 45(1): l-22.

______________ (1979), "Sibling Models and Data in Economics: Beginnings of a
Survey," Journal of Political Economy, 87(5), Part 2: S37-S64.

______________ (1997) "Education, Human Capital, and Growth- A Personal
Perspective", paper presented at the Memorial Conference for Yoram Ben-Porath,
Jerusalem, October 1993; Journal of Labor Economics , 15(1), part 2: S330-S344.

____________, John Bound and Bronwyn H. Hall (1986), "Wages, Schooling and IQ
of Brothers and Sisters: Do The Family Factors Differ?", International Economic
Review, 27(1): 77-l05.

 _________ and Gary Chamberlain (1975), "Unobservables with a Variance-
Components Structure: Ability, Schooling and the Economic Success of Brothers",
International Economic Review, , l6(2): 422-449.

_____________ (1977),"More on Brothers," in Paul Taubman, ed., Kinometrics:
Determinants of Socioeconomic Success Within and Between Families, New York:
North Holland.

___________ and Dale Jorgenson (1966), "Sources of Measured Productivity Change:
Capital Input, American Economic Review, 56(2): 50-61.




                                        42
___________ (1967), "The Explanation of Productivity Change," Review of Economic
Studies, 34(3): 249-283.

_________ and William Mason (1972), "Education, Income, and Ability," Journal of
Political Economy,80(3), Part II: S74-Sl03.

Goldberger, Arthur S. (1977) , “Twin Methods: A Skeptical View”, in Paul Taubman,
ed., Kinometrics: Determinants of Socioeconomic Success Within and Between
Families, New York: North Holland.


Hansen, W. Lee, Burton A. Weisbrod and W.J. Scanlon (1970), “Schooling and
Earnings of Low Achievers”, American Economic Review, 60: 409-418.

Hause, John, C. (1972), “Earnings Profile: Ability and Schooling,” Journal of Political
Economy,80(3), Part II: S108-S138.

Houthakker, H.S. (1959), “Education and Income,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 41: 21-28.

Husen, T. (1968), “Talents, Opportunity, and Career: A 26 Year Follow-up”, School
Review, 76 (4).

Jensen , Arthur R. (1967), “Estimating the Limits of Hereditability of Traits by
Comparison of Monozygotic and Dizygotic Twins”, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science, 58:149-156.

Juster, F. Thomas (1975), “ Introduction and Summary” to F.T. Juster ed., Education,
Income and Human Behavior, New York: McGraw-Hil: 1-43.

Katz Lawrence F. and David H Autor.(1999), “Changes in the Wage Structure and
Earnings Inequality,” in O.C. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds. Handbook of Labor
Economics Vol. III.

Kerr, Clark (1975), “ Foreward” to F.T. Juster ed., Education, Income and Human
Behavior, New York: McGraw-Hil: xv-xvi.

Krueger, Alan B. and Timothy Taylor (2000), “ An Interview with Zvi Griliches”, The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14 (2):171-190.

Lillard, Lee (1977), “Inequality: Earnings vs. Human Wealth”, American Economic
Review, 67: 42-53.

Michael, Robert T. (1977), “Family Background and Achievement: A Comment” in
Paul Taubman, ed., Kinometrics: Determinants of Socioeconomic Success Within and
Between Families, New York: North Holland.


                                          43
Miller, H.P. (1960), “Annual and Lifetime Income in Relation to Education,”
American Economic Review 50: 962-986.

Mincer, Jacob (1958), “Investment in Human Capital and Personal Income
Distribution,” Journal of Political Economics, 66: 281-302.

_____________(1962), “On-the-Job Training: Costs, Returns, and Some
Implications,” Journal of Political Economics, 70(5) Part 2: 50-79.

_____________(1974), Schooling, Experience and Earnings, New York: Natural
Bureau of Economic Research.

Neumark, David (1999), “ Biases in Twin Estimates of the Return to Schooling”,
Economics of Education Review, 18 (2):143-148.


Parsons, Donald, O. (1972), “Specific Human Capital: An Application to Quit Rates
and Layoff Rates,” Journal of Political Economics, 80(6): 1120-43.

Riley, John G. (1975) “ Competitive Signaling”, Journal of Economic Theory, 10:175-
186.

___________ (1979) “Testing the Educational Screening Hypothesis”, Journal of
Political Economy, 87: S227-S251.

Rosen, Sherwin. (1977), "Human Capital: A Survey of Empirical Research," in R.
Ehrenberg, ed., Research in Labor Economics. Greenwich Conn.: JAI Press, Vol.1.

Rouse, Cecilia E. (1999), “ Further Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling
from a New Sample of Twins”, Economics of Education Review, 18 (2):169-182.


Schultz, Theodore W. (1961), “The Investment in Human Capital”, American
Economic Review, 5 (1): 1-17.

Spence, Michael (1973), “Job Market Signaling,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
87(3): 355-74.

______________(1974), Market signaling. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1975), "The Theory of 'Screening’, Education and the Distribution
of Income,” American Economic Review, 65(3): 283-300.




                                          44
Taubman, Paul (1976), “The Determinants of Earnings: Genetics, Family, and Other
Environments: A Study of White Male Twins,” American Economic Review 66: 858-
870.

_____________. and Terence Wales (1974), Higher education and earnings: College
as an investment and a screening device. New York: McGraw-Hill.

____________ (1975), “Education as an Investment and a Screening Device”, in F.T.
Juster ed., Education, Income and Human Behavior, New York: McGraw-Hil: 95-121.

Thorndike, R.L. and E. Hagen (1959), Ten Thousand Careers, New York: John Wiley
and Sons.


Willis, Robert J. (1986), "Wage Determinants: A Survey and Reinterpretation of
Human Capital Earnings Functions," in O.C. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds.
Handbook of Labor Economics Vol. I.

____________and Sherwin Rosen (1979), "Education and Self-Selection,” Journal of
Political Economy, 87(5), Part 2: S7-S36.

Wolpin, Kenneth I. (2003), “Wage Equations and Education Policy,” in M.
Dewatripont, S. Turnovsky and L.Hansen eds., Advances in Economics and
Econometrics, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.




.




                                         45
