NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE WRITING AND INTERPRETATION OF CONTRACTS
Steven Shavell
Working Paper 10094
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10094
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2003

I wish to thank Ian Ayres, Pierpaolo Battigalli, Lucian Bebchuk, Richard Craswell, Gillian Hadfield, Oliver
Hart, Louis Kaplow, Kathryn Spier, Jean Tirole, and Joel Watson for comments and the John M. Olin Center
for Law, Economics, and Business at Harvard Law School for research support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

On the Writing and the Interpretation of Contracts
Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 10094
November 2003
JEL No. D00, D8, K12
ABSTRACT
The major theme of this article is that the interpretation of contracts -- their possible amplification,
correction, and modification by adjudicators -- is in the interests of contracting parties. The general
reasons are (a) that interpretation may improve on otherwise imperfect contracts; and (b) that the
prospect of interpretation allows parties to write simpler contracts and thus to conserve on
contracting effort. A method of interpretation is defined as a function whose argument is the written
contract and whose value is another contract, the interpreted contract, which is what actually governs
the parties' joint enterprise. It is shown that interpretation is superior to enforcement of contracts as
written, and the optimal method of interpretation is analyzed.
Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Hauser Hall 508
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu

ON THE WRITING AND THE INTERPRETATION OF CONTRACTS
Steven Shavell
© 2003. Steven Shavell. All Rights Reserved.
1. Introduction
The major theme of this article is that the interpretation of contracts -- their
possible amplification, correction, and modification by adjudicators -- is in the interests
of contracting parties. The reasons are no doubt well-appreciated in at least a general
sense: interpretation may improve on otherwise imperfect contracts; and the prospect of
interpretation allows parties to write simpler contracts and thus to conserve on
contracting effort.
As background, we know from common experience that parties may fail to
provide for certain events in their contracts (suppose that they overlook the possibility of
a leap year) and that they often employ broad terms that do not reflect their wishes in
particular circumstances (suppose that they specify that material A should be used in
construction but that they would really prefer substitution of material B if an unusual
problem arises with A). To explain why parties write such incomplete contracts, it is
frequently suggested that some eventualities are hard to anticipate or describe in advance,
that leaving contracts incomplete saves time and effort, and that fashioning highly refined
contracts would be impractically costly.1

1

This explanation for incomplete contracts was early emphasized by Williamson (1985). For
discussion of it and of other reasons for incompleteness, see, for example, Hart and Holmström (1987),
Hart and Moore (1999), and Tirole (1999).

1

We also observe that the courts actively engage in the interpretation of contracts.
The courts fill gaps in contracts, resolve conflicts and ambiguities of language, and
sometimes replace the parties’ express terms with the courts’ terms (such as to permit
substitution of material B if a problem with A occurs).2 Moreover, the interpretation of
contracts is widely understood to influence how parties write contracts; parties are more
willing to leave gaps and to write fairly general terms the more closely the courts’
interpreted contracts resemble the parties’ true wishes, whereas parties are more willing
to take extra pains to write more detailed contracts when courts refrain from interpreting
terms or interpret terms in ways that run counter to their true desires.
Given this motivation, the writing of contracts and the courts’ interpretation of
them is examined here in a basic model of contracting, and the optimal method of
interpretation is investigated.
In section 2, the main assumptions of the model are stated. These include that
parties are risk-neutral, that they have symmetric information, that all variables are
contractible, but that writing contracts involves costs that rise with the number of
contractual terms.3 A method of interpretation is defined as a function whose argument is
the written contract and whose value is another contract, the interpreted contract. It is the
interpreted contract, not the written contract, that actually governs the parties’ joint
enterprise.
In section 3, the type of contract that parties choose to write is examined. In
particular, it is asked when parties decide to stipulate specific terms, when they elect to
2

See generally chapter 7 of Farnsworth (1999) and section 6 below.

3

The assumptions are perhaps those that allow the most transparent development of the points of
interest. However, as will be discussed in section 6 and is noted later in the introduction, many of the
qualititive conclusions hold independently of the contractual environment.

2

write broad terms, and when they wish to leave gaps, given the courts’ method of
interpretation of contracts and given the cost of writing additional terms. Thus, note that
how parties write contracts is influenced not only by writing costs, but also by the method
of interpretation.
In section 4 the courts’ optimal method of interpretation of contracts is
considered. For any method of interpretation, one can determine the contracts that
parties will decide to write (as described in section 3), their costs of so doing, the
interpreted contract that actually will be employed, and consequently the expected payoff
from the written contract. Of course, the contracts that are written will vary among
contracting parties, depending on their underlying situation -- the payoffs that they enjoy
given their acts and the contingencies that obtain. The underlying situation of a pair of
contracting parties (the payoff function) is called their contractual type. It is assumed
that the contractual type of contracting parties is not observable to the courts, so that the
courts must use the same method of interpretation for all contracting parties. The optimal
method of interpretation maximizes the expected value of contracts net of writing costs
over the population of contractual types.
The conclusions about the optimal method of interpretation can be summarized as
follows. First, some method of interpretation of contracts is always socially desirable:
the optimal method of interpretation is strictly superior to literal enforcement of contracts
as written. This is true because there exists, at the least, a way of filling gaps that allows
some parties to reduce the number of terms in their contracts.
Second, the optimal method obeys a simple, fundamental necessary condition: the
interpretation of a term in a contingency is that which maximizes the expected payoff for

3

the subgroup of types who write the observed contract. (For instance, the optimal
interpretation of a general term calling for use of material A is determined by what
material is best in the contingency for the conditional distribution of types who write the
observed contract.) In other words, to determine the optimal interpretation of a
contractual term, the court behaves naively, as if its method of interpretation does not
influence the set of contracts that are written (even though its method of interpretation
generally does have this influence).
Although a necessary condition for optimal interpretation is that interpretation is
best for those who write the observed contract, this is not a sufficient condition for
optimal interpretation. For example, suppose that a gap might be filled in one of two
ways: either as the majority wants or as the minority wants. If the gap is filled as the
minority wants and this induces the majority to write a term reflecting their wishes, then
the gap is filled in the optimal way for those (the minority) who leave the gap, so the
necessary condition is satisfied. But this method of interpretation is not optimal, for it
would be better to fill the gap as the majority wants, in order to reduce writing costs (then
only the minority will bear the cost of writing a term reflecting their wishes). And if the
gap is filled as the majority wants and this leads the minority to write a term reflecting
their wishes, then the gap is filled in the optimal way for those (now the majority) who
leave the gap, so the necessary condition is also satisfied.
Third, specific contractual terms are interpreted as they are written (so that if a
term stipulates that material A should be used in a single, fully-described contingency,

4

this term will be respected by the courts). In other words, it is not optimal for the courts
to override specific terms.4
Fourth, it is sometimes desirable for the courts to override a general contractual
term (such as a term requiring the use of material A in a broad set of circumstances). The
reason that overriding a general term might be desirable is, on one hand, that the parties
may prefer that a different action from that provided in the term be taken when certain
problematic contingencies arise (the parties might be made better off if material B is
substituted for material A if the use of A becomes difficult). On the other hand, the
reason that the contracting parties might write the general term to begin with is, as
indicated at the outset, that they find this economical in order to save writing costs. Note
too that bound up in the statement that the parties would often want to write a general
term is that they are better off doing that than leaving gaps, for general terms frequently
signal their desires.5
The point of the foregoing paragraph bears emphasis: contractual terms that give
outwardly clear, unambiguous instructions for contingencies (such as use material A in a
broad range of circumstances) may sometimes be best for the courts not to enforce,
because the parties do not really want the terms enforced as written in the particular
contingency that occurred. Realistically, this point has substantial importance because of
the omnipresence of general terms in contracts (on reflection, essentially any term is seen
4

However, this result relies on a simplifying assumption about the method of interpretation (that
the interpretation of one term does not depend on other terms); see the discussion following Proposition 3.
5

For instance, a person who is renovating his kitchen may specify that he wants an oak floor
without qualification, even though he would not want oak three percent of the time, when certain unusual
contingencies arise, such as that a shortage in oak develops and delivery is delayed by six months. In these
contingencies, the person might want another hardwood (perhaps maple) substituted for oak, and the courts
might well infer this preference for hardwood (rather than for tile or a composite material) from the fact
that the term in question specifies oak.

5

to cover multiple contingencies6). Thus, latent in a court’s proper role in regard to
virtually any contractual term is the possibility that the term should not be enforced as
written.
A fifth point follows from the fourth. Although it may be desirable for the courts
not to enforce a contractual term as written, but rather to interpret it, because many
contracting parties wish for that in certain circumstances, some contracting parties may
not want the term overridden (some parties may want material A to be used even if a
problematic contingency occurs – they do not want B to be substituted for A). This
implies that it would be desirable for contracting parties to have a no-interpretation
option (an “I really mean it” option) for each term. If exercised, this option would imply
that the courts would enforce the term exactly as written.
In section 5, the model is extended to allow for the possibility of presentation to
courts of evidence beyond the contract (for instance, the contractual negotiation history,
the parties’ course of dealing, usual trade practice) at a cost. It is assumed for simplicity
that this extrinsic-to-the-contract evidence is perfect, allowing the courts to determine the
ideal contractual term. The effect of the ability to present such extrinsic evidence is
determined, one of the main points being that specific terms are needed less often. It is
also observed that the decision about the use of evidence ought to be made by the parties,
not the courts.
In section 6, concluding comments are made about the generality of the
conclusions, where it is explained that many (but not all) of the results hold regardless of
6

Even a highly detailed term (such as a term specifying that oak should be used for a kitchen floor
unless there is a delay in supply of over six months or a price increase of over 100%) typically omits
explicit mention of a multitude of potentially relevant contingencies (such as that oak becomes subject to
an insect pest or that a new kind of wood is discovered that is more durable than oak, essentially the same
in appearance, and cheaper).

6

assumptions made about the contractual environment, notably, concerning the
contractibility of variables, renegotiation to avoid ex post inefficiency, and the
information of the parties. Comments are also made about actual legal practice in light of
the analysis.
Before proceeding, the relationship between this article and literature on contracts
should be noted. Articles of relevance include those concerning the costs of writing
contracts; see Dye (1985) and, for example, Anderlini and Felli (1999), Battigalli and
Maggi (2002), and Schwartz and Watson (2001). In these articles, the question
considered is how parties ought to simplify their contracts in order to save writing costs,
but it is presumed that the contracts will be enforced as they are written. Hence, the issue
of the interpretation of contracts and its effects on the writing of contracts is not studied.
More generally, the usual assumption in the incomplete contracting literature is that
contracts are enforced as written, so that the interpretation of contracts is not examined.7
However, there are a number of articles (mostly in law reviews and law and
economics journals) that do address, or touch upon, interpretation. See Anderlini, Felli,
and Postlewaite (2001), Ayres and Gertner (1989), Bebchuk and Shavell (1991),
Bernstein (1996), Goetz and Scott (1985), Hadfield (1994), Posner (1998), and Schwartz
(1992). While suggestive, these articles do not state and develop the general view of
interpretation set out here as a function that transforms the written contract into the
interpreted one.8
7

Some articles mention informally that courts engage in interpretation; see, for instance, the
survey by Hart and Holmstrom (1987) at 148.
8

Anderlini, Felli, and Postlewaite (2001) consider a model in which courts engage in a simple
form of interpretation, voiding or not voiding a contract; the voiding of a contract can provide an implicit
insurance benefit to the parties, who cannot contract in a set of indescribable contingencies. Ayres and
Gertner (1989) and Bebchuk and Shavell (1991) focus on the specific point that courts can fill gaps so as to

7

2. Assumptions
There is a population of risk-neutral contracting pairs. The joint monetary payoffs
to a contracting pair depend on the act and the contingency that occurs. In particular,
define
a = an act, where a , A, the universe of possible acts;

2i = a contingency, where 2i , S, the set of n possible contingencies;
pi = probability of 2i;
x(2i, a) = joint payoff to a pair of parties if the contingency is 2i and the act is a.
An act may be interpreted as a vector with components corresponding to behaviors of
both contracting parties. The occurrence of contingencies and acts is assumed to be
verifiable by the courts. The joint payoff to the parties is the sum of the payoffs to each
individually (for instance, the value of a good to the buyer minus the production costs
incurred by the seller). The act(s) that maximizes x(2i, a) for a given contingency 2i will
be called the ideal act given 2i; this will be denoted a*(2i).9
A pair of contracting parties is identified by its type; let
t = type of pair of contracting parties, where t , T, the universe of possible types.
The type t stands for the parties’ contractual situation and is a parameter of the payoff
function, x, which will sometimes be written x(a, 2i, t); however, t will usually be
induce parties with private information to reveal it at the time of contracting. Goetz and Scott (1985)
emphasize difficulties courts face in interpreting non-standard express terms. Hadfield (1994) examines a
model of the interpretation of best effort clauses (she assumes that parties do not contract over effort levels
but courts observe effort levels and penalize parties for inadequate effort). Posner (1998) focuses on the
issue of whether courts should restrict attention to the written contract or consider evidence extrinsic to it.
Schwartz (1992) suggests that in practice courts often interpret contracts in ways that are not consistent
with parties’ wishes, and Bernstein (1996) argues that evidence from contract dispute resolution in trade
associations indicates that commercial parties generally want to avoid interpretation. Cohen (2000),
Craswell (2000), and Katz (1998) survey contract interpretation from an economic viewpoint.
9

For simplicity, I will usually discuss the ideal act as if it is unique.

8

suppressed in the notation. Also, the ideal act will sometimes be written a*(2i, t), but t
will usually be suppressed in the notation. The courts cannot observe t but know its
probability distribution; let
F(t) = probability distribution of types t.
A contract K will be identified with a list of events and the act to be taken in each
of the events. Let
K = {(E1, a1),..., (Em, am)},
where the Ej are mutually exclusive (but not necessarily exhaustive) events in S and aj is
the act to be taken if Ej occurs. An event and the associated act, that is, (Ej, aj), is called a
term of the contract. A contract will also have a contract price, but our focus will be on
its terms (and for ease K will be called a contract even though K leaves out the price). If
the event Ej in a term is a single contingency 2i, the term is called a specific term;
otherwise, the term is called a general term, as it names an act to be done for more than
one contingency. A contract is said to be explicitly complete if it has a specific term for
each contingency. If it is not explicitly complete, but does provide for all contingencies
through its general terms, it is called implicitly complete; that is, an implicitly complete
contract is such that the union of the events Ej in the contract is the universe S of all
possible contingencies. A contract is said to have gaps if it is not implicitly or explicitly
complete, in other words, if the union of the Ej leaves out at least one contingency.10

10

This terminology is different from that generally used in the contracting literature, for what I am
calling an implicitly complete contract would often be described as an incomplete contract.

9

Consider an example (which will be amplified below). There are four alternative
materials, A, B, C, and D that the seller can use in making something11 and there are two
possible contingencies, a normal contingency, 21, and an unusual, problematic
contingency, 22. A contract that says to use A in contingency 21 and to use D in 22 is
explicitly complete; this contract has two terms, {(21, A), (22, D)}. A contract that says
to use C no matter what is implicitly complete; the contract has one term, {(21 or 22, C)}.
This contract, note, is different from the explicitly complete contract that says to use C in

21 and also to use C in 22; that contract has two terms, {(21, C), (22, C)}.12 A contract
that says only to use B in 21 has a gap because it does not provide for 22; the contract is
{(21, B)}.
It is assumed that a contract involves a writing cost, which is a positive amount
per term.13 Let

" = cost of writing a term; " > 0.
Thus, in the example, the contract that says to use A in 21 and D in 22 costs 2" because it
has two terms, whereas the contract that says to use C no matter what costs " because it
has one term. Let
n(K) = number of terms in a contract K,
11

It is expositionally convenient to denote the acts in this example by A, B, C, and D rather than
by a1, a2, a3, and a4 . The example involves four acts because it turns out that this is the minimum
necessary to illustrate the full range of possible outcomes that will be of interest.
12

Admittedly, in this simple example, with only two contingencies, the difference between writing
the general term “use C whether 21 or 22 occurs” and writing the pair of explicit terms “use C if 21 occurs”
and “use C if 22 occurs” is not great. However, in realistic situations, the event E in a general contractual
term will cover a vast multitude of contingencies, so that writing “use C if E occurs” is much easier than
naming all the 2 in E and writing a separate term for each saying that C should be used
13

If the cost of making contracts depends in a more complicated way on the description of acts
and events, it will be evident that the qualitative nature of the major conclusions would not be altered.

10

so that the cost of writing a contract is "n(K).
A contract K that the parties write is presumed to be treated by the courts
according to a method of interpretation, denoted by M, which is known by contracting
parties14 and which the courts commit to employ.15 This is a function whose argument is
a contract K and whose value M(K) is a contract called the interpreted contract. Let
M(K) = M({(E1, a1),..., (Em, am)}) = {(21 , a(21)),..., (2n , a(2n))},
where a(2i) is the act undertaken in 2i and where the interpreted contract is assumed not
to contain gaps. It will be assumed that the method of interpretation is such that a(2i) is
independent of contractual terms that do not cover 2i and that how a gap is filled is
independent of contractual terms.16 This independence assumption is simplifying
because it implicitly rules out inference in the interpretation of one term from the
character of other terms; where it makes a difference to results will be indicated below.
Note that M cannot be a function of the parties type t since this is not observed by the
courts.17
To illustrate a method of interpretation, consider the example mentioned above
and the following method: specific terms are interpreted as written; gaps are filled with

14

In reality, the interpretation of contracts is guided by various doctrines and principles, so that
knowing M involves learning these doctrines and principles, which may not be as difficult as learning an
arbitrary function M.
15

The legal system is able to commit to employ rules by means of a variety of constraints on
judges and juries, including the appeals process (meaning that decisions can be reversed if deviant) and
rules of procedure and evidence.
16

In other words, if 2i 0 Ej in a term (Ej, aj), then a(2i) does not depend on other terms; and if
there is a gap at 2i, how the gap is filled does not depend on any terms.
17

If the courts do observe information about parties’ type, then one can view F(t) as the
distribution of t conditional on this information.

11

act A; general terms are interpreted as written, except that (21 or 22, C) is interpreted as
{(21, C), (22, B)}, that is, the contract calling for C always is overridden in 22.
The (joint) expected value V of a contract K = {(E1, a1),..., (Em, am)} if it were
enforced as it is written and has no gaps is
n

V(K) = 3pix(2i, ai),

(1)

i

where the (2i, ai) are as determined by the contract.18, 19 However, because the contract
that is actually enforced is the interpreted contract M(K), and because the contract
involves a writing cost, the expected value (net of writing costs) of the contract K is given
by
V(M(K)) – "n(K).

(2)

To illustrate the calculation of the expected value of a contract, let us continue
with the example. Suppose that the method of interpretation is the one discussed above
and that the payoffs to the parties are given by the following table.

21
22

Payoffs as a function of contingencies and acts
A
B
C
15
9
18
6
4
12

D
22
8

Assume as well that the probability of 21 is .8 and that of 22 is .2. Also, assume that the
writing cost " per term is 2. Then several calculations of the expected value of contracts
18

That is, for any 2i, find the event Ej containing2i and define ai to be the act in the term (Ej, aj).

19

Implicit in this expression is the assumption that the parties do not renegotiate their contract; for
were they to do so, they would always obtain the ideal act a*(2i). The assumption may be justified when
there are costs of renegotiation (often problematic contingencies occur at unforeseen times and a decision
must be quickly made by one party, making it difficult to bargain with the other contracting party).
However, it will be evident from the concluding comments that many of the results reached would hold in a
model with costless renegotiation and efficiency of actions ex post, where the purpose of contracts is to
improve the efficiency of ex ante investments by combatting hold up problems.

12

are these: If the contract is {(21, D)}, the interpreted contract, M({(21, D)}), is {(21, D),
(22, A)} since the gap in 22 is filled with A; the number of terms in the written contract is
one; hence its expected value is .8x22 + .2x6 – 2 = 16.8. If the contract is {(21, C), (22,
A)}, the interpreted contract is the same; the number of terms is two; and its expected
value is .8x18 + .2x6 – 4 = 11.6. And if the contract is {(21 or 22, C)}, the interpreted
contract is {(21, C), (22, B)}; the number of terms is one; and its expected value is .8x18
+ .2x4 – 2 = 13.2.
3. Choice of the Written Contract Given the Method of Interpretation
It is assumed that parties write the contract with highest expected value, that is,
the contract maximizes the expected value of the interpreted contract minus the writing
costs. (This assumption is consistent with the assumptions that parties are risk-neutral
and that they each know the payoff function x(2i, a).) Thus, the parties choose a contract
K to maximize (2), which depends on the method of interpretation M. Let K(M) be this
contract (or, if the optimal contract is not unique, one of the optimal contracts).
Note that parties would choose the ideal explicitly complete contract, the contract
with the ideal act a*(2i) for each contingency 2i, if contracts were enforced as written and
there were no writing costs. This ideal contract (the terms of which will sometimes be
referred to as what the parties want or desire) is a natural benchmark for comparison with
written contracts and interpreted contracts.
Let us first consider the contract that the parties in the example would choose. It
can be verified (by calculating the values of the possible contracts20) that the parties’ best

20

There are twenty-nine possible contracts: sixteen explicitly complete contracts (such as {(21, A),
(22, B)}), eight contracts with one gap (such as {(21, A)} or {(22, C)}), one contract with two gaps, and
four contracts with general terms (such as{(21 or 22, A)}).

13

contract is {(21 or 22, D)}, a contract with a general term calling for use of D; since this
contract is interpreted as written, its expected value is 17.2. The optimality of this
contract for the parties given the method of interpretation can be explained roughly as
follows. The ideal acts for the parties are D in 21 and C in 22. Were the parties to write
an explicitly complete contract with two terms (21, D) and (22, C), they would have to
bear 4 in writing costs; their expected value would be 16. They can do better by writing a
less detailed contract with one term, namely, the contract specifying D all of the time. It
is true that under this contract, D rather than C is the act in 22, but this reduces the payoff
by only 4, and thus by an expected amount of only .8, which is less than the writing cost
of 2 of an extra term. Among the contracts with one term, and thus involving the same
writing cost, the parties could write a contract leaving a gap in 22, but a gap would be
filled with A, which is inferior for the parties to D.
The preceding example illustrates how parties trade off specificity of terms for
savings in writing costs, but no simple characterization of the optimal written contract
given the method of interpretation is apparent. However, it is worth noting general
necessary conditions for a contract to be optimal. There are three ways in which each
contingency 2i can be treated in a contract: 2i can be provided for in a specific term; 2i
can be included in the event Ej of some general term (Ej, aj); or 2i can be omitted, leaving
a gap. For a contract to be optimal, the choice among the three possibilities just
mentioned must be made correctly for each 2i.21

21

This necessary condition was in effect the basis of the explanation of the best contract to write
in the example just considered. For instance, that contingency 22 is part of a general term is due to the
inferiority of 22 being provided for specifically (on account of the added writing cost) and to the inferiority
of leaving a gap at 22 (on account of act A being worse than D).

14

Let us next comment on a number of paradigmatic relationships that may hold
among the terms of written contracts, interpreted contracts, and the parties’ ideal
contracts.
(a) A specific term is interpreted as written and results in the ideal act for the
parties: This occurs when a specific term (2i, a) is interpreted as written and when the
expected benefit of writing a specific term exceeds its writing cost ". The expected
benefit is determined by the probability of the contingency 2i and the benefit of the
specific term, that is, the difference between the payoff under the ideal act a*(2i) and the
payoff under the best alternative (either a gap or the best general term).22
(b) A general term is interpreted as written and always results in the ideal act for
the parties: This occurs when a general term (Ej, aj) is interpreted as written and aj is the
ideal act for all contingencies in Ej.23
(c) A general term is interpreted as written but does not always result in the ideal
act for the parties: This occurs when a general term (Ej, aj) is interpreted as written, the
parties do not want aj to be performed in at least some contingency 2i in Ej, but the
expected gain from an alternative contract (writing an explicit term for 2i, including 2i in
another general term, leaving a gap) is lower.24
22

To illustrate in the example, if the writing cost " is .2 (rather than 2), the contract selected by the
parties is the explicitly complete ideal contract, {(21, D), (22, C)}, for only by writing this contract will the
ideal acts be taken, and the writing cost is low enough to justify that. In particular, the expected value of
{(21, D), (22, C)} is 19.6, whereas the expected value of {(21 or 22, D)} is 19; the latter contract is no
longer superior because the writing cost is so low.
23

Suppose that the payoffs in the table are modified: the payoff from D in 22 from 8 to 18, so that
the ideal act is D in both 21 and 22. Then the chosen contract is {(21 or 22, D)}, which is a general term
that is interpreted as written, and which always results in the parties’ ideal act.
24

This was already shown in the example, for the chosen contract was {(21 or 22, D)} but the
parties want C rather than D in 22.

15

(d) A general term is overridden in a contingency and results in a superior act for
the parties: This occurs when a general term (Ej, aj) is overridden in 2i and the act aj is
replaced with a better act, such as a*(2i), saving the parties the cost of writing a separate
term or of failing to obtain what they want in another general term or from a gap.25
(e) A general term is overridden in a contingency but the parties would be better
off if the term were enforced as written: This occurs when a general term (Ej, aj) is
overridden in 2i, aj is a better act in 2i, and the parties would be worse off with another
term.26
(f) A gap is filled with the ideal act for the parties: This occurs when a gap for 2i
is filled with a*(2i). In this case, it is optimal for the parties to leave a gap, for they then
obtain what they want without a writing cost.27
(g) A gap is filled with an act different from the ideal act for the parties: This
occurs when a gap for 2i is filled with an act that the parties do not want but that is still
superior to them to alternatives.28

25

Suppose in the example that the payoff from B is 19 in 21 and 14 in 22 and the payoff from C is
28 in 21. Then the ideal acts are C in 21 and B in 22, the chosen contract is {(21 or 22, C)}, and this is
interpreted as {(21, C), (22, B)}.
26

Suppose in the example that the payoff from C in 21 is 28. Then the ideal act is C in both 21 and
22, the contract that would be written is {(21 or 22, C)}, which would be interpreted as {(21, C), (22, B)}
even though the parties want C in 22. Note here that the parties could obtain what they want with the
explicitly complete contract{(21, C), (22, C)}but this would not be worth the added writing costs. In
particular, the expected value of {(21 or 22, C)} is 21.2 (because it is interpreted as {(21, C), (22, B)}) and
the expected value of {(21, C), (22, C)} is only 20.8.
27

Suppose in the example that the payoff from A in 22 is 14. Then the ideal acts are D in 21 and A
in 22, the contract that would be written is {(21, D)} and the gap in 22 would be filled with A.
28
Suppose in the example that the payoff from B in 22 is 9 and from both C and D in 22 is 2.
Then the ideal acts are D in 21 and B in 22, the contract that would be written is {(21, D)}, which would be
filled with A in 22. Note that in this case, {(21 or 22, D)} is not desired by the parties since act D in 22 is
inferior to act A in 22, and that an explicitly complete ideal contract {(21, D), (22, B)} is not worth the
writing costs.

16

4. The Optimal Method of Interpretation
Given a method of interpretation M, we can calculate the expected value of the
contract chosen by contracting parties of any type t. To be explicit, note that the value of
any enforced contract, given by (1), depends on t because the x(2i, a) are in fact x(2i, a,
t); hence (1) may written as V(K, t). Also, the chosen contract K(M) described in the last
section depends on t as well as on M, so we may write K(M, t) rather than K(M). Hence,
the expected value W of the contract chosen by type t given M is
(3)

W(M, t) = V(M(K(M, t)), t) – "n(K(M, t)).

(The right side reflects the two effects of M: M influences the choice of the written
contract, and M then determines how the written contract is interpreted.) Hence, social
welfare, that is, the expected value of contracts over the population of different types t is
(4)

S = IW(M, t)dF(t).
T

Before continuing, an issue needs to be noted (even though it is somewhat
distracting): for any method of interpretation, there is a family of equivalent methods of
interpretation resulting in the same interpreted contracts, writing costs, and level of social
welfare S. In particular, let B denote a permutation of the set of acts A (that is, B is a 1:1
mapping from A to A). Given any method of interpretation M, define the B-permuted
version MN of M as follows: (Ej, aj) is interpreted under MN in the way that (Ej, B(aj)) is
interpreted under M, and gaps are interpreted identically under MN as under M. For
instance, if in our example, the permutation is B(A) = B, B(B) = C, B(C) = D, and B(D) =
A, then under the B-permuted version of a method of interpretation, the specific term (21,
A) would be interpreted as (21, B(A)) = (21, B) had been, the general term (21 or 22, D)

17

would be interpreted as (21 or 22, B(D)) = (21 or 22, A) had been, and so forth. It is
evident that the parties can obtain any interpreted contract under MN that they can obtain
under M, and with the same number of terms -- if they write (Ej, aj) under M, let them
write (Ej, B-1(aj)) under MN. (Thus, if they had written (21 or 22, A) under M, they would
obtain the same outcome by writing (21 or 22, D) under MN.) Conversely, they can obtain
any interpreted contract under M as they can obtain under MN, and with the same number
of terms -- if they write (Ej, aj) under MN, let them write (Ej, B(aj)) under M.
Accordingly, for all parties, the menu of opportunities under MN and under M are
identical, they will choose contracts resulting in the same interpreted contracts, and thus
W(M, t) = W(MN, t). In other words, we have
REMARK 1. Let MN be any permuted version of a method M of interpretation. Then the
interpreted contracts for parties of each type t will be identical under MN and M, and
social welfare S will be the same under MN as under M.
The optimal method of interpretation maximizes the expected value of contracts
over the population of different types t; that is, the optimal method maximizes (4).29

29

Note that types are presumed not to be able to send messages to the court declaring their type -the method of interpretation is assumed to depend only on the contractual terms. Were parties able to
declare their type at no cost, then the ideal contract would be costlessly achieved trivially: let the
mechanism be that if contracting parties declare they are of type t, the contract is always interpreted to be
the ideal contract for type t. Then parties would always announce their true type, not spend anything on
contract terms, and obtain the ideal contract. The justification for the assumption that parties cannot
costlessly declare their type is that this is tantamount to declaring the entire function x(2i, a, t), which
should be more costly than naming the ideal contract, but doing that has been assumed to be expensive. In
other words, the whole point of the present article is that it is expensive to convey information about
contractual desires, so in keeping with that assumption, it is presumed that parties cannot costlessly convey
their type.

18

Because of Remark 1, we know that the optimal method is not unique, but for ease, let us
speak of “the” optimal method in any case.30
Let us first show that some method of contract interpretation different from literal
enforcement of contracts as written is optimal. Under literal enforcement, whatever
contract parties write is the interpreted contract and it is assumed that their contract
leaves no gaps. (As noted in the Introduction, literal enforcement is generally presumed
in the literature on writing costs.) We have
PROPOSITION 1. The optimal method of contract interpretation is strictly superior to literal

enforcement of contracts as written.
Note. The reason that this is true is that it is always possible to do better than
literal enforcement by interpreting some gaps in ways that will allow at least some
contracting parties to save writing costs.31 (Of course, in general, the optimal method of
interpretation involves more than the mere filling of gaps.)
Proof. Assume that contracts are literally enforced. Consider any type t of
contracting parties and any term (Ej, aj) in the contract they write. Now consider a
method of interpretation M in which all terms are interpreted as written and gaps for 2i in
Ej are filled with act aj. Under this method, the type t can be made better off by writing
the same contract as before except leaving gaps for all 2i in Ej: under this contract, the
parties of type t will obtain the same interpreted contract as before, but their writing cost

30

In particular, when under an optimal method a term is interpreted as written, we will focus on
that method rather than a permuted version under which terms are not interpreted as written.
31

The optimal method of interpretation is not necessarily superior to literal enforcement if,
contrary to the assumption of this article, interpretation involves a cost. Proposition 1 might thus be better
expressed by the statement that the optimal method of interpretation has positive value.

19

will be reduced by ". All other types will be at least as well off as before, as they can
write the same contract they had before and be equally well off.//
It is useful to illustrate the optimal method of interpretation with the oftendiscussed case of filling a single gap where there are two possible ways to do so.
Specifically, assume that there are two contingencies 21 and 22, that all parties want the
same act C in 21, that a fraction q of parties want act A in 22 and would obtain a positive
payoff r from A and 0 from the other act B, and that the remaining fraction 1 – q of
parties wants act B in 22 and would obtain a positive payoff y from B and 0 from act A.
In this case, the optimal method of interpretation is either to interpret a gap in 22 as A or
as B.32 If a gap is interpreted as A, then the A-types will leave a gap in 22 and the Btypes will leave a gap if p2y < " and otherwise will write a term, spending ", and obtain
p2y - ". Thus, the loss relative to the first-best will be p2y if this is less than the writing
cost and otherwise the loss will be the writing cost, so the expected loss will be (1 q)min(p2y, "). Similarly, if a gap is filled with B, A-types will leave a gap if p2r < ", and
the expected loss will be qmin(p2r, "). Thus, a gap should be filled with A if and only if
(5) qmin(p2r, ") > (1 - q)min(p2y, ").
One case is where the writing cost is low enough that both groups would write their
preferred term if the gap is not filled as they want. In that case (5) reduces to q > (1 - q),
so the gap is filled with the term preferred by the majority, in order to minimize writing
costs. Another case is where the writing cost is high enough that neither group would
write its preferred term. In that case, (5) reduces to qr > (1 - q)y, so that both the
population proportion and the loss from the wrong term matter and the optimal decision
32

It is obviously best to interpret a gap in 21 as C since all parties want that.

20

is not necessarily to fill the gap with what the majority wants. We may summarize as
follows.33
REMARK 2. In the simple situation where there are two ways to fill a gap, condition (5)
determines how the gap is optimally filled. Hence, the gap should be filled as the
majority desires if the writing cost " is sufficiently low -- in which case each group
would write its preferred term when the gap would not be filled as it wants; otherwise
filling the gap as the majority desires might not be optimal.//
In the situation just examined, suppose that the writing cost " is sufficiently low
that each group will write its preferred term if the gap in22 is not filled as it wants, and
suppose that q > .5, so that A-types are in the majority and the gap should thus be filled
with A. Observe then that if the gap is filled with A, all parties who leave a gap will be
A-types, so the interpretation of the gap will be optimal given the contracts that are
written. And observe too that if the gap is -- suboptimally -- filled with B, all parties who
leave a gap will be B-types, so the interpretation of the gap will also be optimal given
how contracts are written (now differently). These observations show that interpreting a
contractual term optimally given the way that contracts are written is not sufficient for
interpretation to be optimal (as was noted in the Introduction). The reason is that
although the method of interpretation may be optimal given how contracts are written, the
method also influences how contracts are written, and might not affect that in a desirable
way.
The observations also raise the question whether interpreting a term optimally,
taking as given the way contracts are written, is a necessary condition for the method of

33

Ayres and Gertner (1989) state a similar conclusion at 114.

21

interpretation to be optimal. The answer is yes. As is now shown, a fundamental
property of the optimal method of interpretation is that interpretation must be “naively”
socially optimal – the interpretation of a term must be best for the types of parties who
actually write the observed contract, which is to say, ignoring any effects of the method
of interpretation on how contracts are written.
PROPOSITION 2. (a) The optimal method of interpretation must be optimal given the
constraint that the contracts that are written by parties are fixed. That is, if M* is the
optimal method of interpretation (so that K(M*, t) is the contract written by parties of
type t), then M* must maximize I[V(M(K(M*, t)), t) – "n(K(M*, t))]dF(t) over M.
T

(b) Hence, in any contingency 2i, the act called for under the optimal method of
interpretation is the act that maximizes the expected payoff to contracting parties in 2i
over the conditional distribution of types who write contracts with the observed term
covering 2i.
Notes. The reasoning establishing part (a) is essentially as follows. Suppose that,
under the optimal method of interpretation M*, social welfare is not maximized given the
contracts that parties write under M*. Then there exists another method MN producing
higher welfare given the contracts written under M*. Now, in fact, the contracts written
under MN will generally be different (since the contracts that are written depend on the
method of interpretation), but this can only raise welfare. Hence, M* could not have
been optimal.
Part (b), a corollary of part (a), is a substantial aid in determining the optimal
method of interpretation because it means that attention can be restricted to a limited
class of methods of interpretation.

22

Proof. To prove part (a) we want to show that if M* is the optimal method of
interpretation, then M* maximizes I[V(M(K(M*, t)), t) – "n(K(M*, t))]dF(t) over M.
T

Assume otherwise, that there exists an MN such that
(6)

I[V(MN(K(M*, t)), t) – "n(K(M*, t))]dF(t) >
T

I[V(M*(K(M*, t)), t) – "n(K(M*, t))]dF(t).
T

However, we know that
(7)

I[V(MN(K(MN, t)), t) – "n(K(MN, t))]dF(t) $
T

I[V(MN(K(M*, t)), t) – "n(K(M*, t))]dF(t),
T

since, for each t, V(MN(K(MN, t)), t) – "n(K(MN, t)) $ V(MN(K(M*, t)), t) – "n(K(M*, t)),
because the parties choose their contracts optimally given MN. Combining (6) and (7), we
obtain
(8)

I[V(MN(K(MN, t)), t) – "n(K(MN, t))]dF(t) >
T

I[V(M*(K(M*, t)), t) – "n(K(M*, t))]dF(t),
T

which contradicts the supposed optimality of M*.
Part (b) follows from part (a). In particular, since the contracts K(M*, t) are taken
as given, for M to maximize I[V(M(K(M*, t)), t) – "n(K(M*, t))]dF(t), it must be that M
T

maximizes IV(M(K(M*, t)), t)dF(t). This implies that M maximizes the expected
T

payoff for each 2i. Hence, it is evident that for any term (Ej, aj) and 2i in Ej, the
interpreted act a maximizes Ix(2i, a, t)dF(t*T(Ej, aj)), where T(Ej, aj) = {t| K(M*, t)
T(Ej, aj)

includes (Ej, aj)}. Likewise, if there is a gap at 2i, a must maximize
Ix(2i, a, t)dF(t*T(gap at 2i)), where T(gap at 2i) = {t| K(M*, t)} includes a gap at 2i.//
T(gap at 2i)

23

It may be noted that the proof of part (a) does not depend on the independence
assumption. If that assumption is relaxed, the conditional distribution in part (b) is of
types who write the observed contract (rather than the generally wider class of types who
write the observed term).
Let us next show another important property of the optimal method of
interpretation.
PROPOSITION 3. Under the optimal method of interpretation, specific terms are
interpreted as written.//
Note. The explanation for the proposition is essentially that if the parties go to the
expense of writing a term covering only a single contingency 2i, their welfare will be
maximized if the act that results when 2i occurs is their ideal act a*(2i). Hence, it is
desirable for the method of interpretation to be such that their ideal act does in fact result
when they write a specific term; and that will clearly be so if a specific term is interpreted
as written, for then the parties will name their ideal act and obtain it if 2i occurs.
Proof. Let us show that any method of interpretation M in which specific terms
are not interpreted as written is (weakly) dominated by another method MN defined to be
the same as M, except that under MN specific terms are interpreted as written. To
demonstrate that M is dominated by MN, consider the contract K = K(M) that parties of
some type t choose under M. Either K does not contain specific provisions or it does. If
K does not contain specific provisions, then MN(K) = M(K) by definition of MN, so the
parties are as well off choosing K under MN as under M. And since the parties can choose
K under MN and might choose a different contract, they must be at least as well off under
MN as under M. The other possibility is that K contains specific provisions. In this case,
24

let the parties replace K with KN, which is the same as K except that in place of each
specific provision (2i, a) in K is the specific provision (2i, a*(2i)). The parties will be at
least as well off under MN(KN) as under M(K): K and KN have the same number of terms
and thus involve the same writing cost; any term that is not specific in K will also be a
term in KN and will be interpreted in the same way under MN as under M;34 and any term
that is specific in K will be replaced with (2i, a*(2i)) and will result in the ideal act a*(2i)
for 2i rather than a(2i). Since, then, for any type t, parties will be at least as well off
under MN as under M, the expected value of MN is at least that of M. Thus, we conclude
that under an optimal method of interpretation, we may assume that any specific term
will be interpreted as written.//
As observed in a footnote, the proof of this proposition does depend on the independence
assumption, raising the question whether the proposition holds otherwise. In fact, it does
not; an example is given in the appendix in which, under the optimal method of
interpretation, a specific term is interpreted differently from how it is written. The
intuition underlying the example is that by writing an unusual specific term, different
from the term the parties actually want, the parties can signal their type, and this
information can be usefully employed in the interpretation of the entire contract;35 the
court can then interpret the unusual specific term in the way the parties really want,
which is to say, not as written.36
34

This step makes implicit use of the independence assumption about M, for the interpretation of a
term that is not specific is assumed here not to depend on specific terms.
35

Note that such information cannot be used to interpret the rest of the contract if the independence
assumption holds.
36

The example notwithstanding, my intuition is that the possibility that it would be optimal not to
interpret a specific term as written is remote, perhaps a theoretical curiosity; for there should be a rich set of
opportunities in the contract for parties to signal their type apart from the particular one just mentioned.

25

The next proposition states that the paradigmatic types of outcomes discussed
earlier in Section 3 can all occur under the optimal method of interpretation.
PROPOSITION 4. Under the optimal method of interpretation, when contracting parties
write the contracts that are best for them, the following different types of outcome are
possible for a pair of contracting parties:
(a) a gap is filled in a way that is ideal for the parties;
(b) a gap is filled in a way that is not ideal for the parties;
(c) a general term is interpreted as written and this is ideal for the parties;
(d) a general term is interpreted as written but this is not ideal for the parties;
(e) a general term is overridden in a contingency and this is better for the parties;
(f) a general term is overridden in a contingency but interpreting the term as written
would be better for the parties.//
This is shown in the appendix, which presents examples in which these outcomes occur
under the optimal method of interpretation.
Now let us consider an opt-out rule, defined to be a rule under which contracting
parties can specify, for any term, that the term will not be interpreted but rather enforced
as written.
PROPOSITION 5. The opt-out rule, which allows contracting parties to specify that any
term that they write not be interpreted by courts, is socially desirable.//
Note. The opt-out rule raises social welfare because it allows contracting parties
to avoid outcome (f) of Proposition 4, that a general term would be overridden when that
would lower the parties’ well-being. (In the example given in the appendix, the CC type
could guarantee that their contract {(21 or 22, C)} would not be overridden by opting out

26

of contract interpretation, whereas under the optimal method of interpretation, C would
be overridden with E in 22.)
Proof. Let M be the optimal method of interpretation in the absence of the optout possibility for contracting parties. Any pair of contracting parties will be at least as
well off if they have the opt-out provision under M than if not, and some parties may be
better off, given possibility (f) of Proposition 4. Hence, social welfare might be higher
under M with the opt-out rule, and thus under whatever is the optimal method of
interpretation under the opt-out rule.//
5. Evidence Beyond the Contract
Let us now consider briefly the possibility that the court considers not only the
contract but also evidence going beyond the contract. In fact, the courts often do
consider such evidence, including the parties’ contract negotiating history, their business
dealings with each other during the life of the contract, other contracts they have made,
and customs and norms in their industry. Let
$ = cost of presenting evidence,
where the cost is borne by the parties. If evidence is presented, assume for simplicity that
it is perfect, allowing the court to determine the parties’ ideal act a*(2i, t) in the
contingency 2i. Assume also that the cost of presenting evidence exceeds the cost of
writing a specific term,
(9)

$ > ",

the motivation being that at least as much information usually has to be presented to
convince a court that some action a is optimal as merely to name that action in a contract,
and further that parties are likely to be contesting each other’s evidence in court. Assume

27

also that the parties can costlessly specify in their contract the set of contingencies for
which evidence will be presented.37 Let
R = set of contingencies in which evidence will be presented.
Assume then that if 2i , R, evidence will be presented and the act that will be enforced is
a*(2i, t) for the parties of type t. Finally, assume for ease that the method of
interpretation M does not depend on R.
Let us examine how parties will write contracts, assuming that specific terms are
interpreted as written.38 We have
PROPOSITION 6. Suppose that contracting parties stipulate in their contract in what
contingencies they will present evidence to the court. Then
(a) a specific term will not be written for any contingency with a probability less than or
equal to the threshold p* = "/$;
(b) evidence will not be presented for any contingency with a probability exceeding p*
(that is, R does not contain any 2i for which pi > p*); and
(c) evidence will be presented if and only if the cost is less than the joint loss from not
doing so, namely,
$ < x(a*(2i, t), 2i, t) - x(a(2i), 2i, t).

(10)

(That is, given the terms of the contract, (10) determines R.)//
Note. Because it is more expensive to present evidence to determine the ideal act
a*(2i, t) than to provide for it explicitly in the contract, it makes sense that parties will
37

This assumption of costlessness is motivated by the fact that the parties do not specify an action
for any contingency in R, but it is an inessential assumption. If it were supposed that there is a cost r per
contingency that is included in R, then in Proposition 6, p* would be (" ! r)/ $ and (10) would be replaced
by $ < x(a*(2i, t), 2i, t) ! x(a(2i), 2i, t) ! r/ pi.
38

This is a feature of the optimal method of interpretation; essentially the same proof as that of
Proposition 3 applies.

28

provide explicitly for it rather than present evidence if the likelihood of the contingency
is sufficiently high; but if the likelihood is low, they save by avoiding the ex ante cost of
specific provision. This explains parts (a) and (b). Part (c) is clear; if the loss from a
less-than-ideal act in 2i under a general contractual term would exceed the cost $ of
presenting evidence, then the parties will arrange to present evidence in order to eliminate
the loss.
Proof. Writing a specific term for a contingency 2i and stipulating that if 2i
occurs evidence be presented are substitutes, in that each results in the ideal act a*(2i, t)
if 2i occurs. The cost of a specific term (rather than a gap or including 2i in a general
term) is ", and the expected cost of having evidence presented if 2i occurs (by including

2i in R) is pi$. Accordingly, if pi < p*, then pi$ < "; it is cheaper to have the court
consider evidence ex post than to bear the certain cost " of a specific term, demonstrating
(a) (if pi = p*, the parties are indifferent, and we assume for convenience that they would
not write a specific term). Conversely, if pi > p*, then pi$ > "; it is more expensive to
have the court consider evidence ex post than to bear the certain cost " of a specific term,
demonstrating (b). Part (c) is self-explanatory.//
Parts (a) and (b) do not hold if the assumption of independence about M is relaxed, for
then writing a specific term generally affects the interpretation of all other terms, not just
the outcome in 2i.
Two observations may be added. First, the parties’ choice of the set R in which to
present evidence depends on their type t – notably, to know what their loss would be if
they did not present evidence and relied on the court’s interpretation depends on their
type (see (10)). Hence, the court is not itself able to determine when it would be best for

29

evidence to be presented; if the court decides when evidence is presented, social welfare
will fall. Second, as a general matter, the optimal method of interpretation will change
from what it is in the absence of the possibility of presentation of evidence, for, among
other factors, the danger of large losses from errors in interpretation is bounded by the
cost $ of presentation of evidence.
6. Concluding Comments
Generality of the analysis. The basic structure of the model of optimal
interpretation considered here applies independently of the assumptions made about the
contractual environment, in particular, relating to the contractibility of variables,
renegotiation, and the information of the parties. That is, in any contractual environment,
one can consider a method of interpretation M to be a function that transforms a written
contract K into the interpreted contract K(M); contracting parties of type t will, given M
and the assumed bargaining process, select a contract K(M, t) and the actual contract that
is employed will thus be M(K(M, t)); and the problem of the court, supposing that it does
not observe t, will be to choose M to maximize IW(M, t)dF(t), where W(M, t) is the
T

addition to social welfare when parties of type t choose K(M, t) and the contract that
governs is M(K(M, t)).
Moreover, many of the conclusions reached about optimal interpretation hold in
fairly broad circumstances, because the arguments for the conclusions often did not
depend on the particulars of the model studied here. Proposition 1, that some method of
interpretation is desirable, is true whenever contracting parties can save writing costs or
contracting effort by leaving a gap.39 Proposition 2(a), that the optimal method M* is

39

Recall that the essence of the argument for the proposition was that if contracts are enforced as
written (there is no interpretation), one can select any term in the contract written by any type t and employ

30

naively optimal -- is best for the conditional distribution of types t who write the
observed contract – is valid as long as contracting parties maximize their joint welfare
W(M, t) given M.40 Likewise, Proposition 3, that specific terms are enforced as written
when the method of interpretation is assumed to display independence holds.41 The
various types of outcome described in Proposition 4, including the overriding of general
terms, it is evident will be possibilities under the optimal method of intepretation.
Let me now comment on several factors that were not taken into account in the
analysis and how doing so would affect the conclusions.

the method of interpretation M under which gaps are filled with the act aj that had been specified in this
term. M will then allow the type t to leave a gap in the term and obtain the same contract as before, and
other types can always write the contracts that they had before. This argument that M will lead to an
increase in social welfare applies whatever the nature of contractual terms (for instance, if a term names
damages for breach), as long as contracting parties save writing cost or contracting effort by leaving a gap.
40

The proof is essentially that given above. In particular, we want to show that M* maximizes
I[V(M(K(M*, t)), t) – "(K(M*, t))]dF(t) over M, where "(K) is some writing or effort cost associated with
T

a contract K (not necessarily the simple one assumed in the analysis). Then if the claim is not true, there
exists an MN such that
(6N) I[V(MN(K(M*, t)), t) – "(K(M*, t))]dF(t) >
T

I[V(M*(K(M*, t)), t) – "(K(M*, t))]dF(t).
T

However, we know that
(7N) I[V(MN(K(MN, t)), t) – "(K(MN, t))]dF(t) $
T

I[V(MN(K(M*, t)), t) – "(K(M*, t))]dF(t),
T

since, for each t, V(MN(K(MN, t)), t) – "(K(MN, t)) $ V(MN(K(M*, t)), t) – "(K(M*, t)), because of the
assumption that the parties choose K to maximize their joint welfare W(MN, t) = V(MN(K), t) – "(K) given
MN. Combining (6N) and (7N), we obtain
(8N) I[V(MN(K(MN, t)), t) – "(K(MN, t))]dF(t) >
T

I[V(M*(K(M*, t)), t) – "(K(M*, t))]dF(t),
T

which contradicts the supposed optimality of M*.
41

It is clear that the argument that any method of interpretation M in which specific terms are not
interpreted as written is (weakly) dominated by another method MN defined to be the same as M, except
that under MN specific terms are interpreted as written, holds generally, given the assumption that methods
of interpretation display independence.

31

One factor that was not considered in the model is renegotiation, since in the
model it was assumed that contractual terms directly determine outcomes, even though
they might be inefficient. Suppose instead that one makes assumptions as in much of the
literature on contracting: renegotiation always leads to efficient outcomes ex post, and the
purpose of contracts is to improve the choice of ex ante investment, notably by implicitly
combatting the problem of hold-up.42 In this type of model, although the value of
interpreted contracts would be determined by how well the contracts improve investment
decisions, the main qualitative conclusions about optimal interpretation would hold, as
indicated two paragraphs above. However, Proposition 2(a), that M* is naively optimal,
must be carefully construed. It does not imply that the court interprets a term in the way
that is ex post efficient for those who write the observed contract, but rather that the court
interprets the term so as to foster investment incentives for those who write the observed
contract. Suppose, for instance, that a contract specifies specific performance, and it is
obvious to the court that performance is inefficient because the cost of performance far
exceeds the value to the buyer. This does not imply that the court should interpret the
contract as excusing performance. Since the parties may well have chosen specific
performance to enhance the buyer’s incentives to invest,43 the best thing for the court to
do may well be to enforce specific performance (that is, the court may know that the
purpose of specific performance is to improve investment incentives and that ex post
efficiency, here nonperformance, will come about through renegotiation).

42

See, for example, Hart and Holmström (1987) and Tirole (1999).

43

For example, in Rogerson (1984), an early model of breach remedies with renegotiation,
specific performance leads to superior buyer investment decisions than does the expectation measure or the
reliance measure of damages for breach.

32

Another factor of interest is asymmetry of information between the contracting
parties. In the model, the parties were assumed to have symmetric information. If they
do not, then two of the conclusions reached do not hold. First, the conclusion that the
optimal method of interpretation M* is naively optimal is not true. A prototypical
example is where a contracting party chooses an inefficient term in order to masquerade
as another kind of party and thereby to gain a price advantage.44 The optimal
interpretation of the term might be to override it to obtain the efficient action, even
though that interpretation is not best on average for the set of individuals who write the
observed contract, thus contradicting Proposition 2(a).45 The second major difference in
conclusions when information is asymmetric is that the optimality of allowing parties to
opt out of interpretation might not hold. For instance, some individuals who sign
installment payment agreements for consumer goods that allow the seller to repossess if
they are even a day late in making payments might overestimate the likelihood that they
will make all payments on time. By signing an opt out clause, they guarantee the
repossession feature of the contract even though it may be against their interests;
disallowing opt out might therefore be socially beneficial.
Another factor not considered is the indescribability of events. In particular, a
reason that parties do not write very detailed contracts is that some events may not be
readily describable (perhaps because these events do not happen to be in the conscious
minds of the parties at the time of contracting). If so, the events named in contractual

44

See Spier (1992) on this and related issues.

45

Also, it is evident why the proof of Proposition 2(a) does not hold when parties have
asymmetric information. Inequality (7N) in note 40 does not necessarily apply, for the contract that is
chosen does not necessarily maximize the contracting parties’ joint welfare V(MN(K), t) – "(K) given MN.

33

terms would be restricted to the set of describable events. This restriction, however,
would not alter the main conclusions about the optimal method of interpretation,46 and it
would seem to make interpretation more valuable because indescribability would increase
the need to modify terms in the light of the realization of outcomes.
Legal practice. Several points about the interpretation of contracts in practice
seem worth making in the light of the foregoing analysis. First, as stated at the outset,
contractual interpretation is an important function of the courts (one commentator cites
25% as the fraction of contract cases concerned with interpretation47), and interpretation
is much more often concerned with the overriding of terms and related matters than with
the filling of gaps in the sense of unprovided for contingencies.48
Second, the ability of parties to control interpretation by explicitly opting out of
interpretation of a term is circumscribed,49 even though a legal policy of allowing such
opting out often is socially desirable (Proposition 6). (Still, the reluctance of courts to
allow opting out could be justified by a concern that a party to the contract is opting out
of interpretation because, as just noted above, and unlike in the model, he has less
information than the other party and fails to understand that opting out disadvantages him
or because of ambiguity in the meaning of words.)

46

If the only change in the assumptions of the analysis is that the events Ej be in the set of
describable events, then it is readily verified that the proofs of Propositions 1-3 are unchanged. Proposition
3 applies only in respect to contingencies that are describable. Proposition 4 could be shown using an
example constructed along the lines of that in the appendix. Proposition 5 is a corollary of Proposition 4.
47

See Farnsworth (1999) at 426.

48

Perusal of chapter 7 of Farnsworth (1999), or discussion with practicing lawyers, will reveal that
interpretation usually involves overriding terms, resolving ambiguities of language, or settling internal
contradictions in terms, and only unusually involves outright failure to provide instructions for a
contingency. (Nevertheless, commentators often describe interpretation as the filling of gaps.)
49

Chapter 7 of Farnsworth (1999); personal communications with teachers of contracts courses.

34

Third, the issue of the use of evidence extrinsic to contracts in their interpretation
is of significance in actual practice and is also much debated. Whereas it was assumed in
Section 5 that extrinsic evidence was perfect, this evidence is highly imperfect in reality
and is very costly to consider (especially because of the tendency of parties to contest
negotiating history, oral statements, course of dealing). Thus, the question whether the
value of extrinsic evidence in contractual interpretation exceeds its cost to the parties is a
real one. Accordingly, the ability of the parties to control whether the courts will
examine extrinsic evidence would seem to be of subsantial importance to them.
However, their power to limit interpretation to the written contract is restricted50 (which
is of a piece with their difficulty in opting out of interpretation altogether). Possibly this
is due to the courts’ belief that the parties’ true desires should be discovered at trial,
without due regard to the cost to the parties of the necessary inquiry.

50

Notably, the parol evidence rule, requiring a court to focus on the written contract and to bar
extrinsic evidence if the contract was intended to be an “integrated” expression of the parties’ desires, is
subject to many exceptions. See generally chapter 7 of Farnsworth (1999).

35

References
Anderlini, Luca and Leonardo Felli. 1999. Incomplete Contracts and Complexity Costs.
Theory and Decision. 46: 23-50.
Anderlini, Luca, Leonardo Felli, and Andrew Postlewaite. 2001. Courts of Law and
Unforeseen Contingencies. University of Pennslyvania Law School, Institute for
Law and Economics, Research Paper No. 01-05.
Ayres, Ian and Robert Gertner. 1989. Filling Gaps in Incomplete Contracts: An
Economic Theory of Default Rules. Yale Law Journal. 99: 87-130.
Battigalli, Pierpaolo, and Giovanni Maggi. 2002. Rigidity, Discretion, and the Costs of
Writing Contracts. American Economic Review. 92: 798-817.
Bebchuk, Lucian, and Steven Shavell. 1991. Information and the Scope of Liability for
Breach of Contract: The rule of Hadley v. Baxendale. Journal of Law,
Economics, and Organization. 7: 284-312.
Bernstein, Lisa. 1996. Merchant Law in a Merchant Court: Rethinking the Code’s Search
for Immanent Business Norms. University of Pennsylvania Law Review. 144:
1765-1821
Cohen, George M. 2000. Implied Terms and Interpretation in Contract Law, in
Encyclopedia of Law and Economics, Boudewijn Bouckaert and Gerrit de Geest,
editors, 3: 78-99. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Craswell, Richard. 2000. Contract Law: General Theories, in Encyclopedia of Law and
Economics, Boudewijn Bouckaert and Gerrit de Geest, editors, 3: 1-24.
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Dye, Ronald A. 1985. Costly Contract Contingencies. International Economic Review.
26: 233-250.
Farnsworth, E. Allan. 1999. Contracts. Third edition. Aspen, New York.
Goetz, Charles J. and Robert E. Scott. 1985. The Limits of Expanded Choice: An
Analysis of the Interactions between Express and Implied Contract Terms.
California Law Review. 73: 261-322.

36

Hadfield, Gillian K. 1994. Judicial Competence and the Interpretation of Incomplete
Contracts. Journal of Legal Studies. 23: 159-184.
Hart, Oliver and Bengt Holmström. 1987. The Theory of Contracts, Chaper 3 in
Advances in Economic Theory, Fifth World Congress, Truman Bewley, editor.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore. 1999. Foundations of Incomplete Contracts. Review of
Economic Studies. 66: 115-138.
Katz, Avery. 1998. Contract Formation and Interpretation, in The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics and the Law, edited by Peter Newman, 1: 425-32.
London: Macmillan.
Posner, Eric A. 1998. The Parol Evidence Rule, The Plain Meaning Rule, and the
Principles of Contractual Interpretation. University of Pennsylvania Law Review.
146: 533-577.
Rogerson, William P. 1984. Efficient Reliance and Damage Measures for Breach of
Contract. Rand Journal of Economics. 15: 39–53.
Schwartz, Alan. 1992. Relational Contracts in the Courts: An Analysis of Incomplete
Agreements and Judicial Strategies, Journal of Legal Studies. 21: 271-318.
Schwartz, Alan and Joel Watson. 2001. The Law and Economics of Costly Contracting.
Discussion Paper 2001-21. Department of Economics, University of California at
San Diego.
Spier, Kathryn E. 1992. Incomplete Contracts and Signalling. RAND Journal of
Economics. 23: 432-443.
Tirole, Jean. 1999. Incomplete Contracts: Where Do We Stand? Econometrica. 67: 741781.
Williamson, Oliver E. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets,
Relational Contracting. New York: Free Press.

37

Appendix
Example in which a specific term is not enforced as written under the optimal
method of interpretation. As stated in the text after Proposition 3, if the assumption that
the method of interpretation obeys independence is relaxed, then it is possible that a
specific term is not enforced as written under the optimal method of interpretation. The
following example demonstrates this possibility.
There are two contingencies 21 and 22, each occurring with probability .5; five
acts, A, B, C, D, E; and a writing cost " of 1. A contractual type will obtain a positive
payoff of 4 under one preferred act in each contingency and 0 otherwise. For instance,
the type AB obtains a payoff of 4 if A is the act in 21 but obtains 0 otherwise in that
contingency, and the type obtains a payoff of 4 if B is the act in 22 but obtains 0
otherwise in that contingency. The types in the population are these: AA, CB, CC, DD,
EE, AB, AE, CD, DE, EA, DA, EB, AC, DB, CE, and AD, and the fraction of each type
is .01, except that the fraction of type AD is .85. Now consider a method M of
interpretation and the contracts chosen by the different types as described in this table.

38

Type
Written Contract
AA
{(21 or 22, A)}
CB
{(21 or 22, B)}
CC
{(21 or 22, C)}
DD
{(21 or 22, D)}
EE
{(21 or 22, E)}
AB
{(21, A)}
AE
{(21, B)}
CD
{(21, C)}
DE
{(21, D)}
EA
{(21, E)}
DA
{(22, A)}
EB
{(22, B)}
AC
{(22, C)}
DB
{(22, D)}
CE
{(22, E)}
AD
{A}*
*The contract has no terms – gaps for 21 and 22

Interpreted Contract
{(21, A), (22, A)}
{(21, C), (22, B)}
{(21, C), (22, C)}
{(21, D), (22, D)}
{(21, E), (22, E)}
{(21, A), (22, B)}
{(21, A), (22, E)}
{(21, C), (22, D)}
{(21, D), (22, E)}
{(21, E), (22, A)}
{(21, D), (22, A)}
{(21, E), (22, B)}
{(21, A), (22, C)}
{(21, D), (22, B)}
{(21, C), (22, E)}
{(21, A), (22, D)}

Note that the method M is described for all contracts with one term and for the double
gap, but not for explicitly complete two-term contracts. (However, it will not matter how
M is defined for such contracts.) Note as well that M does not obey independence, for
the interpretation of gaps depends on the accompanying specific term.
It is evident why each type chooses the contract shown in the table. It is obvious
that type AD will chooses the double gap, as that is costless. Each other type obtains its
ideal contract at a cost of 1 by writing the indicated one term contract, whereas if it
spends nothing and leaves a double gap, its expected payoff would fall by at least 2.
That M is optimal follows from two observations. All types obtain their ideal
contracts with contracts with one term or the double gap contract. The type that writes
the double gap contract is AD, the most numerous (.85 vs. .01).

39

Observe that type AE writes the specific term (21, B) yet B is interpreted as A, so
the specific term is not interpreted as written, which is what we claimed. (One can view
the explanation as follows. Type AB implicitly signals its type by writing B as the act in
the specific term for 21, but having done that, it is best for A to be the actual interpreted
act in 21.)
Moreover, although there are other optimal methods, under any optimal method
the contract {(21, B)} will be interpreted differently from B. In particular, observe that
any permutation of the first 15 rows of the interpreted contract column will also be
optimal: for any permutation is just another way of allowing each of the 15 types with
fraction .01 to obtain their ideal contracts with a one term contract; the double gap
contract must be for the AD types due to their high fraction. But there is no type for
whom B is the ideal act in 21. Thus, since the interpreted contract must be the ideal
contract for some type, it cannot be interpreted as B.

Proof of Proposition 4. We want to demonstrate that the outcomes listed in
Proposition 4 are possible under an optimal method of interpretation, where M is
assumed to display independence. Consider a variation of the example just discussed
above with two equally likely contingencies, acts A, B, C, D, E and payoff functions as
were described. The types in the population are these: CD, DE, CE, DD, EE, BB, CB,
DB, EB, AA, AC, AD, AE, and AB, and the fraction of each type is .01, except that the
fraction of type AB is .85. Now consider a method M of interpretation and the contracts
chosen by the different types as described in this table.

40

Type
Written Contract
CD
{(21 or 22, A)}
DE
{(21 or 22, B)}
CE
{(21 or 22, C)}
DD
{(21 or 22, D)}
EE
{(21 or 22, E)}
{(21, A)}
BB
{(21, B)}
CB
{(21, C)}
DB
{(21, D)}
EB
{(21, E)}
AA
{(22, A)}
{(22, B)}
AC
{(22, C)}
AD
{(22, D)}
AE
{(22, E)}
AB
{A}*
*The contract has no terms – gaps for 21 and 22

Interpreted Contract
{(21, C), (22, D)}
{(21, D), (22, E)}
{(21, C), (22, E)}
{(21, D), (22, D)}
{(21, E), (22, E)}
{(21, A), (22, B)}
{(21, B), (22, B)}
{(21, C), (22, B)}
{(21, D), (22, B)}
{(21, E), (22, B)}
{(21, A), (22, A)}
{(21, A), (22, B)}
{(21, A), (22, C)}
{(21, A), (22, D)}
{(21, A), (22, E)}
{(21, A), (22, B)}

Note that M displays independence, for the interpretation of a gap in 21 is A regardless of
the term for 22 and the intepretation of a gap in 22 is B regardless of the term for 21.
Note also that specific terms are interpreted as written (which we can assume is true of an
optimal method, by Proposition 3).
It is evident why each type chooses the contract shown in the table. It is obvious
that type AB will chooses the double gap, as that is costless. Each other type obtains its
ideal contract at a cost of 1 by writing the indicated one term contract, whereas if it
spends nothing and leaves a double gap, its expected payoff would fall by at least 2.
That M is optimal follows from two observations. All types obtain their ideal
contracts with contracts with one term or the double gap contract. The type that writes
the double gap contract is AB, the most numerous (.85 vs. .01).

41

Observe that there is a general term that is interpreted as written, which is ideal
for the parties, for instance {(21 or 22, D)}. There is also a general term that is not
interpreted as written, which is ideal for the parties, for instance {(21 or 22, C)} (here the
parties obtain E in 22, which is desirable for them. There is also a gap that is interpreted
in a way that is good for parties, for instance{(21, B)}.
The example can be slightly modified to illustrate the other possibilities. Suppose
that there is a group CC, for whom there is not only a payoff of 4 if C is the act in either
contingency, but also a payoff of 3 if A is the act in21. Assume also that the fraction of
this group is very small (and that of the other groups are reduced proportionally), so that
the optimal M does not change. Then the CC type will choose {(22, C)}, for this way
they obtain A in 21, whereas the only way they can obtain their ideal contract is by
writing {(21, C), (22, C)}, which would cost them 1 but increase their expected return by
only .5 (that is, their expected return would fall from from 3.5 – 1 = 2.5 to 4 – 2 = 2).
Hence, the CCs would choose a contract with a gap that would not be filled as they want.
To show that a general term may not be interpreted as written and that it would be
better for parties that it is interpreted as written, consider another modification. Let there
be a group of CC, for whom there is not only a payoff of 4 if C is the act in either
contingency, but also a payoff of 3 if E is the act in 22. As in the previous paragraph,
assume that this group is small enough that the optimal M does not change. The CC type
will choose {(21 or 22, C)}, which will be interpreted as E in 22 even though the CC type
would prefer that this general term be interpreted as written.
Finally, to show that a general term may be interpreted as written and that it
would be better for parties that it be interpreted otherwise, consider the following

42

modification of the example. Let there be a group of DA, for whom there is not only a
payoff of 4 if D is the act in 21 and if A is the act in 22, but also a payoff of 3 if D is the
act in 22. Again, assume that this group is small enough that the optimal M does not
change. The DA type will choose {(21 or 22, D)}, which will be interpreted as written
but they would prefer that A be the act in 22.

For completeness, let us also demonstrate that Proposition 4 holds if M is not
assumed to display independence. To do this, we will use the initial example in the
appendix and variations of it. The initial example involves a general term that is
interpreted as written, where this is ideal for the parties, for instance {(21 or 22, A)}; it
also has a general term that is not interpreted as written, where this is ideal for the parties,
for instance {(21 or 22, B)}; it involves as well a contract with a gap that is filled in an
ideal way, for instance {(22, E)}.
To show that a gap may be filled in a way that is not ideal for the parties, let there
be a group of BB, for whom there is not only a payoff of 4 if B is the act in either
contingency, but also a payoff of 3 if E is the act in 21. Assume that this group is small
enough that the optimal M does not change. The BB type will choose {(22, B)}, so the
gap will be interpreted as E but they they would prefer that B be the act in 21.
To show that a general term may be interpreted as written but this is not what is
desired by parties, let there be a group of CA, for whom there is not only a payoff of 4 if
C is the act in 21 and if A is the act in 22, but also a payoff of 3 if A is the act in 21.
Assume that this group is small enough that the optimal M does not change. The CA

43

type will choose {(21 or 22, A)}, which will be interpreted as written, but they would that
C be the act in 21.
Last, to show that a general term may not be interpreted as written but the parties
would prefer that it be interpreted as written, let there be a group of BB, for whom there
is not only a payoff of 4 if B is the act in either contingency, but also a payoff of 3 if C is
the act in 21. Assume that this group is small enough that the optimal M does not change.
The BB type will choose {(21 or 22, B)}, which will be interpreted as C in 21, but they
would that B be the act in 21.

44

