                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                GRASSHOPPERS, ANTS, AND PRE-RETIREMENT WEALTH:
                         A TEST OF PERMANENT INCOME

                                               Erik Hurst

                                         Working Paper 10098
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10098


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2003




I am grateful for the financial support provided by the Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago.
I would like to thank Mark Aguiar, Steve Davis, Jon Gruber, David Laibson, Anna Lusardi, Joe Lupton,
Brigitte Madrian, Jim Poterba, Matthew Shapiro, Jon Skinner, Mel Stephens, Steve Venti, Paul Willen and
Jim Ziliak for helpful comments. Additionally, I would like to thank seminar participants at the University
of Chicago’s, Graduate School of Business macro lunch, the joint Harvard/MIT public finance workshop, the
Harvard macro seminar, the applied economics workshop at the University of Kentucky, and the 2003 NBER
Aging Summer Institute Workshop. I am indebted to the excellent research of Sonia Oreffice. All remaining
errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Erik Hurst. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Grasshoppers, Ants, and Pre-Retirement Wealth: A Test of Permanent Income
Erik Hurst
NBER Working Paper No. 10097
November 2003
JEL No. E2, J2

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper shows that households who enter retirement with low wealth consistently followed non-

permanent income consumption rules during their working years. Using the Panel Study of Income

Dynamics (PSID), household wealth in 1989 is predicted for a sample of 50-65 year olds using both

current and past income, occupation, demographic, employment, and health characteristics. Using

the residuals from this first stage regression, the sample of pre-retired households is subsetted into

households who save 'lower' than predicted and all other households. The panel component of the

PSID is then used to analyze the consumption behavior of these households early in their lifecycle.

It is shown that these low pre-retirement wealth households had consumption growth that responded

to predictable changes in income during their early working years. No such behavior was found

among the other pre-retired households. Moreover, the low wealth residual households responded

both to predictable income increases as well as predictable income declines, a result that is

inconsistent with a liquidity constraints explanation. After ruling out other theories of consumption

to explain these facts, it is concluded that households who entered retirement with lower than

predicted wealth consistently followed near sighted consumption plans during their working lives.

Erik Hurst
University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business
213A Walker Museum
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
erik.hurst@gsb.uchicago.edu
                             Grasshoppers, Ants and Pre-Retirement Wealth:
                                A Test of Permanent Income Consumers

         It was wintertime, the ants’ store of grain had got wet and they were laying it
         out to dry. A hungry grasshopper asked them to give it something to eat.
         ‘Why did you not store food in the summer like us?’ the ants asked. ‘I hadn’t
         time’, it replied. ‘I was too busy making sweet music.’ The ants laughed at
         the grasshopper. ‘Very well’, they said. ‘Since you piped in the summer, now
         dance in the winter’.
                                                  – Aesop’s Fable

      It is well documented that, conditional on lifetime income, wealth varies dramatically across

households entering retirement (Gustman and Juster, 1996; Smith, 1997; Hurst, Luoh and

Stafford, 1998; Venti and Wise, 1998 and 2000; Lusardi, 2002).                              While many authors have

attempted to explain this fact (Venti and Wise, 2000; Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg, 2001;

Hurd and Zissimpopoulos, 2002), the approach taken in this paper is quite different.1 In this

paper, I directly examine the relationship between households’ pre-retirement wealth and their

consumption behavior while young. I find that households who entered retirement with much

lower than predicted wealth did not follow permanent income consumption rules during their

working years; their year-to-year consumption growth responded strongly to predictable income

changes.      No such behavior was evident in the other group of pre-retired households who had

higher wealth conditional on observables.                   After ruling out other theories of consumption,

including the existence of binding liquidity constraints, I conclude that those households who are

most likely to under-save for retirement do so, at least in part, because they follow myopic

consumption rules during their working years.
1
  There is an additional literature which analyzes the adequacy of pre-retired household wealth by comparing simulated optimal
saving behavior from a calibrated lifecycle model to actual household data (Bernheim, 1992 and 1997; Bernheim and Scholz,
1993). The conclusion of these papers is that a large fraction of households have wealth levels that will leave them unprepared
to sustain consumption during retirement. More recently, Engen, Gale, and Uccello (1999) and Scholz, Seshardri, and
Khitatrakun (2003) maintain that it is possible to account for much of the observed variation in pre-retirement wealth across
households using a life-cycle model with heterogeneous earnings shocks and pension coverage. However, both papers conclude
that approximately 20% of the pre-retired population under-save for retirement.
    Specifically, in the first part of the paper, I segment 50-65 year old households in the 1989

Wave of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) by residuals from a regression of observed

household wealth on a vector of current and historical income, employment, demographic and

health controls. Doing so, allows me to isolate households with similar opportunities to save. I

classify households within the bottom twenty percent of residuals from this first stage regression

as having ‘lower than normal’ wealth. In the latter portion of the paper, I justify the use of the

twenty percent cutoff.   By construction, households with lower than normal pre-retired wealth

are identical to other pre-retired households along income, health, employment, pension and

demographic characteristics.     However, these households with low pre-retirement wealth

residuals experienced a much larger consumption decline upon their subsequent retirement.

Their consumption decline during retirement was twice as large, on average, compared to their

counterparts with similar pre-retirement income trajectories, but higher pre-retirement wealth.

The dramatic decline in consumption at retirement for households with lower-than-normal

wealth is consistent with the hypothesis that these households were ill-prepared for retirement.

    The innovation of the paper comes next. Using the panel dimension of the PSID, I am able

to observe the income and consumption behavior of these pre-retired households over a majority

of their working years. I then test whether households who appear to violate the Permanent

Income Hypothesis (PIH) by accumulating too little wealth to sustain consumption in retirement

also violate the PIH while young. Performing standard excess sensitivity tests, I am able to

reject that households with lower than normal pre-retired wealth behave as standard permanent

income consumers while young. I find that the consumption growth of households with lower

than normal pre-retirement savings responds strongly to predictable income changes.            The

consumption of other pre-retired households does not respond in any way to predictable income




                                                                                                   1
changes. Those households entering retirement with little wealth relative to their income, health

and demographic trajectories appear to be following rule of thumb consumption plans during

their working years.

    The fact that consumption responds to predictable income changes for households with little

pre-retirement wealth - relative to observables - is not the result of liquidity constraints.

Liquidity constraints may prevent a household from borrowing to smooth their consumption

when income is predicted to increase.       As a result, their consumption growth may track

predictable income growth. However, liquidity constraints do not prevent households from

smoothing predictable income declines (Altonji and Siow (1987), Zeldes (1989) and Shea

(1995)).    If the household realizes that their income is going to decline in the near future,

nothing prevents them from saving to smooth their marginal utility of consumption over time. I

find that the consumption of households with relatively little retirement savings responds

similarly (in terms of magnitude) to both predictable income increases and predictable income

declines. These results indicate that liquidity constraints are not the cause of the failure of the

permanent income hypothesis during working years for households with little pre-retirement

wealth.    Furthermore, the substitutability between consumption and leisure is not driving the

results. Households with lower than normal wealth entering retirement had consumption profiles

while young that responded to predictable income changes even after directly controlling for

changes in work hours.

    This paper provides a set of facts that describe at least two different types of households.

Most households in the population behave according to the Permanent Income Hypothesis.

However, there is a segment of households who enter retirement with very low wealth even after

controlling for differences in income, demographic, employment and health histories. These




                                                                                                 2
same households experience a large consumption decline at the onset of retirement, relative to

other pre-retired households. Additionally, these households have consumption profiles that

respond to predictable income shocks throughout their working years. Many alternative theories

can explain a subset of the above behaviors, but very few theories can jointly explain them all.

Specifically, it is shown that the behaviors of these low wealth, pre-retired households are

inconsistent with consumption theories such as precautionary savings (Deaton, 1992; Carroll,

1997) or habit formation (Deaton, 1992).    These behaviors, however, are consistent with either

rule-of-thumb consumption (Campbell and Makiw, 1989) or hyperbolic consumers (Laibson,

1997).   In either case, the households display a lack of planning behavior; under the former

theory, the households are myopic and do not attempt to plan for the future, while under the

latter theory, the households attempt to plan, but are incapable of committing themselves to carry

out those plans.

    As supporting evidence that differences in planning propensities are driving the differences

in behavior between the two groups, I find that these households with low wealth entering

retirement, conditioned on lifecycle factors, were aware of their near-sighted behavior nearly two

decades prior to their retirement. In 1972, questions were asked of all PSID respondents about 1)

their propensity to plan for the future, 2) carry out their plans for the future and 3) their

propensity to spend their income rather than save it. The answers to such questions are definitely

noisy measures of household behavior. However, households who entered retirement with lower

than normal savings were much less likely to report that they plan for the future, were much less

likely to report that they carry out their plans and were much more likely to report that they

spend their income rather than save it.




                                                                                                3
    At the beginning of the paper, a classic fable by Aesop is recounted. In the fable, a sharp

distinction is drawn between ants, who saved during their summer (i.e., working years) to sustain

consumption during their winter (i.e., retirement), and grasshoppers, who saved little for their

future period of low earnings. The results shown in this paper confirm Aesop’s proposition;

within an economy, consumers are of different types. Some households are forward looking and

behave according to the Permanent Income Hypothesis. Others, however, lack either the desire

or the ability to plan for the future. When constructing economic models, it is often misguided to

assume all households follow similar consumption rules. With respect to retirement saving,

while it is true that the majority of households appear to follow permanent income consumption

rules, approximately 20% of the population behaves as ‘economic grasshoppers’.                The

consumption of such households closely tracks their income during their working years leaving

them with little financial wealth as they enter retirement.   Given their lack of planning, such

households must sharply decrease consumption – and by extension utility – at the time of

retirement.

    This paper adds to a growing literature which assesses the effects of planning behavior on

household wealth accumulation (Lusardi, 1999, 2002, 2003a; Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy, 2003).

Lusardi (2002) uses data from the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) to show that 1/3 of

households nearing retirement report that they have “hardly thought” about retirement. These

households have much lower wealth levels than households who reported thinking a lot about

retirement. Similarly, Ameriks et. al. (2003) use special surveys of TIAA-CREF investors to

show that households who self report spending time financially planning for retirement have

higher wealth than households who self report spending little time financially planning. Also,

both Bernheim and Garrett (2003) and Lusardi (2003b) find positive causal effects between




                                                                                                4
attending firm sponsored retirement planning seminars and retirement wealth. Collectively,

there exists evidence that planning can foster higher savings.

II. Segmenting Pre-Retired Households By Wealth Residuals

     The purpose of this section is to identify pre-retired households with lower than ‘normal’

wealth. Household wealth, at the time of retirement, is a function of economic factors (income,

demographics, health shocks, interest rates) and individual decision factors (saving propensities,

portfolio allocation). In order to explore household planning behavior, households who had

similar opportunities to save over their lifetime are compared. Using the 1989 Panel Study of

Income Dynamics (PSID), where there are multiple decades of past income, demographic and

health data for each household, pre-retired households are segmented by whether they have

higher or lower wealth than other households who experienced similar economic, demographic,

and health histories.

A.   Segmenting Pre-Retired Households

     To start, a cross section of pre-retired households who were in the PSID during the 1989

survey were examined. Pre-retired households are defined to be households with a non-retired

head between the age of 50 and 65. The analysis year of 1989 was chosen purposefully. While

the PSID has collected income, employment and demographic information in all survey years

since its inception in 1968, information on wealth and savings were only asked at five-year

intervals starting in 1984 through 1999.    Since 1999, the PSID has tracked household wealth

every other year. Consequently, cross-sectional studies of wealth using PSID data are limited to

the years of 1984, 1989, 1994, 1999, and 2001 where the 2001 data is the most recent PSID data

made available.    Given the nature of the tests that I perform below, I need to follow the pre-

retired households backwards in time (to observe their consumption behavior during their


                                                                                                5
working years) as well as to follow the households into the future (to observe their consumption

behavior around the period when they subsequently retire). For these reasons, 1989 was chosen

as the year in which pre-retired households were segmented by their conditional wealth levels.2

Additionally, as discussed in the Data Appendix, certain pension questions used in the wealth

prediction equation were asked only in 1989. Given the sample design of the PSID, nearly all

1989 pre-retired households had one family member participate in the PSID every year since the

survey’s inception in 1968. As a result, there are almost twenty years of income, employment,

demographics and health data for each pre-retired household in the 1989 PSID.

      The analysis sample was restricted to include only those households who had positive 1989

wealth. Given that pre-retired households are well into their lifecycle, this requirement was not

overly restrictive. Less than 4% of non-retired 50-65 year olds in the 1989 PSID had zero or

negative wealth. The positive wealth restriction was imposed so that the log of wealth can be

used as the dependent variable in subsequent regressions.

      The PSID wealth supplements contain information on the household’s investment in real

estate (including main home), vehicles, farms, businesses, stocks, bonds, mutual funds, saving

and checking accounts, money market funds, certificates of deposit, government savings bonds,

Treasury bills, IRAs, bond funds, cash value of life insurance policies, valuable collections for

investment purposes, and rights in a trust or estate, mortgage debt, credit card debt, and other

outstanding collateralized and non-collateralized debt. The measure of wealth used in this paper

is the sum of all of the above asset measures less all of the above debt measures.                                For a full

discussion of the PSID wealth data, see Hurst, Luoh and Stafford (1998).




2
  The main results of the paper carry through if the 1984 wealth data is used to segment pre-retired households by their wealth
residuals.


                                                                                                                             6
    The PSID wealth supplements have one major drawback when used to assess retirement

savings. Through the late 1990s, the PSID did not ask explicitly ask households about their

wealth in either private or public pensions. In 1989, however, this problem can be partially

alleviated. The 1989 PSID respondents were asked questions about their expectations of the

percentage of their pre-retirement yearly labor earnings that would be replaced by all household

pension plans (including social security) during retirement. Using this information, one can

account for expected differences in pension coverage across households.

    To identify households who saved little given their economic opportunities, the following

regression was estimated:


                      Wi,1989 = φ0 + φ1 Xi,,1989 + φ2 Zi,historical + ηi,1989 ,            (1)


where Wi,1989 is the log of household i’s net wealth in 1989, Xi, 1989 is a vector of household i’s

1989 income, employment, demographic, and health controls, and Zi,historicial is a vector of

household i’s historical income, employment, demographic and health controls. The error term,

ηi,1989, represents the portion of current household log wealth that is unexplained by the X and Z

controls.

    The Data Appendix details the specific controls used in estimating regression (1). Briefly,

Xi,1989 includes the current age of the household head, age squared, dummies for the household

head’s race, marital status, educational attainment, occupation, industry and family composition,

a quadratic in household current total labor income, dummies for the household head and

“wife’s” current health and employment status, and the household’s self reported expectation of




                                                                                                 7
their pension replacement rate.3              Zi,historical includes a quadratic in average household labor

income between 1980 and 1987, a quadratic in average household labor income between 1974

and 1979, the change in labor income between 1980 and 1988, the coefficient of variation of

income over 1975 and 1989, and health and unemployment shocks experienced by the head and

the wife between 1980 and 1988. In some specifications, health and unemployment shocks

experienced by the household in the 1970s were included.                             These variables provided no

additional explanatory power to the regression and, as a result, were omitted from the base

specification.

     The residuals from (1), ηi,1989, provide a measure of whether the household has saved more

or less than households with similar economic, demographic, employment, and health

trajectories. The adjusted R-squared from (1) was 0.53 indicating that the controls included

captured a majority of the variation in wealth across households.                             Figure 1 presents the

distribution of 1989 wealth residuals for the sample of 1989 pre-retired households.                                  Any

classification of households into two groups based on these wealth residuals is in some sense

arbitrary.     To begin, I segment households with the lowest 20% of residuals as having low

“normalized” wealth. These households correspond to the proverbial economic grasshoppers

discussed above. My comparison group will be all other pre-retired households in the sample

(the proverbial economic ants).

     The 20th percentile cutoff is chosen given that: 1) Hall and Mishkin (1982) find that about

twenty percent of the population appears to be rule of thumb and 2) both Engen et al. (1999) and

Scholz et al. (2003) find that about 20% of households dramatically under save for retirement.

However, in the sections that follow, I explore the robustness of my results when the cutoff is

3
   The PSID surveys its respondents in the spring of the year. During the 1989 survey year, households are asked about their
wealth (spring 1989) and about the previous year of income (1988 income). As a result, when predicting 1989 wealth, 1988
income is the appropriate income measure.


                                                                                                                          8
redefined as the 10th, 30th, 40th or 50th percentile of the residual distribution.   For my sample,

based on the first stage regression, the corresponding cutoffs of the log pre-retirement wealth

residuals for the 10th, 20th, 30th, 40th and the 50th percentiles of the wealth residual distributions

are, respectively, -1.32, -0.73, -0.36, -0.12, and 0.12. As we will see in the following sections,

the twenty percent cutoff is well justified.

    These residuals, however, should not be strictly interpreted as a measure of a household’s

planning propensity because many of the controls in equation (1) are a function of the extent to

which individuals are forward looking. For example, education affects income (the opportunity

to save). However, education is also the result of household forward looking behavior. The fact

that wealth differs across households despite the inclusion of these controls suggests that I have

isolated groups of households who have different saving propensities above and beyond the

extent that these saving propensities are correlated with the controls included in X and Z. The

alternative would be to include only controls which are totally exogenous to the propensity to

plan.   However, there are very few controls that are truly exogenous. Even age, given its

relationship to health, is potentially a proxy for household planning behavior. Using very few

controls in equation (1) would leave the results discussed below open to the criticism that the

sample selection procedure isolated households who had different opportunities to save. By

including controls that may also proxy for household planning propensity into equation (1),

however, my estimates below may underestimate the amount of ‘grasshopper’ behavior in the

sample. Given this, the estimates below should be treated as lower bounds. In Section IV, the

same analysis is performed on samples split using actual wealth levels as opposed to the wealth

residuals. In that section, the results of the two approaches are compared. Foreshadowing the




                                                                                                    9
results, the qualitative conclusions of the paper are not sensitive to the control variables included

in equation (1). The reason for the similarity in results is discussed in Section IV.

        Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the two samples of pre-retired households where

the sample is split based on the first stage wealth residuals estimated from (1).              Aside from

wealth, the two samples look identical along income, demographic and health histories. Given

the sample selection procedure, this result should not be surprising.4

B.      Differences in Subsequent Retirement Behavior By Wealth Residual Groups

        If differences in planning ability across households were driving the difference in

normalized pre-retirement wealth across households, we would expect to see subsequent

differences in retirement behavior. Households who accumulated too little wealth for retirement

should react to the realization that they were ill prepared by: 1) reducing their consumption in

retirement and/or 2) delaying the time of their retirement (or working a part time job after

retiring).

        There are potentially two interrelated drawbacks to comparing the subsequent retirement

behavior of the households with low wealth residuals and all other pre-retired households. First,

given that the 1999 PSID is the most recent data available for public use, it is not possible to

observe all households actually retiring. A household who was 50 in 1989 will likely not retire

until the mid 2000s. Second, and potentially more important, those who retire early may be a

selected sample.             One may imagine that those households with very low wealth would delay

their retirement relative to other households. There is no information, however, to suggest that

the households in the two pre-retirement wealth residual groups retire at different ages. Panel A

of Table 2 shows that the average age of retirement, conditional on retiring, is between 62 and 63


4
    Unless otherwise specified, all dollar values reported in the paper are in 1989 dollars.


                                                                                                       10
years old for both those with low and high first stage 1989 pre-retirement wealth residuals. Self-

reported retirement status is used to define household retirement behavior. Furthermore, similar

percentages of both groups were observed actually retiring before 1999 (43% of ants and 38% of

grasshoppers). Given the incentives in public and private pension systems and the fact that the

average household in each group is similar along occupation, education and income dimensions,

it is not surprising that the retirement age is similar between the two groups. However, as we

show below, the propensity to take a part-time job in retirement does differ between the two

groups.

      The only measure of consumption, aside from housing expenditures, that the PSID directly

asks its respondents about is their food consumption.5 Specifically, in all years between 1970

and 1987 and all survey years between 1990 and 1999, households were asked to report the

amount that that they spent on food at home and food away from home during the previous

month. Consistent with the hypothesis that our group of low residual households are ill prepared

for retirement, it is found that such households have much larger declines in consumption upon

retirement. Table 2 shows the level of food consumption averaged over the three years preceding

retirement, the level of food consumption averaged over the three years after retiring, and the

mean and median percentage decline in consumption associated with retirement for those

households that retired. The percentage decline compares the three year average consumption

prior to retirement to the three year average after retirement for each household who retired and

then averaged the percentage declines over all households.

5
  Many authors examining consumption in the PSID use the ‘Skinner’ measure of consumption (Skinner, 1987). The Skinner
consumption measure optimally weights food consumption with measures of housing expenditures to come up with a total
measure of consumption. However, when examining changes in consumption, all the time series variation in the Skinner
consumption measure comes from either the variation in food consumption or the variation in housing expenditures. Given that
housing expenditures may be directly related to a household’s level of wealth (because of liquidity constraints in the housing
market), it is inappropriate to use the Skinner consumption measure when estimating consumption Euler equations when the
samples are split based on wealth. For this reason, in this paper, I only focus on food consumption and do not include housing
expenditures in my PSID consumption measure.


                                                                                                                           11
      The mean consumption levels prior to retirement for both groups of households were quite

similar (second row of Table 2). However, after retirement, those with low pre-retired wealth

residuals consumed $2,900 of food per year while those with the higher wealth residuals

consumed over $3,700 of food per year. The average decline in consumption for the low wealth

residuals households was 11%, while the other group, on average, only decreased their

consumption during retirement by 3%. The median decline in consumption at retirement showed

a similar pattern: low wealth pre-retired households experienced nearly a 20% consumption

decline compared to a 11% decline for the other households. The fact that the average household

experiences a consumption decline during retirement is consistent with almost all existing

empirical work (see, Banks, Blundell and Tanner, 2000; Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg, 2001,

Aguiar and Hurst, 2003; Hurd and Rohwedder, 2003).6 Furthermore, Bernheim et al. (2002) also

finds that low wealth households experience much larger consumption expenditure declines at

the onset of retirement.

      The results in Table 2 are based on very few low wealth residual households who were

observed to subsequently retire. As seen in Table 2, the average decline in consumption between

the two samples is not statistically different from each other at standard levels. The question is

whether the lack of significance is due to low power or is it because there is no actual difference

in behavior between the two groups. To explore the robustness of these results, the exact same

analysis was performed using 1984 wealth to split the sample.7 Doing so allowed many more

households who actually retired between 1984 and 1999 to be observed. The results are shown

in Appendix Table A1 and are nearly identical to the results shown in Table 2. Low residual

6
  Both Hurd and Rohwedder (2003) and Aguiar and Hurst (2003) provide evidence that a large portion of the decline in
expenditure – particularly food expenditure - associated with retirement for the median household is the result of a switch
towards home production. Aguiar and Hurst show that while food expenditure falls for the average households by 10-20%, food
consumption, measured via food diaries, does not change at the onset of retirement.
7
  For a sample of non-retired, 50-65 year olds in 1984, 1984 log wealth was regressed on the full set of variables used to segment
the 1989 pre-retired households, except all control variables were lagged 5 years.


                                                                                                                              12
households experienced a consumption decline that was nearly twice as large as the other pre-

retired households. However, these average and median declines are statistically different from

each other at standard levels of significance. The results from Table 2 and Appendix Table A1

document large differences in consumption declines between the two groups at the time of

retirement.

    While the average household in each group retire at similar ages, there is evidence that the

low wealth residual households take less leisure in retirement. Households in the bottom 20% of

residuals and the remaining 80% of residuals both work similar average annual hours during the

three years prior to retirement (1,631 hours vs 1,806 hours, p-value of difference = 0.11).

However, during the three years after retirement, low wealth households work 413 hours

annually (on average) compared to 240 annually for high wealth households (p-value of

difference = 0.05).   The average decline in work hours is 11 percentage points less for low

wealth residual households (75% decline vs. 86% decline, p-value of difference = 0.03). These

work hours result from the retired household working a part-time job. So, even though the low

wealth residual and high wealth residual households retire at a similar age, the low wealth

residual households are much more likely to work after their self reported age of retirement.

These results can be reconciled given institutional incentives for households to retire between the

ages of 63 and 65.


III. Testing For Differences in PIH Behavior Across Wealth Residual Groups

    The large decline in consumption at retirement for low wealth households seems at odds

with the standard permanent income hypothesis (PIH) model (Modigliani and Brumberg, 1954;




                                                                                                13
Friedman, 1957).8 Given that the date of retirement is largely forecastable, forward looking

households should accumulate enough wealth so as to sustain consumption during retirement. In

this section, I explicitly test whether the low wealth residual households behaved as permanent

income consumers in the decades prior to retirement. In other words, do low wealth pre-retired

households seem to violate the PIH throughout their lives or only at the time of retirement?

     According to the PIH with perfect capital markets and patient consumers, expected income

growth between period t and t+1 should not have statistical power in predicting consumption

growth between period t and t+1 (Hall 1978).                                           Any predictable future changes in the

household’s income stream should already be incorporated into the household’s current

consumption plan. Linking household retirement wealth with their consumption behavior while

young is the innovation of this paper.

A.       Empirically Testing for Permanent Income Consumption Behavior

     In this sub-section, I outline the standard PIH model as presented in (1989). I then use this

model to test for differing consumption behavior between groups of households defined by their

pre-retirement wealth residuals.

     Assume that households solve the following maximization problem:
                                                              ( s −t )
                                         T
                                                  ⎛ 1 ⎞
      max      u (Cikt , Θikt ) + Et   ∑          ⎜       ⎟              u (Ciks , Θiks )                     (2)
       Cikt
                                       s = t +1   ⎝ 1+ δk ⎠

      s.t.         X ik ,t +1 = (1 + rik ,t +1 )( X ikt − Cikt ) + Yik ,t +1

                   Yikt = PiktVikt

                   Pikt = gik Pik ,t −1 N ikt




8
  If consumption and leisure are substitutes, the PIH model could predict a large consumption decline at retirement. This
proposition is tested in Section V.


                                                                                                                         14
                                           Cikt1− ρk
                        u (Cikt , Θikt ) =           exp(Θikt ), ρ k > 1 ;
                                           1 − ρk

where i indexes households, k indexes household type (i.e., whether or not the household belongs

to the low pre-retirement wealth residual group) and t indexes time; Cikt, Xikt, and Yikt are,

respectively, household i’s consumption, cash on hand for consumption, and household income

in period t; rik,t+1 is the household specific after tax interest rate between years t and t+1 and δk is

the discount rate that pertains to a household of type k. The household’s utility function is of the

Constant Relative Risk Aversion form with a time invariant coefficient of relative risk aversion,

ρk,, and a time invariant time discount rate, δk. Both ρ and δ are allowed to differ by household

type but are assumed constant within each type. Utility of the household is also dependent upon

the household’s tastes in period t, Θikt. Household income can be decomposed into two parts; a

permanent component (Pikt) and a transitory component (Vikt). Permanent income in the current

period is equal to permanent income in the previous period multiplied by a nonstochastic growth

factor (gik), specific to the household, and a stochastic shock (Nikt). The stochastic components

to income {Nikt,Vikt} are assumed to be independently and identically distributed jointly

lognormally with zero means and variances of the underlying distributions equal to zero and

{σik,N2,σik,V2}, respectively.

     The Euler Equation to the above optimization problem can be estimated with the familiar

specification (see, among others, Shapiro (1984), Zeldes (1989) and Lawrance (1991)):9

          •             − ln(1 + δ k )       ωik2 ln(1 + rik ,t +1 ) (Θik ,t +1 − Θikt )
         C ik ,t +1 =                    +       +                  +                    + ε ik ,t +1 ,   (3)
                             ρk              2ρk       ρk                     ρk




9
  The solution to this model is discussed in Zeldes (1989). Also, see Lawrance (1991) for a discussion of estimating this
consumption Euler equation when consumption is measured with error.


                                                                                                                      15
           •
where q ik ,t +1 = ∆ ln qik ,t +1 , for any variable q, εik,t+1 is the mean zero expectations forecast error,

and ωik2 is the variance of the forecast error. The law of iterated expectations implies that εik,t+1

is uncorrelated with any variable known at time t (Hall, 1978).

      Similar to Zeldes (1989), household tastes are defined according to the following:

               Θikt = b0 k ageikt + b1k ageikt
                                           2
                                               + b2 k ln( famsizeikt ) + τ ik + µt + ξik ,t +1                     (4)


where ageikt is the age of the household head in year t and famsizeit represents the number of

members in the household in year t. The effects of age and family size on the taste shifter are

allowed to differ by household type, k. The unobservable (to the econometrician) component of

the taste shifter includes a family fixed component which is constant over time for any family

within a type (τi), an aggregate component that is constant across types and families but varies

across time (µt), and a remaining component that is orthogonal to the other two (ξikt).10,                                    11



Substituting (4) into (3), one gets:

       •                                                    •
      C ik ,t +1 = λ0 k + λ1k ln( 1 + rik ,t +1 ) + λ2 k famsizeik ,t +1 + λ3k ageikt + µt +1 − µt + ε ik* ,t +1   (5)

where ε*ik,t+1 = εik,t+1 + (ξik,t+1 - ξikt)/ρk and has mean zero. The constant, λ0k, can be expressed as

(δk - ωik2/2 + b0k + b1k)/ρk. The coefficient λ1k in (5) is equal to (1/ρk).12

      As outlined in the previous section, (5) will be jointly estimated for the two different sub-

populations of households - those with low first stage pre-retired wealth residuals and all other

households.            Formally, the following equation allows for the parameters of (5) to differ

accordingly between the two groups of households:

10
    Innovations to ξikt are assumed to be persistent such that Et[ξik,t+1 - ξikt] equals zero.
11
   Allowing a component which varies by type over time (ψkt) did not alter the results presented below in any way.
12
    Given that changes in family size are planned in advance, ∆ln famsizeit is assumed to be uncorrelated with ε*i,t+1. The
following results were also run omitting changes in family size as a control but with the growth in per capita consumption as the
dependent variable. The results were unchanged.


                                                                                                                             16
          •                                                                                             •
         C ik ,t +1 = α 0 + α1 D< 20 + α 2 ln( 1 + rik ,t +1 ) + α 3 D< 20 ln( 1 + rik ,t +1 ) + α 4 famsizeik ,t +1
                                                  •
                                                                                                                                (6)
                                  + α 5 D< 20 famsizeik ,t +1 + α 6 ageikt + α 7 D< 20 ageikt + ϕ DYear + ε     *
                                                                                                                ik ,t +1



where D<20 is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the household has a first stage wealth residual

(defined in the previous section) in the lowest twenty percent of the wealth residual distribution.

Including the low residual dummies and these dummies interacted with the interest rate, age and

family size allows for preference parameters (δ and ρ), as well as the impact of taste shifters (b1

and b2), to differ across the two groups. DYear is a vector of year dummies which are included to

account for aggregate shocks which affect both types of households.

         To test whether household consumption responds to predictable changes in income, the

following regression can be estimated:

              •                                                                                             •
          C ik ,t +1 = α 0 + α1 D< 20 + α 2 ln( 1 + rik ,t +1 ) + α 3 D< 20 ln( 1 + rik ,t +1 ) + α 4 famsizeik ,t +1
                                                                                                                                           (7)
                              •                                                           • Predict                 • Predict
     +α 5 D< 20 famsizeik ,t +1 + α 6 ageikt + α 7 D< 20 ageikt + ϕ DYear + β1 Y ik ,t +1 + β 2 D< 20 Y ik ,t +1 + ε            *
                                                                                                                                ik ,t +1



                  • Predict
where Y ik ,t +1 is the predictable component of income growth rate between t and t+1 estimated

simultaneously with (7).13,14                         If households are not sufficiently ‘impatient’, the Permanent

Income Hypothesis predicts that consumption growth between periods t and t+1 should be

unaffected by forecastable changes in income between periods t and t+1.15 Any predictable


13
    This procedure to test for the excess sensitivity of consumption is standard in the literature. See Browning and Lusardi (1996)
and the cites within.
14
     It has been suggested that the wealth residual itself, as opposed to the wealth dummy, D<20, should be interacted with the
predictable component of income in (7). Given the theory, this would be inappropriate. The relationship between the wealth
residual and the response of consumption to predictable income changes is non-linear. If the permanent income hypothesis is
correct, the coefficient on the predictable income change should be zero for most households and positive for others. One could,
in principle, include higher powers of the residual interacted with the predictable component of income growth to capture the
non-linear relationship. For simplicity, and ease of exposition, the wealth dummy approach is used in this paper. In Section IV
and in Table 5, the non-linear relationship between the wealth residuals and the violation of the PIH is explored more fully.
15
   ‘Impatient’ households are classified as households who wish to borrow, all else equal, in the current period. Formally,
households are deemed ‘impatient’ if the following condition is satisfied: γk (ri,t+1-δk) + (ρk/2) σi,N2 < gi - σi,N2/2. This impatience
condition is necessary to generate buffer stock saving behavior (Carroll, 1997). Below, I rule out buffer stock saving behavior as
an explanation for the results presented in this and previous sections.


                                                                                                                                                 17
change in income should already be included in the household’s consumption plan. If either β1

or β2 is positive and significant, predictable income growth has statistical power in predicting

consumption growth and the standard Permanent Income Hypothesis with no liquidity

constraints and patient consumers can be rejected.16

         In order for the two stage least squares estimation of (7) to yield unbiased estimates of β1

and β2, both the predictable income growth components and the dummy indicating the bottom

20% of the pre-retirement wealth distribution have to be independent of the regression error

term.        In the following empirical work, I will instrument for a household’s predictable

component of income growth using four lags of income growth, excluding the first lag.17                          By

definition, these lagged variables are orthogonal to the error term, ε*i,t+1.

         The standard assumption made about the error structure when estimating consumption Euler

equations is that Et [ε ik* ,t +1 Ωt ] = 0 ∀ k and ∀ t, where Ωt is all information known at time t.

However, given the above sample selection procedure, Et [ε ik* ,t +1 D< 20 ] need not equal zero within

each wealth residual group.                   For example, it is possible that households with low wealth

residuals repeatedly received poor income draws throughout their lifetime. In other words, these

households may have been perpetually unlucky. Once the subsequent period came, they realized

bad income growth, adjusted their consumption downward, and continued to expect high income

growth in the following period. Such households who were persistently unlucky (or persistently

over optimistic) could end up in retirement with little wealth. Furthermore, their expectations

about future income growth would not be ascertained from lagged income growth. In each

period, they expected higher future income growth and realized lower income growth. Their

expectations, on average, and their realizations, on average, would not be equal for perpetually
16
     We will specifically test for the existence of liquidity constraints in the following section.
17
     The first stage regression showing the validity of the instruments is discussed in the following section.


                                                                                                                 18
unlucky households. Such a situation could cause households with negative realizations of ε* in

years prior to 1989 to have low wealth in 1989.

    However, under rather general assumptions, estimating (7) will still yield unbiased estimates

of β1 and β2. The reason for this is that (7) includes a dummy variable indicating differences in

type across households, D<20. If the low residual group had persistently low-income realizations

(relative to their expectations), the lagged income growth controls will persistently under-predict

their expected income growth. These households will be consistently revising their consumption

downward with each ‘unlucky’ income draw.          As a result, their consumption growth will be

lower, on average, than the other group of pre-retired households.                If this underestimate is

constant over time within the low wealth residual grouping, the differences in expectations will

be captured by the inclusion of D<20 into the estimating equation. In other words, the estimation

                                                                     • Pr edict
of (7) will yield valid estimates of β1 and β2 if Cov[ε*i,t+1, D<20 Y i ,t +1 | D<20) = 0. The two

groups could have different, non-zero ex-post mean realized shocks. However, in order for (7)

to be valid, the shocks must be i.i.d within each group. This assumption is not much different

than the standard assumption that ε*i,t+k is i.i.d. for the full sample. Therefore, the inclusion of

D<20 allows the two groups to have different mean expected shocks, on average. As long as the

shocks are i.i.d. within each group, the instruments for the predictable component of income

growth will be orthogonal to the error term within each group.

    Two further comments can be made about the identification assumptions.                  First, we can

directly test to see if the income processes differ between the two groups by regressing current

income growth on lags of income growth and those lags interacted with D<20. If the two groups

have different income processes, the interaction terms would enter significantly. There is no

evidence that the two groups have different income processes.               The coefficients on the



                                                                                                       19
interaction terms in such a regression were essentially zero and no interacted term was

statistically different from zero. Furthermore, the joint test of significance on the interacted

terms could not reject that the two income processes were similar. Second, this result should not

be surprising. By definition, the low wealth residual households and the high wealth residual

households are identical along all observables including actual income shocks (unemployment

spells) and expected income shocks (education/occupation/industry interactions) (see Table 1).

Given the way the sample was split in regression (1), there should be no reason to believe that

the expected income processes differ between the two groups of pre-retired households.18

B.    Estimation Results

      Equation (7) is estimated on data from 1975–1987 for the sample of PSID households who

were ‘pre-retired’ in 1989. Formally, consumption growth is defined as the change in log annual

food expenditures between year t and year t+1.19 See the Data Appendix for a full discussion of

the creation of household real consumption growth and household real after-tax interest rates.

      When estimating (7), I instrument for the predictable component of household labor income

growth using 4 lags of household labor income growth, excluding the first lag. If household

labor income growth follows an autoregressive or moving average process, past labor income

growth will have predictive power in determining expected future labor income growth. As

noted above, I allow the income processes to differ accordingly between the two different groups

of pre-retired households. A first stage regression of current household labor income growth on

18
   For all estimations reported in Tables 3-5, the income processes were estimated separately for each group. All the regressions
were re-estimated forcing both groups to have the same income process. As expected, given the above discussion, there was no
difference in results between the two procedures.
19
    Food consumption in the PSID, used by many authors to estimate consumption Euler equations, is a good measure to test
household consumption behavior. First, food consumption has little aspects of durability. Second, because households can
substitute away from eating in restaurants or from buying more expensive brands, food consumption will be sensitive to changes
in income. To the extent there is habit formation in food consumption or if food consumption responds little to income changes,
the estimation of (7) will be biased against finding significant coefficients on β1 and β2.




                                                                                                                             20
four lags of household labor income growth shows that the lags have strong predictive power

both for households who have wealth residuals in the top 80% (F-statistic = 10.7, p-value <

0.01) and for households who have 1989 wealth residuals in the bottom 20% (F-statistic = 4.2, p-

value < 0.01).

    Table 3 shows the results from estimating equation (7). If both the low residual and high

residual groups followed standard PIH consumption rules, then both β1 and β2 would equal zero.

If the low residual wealth groups followed a similar consumption plan as the high wealth

residual group, β2 would equal zero, regardless of the value of β1. Table 3 reports that β1, the

coefficient on the predictable change in income for the whole sample, is negative and not

statistically different from zero. β2, however, is large, positive, and statistically different from

zero. Households who had little pre-retirement wealth relative to their lifecycle characteristics

responded positively to predictable income changes. The model predicts that the marginal

propensity to consume out of predictable income changes is 56 percentage points higher for

households with lower than normal pre-retirement wealth (t-statistic = 2.0).   The net response to

predictable income changes for the low residual group (β1 + β2) is positive (an estimated

marginal propensity to consume of 0.40) and statistically different from zero (p-value 0.06).

    In summary, the results of this section show that households who display behavior that is

inconsistent with the permanent income hypothesis as they transition into retirement also display

behavior that is inconsistent with the permanent income hypothesis during their working lives.

IV. Robustness Specifications

    The results in section III suggest that pre-retired households residing in the lowest twenty

percent of the normalized wealth distribution have different consumption behavior during their

working years than other households with similar economic histories. Is the difference in



                                                                                                 21
consumption behavior due to liquidity constraints? How sensitive are the results to the choice of

a 20% wealth residual cutoff? Are the findings in section III robust to changes in the sample

selection criteria? In this section, all of these questions are explored.


A.   Empirically Testing for the Existence of Binding Liquidity Constraints

     If market imperfections prevent households from borrowing when expected income growth

is positive, predictable income growth will have statistical power in predicting consumption

growth.      The lower the household wealth, the more likely the household will be liquidity

constrained. However, as noted by Altonji and Siow (1987), Zeldes (1989) and Shea (1995), it is

possible to empirically test whether the existence of liquidity constraints is driving the rejection

of the Permanent Income Hypothesis in micro data. Liquidity constraints prevent a household

from borrowing but do not place any restrictions on a household’s ability to save. As a result,

the consumption growth of liquidity constrained households should only respond to predictable

increases in income, but not predictable income declines.                                   If households truly expect their

income to decline, they could save a percentage of their income today so as to fund consumption

in the future, leaving their discounted marginal utility of consumption unchanged.

     To test whether liquidity constraints are causing the rejection of the Permanent Income

Hypothesis, the following equation can be estimated:

      •                                                                                               •
     C ik ,t +1 = α 0 + α1 D< 20 + α 2 ln( 1 + rik ,t +1 ) + α 3 D< 20 ln( 1 + rik ,t +1 ) + α 4 famsizeik ,t +1
                           •                                                                        • Predict
          + α 5 D< 20 famsizeik ,t +1 + α 6 ageikt + α 7 D< 20 ageikt + ϕ DYear + β 3 DUp Y ik ,t +1               (8)
                            • Predict                  • Predict                     • Predict
             + β 4 DDown Y ik ,t +1 + β5 D< 20 DUp Y ik ,t +1 + β 6 D< 20 DDown Y ik ,t +1 + ε ik* ,t +1


where DUp and DDown are dummy variables indicating whether the household’s predicted income

growth between t and t+1 was positive or negative, respectively. Table 4 reports the results of



                                                                                                                         22
estimating equation (8). If liquidity constraints were driving the failure of the permanent income

hypothesis for the low wealth residual households, the consumption of the household would

respond to predictable income increases but not predictable income declines. In other words, β5

would be positive and β6 would be equal to zero. Table 4 shows that the low residual households

respond equally to predictable income increases and to predictable income declines.        Such a

result suggests that liquidity constraints are not driving the rejection of the permanent income

hypothesis.

     This should not be surprising. By definition, the two groups of households had earned

similar levels of labor income over their lives. If one group was liquidity constrained while

young, their consumption over that time period should have been lower, all else equal. This

implies that liquidity constrained households will show up in retirement with higher wealth, not

lower wealth. The fact that a household has low normalized wealth at retirement suggests

against liquidity constraints while young.


B.   Alternate Specifications of Low Wealth Residual Households

     The results in Tables 3 and 4 compare the consumption behavior of those households with

the lowest twenty percent of 1989 pre-retirement wealth residuals to the consumption behavior

of all other pre-retired households. There is nothing magical about the twenty percent cutoff.

One question of interest is how robust are the findings in Tables 3 and 4 to alternate definitions

of ‘lower than normal’ pre-retirement wealth. Table 5 explores this question.

     Instead of defining the low pre-retirement wealth residual cutoff as an absolute cutoff, the

responsiveness to predictable income changes are allowed to differ by residual deciles.

Specifically, households are grouped together based upon having pre-retirement residuals

(estimated from the first stage regression discussed in section II) in the following ranges: 0-10%,



                                                                                                23
10%-20%, 20%-30%, 30%-40%, 40%-50%, and greater than 50%. Such a specification allows

for a non-linear consumption response to predictable income changes depending on the wealth

residuals.   Additionally, with such a specification one can see whether the responsiveness of

consumption growth to predictable income shocks increases as the wealth residuals become more

negative.

    Table 5 reports the results of this specification.   Households with wealth residuals in the

bottom 10% of the distribution respond the strongest to predictable income changes; the

marginal propensity to consume out of predictable income shocks is 0.67 (0.93-0.26) with a p-

value = 0.07.   Households with residuals in the 10th-20th percentile also respond positively to

predictable income changes, although the responsiveness was much smaller and not statistically

different from zero; 0.08 (0.34 – 0.26), p-value = 0.34. It is worth noting that those in the 10th-

20th percentile of the wealth residual distribution did respond differently than those in the top ½

of the wealth residual distribution (coefficient = 0.34, p-value = 0.05). Households in the other

wealth residual deciles (20th-30th, 30th-40th, or 40th-50th) did not respond in any way that was

economically or statistically different than households with higher wealth residuals.         It is

concluded that somewhere between 10-20% of the pre-retired wealth distribution have lower

than normal pre-retirement wealth and have consumption profiles that respond to predictable

changes in income. In other words, the twenty percent cutoff used in the early parts of the paper

was well-justified.


C. Redefining the Sample Splitting Equation

    As discussed in Section II, given the sample selection procedure, the results may be biased

against finding grasshopper behavior. For example, the X and Z controls in regression (1) are

likely correlated with poor planning on the part of the household. Households who do not go to



                                                                                                24
college may plan less for the future than households who go to graduate school. By including

education dummies as controls when estimating (1), some differences in planning propensities

across households will be purged from the residuals. To examine the impact of including such

controls in the sample selection equation, two samples are isolated using the actual wealth

distribution as opposed to the residual wealth distribution. This procedure is the same as

including no X or Z controls when estimating (1). As noted in section II, including many

controls has a distinct advantage. The PIH theory says that households who experience different

economic, demographic and health trajectories should have different consumption and saving

patterns entering retirement. Using the X and Z controls creates households who are similar

along all the X and Z dimensions but differ in wealth. However, it can still be illustrative to

examine the results when no controls are used when splitting the sample.

    To start, equation (7) is re-estimated with D*<20 is replaced by D<20, where D*<20 is defined

to include all pre-retired households in the bottom 20% of the actual 1989 log wealth distribution

(as opposed to the normalized log wealth residual distribution). The overlap of households in

both D*<20 and D<20 is 76%. This implies that the actual wealth levels of most households in

the left tail of the wealth distribution cannot be explained by the X and Z controls. Given the

high overlap of households in the normalized and actual wealth groupings, it is not surprising

that the results do not change when (7) is re-estimated using D*<20 instead of D<20.          The

estimate of β1 was -0.22 (standard error = 0.16) and the estimate of β2 was 0.85 (p-value = 0.09).

Using the same procedure to get the results presented in Table 5, it is found that between 20 and

30% of households with the lowest wealth residual respond to predictable income changes. In

other words, slightly more households behave as the proverbial grasshopper using the method

with no first stage controls.




                                                                                               25
V. Interpretation

    The results in sections II – IV show that there is a link between household retirement wealth

and their consumption while young. Specifically, a set of facts are presented which describe two

different types of households. First, there is a segment of households who enter retirement with

very low wealth even after controlling for differences in income, demographic, employment and

health histories. Second, these same households experience a large consumption decline at the

onset of retirement, relative to other pre-retired households. Third, these households have

consumption profiles that respond to predictable income shocks throughout their working years.

Differences in observables do not explain differences between these groups. These households,

by construction, are identical along income, employment, demographic, and health dimensions.

While it is found that a majority of households behave as predicted by the standard permanent

income hypothesis, a subset of households (roughly 10-20% of the population) have

consumption and saving behavior that is inconsistent with such a theory. The goal, then, is to

explain the behavior of this latter group of households.

    Many alternative theories can explain a subset of the above facts, but very few theories can

jointly explain them all. For example, the results described above for low wealth residual

households are inconsistent with models of consumption habits or precautionary savings. While

both of those theories could predict excess sensitivity in consumption to predictable income

changes during a households working years, neither would predict such a sharp decline in

consumption upon retirement. To the contrary, standard models of consumption habits (Deaton,

1992) predict that consumption will decline less slowly during retirement for those households

with habit preferences, compared to PIH households, all else equal. Furthermore, there is

nothing to suggest that models of habit persistence in consumption would lead households to




                                                                                              26
have extremely low levels of wealth upon retirement.        Precautionary models of saving may

predict low pre-retirement savings along with the excess sensitivity of consumption, but such

households would still smooth their consumption across the period of retirement (Gourichas and

Parker, 2000). Also, differences in time preferences across households cannot alone generate the

above findings. It is true that households with a high, constant time discount rate will enter

retirement with little wealth, relative to households with similar income profiles and a lower time

discount rate. However, such household will still smooth the marginal utility of consumption

over time.          These households will have consumption profiles that would not respond to

predictable income changes, including retirement.

        A strong substitutability between leisure and consumption could reconcile the main results

outlined above. Leisure is high in both retirement and periods of job loss. Households who treat

consumption and leisure as substitutes would optimally plan for lower consumption in retirement

and, as a result, would save less during their working years. Furthermore, as the household

became retired, and leisure increased, we would expect a sharp decline in consumption if the

household was smoothing total utility and not just consumption. Lastly, these households would

optimally choose to have a positive correlation between predictable income movements and

consumption while young, if the predictable income changes were associated with a change in

leisure (such as job loss). When leisure is low, consumption would be high and when leisure is

high, consumption would be low.20 To explore whether the substitutability between leisure and

consumption is causing the failure of the permanent income tests, changes in total hours worked

by both the household head and wife (if present) were included directly into the estimation of

regressions (7) and (8). This procedure is similar to that used by Attanasio and Browning (1995)

to test for the substitutability of consumption and leisure.   The results reported in Tables 3-5
20
     See Attanasio and Browning (1995) for a discussion.


                                                                                                27
were essentially unchanged with the inclusion of work hours into the estimation equation. Such

a finding suggests that the substitutability between consumption and leisure is not causing the

failure of the permanent income hypothesis documented above.

    There are two possible types of behavior that are consistent with all of the results above.

First, households who follow myopic (rule-of-thumb) consumption rules would have

consumption that closely tracks income (Campbell and Mankiw, 1987). If households do not

plan for the future they will end up in retirement with little wealth, be forced to take a

consumption decline upon retirement, and will have consumption profiles that respond to

predictable income changes during their working years. Second, a theory of time inconsistent

preferences can match the above facts. Such households may want to plan for the future, but are

incapable of doing so; these households have relatively high discount rates over short horizons

and relatively low discount rates over longer horizons. This discount structure sets up a conflict

between today’s preferences (which prefer current consumption), and the preferences that will be

held in the future (which prefer that they had deferred consumption in the past). A household

may realize that retirement is coming, yet in each period the household would choose to

postpone saving for retirement until the next period. Eventually, the household could enter

retirement with little accumulated wealth, and as a result, consumption would eventually have to

decline. Furthermore, consumers with time inconsistent preferences could have consumption

growth that responds to both predictable income increases and predictable income declines

(Laibson, 1997) and could have consumption that falls sharply at the time of retirement

(Angeletos et al., 2000).

    While both the rule of thumb and the time inconsistent preference theories can reconcile the

behavior of households with low wealth residuals, it is not possible to disentangle the two




                                                                                               28
theories. Specifically, it is not possible to distinguish whether these identified household are

completely myopic with respect to their consumption decisions or whether they would like to

plan for the future, but are incapable of doing so. However, certain types of consumers with time

inconsistent preferences can be ruled out. Laibson (1997) and Angelitos et. al. (2000) draw

distinctions between ‘sophisticated hyperbolic consumers’ and ‘naïve hyperbolic consumers’.

The former group is aware of their time inconsistent preferences while the latter is not.

Sophisticated hyperbolic consumers will take steps to commit themselves to saving. Such

households, knowing their desire to reduce saving and increase consumption, will shift their

savings toward illiquid assets (i.e., real estate, business or pension).

    There is no evidence among the low pre-retirement wealth residual households to suggest

that they are trying to commit themselves to save. Actually, the results suggest the opposite.

Only 56% of the pre-retired, low wealth residual households (those in the bottom 20% of the

wealth residual distribution) own any ‘illiquid’ assets, where liquid assets are defined as the sum

of housing, other real estate and business equity. The comparable number for the other pre-

retired households was over 90%.        Furthermore, the median fraction of household wealth in

these illiquid assets is much smaller for those households with low pre-retirement wealth

residuals (0.23 vs. 0.66). If the households with low pre-retirement wealth residuals have time

inconsistent preferences, they are not taking actions to commit themselves to save for the future.

    In conclusion, there exists at least two different types of consumers in the population; those

that plan for the future and those that do not plan for the future. In future work, it would be

useful to understand whether such households simply do not plan for the future (are myopic) or

do plan for the future, but are unable to commit themselves to save (have time inconsistent

preferences).




                                                                                                29
VI. The Self-Awareness of Economic Grasshoppers

    There is one final piece of evidence that suggests pre-retired households in 1989 who had

lower than normal wealth did so because of poor planning. In 1972 and 1975, the PSID asked its

respondents to self assess many of their socio-economic characteristics. Some of the questions

asked of PSID respondents included: whether they get angry easily, whether they are concerned

about failure, whether they feel life will work out, whether they have control over life, and

whether they are satisfied with themselves. There were three questions asked as part of these

supplements that directly pertained to a household’s consumption-savings tradeoff and the

household’s willingness to plan for the future. Specifically, the questions were:

    1. Are you the kind of person that plans his life ahead all the time or do you live more from
        day-to-day?
    2. When you make plans ahead, do you usually carry out things the way you expected?
    3. Would you rather spend your money and enjoy life today or save more for the future?


The first question was asked in both 1972 and 1975, while the second and third questions were

only asked in 1972. The questions above are inherently vague about what they were intended to

measure. I do not want to claim that the answers to such questions are in any way indicative of

the household’s actual behavior. I do, however, believe that the answers to such questions may

provide some suggestive evidence about how the two groups of pre-retired households studied

above assess their own behavior.

    As noted earlier, most of the pre-retired PSID households in 1989 were in the PSID since its

inception in 1968 and, as a result, provided answers to the self-assessment questions in both

1972 and 1975. The results are reported in Table 6. Responses were compared between

households with low normalized pre-retirement wealth residuals (bottom 20%) and all other

households. The sample split is identical to the one described in Table 1.          As expected,


                                                                                              30
households with lower than normal pre-retirement wealth were much less likely to classify

themselves as planners in 1972 (46% for the low wealth residual households vs. 59% for the

higher wealth residuals, p-value of difference = 0.06). The results are even more striking in

1975.   Households with lower than normal pre-retirement wealth in 1989 only reported

themselves to be a planner 38% of the time (compared to 56% of the time for the other 1989 pre-

retired households).   In 1972, only 54% of the low wealth residual households said that they

were likely to carry out plans as expected. The other pre-retired households in 1989 said that

they carried out their plans 67% of the time. All these differences were significant at the ninety-

four percent level of confidence.

    Perhaps the most interesting question is the one that most directly assesses the household’s

consumptions decisions.     Of the households with the lowest 1989 pre-retirement wealth

residuals, 60% of them reported in 1972 preferring spending money today (as opposed to saving

it for the future). The comparable number for the other 1989 pre-retired households was only

40%.    While only suggestive, it appears that those households who behave most like the

proverbial ‘economic grasshopper’ are aware of their grasshopper tendencies. Such households

report being less likely to plan for their future, less likely to carry out plans conditional on

making them, and more likely to spend their money today rather than save it for the future. One

should not forget that these self-assessments were made almost two decades prior to when their

pre-retirement wealth was measured.

    There are two other questions in the early PSID surveys that are worth reporting. The first

question asked households whether or not they had any positive savings. The second asked if the

household had accumulated savings greater than two months of income. These questions were

asked both in 1972 and 1975.        The responses to these questions for our 1989 pre-retired




                                                                                                31
households are also reported in Table 6. Not surprisingly, households who under-saved entering

retirement were low savers throughout their early working years. For example, in 1972, only

30% of those pre-retired households with wealth residuals in the bottom twenty percent of the

wealth distribution had two months worth of accumulated savings. Over ½ of the other pre-

retired households had at least two months of accumulated savings.         Households who have

lower than normal wealth entering retirement were much less likely to have had any significant

amount of saving early in their lifecycle.

VI. Conclusion

    In this paper, it is shown that households who enter retirement with low wealth consistently

followed non permanent income consumption rules during their working years. Using the Panel

Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), household wealth in 1989 is predicted for a sample of 50-65

year olds using both current and past income, occupation, demographic, employment, and health

characteristics.   Using the residuals from this first stage regression, the sample of pre-retired

households is subsetted into households who save ‘lower’ than predicted and all other

households. By construction, these households had similar opportunities to save; the average

household in both these sub-samples are identical along all observable income and demographic

characteristics. It is then shown that households in the low wealth residual sample had much

larger declines in consumption upon retirement. Such a result is consistent with the household

not adequately planning for retirement.

    In the main part of the paper, the panel component of the PSID is used to analyze the

consumption behavior of these households early in their lifecycle. It is shown that these low pre-

retirement wealth households had consumption growth that responded to predictable changes in

income during their early working years. No such behavior was found among the other pre-



                                                                                               32
retired households. Moreover, the low residual households responded both to predictable income

increases as well as predictable income declines, a result that is inconsistent with a liquidity

constraints explanation.   It is also shown that the set of facts presented about households with

low pre-retirement wealth residuals are inconsistent with theories of habit formation or

precautionary saving.      Lastly, these results are not caused by the households treating

consumption and leisure as substitutes.

   There are two theories that can explain all of the behaviors associated with low wealth

residual households. First, households who follow myopic (rule-of-thumb) consumption rules

would have consumption that closely tracks income. If households do not plan for the future

they will end up in retirement with little wealth, be forced to take a consumption decline upon

retirement, and will have consumption profiles that respond to predictable income changes

during their working years. Second, the results could be reconciled if the household had time

inconsistent preferences. Such households may want to plan for the future, but are incapable of

doing so. There is no evidence, however, that these households had taken steps to commit

themselves to saving for the future. While both the rule of thumb and the time inconsistent

preference theories can reconcile the behavior of households with low wealth residuals, it is not

possible to disentangle the two theories. Specifically, given PSID data, it is not possible to

distinguish whether these identified household are completely myopic with respect to their

consumption decisions or whether they would like to plan for the future, but are incapable of

doing so. Regardless, the near sighted behavior of both types of households leaves them ill

prepared to sustain consumption through retirement.

    At the beginning of the paper, a classic fable by Aesop is recounted. In the fable, a sharp

distinction is drawn between ants, who saved during their summer (i.e., working years) to sustain




                                                                                              33
consumption during their winter (i.e., retirement), and grasshoppers, who saved little for their

future period of low earnings. The results shown in this paper confirm Aesop’s proposition;

within an economy, consumers are of different types. Some households are forward looking and

behave according to the Permanent Income Hypothesis. Others, however, lack either the desire

or the ability to plan for the future. When constructing economic models, it is often misguided to

assume all households follow similar consumption rules. With respect to retirement saving,

while it is true that the majority of households appear to follow permanent income consumption

rules, approximately 20% of the population behaves as ‘economic grasshoppers’.          In future

work, it would be useful to understand the reasons why households do not plan for the future.

Exploring the origins of such households could also be fruitful. Are households born of a given

type or do they evolve as their life progresses?




                                                                                               34
References

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst (2003). “Consumption vs. Expenditure”, University of Chicago
   Working Paper.

Altonji, Joseph and Aloysius Siow (1987). “Testing the Response of Consumption to Income
   Change with (Noisy) Panel Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(2): 293-328.

Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, and John Leahy (2003). “Wealth Accumulation and the
  Propensity to Plan,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), 1007-48.

Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, and Stephen
   Weinberg (2001). “The Hyperbolic Buffer Stock Model: Calibration, Simulation, and
   Empirical Evaluation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(3), Summer, 47-68.

Attanasio, Orazio and Martin Browning (1995). “Consumption over the Life Cycle and over the
   Business Cycle.” American Economic Review, 85(5): 1187-1237.

Banks, James, Richard Blundell and Sara Tanner (1999).     “Is There a Retirement-Savings
   Puzzle?” American Economic Review 88(4): 769-88.

Bernheim, Douglas (1992). “Is the Baby Boom Generation Preparing Adequately for
   Retirement? Technical Report.” Unpublished paper. New York. Merrill Lynch.

Bernheim, Douglas (1997). “The Adequacy of Personal Retirement Saving: Issues and
Options.”   In Facing the Age Wave, eds, David Wise. Stanford, CA. Hoover Press.

Bernheim, Douglas and Daniel Garrett (2003), "The Effects of Financial Education in the
   Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Households," Journal of Public Economics, 87, pp.
   1487-1519.

Bernheim, Douglas and Karl Scholz (1993). “Private Saving and Public Policy.” In Tax Policy
   and the Economy, vol 7, eds, James Poterba. Cambridge and London: MIT Press.

Bernheim, Douglas, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Weinberg (2001). “What Accounts for the
   Variation in Retirement Wealth Among U.S. Households?” American Economic Review
   91(4): 832-57.

Browning, Martin and Annamaria Lusardi (1996). “Household Saving: Micro Theories and
   Micro Facts.” Journal of Economic Literature 34(1): 1797-1902.

Carroll, Christopher (1997). “Buffer Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income
   Hypothesis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(1): 1-56.

Campbell, John and Gregory Mankiw (1989). “Consumption, Income, and Interest Rates:
  Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 4(1): 185-247.



                                                                                        35
Deaton, Angus (1992). Understanding Consumption. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Dynan, Karen (2000). “Habit Formation in Consumer Preferences: Evidence from Panel Data,”
   American Economic Review, 90(3): 391 – 406.

Engen, Eric M., William G. Gale, and Cori Uccello (1999). “The Adequacy of Household
   Saving”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1999:2, 65-165.

Friedman, Milton (1957).   A Theory of the Consumption Function.      Princeton:   Princeton
    University Press.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan Parker (2000). “Consumption Over the Life Cycle,”,
   Econometrica, 70(1): 47-89.

Gustman, Alan and F. Thomas Juster (1996). “Income and Wealth of Older American
   Households,” in Eric Hanushek and Nancy Maritato, Assessing Knowledge of Retirement
   Behavior, Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.

Hall, Robert (1978). “Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income Hypothesis:
   Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy 86(6): 971-987.

Hall, Robert and Frederic Mishkin (1982). “The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory
   Income: Estimates from Pane Data on Households.” Econometrica 50(2): 461-481.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth Singleton (1983). “Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion,
   and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns.” Journal of Political Economy 91(2): 249-265.

Hurd, Michael and Susann Rohwedder (2003). “The Retirement Consumption Puzzle:
   Anticiapted and Actual Declines in Spending at Retirement,” NBER Working Paper #9586.

Hurd, Michael and Julie Zissimopoulos (2002). “Saving for Retirement: Wage Growth and
   Unexpected Events”, Rand Working Paper, July.

Hurst, Erik, Ming-Ching Luoh and Frank Stafford (1998). “Wealth Dynamics of American
   Families: 1984-1994.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1998(1): 267-337.

Laibson, David (1996). “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 112(2): 443-477.

Lawrance, Emily (1991). “Poverty and the Rate of Time Preference: Evidence from Panel
   Data.” Journal of Political Economy 99(1): 55-77.

Lusardi, Annamaria (1999). “Information, Expectations, and Savings”, in Behavior Dimensions
   of Retirement Economics, Henry Aaron, eds. New York: Brookings Institution/Russel Sage
   Foundation, 81-115.



                                                                                         36
Lusardi, Annamaria (2002). “Explaining Why So Many Households Do Not Save”, Mimeo,
   Dartmouth College.

Lusardi, Annamaria (2003a). “Planning and the Effectiveness of Retirement Saving”, Mimeo,
   Dartmouth College.

Annamaria Lusardi (2003b). “Financial Education and Saving”, in Pension Design and
     Decision-Making Under Uncertainty. Eds, Olivia Mitchell and Steven Utkus. Pension
     Research Council, Philadelphia.

Modigliani, Franco and Richard Brumberg (1954). “Utility Analysis and the Consumption
  Function: An Interpretation of the Cross-Section Data,” in Post-Keynesian Economics. Eds.,
  Kenneth Kurihara. New Brunswick, NJ. Rutgers U. Press: 388-436.

Scholz, Karl, Anath Seshadri, and Surachai Khitatrakrun (2003).     “Are Americans Saving
   “Optimally” for Retirement?”, Mimeo, University of Wisconsin.

Shapiro, Matthew (1984). “The Permanent Income Hypothesis and the Real Interest Rate: Some
   Evidence from Panel Data.” Economic Letters 14(1): 93-100.

Shea, John (1995). “Union Contracts and the Life Cycle-Permanent Income Hypothesis.”
   American Economic Review 85(1): 186-200.

Skinner, Jonathan (1987). “A Superior Measure of Consumption from the Panel Study of
   Income Dynamics,” Economic Letters, 23(2): 213-16.

Smith, James P. (1997). “Wealth Inequality Among Older Americans,” Journal of Gerontology,
   52(B), May: 74-81.

Venti and Wise (2000). “Choice, Chance and Wealth Dispersion at Retirement,” NBER Working
   Paper #7521.

Venti, Stephen and David Wise (1998). “The Cause of Wealth Dispersion at Retirement: Choice
   or Chance?” American Economic Review 88(2): 185-191.

Zeldes, Stephen (1989). “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation.”
   Journal of Political Economy 97(2): 305-346.




                                                                                         37
Data Appendix
    In this appendix, the controls included in the estimation of equation (1) are discussed. After

which, the construction of the after tax interest rate and the household’s consumption growth

rate, included in the estimation of equations (7) and (8) are detailed.

    Regression equation (1) included a vector of 1989 household controls, Xi,1989, and a vector of

historical, pre-1989 controls, Zi,historical. The specific controls included in the X vector were:

        •   a quadratic in the household head’s age,

        •   a dummy equal to 1 if the household head is black,

        •   a dummy equal to 1 if the household head is currently married,

        •   the number of children in the family unit,

        •   the number of children between the ages of 13-17 (living within or away from the
            household),

        •   the number of children between the ages of 18 and 21 (living within or away from
            the household),

        •   a dummy equal to 1 if the head had less than a high school degree,

        •   a dummy equal to 1 if the head had exactly a high school degree,

        •   a dummy equal to 1 if the head had some college education (but no college degree)
            (household heads with four or more years of college was the excluded group),

        •   dummy variables indicating the census region where the household resides,

        •   a vector of one digit occupation dummies,

        •   a vector of one digit industry dummies,

        •   a dummy variable equal to 1 if the head was unemployed,

        •   and, a quadratic in household labor income, where household labor income is
            defined as the sum of labor earnings of both the head and spouse, if a spouse was
            present.




                                                                                                     38
    Additionally, the PSID asked the following question of both heads and spouses to ascertain

individual health status: “Would you say your (Head’s/Wife’s) health in general is excellent,

very good, good, fair, or poor?”. If the individual responded that their health was fair or poor,

the individual was coded as having “bad health”. 1989 “bad health dummies” were included for

both the head and the wife.

    Lastly, two questions were asked in 1989 about household pensions. First, households were

asked the following question about their pension replacement rates:

    “We're interested in how much of earnings will be replaced by pensions. Thinking of your
    (and your (wife's/"WIFE'S")) total pension benefits when you (both) retire, including Social
    Security, how will they compare with your (and your (wife's/"WIFE'S")) pre-retirement
    earnings--I mean, about what percent of your pre-retirement earnings will they be?”

The response to this question was included as part of the X vector of controls. Secondly,

equation (1) also included the amount that households directly contributed to their pension

during the previous 5 years. In other specifications (not reported), occupation, industry and

education controls were interacted. These interactions had no affect on the results and, as a

result, were omitted from the main specification discussed in the text.

    The Z vector included pre-1989 controls including:
   •   a dummy variable equal to 1 if the household head had any “bad health” between 1980
       and 1988,

   •   a dummy variable equal to 1 if the spouse had any “bad health” between 1980 and 1988,

   •   the number of years of “bad health” reported for both the head and the spouse between
       1980 and 1988,

   •   a dummy variable equal to 1 if the household head become divorced anytime between
       1980 and 1988,

   •   a quadratic in average family labor income between 1980 and 1988,

   •   the change in family labor income between 1980 and 1988,

   •   the coefficient of variation of income between 1975 and 1989,


                                                                                              39
   •    a dummy variable indicating whether the household head was ever unemployed between
        1980 and 1988,

   •    and the total duration of unemployment spells (in weeks) of the household head between
        1980 and 1988.

For completeness, income and employment controls from the 1970s were included in many of

the regression specifications. These controls added little to the predictive power of regression

(1). Including income and employment controls from the 1970s did not alter the reported results

in any way.

    When estimating equation (7), a measure of consumption growth and the after tax interest

rate must be constructed. Consumption growth is defined as the percentage increase in annual

food expenditures between year t and year t+1. The PSID annually collects information on the

cost of food consumed at home, the amount spent away from home in restaurants and the value

of food purchased with food stamps.          Aside from the potential measurement error in the

reporting of consumption data, researchers also must deal with the potential uncertainty

surrounding the time period to which the respondents’ answers refer. Questions dealing with the

amount of non-food stamp consumption the household undertakes in an average week are asked

primarily during April through August of each year, with the median interview date occurring in

June.   To obtain an estimate of annual food consumption flow, the PSID editors multiply this

response by 52.     A potentially important question is the time frame used by consumers in

determining average consumption since that will determine the appropriate timing of the interest

rate, current consumption, consumption growth and the relevant income growth. All food

consumption reported during the early summer of year t is assumed to apply to all of year t.

    Formally, a household’s after-tax interest rate can be expressed as ri,t+1 = rt+1tbill (1 – τi,t+1) -

πet+1, where rt+1tbill equals the average nominal rate on a one year treasury starting in June of year


                                                                                                      40
t, τt+1 equals household i’s marginal tax rate in year t+1, and πet+1 is the expected inflation rate

between t and t+1. The PSID, during this sample period, reports the household’s marginal tax

rate computed on the basis of detailed income data and the relevant tax tables. It is assumed that

households have perfect foresight with respect to their future marginal tax rates. Because

inflation is unpredictable, the household in period t may not know the real rate that it will face

between t and t+1. Using the actual inflation rate between t and t+1 may bias estimated

coefficients because of the potential correlation with the error term. To account for this, most

researchers use the actual inflation rate when calculating the return and instrument using lagged

inflation rates. Instead, I calculate the household’s expected borrowing rate using the Livingston

Inflation Forecast, where the forecast runs from June of year t to June of year t+1. The

Livingston Survey of Inflation Forecasts is maintained by the Philadelphia Federal Reserve. All

values were converted into 1989 dollars. This methodology for computing after-tax interest rates

and consumption growth rates is similar to most authors who use the PSID data to estimate

consumption Euler equations (see Shapiro, 1984; Zeldes, 1989; and Shea, 1995).




                                                                                                 41
       Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Two Sub Samples of Pre-Retired Households:
        Bottom 20% of 1989 Wealth Residuals and Top 80% of 1989 Wealth Residuals

                                                                         I                II               III
                                                                    1st Stage         1st Stage        p-value of
                                                                    Residual          Residual         difference
                                                                       Top             Bottom         Column I and
Selected Income and Demographic Variables                          80 Percent        20 Percent             II

Wealth Distribution and Portfolio Composition
25th percentile of Household Wealth                                 $28,900             $2,014             <0.01
Median Household Wealth                                              $83,150            $8,275             <0.01
75th percentile of Household Wealth                                 $205,500           $29,954             <0.01
% Owning Home                                                         0.77               0.43              <0.01
% Owning Stocks                                                       0.31               0.12              <0.01
% Owning Business                                                     0.19               0.03              <0.01

Demographics
Age of Head in 1989                                                    57                 57               0.30
Dummy: Marital Status in 1989                                         0.68               0.58              0.02
Dummy: Divorced Anytime 1980 – 1988                                   0.11               0.12              0.50
Dummy: Race of Head in 1989 (Black = 1)                               0.10               0.13              0.35
Dummy: Education in 1989 12 years or less                             0.48               0.55              0.22
Dummy: Have Children Aged 1– 5 in 1989                                0.03               0.01              0.09
Dummy: Have Children Aged 6 – 13 in 1989                              0.06               0.05              0.65
Dummy: Have Children Aged 14 - 20 in 1989                             0.20               0.20              0.91
Number of People in Household                                          2.4                2.2              0.25

Labor Income and Labor Income Variability
Mean Family Labor Income in 1989                                    $39,947            $39,790             0.98
Mean Family Labor Income: 1980-1989                                 $37,793            $35,260             0.49
Change in Family Labor Income: 1980 to 1989                         $4,349             $6,949              0.62
% Heads Unemployed in 1989                                           0.04               0.03               0.66
% Heads Unemployed Anytime 1980-1988                                 0.21               0.23               0.60
Median Coefficient of Variation of Income: 1975-1989                 0.51               0.53               0.21

Health Shocks
% With Head ‘Bad Health’ in 1989                                      0.19               0.25              0.10
% With Head ‘Bad Health’ Anytime 1980-1988                            0.33               0.39              0.14
% With Wife ‘Bad Health’ in 1989                                      0.11               0.09              0.52
% With Wife ‘Bad Health’ Anytime 1980-1988                            0.22               0.24              0.68

Retirement Pension
% of 1989 Income Replaced During Retirement                           0.54               0.52              0.66

Consumption
Mean Household Food Consumption: 1980-1987                           $4,125            $3,901              0.25
Mean Household Food Consumption: 1975-1979                           $3,481            $3,264              0.13
Med. Coefficient of Variation of Consumption: 1975-87                 0.37              0.41               0.13

Notes: The sample was split using the residuals from a first stage regression of 1989 household log wealth on a vector
of household observables. The sample included all non-retired households aged 50-65 in the 1989 wave of the PSID
(819 households). All dollar values are in 1989 dollars.




                                                                                                                    0
                                          Table 2
            Average Age of Retirement and Consumption Decline Upon Retirement,
                              By 1989 Wealth Residual Groups


                                                                       I                 II                III
                                                                  1st Stage          1st Stage         p-value of
                                                                  Residual           Residual          difference
                                                                     Top              Bottom          Column I and
                                                                 80 Percent         20 Percent              II

Average Age of Retirement                                           62.4               62.3                0.99

Average Yearly Food Consumption Prior to                          $4,045              $3,700               0.39
Retirement

Average Yearly Food Consumption After                             $3,744              $2,913              <0.01
Retirement a

Average Percentage Point Decline in                                -0.03               -0.11               0.14
Consumption At Retirement b

Median Percentage Point Decline in                                 -0.11               -0.19               0.40
Consumption At Retirement c

a
   Yearly Food Consumption Prior to Retirement is defined as the household’s food consumption averaged over the
three years prior to retirement.
b
   Yearly Food Consumption After Retirement is defined as the household’s food consumption averaged over the three
years after retirement.
c
  Average Percentage Point Decline in Consumption At Retirement is computed for each household and then averaged
over households.

Notes: Sample includes all non-retired households aged 50-65 in the 1989 wave of the PSID, who were subsequently
retired between 1990 and 1999. The sample size included 267 high wealth residual households (column I) and 51 low
wealth residual households (column II). The wealth residuals are defined as in Table 1. Retirement Age is defined as
the first year that the household self-reports being retired. To compute the consumption statistics in this table, the
top/bottom 5% of outliers in the change in consumption distribution were truncated. All dollar amounts reported in
1989 dollars.




                                                                                                                    1
    Table 3: Responsiveness of Early Life Consumption to Predictable Income Changes,
                   Segmenting By 1989 Pre-Retired Wealth Residuals
.

                                                                                               Coefficient
Variable                                                                                    (Standard Error)

Predictable Income Growth, All Households (β1)                                                     -0.16
                                                                                                   (0.15)

Predictable Income Growth, Low Wealth Residual Households (β2)                                      0.56
                                                                                                   (0.28)



Notes: This table reports the estimates of the response of household consumption growth to predictable income
changes (equation (7) in text). β1 is the coefficient on predictable income changes for the full sample. β2 is the
coefficient on predictable income changes for households with low first stage wealth residuals. All other estimated
coefficients were suppressed. Households with low first stage wealth residuals are defined to be pre-retired households
between the age of 50 and 65 who had wealth residuals in the bottom 20% of the wealth residual distribution. See
footnote to Table 1 for additional details. Households for which their one year consumption growth was in excess of
50% or less than -33% were excluded from the sample. The household was only excluded from the sample for that
given year. These sample restrictions left 4,668 observations, based on 727 households. Standard errors (in
parentheses) were adjusted for within household heterogeneity. The equation was estimated using two-stage least
squared where the predictable component of household labor income growth was instrumented for using four lags of
household labor income growth (excluding the first lag). The income processes was estimated separately for low wealth
residual and other wealth residual households.




                                                                                                                     2
    Table 4: Responsiveness of Early Life Consumption to Predictable Income Changes,
                           Testing For Liquidity Constraints


                                                                                                  Coefficient
Variable                                                                                       (Standard Error)

Predictable Income Increase, All Households (β3)                                                     -0.11
                                                                                                     (0.25)

Predictable Income Decline, All Households (β4)                                                      -0.01
                                                                                                     (0.29)

Predictable Income Increase, Low Wealth Residual Households (β5)                                      0.35
                                                                                                     (0.14)

Predictable Income Increase, Low Wealth Residual Households (β6)                                      0.31
                                                                                                     (0.17)



Notes: This table reports the estimates of the response of household consumption growth to predictable income
increases and to predictable income declines (equation (8) in text). β3 is the coefficient on predictable income increases
for the full sample. β4 is the coefficient on predictable income declines for the full sample. β5 and β6 are the
coefficients on predictable income increases and predictable income declines for households with low first stage wealth
residuals. All other coefficients were suppressed. Households with low first stage wealth residuals are defined to be
pre-retired households between the age of 50 and 65 who had wealth residuals in the bottom 20% of the wealth residual
distribution. See footnote to Table 1 for additional details. Households for which their one year consumption growth
was in excess of 50% or less than -33% were excluded from the sample. The household was only excluded from the
sample for that given year. These sample restrictions left 4,668 observations, based on 727 households. Standard errors
(in parentheses) were adjusted for within household heterogeneity. The equation was estimated using two-stage least
squared where the predictable component of household labor income growth was instrumented for using four lags of
household labor income growth (excluding the first lag). The income processes was estimated separately for low wealth
residual and other wealth residual households.




                                                                                                                        3
                                          Table 5:
     Responsiveness of Early Life Consumption to Predictable Income Changes, Additive
                         Definitions of 1989 Low Wealth Residual


                                                                                                                 Estimated
Variable                                                                                                         Coefficient

Predictable Income Change, All Households                                                                            -0.26
                                                                                                                    (0.16)

Predictable Income Change, Households with 0-10th percentile wealth residuals                                        0.93
                                                                                                                    (0.45)

Predictable Income Change, Households with 10-20th percentile wealth residuals                                       0.34
                                                                                                                    (0.17)

Predictable Income Change, Households with 20-30th percentile wealth residuals                                       0.14
                                                                                                                    (0.19)

Predictable Income Change, Households with 30-40th percentile wealth residuals                                       -0.29
                                                                                                                    (0.25)

Predictable Income Change, Households with 40-50th percentile wealth residuals                                       -0.18
                                                                                                                    (0.29)



Notes: This table reports the estimates of the response of household consumption growth to predictable income
changes. The predictable income changes are interacted with five different dummy variables corresponding to the
household’s 1989 wealth residua. All five dummy variables interacted with predictable income changes were included
in the regression simultaneously. The five dummy variables indicated whether the household had 1989 wealth
residuals in the: 0-10th percentile, the 10th-20th percentile, the 20th-30th percentile, the 30th – 40th percentile, and the 40th
– 50th percentile. All other coefficients from the regression were suppressed. Households for which their one year
consumption growth was in excess of 50% or less than -33% were excluded from the sample. The household was only
excluded from the sample for that given year. These sample restrictions left 4,668 observations, based on 727
households. Standard errors (in parentheses) were adjusted for within household heterogeneity. The equation was
estimated using two-stage least squared where the predictable component of household labor income growth was
instrumented for using four lags of household labor income growth (excluding the first lag). The income processes was
estimated separately for each wealth residual group.




                                                                                                                               4
                                                                Table 6
         Household Response to Historical Saving Questions and to Subjective Self-Assessment of Planning and Spending Behavior:
                                                   By 1989 Wealth Residual Groups

                                                                                                                                   I            II                 III
                                                                                                                              1st Stage     1st Stage          p-value of
                                                                                                                              Residual      Residual           difference
                                                                                                                                 Top         Bottom            Column I
1972 and 1975 Saving and Subjective Self Assessment Questions.                                                               80 Percent    20 Percent            and II

1972 Variables

    % of households who describe themselves as being a planner (as opposed to living day-to-day).a                                0.59         0.46               0.06
    % of households who describe themselves as likely to “carrying out plans”.b                                                   0.67         0.54               0.06
    % of households who describe themselves as being a spender (as opposed to a saver).c                                          0.41         0.60              <0.01
    % of households in 1972 with any positive savings.                                                                            0.80         0.66               0.02
    % of households in 1972 with accumulated savings greater than two months of income.                                           0.52         0.30              <0.01


1975 Variables

    % of households who describe themselves as being a planner (as opposed to living day-to-day).a                                0.56         0.38              0.01
    % of households in 1975 with any positive savings.                                                                            0.80         0.74              0.25
    % of households in 1975 with accumulated savings greater than two months of income.                                           0.48         0.29              <0.01

Sample Size                                                                                                                       500          127
a
  PSID question reads: “Are you the kind of person that plans his life ahead all the time or do you live more from day-to-day?”
b
  PSID question reads: “When you make plans ahead, do you usually carry out things the way you expected?”
c
  PSID question reads: “Would you rather spend your money and enjoy life today or save more for the future?”

Notes: All non-retired households between the age of 50 and 65 in the 1989 PSID who were in the sample during either 1972 or 1975 (627 households). Subjective self
assessment questions were asked only in the 1972 and 1975 waves of the PSID. The 1972 set of questions were more extensive. As a result, the ‘carry out plans” and the ‘saver
versus spender’ questions were not asked in 1975. Household response to the question were on a 1-5 scale, with 5 being agree strongly with the statement and 1 being disagree
strongly with the statement. Households are considered to respond positively to a question if they answered a 4 or a 5. Wealth residuals are defined as in Table 1.




                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                    Appendix Table A1
            Average Age of Retirement and Consumption Decline Upon Retirement,
                              By 1984 Wealth Residual Groups

                                                                       I                 II                 III
                                                                  1st Stage          1st Stage          p-value of
                                                                  Residual           Residual           difference
                                                                     Top              Bottom            Column I
                                                                 80 Percent         20 Percent            and II

Average Age of Retirement                                            62.7               62.8                0.99

Average Yearly Food Consumption Prior to                           $4,238              $4,093               0.61
Retirement a

Average Yearly Food Consumption After                              $3,703              $3,122               0.02
Retirement b

Average Percentage Point Decline in                                 -0.08               -0.16               0.07
Consumption At Retirement c

Median Percentage Point Decline in                                  -0.13               -0.22               0.08
Consumption At Retirement


a
   Yearly Food Consumption Prior to Retirement is defined as the household’s food consumption averaged over the
three years prior to retirement.
b
   Yearly Food Consumption After Retirement is defined as the household’s food consumption averaged over the three
years after retirement.
c
  Average Percentage Point Decline in Consumption At Retirement is computed for each household and then averaged
over households.

Notes: Sample includes all non-retired households aged 50-65 in the 1984 wave of the PSID, who were subsequently
retired between 1985 and 1999. The sample size included 421 high wealth residual households (column I) and 91 low
wealth residual households (column II). The wealth residuals are defined as in Table 1, except using 1984 PSID
households instead of 1989 PSID households. Retirement Age is defined as the first year that the household self-
reports being retired. To compute the consumption statistics in this table, the top/bottom 5% of outliers in the change
in consumption distribution were truncated. All dollar amounts reported in 1989 dollars.
                  Figure 1: Distribution of Wealth Residuals
                  Sample: Pre-Retired Households in the PSID Aged 50-65

           .125



             .1



           .075
Fraction




            .05



           .025




                          -6        -4        -2        0        2         4   6
                                             Pre-Retirement Wealth Residuals
