                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE AND THE MACROECONOMY

                                              John Cawley
                                             Kosali I. Simon

                                          Working Paper 10092
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10092


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2003




We thank Shailesh Bandhari, David Cutler, Alan Garber, Jeanne Lambrew, Linda Loubert, Catherine
McLaughlin, Mark Pauly, and conference and seminar participants for their helpful comments. We thank
Justine Lynge for editorial assistance. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Economic
Research Initiative on the Uninsured and the Bronfenbrenner Life Course Center Innovative Research
Program. Simon gratefully acknowledges support from a W.E. Upjohn Institute mini-grant. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by John Cawley and Kosali I. Simon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Helath Insurance Coverage and the Macreconomy
John Cawley and Kosali I. Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 10092
November 2003
JEL No. I10, J3, J6, E32

                                          ABSTRACT

The primary objective of this paper is to improve our understanding of the historic relationship

between state and national macroeconomic climate and the health insurance coverage of Americans.

The secondary objective of this paper is to use the historic findings to estimate how the number of

uninsured Americans changed during the 2001 recession, and to estimate whether to date enough

people have gained health insurance during the current recovery to offset the losses during the

recession.


We conclude that the macroeconomy (measured by state unemployment rate and real gross state

product) is correlated with the probability of men's health insurance coverage and that this

correlation is only partly explained by changes in men's employment status. Counter-cyclical health

insurance programs such as Medicaid and the State Children's Health Insurance Program seem to

ensure that the health insurance coverage of women and children is insulated from macroeconomic

changes. We estimate that 851,000 Americans, the vast majority of whom were adult men, lost

health insurance due to macroeconomic conditions alone during the 2001 recession.

John Cawley                                          Kosali I. Simon
134 MVR Hall                                         106 MVR Hall
Department of Policy Analysis and Management         Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University                                   Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853                                     Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER                                             and NBER
jhc38@cornell.edu                                    kis6@cornell.edu
                                           1. Introduction

          In March 2001, the longest economic expansion in U.S. history ended, and an

economic recession began that lasted until November of 2001.2 The primary objective of

this paper is to improve our understanding of the historic relationship between state and

national macroeconomic climate and the health insurance coverage of Americans. The

secondary objective of this paper is to use the historic findings to estimate how the

number of uninsured Americans changed during the 2001 recession, and to estimate

whether enough people have gained health insurance during the current recovery to offset

the losses during the recession.

          When thinking of how the macroeconomy may affect the probability of health

insurance coverage, it is useful to consider the ways in which Americans receive health

insurance coverage. Data from the 2001 Current Population Survey (CPS) indicate that

50 percent of adult Americans receive health insurance through their employer, and an

additional 19 percent receive it through the employer of a parent or spouse. Six percent

of Americans purchase individual health insurance coverage, 4 percent are covered by

Medicaid, 4 percent receive it through some other source, and 18 percent are uninsured.3

The macroeconomy may affect the probability of coverage through each of these sources.

For example, there are several ways that a poor economy may result in the loss of

employer-provided coverage. Those who lose their jobs during recession are likely to

lose any health insurance previously provided by that employer. Although the

Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 (COBRA) allows eligible


2
    Business Cycle Dating Committee, National Bureau of Economic Research (2003).
3
    Lambrew (2001), Appendix Table 1.


                                                   1
unemployed workers to temporarily purchase health insurance through their former

employers,4 take-up rates under COBRA are low.5 In the majority of cases, the loss of

employment results in the loss of any health insurance the worker received through that

employer. However, some who lose their jobs remain covered by insurance provided by

a spouse’s employer. Overall, 44 percent of those who lose their job become uninsured

as a result.6

        A poor macroeconomy can reduce health insurance coverage even among those

who remain employed. Employers may cease offering health insurance in order to cut

costs in the face of falling profits. Alternatively, employers may reduce their

contributions and shift health insurance costs to employees, causing some of those

workers to decline coverage. In addition, previously full-time workers may be shifted to

part-time jobs that no longer qualify for health insurance benefits.

        A poor macroeconomy may lead state governments to reduce eligibility for

publicly provided health insurance. Medicaid spending is a large share of state budgets

(it represents 19.6 percent of total state spending7) so when state tax revenues fall

because of an economic downturn, there is increased pressure to cut Medicaid budgets,

potentially increasing the number of Medicaid-eligible individuals left without coverage.

State governors proposed numerous cuts in response to the 2001 recession, including cuts


4
  COBRA stipulates that those who recently worked at firms with more than 20 employees have the option
of continuing in their employer’s health insurance plan for up to 18 months by paying (at most) 102 percent
of the full premium for active employees. The Commonwealth Fund 2001 Health Insurance Survey found
that 65 percent of current workers would be eligible for COBRA if they became unemployed; see Doty and
Schoen (2001).
5
  Only 20 to 25 percent of those eligible for COBRA exercise the option to extend their health insurance
coverage; see Rice (1999). The most common explanation for the low take-up rate is cost; on average
families pay annual premiums of $7,200 for coverage through COBRA, which represents up to two-thirds
of the average worker’s unemployment check; see Lambrew (2001).
6
  Bennefield (1998).
7
  National Association of State Budget Officers (2002).


                                                    2
in payments to providers.8 Those covered by the State Children’s Health Insurance Plan

(SCHIP) may also be vulnerable to state budget cuts. Medicaid and SCHIP cover 15

percent of unemployed women and 53 percent of children with unemployed parents.9

Two factors add to the current pressure on state governments to cut public health

insurance programs: first, many states increased eligibility for public health insurance

during the 1990s when state budget prospects were brighter, and second, health care costs

appear to be increasing as a fraction of GDP after nearly nine years of stability.10

        A poor macroeconomy may also affect the number of uninsured if those who

previously purchased private health insurance become unable to afford it. On the other

hand, some people might gain health insurance coverage during bad macroeconomic

times if their incomes fall to a level that qualifies for Medicaid.

        Policymakers should be concerned about the loss of health insurance coverage for

several reasons. First, some who lose employer provided health insurance will join the

rolls of publicly provided health insurance such as Medicaid and SCHIP, increasing the

strain on the budgets of those programs. Second, uninsured persons may receive less

medical treatment than the insured.11 Third, uninsured persons may impose costs on the

health care system by receiving their care in relatively inefficient ways, such as using the

emergency room for conditions that could have been treated with an office visit.12




8
  Pear and Toner (2002).
9
  Lambrew (2001).
10
   Levitt et al. (2002).
11
   Doyle (2001) exploits auto accidents as natural experiments and finds that auto accident victims who
were uninsured received 20 percent less treatment and had 37 percent higher mortality than those who were
insured.
12
   Weissman, Gastonis, and Epstein (1992).


                                                   3
Fourth, uninsured individuals are at risk of severe financial loss, including bankruptcy, in

the event of illness.13

          The long economic expansion of the 1990s followed by the 2001 recession and

the current recovery raise the question: what is the relationship between macroeconomic

climate and health insurance coverage in the U.S. population? Our research will answer

that question, plus these others: How does the effect of the macroeconomy on insurance

coverage differ for men, women and children? What aspects of the macroeconomy

matter: national recession, state unemployment rate, or real per capita gross state

product? Does the macroeconomic climate primarily affect rates of uninsurance through

changes in employment?

         Our results indicate that increases in unemployment rate are negatively correlated,

and increases in gross state product are positively correlated, with the probability of

coverage for adult men. A substantial fraction, but not all, of this correlation is explained

by changes in employment status. In contrast, the insurance coverage of women and

children appears to be insulated from macroeconomic fluctuations by public health

insurance programs like Medicaid and SCHIP.

         We use our results to estimate the number of people who lost health insurance

during the 2001 recession, and estimate whether enough people have gained health

insurance during the current recovery to offset those losses. We emphasize that our

results measure the number of people who lost (or gained) health insurance due solely to

macroeconomic factors. Our results indicate that roughly 851,000 Americans (the vast

majority of whom were adult men) lost health insurance during the 2001 recession. We

13
   Jacoby, Sullivan, and Warren (2000) find that 45.6 percent of persons filing for bankruptcy either
incurred at least $1,000 in medical bills not covered by insurance or listed illness or injury as the reason for
filing for bankruptcy.


                                                       4
estimate that 616,000 Americans gained health insurance coverage between the end of

the recession in November 2001 and August 2003. This implies that, as a result of the

changing macroeconomy, 235,000 fewer Americans had health insurance coverage in

August of 2003, almost two years after the end of the recession, than had coverage in

March 2001 when the recession began.



                                  2. Related Literature

       The United States Bureau of Census, through its Current Population Reports,

publishes estimates of the number of uninsured in the U.S. For example, Mills (2002)

estimates that 1.4 million Americans lost health insurance during calendar year 2001, and

Mills and Bhandari (2003) estimate that 2.4 million Americans lost coverage during

2002. These estimates include changes in insurance status for any reason, whereas this

paper focuses on those due to changing macroeconomic conditions.

       The Current Population Reports estimates are based on data from the Current

Population Survey (CPS) Annual Demographic Supplement. The CPS records whether

the respondent was covered by health insurance at any point in the last twelve months;

thus, one cannot use the CPS to determine health insurance coverage in a specific month.

This limitation of the CPS questions about health insurance is especially acute because

the 2001 recession lasted less than a year. As an extreme example, suppose every insured

person in the U.S. lost their health insurance during the 2001 recession, and then regained

it as soon as the recession was over. Not a single one of those losing health insurance

would be recorded as such in the CPS, because each would report that he or she had been

covered at some point in the past twelve months.




                                            5
           Most studies investigating determinants of insurance status include

macroeconomic variables such as state unemployment rate as control variables, but the

coefficients on these variables are not the focus of the study and are rarely discussed at

any length in the text. Only a few studies focus on the link between macroeconomic

conditions and health insurance coverage. A Kaiser Family Foundation brief studied

aggregate March CPS data for 1980-2000 and found that every percentage point rise in

unemployment was associated with an increase of 1.2 million uninsured persons.14 A

study by Holahan and Garrett (2001) that is based on Ku and Garrett (2000) estimates

that a percentage point increase in unemployment is associated with a rise in Medicaid

enrollment of 1.5 million. Marquis and Long (2001) find mixed evidence that county

unemployment rates are correlated with employer offers of health insurance and

employer contributions to health insurance. They find that employers are more likely to

offer health insurance in tight labor markets in 1993 but cannot reject the hypothesis of a

zero correlation in 1997. They also find, contrary to their prediction, that the employer’s

contribution to employee health insurance is positively correlated with county

unemployment rate. Using a variety of data including the CPS, Gilmer and Kronick

(2001) estimate that if health expenditures grow twice as fast as personal income over

next decade, the percent of the population under age 65 that is uninsured would rise from

16 percent to 21 percent.

           Glied and Jack (2003) study how macroeconomic conditions, income, and health

care costs are correlated with insurance coverage across education groups using state-

level CPS data. They find that unemployment rates are more strongly correlated with



14
     Gruber and Levitt (2002).


                                               6
insurance coverage for well-educated workers, in part because workers with less

education are at all times less likely to be offered employer-provided health insurance.

        A limitation of several of these previous studies is their use of the CPS data,

which, as mentioned before, cannot indicate health insurance coverage in a particular

month, making it impossible to relate health insurance coverage to macroeconomic

conditions at a specific point in time. A contribution of this paper is to provide estimates

derived from reports of health insurance coverage in a specific month matched with

macroeconomic conditions during that month, using data from the Survey of Income and

Program Participation (SIPP).

        The previous literature is also limited by its use of cross-sectional data and

inability to remove unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity. This is a particular problem

if the populations of high-unemployment states differ from those in low-unemployment

states in unobserved ways that affect the probability of health insurance coverage; such

unobserved heterogeneity would result in biased estimates of the effect of

macroeconomic conditions on health insurance coverage. This paper contributes to the

literature by analyzing longitudinal data on individuals and by controlling for person-

specific fixed effects. Our identification of the effect of macroeconomic conditions on

the probability of health insurance coverage comes from variation within people over

time.



                                        3. Methods

        We first estimate a model in which the dependent variable indicates whether an

individual has any health insurance coverage at a particular point in time. The empirical




                                              7
analysis is motivated by a random utility model. Suppose that each person derives utility

based on insurance status; people enjoy utility U INS if they are insured, and utility

UUNINS if they are uninsured. The utility derived from being insured or uninsured depends

upon individual characteristics X and macroeconomic conditions M :

                          U INS = α INS + X β INS + M γ INS + ε INS
                          UUNINS = αUNINS + X βUNINS + M γ UNINS + εUNINS

Macroeconomic conditions may affect the utility of being insured if, for example, it is

more costly to acquire coverage when unemployment rates are high.

        Let y = 1 if the individual is insured and y = 0 if the individual is uninsured. The

probability that a person is insured is equal to the probability that utility in the insured

state exceeds utility in the uninsured state.

        Pr[ y = 1] = Pr[U INS > UUNINS ]
        Pr[ y = 1] = Pr[(ε INS − εUNINS ) > −(α INS − αUNINS ) − X ( β INS − βUNINS ) − M (γ INS − γ UNINS )]
        Pr[ y = 1] = Pr[ε > −α − X β − M γ ]


        The distribution of the differenced error term determines the proper regression

model to use to estimate the probability of health insurance coverage of individual i

living in state s at time t as a function of macroeconomic conditions M and individual

characteristics X . This paper assumes that the differenced error term follows a logistic

distribution; as a result, logit regression models will be estimated of the form:

        (1)                          yist = α + X it β + M stγ + ε ist

        The macroeconomic conditions M that are examined include an indicator variable

for national recession, state-level unemployment rates, and real per capita gross state

product. We also control for individual-specific fixed effects and year-specific fixed



                                                    8
effects. Individual characteristics X include time-varying factors that may affect the

person’s probability of being uninsured, including age, marital status, education, and

family size.

        Models similar to equation (1) will be estimated for the following dependent

variables: an indicator variable for whether one has health insurance coverage through

any source, an indicator for whether one receives health insurance coverage through

one’s own employer, an indicator for whether the individual is covered by Medicaid or

SCHIP, an indicator for whether the individual is covered by any government-provided

health insurance15, an indicator for whether one’s current employer offers health

insurance, and an indicator for whether a worker offered health insurance by an employer

has accepted that offer (i.e. health insurance “take-up”).

        The parameters of interest are the γ coefficients, which will be used to measure

the change in the probability that individuals are covered by health insurance associated

with change in the macroeconomic variables. We hypothesize that the coefficients on

variables for macroeconomic conditions will have the following sign, depending on the

dependent variable (the source of the health insurance). Higher unemployment rate and

national recession are assumed to decrease the probability of coverage through any

source and decrease the probability of coverage through one’s own employer. Higher

gross state product is predicted to have the opposite effect, increasing the probability of

coverage through any source or through one’s own employer. We do not have

unambiguous predictions about the signs of the coefficients on macroeconomic variables

in the regressions for coverage through the government in general or through Medicaid or

15
  Government provided coverage for adults includes Medicare, Medicaid, other free or subsidized public
assistance health insurance, or Armed Forces related health insurance provided by the government. For
children, the list excludes Medicare since the SIPP did not ask about children’s Medicare status.


                                                   9
SCHIP in particular, because there are potentially offsetting effects. A poor

macroeconomy may increase the probability of coverage through the government if a

person’s income falls to a level that qualifies for Medicaid, or it may lead state

legislatures to tighten eligibility requirements in order to decrease the rolls, or to reduce

the generosity of benefits leading to lower take-up rates among the eligible population.

         To determine the extent to which macroeconomic conditions affect health

insurance coverage through all pathways, we first estimate model (1) without controlling

for employment status. However, a change in employment is clearly one important path

by which macroeconomic conditions affect health insurance, so we also re-estimate

model (1) controlling for employment status, which allows us to determine the fraction of

the overall correlation that is due to changes in employment.



                                                  4. Data

     The relationship between state and national economic climate and individuals’ health

insurance status is measured using data from two nationally representative samples: the

Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and the National Longitudinal

Survey of Youth (NLSY).16 Each is well-suited for a study of health insurance and the

macroeconomy because each follows the same individuals over a considerable period of

time, permitting us to control for individual fixed effects. An advantage of the SIPP is its

large sample size (we have samples of roughly three quarters of a million observations



16
  The Current Population Survey (CPS) is commonly used to assess the health insurance coverage of
Americans. The advantages of the SIPP and NLSY over the CPS are that the SIPP and NLSY track
individuals for long periods of time and that they record health insurance coverage at a particular point in
time whereas the CPS is cross-sectional and records only whether the individual had health insurance
coverage at any time in the past year. Bennefield (1996) finds that CPS respondents tend to underreport
health insurance coverage relative to SIPP respondents.


                                                     10
each for men, women, and children), and an advantage of the NLSY is its richer set of

questions about health insurance. The SIPP serves as the primary dataset in this study,

but when the SIPP lacks certain health insurance information we use that contained in the

NLSY.



                      4a. The Survey of Income and Program Participation

       The Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) is a nationally representative

sample of Americans over the age of 1517 that consists of a series of four-year panels

starting in 1984 with sample sizes ranging from approximately 12,000 to 40,000

households. The SIPP interviews households at 4-month intervals (collecting data on the

current month and, retrospectively, each of the three months between interviews) for up

to 4 years; thus, we have up to 12 interviews for each individual.

       Each wave contains information on the respondent’s insurance coverage and the

source of their coverage, for a particular month. We study the following outcomes in the

SIPP: an indicator variable for whether one has health insurance coverage through any

source, an indicator for whether one receives health insurance coverage through one’s

own employer, an indicator for whether the individual is covered by Medicaid or SCHIP,

and an indicator for whether the individual is covered by any government-provided health

insurance.

       The SIPP also contains information on job status and demographic characteristics that

may influence insurance status (e.g. age, race, gender, education, marital status, and

family size). Publicly available state identifiers permit the merger of macroeconomic

variables with the SIPP data. This paper uses data from the 1990-1996 panels of the
17
     There are also interview records for children in the household, based on parent’s reports.


                                                        11
SIPP covering the period 1990-2000. In order to avoid recall bias we do not use the

retrospective data; we instead focus exclusively on data collected for the current month in

which the respondent is interviewed. As a result, we have up to twelve observations for

each individual in the SIPP.

   The set of regressors used in each regression includes: highest grade completed, age,

number of children in the family, marital status, indicator variables for each individual,

and indicator variables for each year. We exclude income from the set of regressors

because wages and salary are determined simultaneously with fringe benefits such as

health insurance. Summary statistics of the SIPP data appear in Appendix Table 1A.



                      4b. The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth

       The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) contains data from

interviews of 12,686 respondents conducted annually from 1979 to 1994 and every two

years from 1994 to 2000. We study the following outcomes in the NLSY: an indicator

variable for whether one’s current employer offers health insurance (which is available

for 1983-2000) and an indicator for whether the worker accepted (took up) that offer of

coverage (which is available for 1989-2000).

   Restricted-access geocodes permit the merger of macroeconomic variables with the

NLSY data. The set of regressors used in each regression includes: indicator variables

for individual, indicator variables for year, highest grade completed, age, family size, and

indicator variables for marital status. Summary statistics of the NLSY data appear in

Appendix Table 1B.




                                             12
                                4c. Data on Macroeconomic Conditions

       The key explanatory variables that reflect the economic climate are an indicator

variable for national recession, monthly state unemployment rate, and annual real per

capita gross state product. We also include in our set of regressors a vector of indicator

variables for year. The coefficients on these indicator variables capture the correlation of

nationwide, year-specific macroeconomic conditions with changes in the probability of

health insurance coverage.

       The coding of the indicator variable for national recession is based on the business

cycle peaks and troughs identified by the Business Cycle Dating Committee of the

National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Recession is sometimes casually

defined as two consecutive quarters of declining real Gross National Product, but the

NBER defines recession as: “a period of significant decline in total output, income,

employment, and trade, usually lasting from six months to a year, and marked by

widespread contractions in many sectors of the economy.”18 The data used in this paper

include the July 1990 to March 1991 recession.

       The Bureau of Labor Statistics Local Area Unemployment Statistics Series is the

source for monthly unemployment rates at the state level. Unemployment rate is a

lagging indicator of recession.19 We control for individual and year fixed effects, so our

identifying variation of unemployment on health insurance coverage is within people

over time of deviations from the national mean for that year.

       Data on gross state product are derived from the Regional Accounts Data collected by

the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the U. S. Department of Commerce. We convert


18
     Public Information Office, National Bureau of Economic Research (2002).
19
     Business Cycle Dating Committee (2003).


                                                    13
GSP to year 2000 dollars using the annual CPI-U. Real GSP is divided by Census

estimates of the state population in that year. Since we control for individual and year

fixed effects, our identifying variation of real per capita GSP on health insurance

coverage is within people over time of deviations from the national mean for that year.



                              4d. Additional State-Level Data

    We also include three regressors that control for heterogeneity at the state level. The

first regressor is the percent of the workforce that is unionized in that state; Hirsch et al.

(2001) is the source of this data. Unionization is relevant because unions are likely to

negotiate health insurance coverage for their members.

    Second, the Medicare Hospital Wage Index is used to proxy for differences in the

cost of health insurance. The Social Security Act requires that CMS prospective

payments to hospitals be adjusted for area differences in hospital wages; the Hospital

Wage Index is used to make this adjustment. For each distinct labor market (based on

Metropolitan Statistical Areas and statewide aggregates of rural areas), the weighted

average hourly wage (AHW) is computed from the sum of the wage costs of all hospitals

in that market divided by the sum of the hours worked in all hospitals in the market; the

wage index value for a particular labor market equals the AHW for that market divided

by the national AHW. We use the statewide rural area measure of the index because we

know the state, but not county, of residence in the SIPP.

    Finally, we control for variation across states and over time in the generosity of

public health insurance programs like Medicaid and SCHIP using a simulated measure of

public health insurance eligibility as in Currie and Gruber (1996). Specifically, we




                                              14
simulate the fraction of children under age 18 who would have been eligible for public

health insurance had their families lived in a given state in a given year (after adjusting

financial variables for inflation), using the 1990 Public Use Micro Sample (5 percent) of

the Census. This produces an index that measures the generosity of public assistance

health insurance in a given state in a given year.



                                        5. Empirical Results

         We initially estimate the probability that an individual has health insurance

coverage as a function of macroeconomic conditions and basic demographic

characteristics while excluding employment status, and then we re-estimate our models

controlling for employment status in order to determine the proportion of the correlation

explained by changes in employment. Each cell of each of our tables contains, from top

to bottom, the logit fixed-effects coefficient, the t statistic in parentheses, and the

marginal effect italicized in square brackets.20

         In measuring the correlation between insurance status and the macroeconomy one

must first decide what aspects of the macroeconomy to examine. A naive approach

would be to use an indicator variable for recession as the sole measure of the

macroeconomy; this ignores variation in intensity of recession and changes in the

macroeconomy when not in recession. We predict that recession is associated with a

lower probability of coverage, but we find for both men and women that the coefficient

on the recession indicator is not statistically significant in regressions concerning

coverage through any source and coverage through one’s employer. However, the

20
  Marginal effects are evaluated at the mean of the regressors in the sample. Given the number of
observations in the SIPP sample, it was not computationally feasible to estimate marginal effects for each
person in order to report the mean value of the marginal effect in the sample.


                                                    15
probability that men and children are covered through government-provided insurance is

negative and statistically significant. Men are 2.2 percent less likely, and children are

1.59 percent less likely, to be covered by the government during recession.

       The null results for coverage through any source and coverage through an

employer may be partly due to differences in health insurance and health care markets

(such as the extent of mandated benefits) between the time of the recession in our data

(1990-1991) and the more recent years in the data. However, the most likely explanation

is that recession alone is an insufficient measure of the relevant macroeconomic

dynamics that affect health insurance coverage. For example, because unemployment

rate is a lagging indicator of recession, if unemployment rate is an important

macroeconomic factor affecting health insurance coverage, coverage will trough after the

recession is over. In short, recession may be an inaccurate measure of the meaningful

ways in which the macroeconomy affects coverage. As a result, for the remainder of this

paper we measure macroeconomic conditions using both state unemployment rate and

real per capita gross state product.

       Table 2 contains results for males in the SIPP. In the first row, our prediction that

higher unemployment rates will be associated with a lower probability of coverage is

confirmed for both coverage through any source and that through an individual’s

employer. The marginal effects indicate that a one percentage point increase in state

unemployment rate is associated with a 0.7 percent decrease in the probability of any

coverage for men. While this seems like a small effect, we show in the discussion section

that this implies that more than 800,000 adult men lost coverage during the 2001

recession.




                                             16
       The second row of Table 2 confirms our prediction that higher GSP is associated

with a higher probability of coverage. A $1,000 per capita increase in real GSP is

associated with a 0.6 percent increase in the probability that a man has health insurance

from any source.

       We lacked predictions of the sign of the coefficients in regressions concerning

government-provided coverage; the last column of Table 2 indicates that the coefficient

on unemployment is not statistically significant, while that on GSP is positive and

significant at the 10 percent level, the latter suggesting that government coverage works

somewhat pro-cyclically for men.

       Table 3 presents the analogous results for women. While coverage through any

source is not sensitive to macroeconomic conditions for women, coverage through

specific sources is. Specifically, the probability that a woman is covered through an

employer is negatively correlated, and the probability that she is covered through

Medicaid is positively correlated, with state unemployment rate. These results suggest

that Medicaid operates counter-cyclically by enrolling women left uninsured by

employers; the net result is that unemployment is uncorrelated with coverage. A one

percentage point increase in unemployment rate decreases the probability of coverage

through an employer by 0.78 percent, but raises the probability of coverage through

Medicaid by 0.68 percent. It makes sense that Medicaid would operate more counter-

cyclically for women than men given the gender difference in program eligibility.

       Results for children are presented in Table 4 and they resemble those for adult

women. Unemployment and real GSP are not correlated with the probability of coverage

through any source, but unemployment rate is positively correlated with the probability




                                            17
of government coverage. Specifically, a one percentage point increase in unemployment

is associated with a 1.04 percent increase in the probability a child is covered by

Medicaid or SCHIP.21 A $1,000 increase in real per capita GSP is associated with a 0.47

percent decrease in the probability of coverage through these public sources. These

results likely reflect the counter-cyclical nature of Medicaid and SCHIP; when

unemployment rates are high and children lose employer-provided health insurance

because their parents have lost their jobs, SCHIP and Medicaid expand their coverage of

children and the net effect is that the probability a child is covered through any source is

uncorrelated with the unemployment rate.

        One important way that the macroeconomy affects individuals’ health insurance

status is through their employment status (Bennefield, 1998). To determine how the

macroeconomy correlates with the probability of employment, we regressed an indicator

for current employment on the same set of regressors as earlier. The results, which are

contained in Table 5, reveal that both women and men, are, predictably, less likely to be

employed when state unemployment rates are high. A one percentage point rise in state

unemployment is associated with a decrease in the probability of employment of 2.3

percent for men and a 1.11 percent for women. A $1,000 increase in real per capita GSP

is associated with an increase in the probability of employment of 1.13 percent for men

and 0.33 percent for women. The marginal effects of both unemployment rate and GSP

suggest that the employment of men is more pro-cyclical than that of women.

        The NLSY contains certain information about health insurance options that is not

available in the SIPP. For example, the NLSY asks respondents whether their employer

21
  The 1996 SIPP does not specifically ask about the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP)
because of the timing of the survey versus SCHIP enactment, although children on SCHIP may be recorded
under the Medicaid question in the latter part of the 1996 SIPP Panel.


                                                 18
offered them health insurance coverage. It also asks whether they are currently covered

by their own employer, which allows us to measure take-up of employer offers.

         The correlation of employer offers of health insurance coverage with

macroeconomic conditions for the sample of employed NLSY respondents is presented in

Table 6.22 In addition to controlling for the earlier set of regressors, we also add an

indicator for whether the employee is a part-time worker (defined as 35 hours a week or

less). Employer offers to men are more sensitive to state unemployment rate than those

to women; a one percentage point increase in unemployment rate is associated with a

decrease in the probability that one’s employer offers health insurance coverage of 0.28

percent for males and a 0.09 percent for females. This discrepancy is probably not due to

employers having different policies toward the two genders, but is likely attributable to

differences in occupation and sector or industry of occupation.

         Cutler (2002) finds that employee take-up rates fell during the 1990s. We test for

changes in take-up rates of employer-offered health insurance during periods of high

unemployment. Specifically, we regressed an indicator variable for whether one receives

health insurance coverage through one’s own employer on macroeconomic variables for

the sample of NLSY respondents who were both employed and offered health insurance

coverage by their employer. The results are presented in Table 7. The coefficient on

unemployment rate is statistically significant for women; a one percentage point increase

in local unemployment rate is associated with a 3.12 percent increase in the probability of

take-up for women; the results for men are not statistically significant at the 10 percent

level. One story consistent with this gender discrepancy is that families tend to take up

22
  Note that the data on employer offers are at the employee level. As a result, large employers are likely to
be over-represented in the data, biasing our estimates of the willingness of employers to offer health
insurance.


                                                     19
offers from the husband’s employer, no matter what the macroeconomic conditions.

When unemployment rates rise, husbands are less likely to have a job or be offered

coverage, so wives are more likely to take up offers of coverage from their own

employers. Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that an improved

macroeconomy is one reason that take-up rates fell among women during the 1990s.

        We next measure the extent to which macroeconomic conditions are correlated

with insurance status conditional on employment status. Tables 8 and 9 are comparable

to Tables 2 and 3 with the sole difference that indicator variables for employment and

part-time employment have been added to the set of regressors. The coefficients on the

indicator variables for employment and part-time employment are uniformly large and

statistically significant, confirming that employment status has a large impact on the

probability of coverage.

        Tables 8 and 9 indicate that, even controlling for employment status, certain

macroeconomic conditions remain correlated with the probability of health insurance

coverage for men. In Table 2, before controlling for employment status, a one percentage

point rise in unemployment was associated with a 0.7 percent decrease in the probability

of health insurance coverage for men. In Table 8, after controlling for employment

status, the associated decrease is 0.29 percent and this correlation is not statistically

significant. Addition of the controls for employment and part-time employment lower

the increase in the probability of any health insurance coverage associated with a $1,000

increase in real per capita GSP from 0.6 percent to 0.48 percent, both of which are

statistically significant.




                                              20
       For men, unemployment rate remains statistically significant in regressions for

coverage through an employer. Addition of the controls for employment and part-time

employment lower the decrease in the probability of any health insurance coverage

associated with a one point increase in the unemployment rate from 1.25 percent to 0.66

percent.

       Our measures of the macroeconomy were not correlated with the probability of

coverage through any source for women in Table 3, when we did not control for

employment or part-time employment. However, unemployment is correlated with the

probability of employer coverage for women in Table 3; specifically, a one-point increase

in unemployment rate is associated with a 0.78 percent decrease in the probability of

coverage through one’s own employer. After controlling for employment in Table 9, a

one-point increase in unemployment is associated with a 0.54 percent decrease in the

probability of coverage through one’s own employer; controlling for employment has

reduced the correlation by about a third.

       Overall, we conclude that employment status is a major pathway through which

macroeconomic conditions affect the probability of health insurance coverage. Yet even

after controlling for employment status, the macroeconomy still has a strong correlation

with coverage through specific sources.

       We conduct sensitivity checks to gauge the robustness of our findings. The

results are not presented in table form in this paper but are available upon request.

       We experimented with controlling for the employment rate instead of the

unemployment rate. The first, but not the second, denominator includes people who are

out of the labor force. We find that the coefficient on employment rate is statistically




                                             21
significant in the same regressions in which that on unemployment rate is statistically

significant and that the absolute values are similar, although, predictably, the two have

opposite signs.

        In our primary results we use state-level unemployment rate. The restricted-

access geocode for the NLSY allows us to merge county unemployment rates to the

individual observations and thereby determine whether our results differ when we use a

measure of unemployment from a smaller geographic area. We find very similar results

when we use county rather than state unemployment rate in the NLSY regressions.



                                      6. Conclusion

        This paper measures the correlation between macroeconomic conditions and

health insurance coverage. We control for both individual and year fixed effects, so our

identifying variation is within people over time of deviations from the national mean for

that year.

        We find significant gender differences. For men, the probability of any health

insurance coverage is negatively correlated with unemployment rate and positively

correlated with real per capita gross state product. Specifically, a one percentage point

increase in state unemployment rate is associated with a decrease in the probability of

health insurance coverage through any source of 0.70 percent, and a $1,000 increase in

real per capita GSP is associated with an increase in the probability of coverage through

any source of 0.6 percent. In contrast, neither of these macroeconomic measures is

significantly correlated with coverage through any source for women or children. This

difference in results between men, women, and children is likely due to Medicaid and




                                            22
SCHIP working counter-cyclically to enroll women and children who lose employer-

provided coverage during periods of high unemployment.

        Our prediction that an indicator variable for national recession would be

negatively correlated with the probability of health insurance coverage was not supported

by the data; in most cases the correlation is not statistically significant. This likely

reflects the fact that unemployment rate is the most relevant aspect of the macroeconomy

for health insurance status, and unemployment, as a lagging indicator of recession, tends

to peak after recessions. Our finding may also be due to differences in health insurance

and health care markets between the recession and more recent years in the data.

        Employment status is correlated with both macroeconomic conditions and with

the probability of health insurance coverage. Changes in employment status explain

between a third and a half of the correlation between employer-provided health insurance

coverage and unemployment rates for men and women. However, even after controlling

for employment status, the macroeconomy still has a strong correlation with coverage

through specific sources.

        This paper also finds that employer offers of health insurance are sensitive to the

unemployment rate; this correlation is stronger for men than women, likely reflecting

gender differences in occupation and industry. Also, women (but not men) appear to be

more likely to take up employer-offered health insurance when unemployment rates are

high.

        From March to November of 2001 the U.S. experienced an economic recession.

We can use our estimates of the historic correlation between health insurance coverage

and unemployment rate and GSP to predict the number of Americans who lost health




                                              23
insurance during the recession. During the 2001 recession, the national unemployment

rate rose from 4.2 percent to 5.6 percent and real per capita GDP rose from $31,827 to

$31,892. Based on these changes and our regression results, we estimate that roughly

851,000 Americans lost health insurance during the 2001 recession. Our estimates

indicate that almost all of those who lost health insurance were adult men; specifically,

that 827,000 of the 851,000 were men. Our estimate is less than that of Families USA

(2002), which estimated that two million Americans lost health insurance due to

increased unemployment between March and December of 2001. It should be kept in

mind when comparing these estimates that that of Families USA was based on an extra

month (December 2001) and was based on different data (CPS rather than SIPP). In

addition, the Families USA study did not take into account the gain in health insurance

coverage during the recession that occurred as a result of a slight rise in per-capita GSP.

       Our estimates can also be used to estimate whether enough Americans have

gained coverage during the current recovery to fully offset the loss of coverage during the

recession. Between the end of the recession in November 2001 and August of 2003, the

national unemployment rate rose from 5.6 percent to 6.1 percent and real per capita GDP

rose from 31,892 to 33,191. Based on these figures, we estimate that roughly 616,000

Americans gained health insurance coverage during the current recovery. This is less

than the number of Americans we estimate lost coverage during the recession, suggesting

that roughly 235,000 fewer Americans had health insurance coverage in August 2003

than had coverage in March 2001 when the recession began.

       We emphasize that our estimates cover only those who lost (or gained) health

insurance because of changes in the macroeconomy. Because of other changes in health




                                             24
insurance markets, labor markets, or society, additional people may have lost (or gained)

health insurance during the periods we study, which is one factor to consider when

comparing our estimates to recent Census estimates of the number of persons who lost

health insurance for any reason during calendar years 2001 and 2002.

        We stress that because the changes in probabilities of coverage are multiplied by a

large number of Americans, small changes in parameter estimates can result in large

changes in the estimates of Americans losing or gaining health insurance coverage. We

encourage readers to focus on the larger conclusions that the macroeconomy (in

particular, unemployment rate) is correlated with the probability of health insurance

coverage, that this correlation is only partly explained by changes in employment status,

that government-provided coverage for women and children is effectively counter-

cyclical, and that more Americans likely lost health insurance during the 2001 recession

than have gained it during the current recovery, than to assign great precision to the

estimated number of Americans losing health insurance during recession or gaining it

during the recovery.

        We close with a caveat that caution should be used when estimates derived from

the last decade are used to estimate the impact of the current recession. Several factors

have changed that may affect the relationship between the macroeconomy and health

insurance coverage. For example, more couples are dual-earner, suggesting that the

impact of one spouse losing employer-provided health insurance may be less today than

in the past.




                                             25
                                     References
Bennefield, Robert L. 1996. “A Comparative Analysis of Health Insurance Coverage
        Estimates: Data from CPS and SIPP.” #9608. (Bureau of the Census, U. S.
        Department of Commerce: Washington, DC).
Bennefield, Robert L. 1998. “Dynamics of Economic Well Being: Health Insurance
        1993-1995. Who Loses Coverage and for How Long.” Current Population
        Reports. August. (U. S. Census Bureau: Washington, D.C.).
Business Cycle Dating Committee, National Bureau of Economic Research. 2003. “The
        NBER’s Business-Cycle Dating Procedure.” July 17.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. "Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of
        Medical Care, and Child Health." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111: 431-66.
Cutler, David. 2002. “Employee Costs and the Decline in Health Insurance Coverage.”
        NBER Working Paper #9036.
Doty, Michelle M., and Cathy Schoen. 2001. “Maintaining Health Insurance During a
        Recession: Findings from The Commonwealth Fund 2001 Health Insurance
        Survey.” Issue Brief. (The Commonwealth Fund: New York). December.
Doyle, Joseph J. 2001. “Does Health Insurance Affect Treatment Decisions & Patient
        Outcomes? Using Automobile Accidents as Unexpected Health Shocks.”
        Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.
Families USA. 2002. “2 Million Americans Lost Their Health Insurance in 2001:
        Largest One-Year Increase in Nearly a Decade.” Press release. February 12.
Gilmer, Todd, and Richard Kronick. 2001. “Calm Before the Storm: Expected Increase
        in the Number of Uninsured Americans.” Health Affairs 20(6): 207-210.
Glied, Sherry, and Kathrine Jack. 2003. “Macroeconomic Conditions, Health Care
        Costs, and the Distribution of Health Insurance.” NBER Working Paper #10029.
Gruber, Jon, and Larry Levitt. 2002. “Rising Unemployment and the Uninsured.”
        (Kaiser Family Foundation: Menlo Park, CA). January.
Barry T. Hirsch, David A. Macpherson, and Wayne G. Vroman. 2001. "Estimates of
        Union Density by State,” Monthly Labor Review," 124(7): 51-55. July.
        (Accompanying data online at http://www.trinity.edu/bhirsch) Downloaded
        12/2002.
Holahan, John, and Bowen Garrett. 2001. “Rising Unemployment and Medicaid.”
        Health Policy Online. October.
        http://www.urban.org/UploadedPDF/410306_HPOnline_1.pdf
Jacoby, Melissa B., Teresa A. Sullivan, and Elizabeth Warren. 2000. “Medical Problems
        and Bankruptcy Filings.” Harvard Law School Public Law and Legal Theory
        Working Paper Series #008, April.
Ku, L and B. Garrett. 2000 “How Welfare Reform and Economic Factors Affected
        Medicaid Participation:1984-96.” Assessing the New Federalism Discussion
        Paper, Number 00-01. (The Urban Institute: Washington, D.C.).
Lambrew, Jeanne M. 2001. “How the Slowing U.S. Economy Threatens Employer-
        Based Health Insurance.” (The Commonwealth Fund: New York). November.
Levitt, K. C. Smith, C. Cowan, H. Lazenby, and A. Martin. 2002. “Inflation Spurs Health
        Spending in 2000.” Health Affairs, 21(1): 172-181.



                                          26
Marquis, M. Susan, and Stephen H. Long. 2001. “Employer Health Insurance and Local
        Labor Market Conditions.” International Journal of Health Care Finance and
        Economics, 1(3-4): 273-292.
Mills, Robert J. 2002. “Health Insurance Coverage: 2001.” Current Population Reports.
        September. (U. S. Census Bureau: Washington, D.C.).
Mills, Robert J., and Shailesh Bhandari. 2003. “Health Insurance Coverage in the
        United States: 2002.” Current Population Reports. September. (U. S. Census
        Bureau: Washington, D.C.).
National Association of State Budget Officers. 2002. State Expenditure Report 2001.
        World wide web content.
        http://www.nasbo.org/Publications/PDFs/nasbo2001exrep.pdf
Pear, Robert and Robin Toner. 2002, “States Face Hard Choices on Medicaid Cuts” New
        York Times, January 14, p.1.
Public Information Office, National Bureau of Economic Research. 2002. “Business
        Cycle Expansions and Contractions.” Press Release.
Rice, Thomas. 1999. “Subsidizing COBRA: An Option for Expanding Health Insurance
        Coverage” (Kaiser Foundation: Washington, D.C.).
Ruhm, Christopher J. 2003. “Good Times Make You Sick.” Journal of Health
        Economics, 24(4): 637-658.
Ruhm, Christopher J. 2000. “Are Recessions Good for Your Health?” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 115(2): 617-650.
Weissman, J. S., C. Gastonis, and A. M. Epstein. 1992. “Rates of Avoidable
        Hospitalization by Insurance Status in Massachusetts and Maryland.” Journal of
        the American Medical Association 268(17): 2388-2394.




                                         27
                                      Table 1
                                       SIPP
      Whether Covered by Health Insurance as a Function of Current Recession
         Logit Fixed Effects Coefficients, t Statistics and Marginal Effects

                    Group                 Coverage            Coverage          Coverage
                                          Through             Through           Through
                                         Any Source             Own            Government
                                                              Employer

                    Men                     -0.0082            0.0341              -0.109
                  N=731,749                  (-0.29)            (1.42)             (-2.02)
                                            [-0.002]           [0.008]            [-0.022]

                   Women                    0.0168             0.0085             -0.0128
                  N=800,782                  (0.59)             (0.35)             (-0.31)
                                            [0.004]            [0.002]           [-0.0032]

                   Children                 0.0247               N.A.            -0.06352
                  N=703,109                  (0.84)                                (-1.80)
                                            [0.000]                              [-0.0159]
Notes:
    1) Logit coefficients appear first, with t statistics in parentheses and marginal effects in italics
       underneath, in that order.
    2) Data: pooled 1990-1996 waves of the SIPP. Sample includes all individuals between the ages of
       17 and 64 years of age regardless of employment status. The children’s regression contains
       individuals under 18 years of age.
    3) Dependent variables: column 1: indicator variable that equals one if individual covered by health
       insurance from any source and zero otherwise; column 2: indicator variable that equals one if
       individual is covered by employer health insurance in own name and zero otherwise; column 3:
       indicator variable for any type of government provided health insurance. For children, this
       excludes Medicare. Government provided coverage for adults includes Medicare, Medicaid, other
       free or subsidized public assistance health insurance, or Armed Forces related health insurance
       provided by the government. For children, the list excludes Medicare since the SIPP did not ask
       about children’s Medicare status.
    4) Other regressors: Individual fixed effects, year fixed effects, Medicare hospital wage index, union
       coverage rate in the state, children’s Medicaid generosity index of the state, highest grade
       completed, marital status, number of children in the family, and age. For the children’s regression,
       the list excludes highest grade completed, marital status and number of children in the family.




                                                    28
                                         Table 2
                                        SIPP Men
                         Whether Covered by Health Insurance
                      as a Function of Macroeconomic Conditions
            Logit Fixed Effects Coefficients, t Statistics and Marginal Effects

                  Variable                Coverage           Coverage          Coverage
                 Or Statistic             Through            Through           Through
                                         Any Source            Own            Government
                                                             Employer

            State Unemployment              -.0286             -0.0525            -0.0138
                    Rate                    (-3.19)             (-6.91)           ( -0.91)
                                           [-0.007]           [-0.0125]          [-0.0024]

                 Per Capita                 0.0241             0.0271             0.0178
                 Real G.S.P.                 (3.11)            (4.01)             (1.67)
                                            [0.006]           [0.0064]           [0.0032]

            Mean of Dependent                 0.79               0.55               0.09
                Variable

                 Number of                 731,749            731,749             731,749
                Observations


Notes:
    1) Data: pooled 1990-1996 waves of the SIPP. Sample includes all men between the ages of 17 and
       64 years of age regardless of employment status.
    2) Dependent variables: column 1: indicator variable that equals one if individual covered by health
       insurance from any source and zero otherwise; column 2: indicator variable that equals one if
       individual is covered by employer health insurance in own name and zero otherwise; column 3:
       indicator variable for any type of government provided health insurance. Government provided
       coverage includes Medicare, Medicaid, other free or subsidized public assistance health insurance,
       or Armed Forces related health insurance provided by the government.
    3) Other regressors: Individual fixed effects, year fixed effects, Medicare hospital wage index, union
       coverage rate in the state, children’s Medicaid generosity index of the state, highest grade
       completed, marital status, number of children in the family, and age.




                                                     29
                                         Table 3
                                      SIPP Women
                         Whether Covered by Health Insurance
                      as a Function of Macroeconomic Conditions
            Logit Fixed Effects Coefficients, t Statistics and Marginal Effects

      Variable            Coverage              Coverage            Coverage           Coverage
     Or Statistic        Through Any            Through             Through            Through
                           Source                 Own               Medicaid          Government
                                                Employer

       State                -0.00112             -0.0345               0.039              -0.0062
   Unemployment               (-0.12)             (-4.44)             (2.97)               (-0.54)
       Rate                 [-0.0003]           [-0.0078]            [0.0068]            [-0.0015]

      Per Capita              0.0094              -0.002              -0.0217             -0.0034
      Real G.S.P.             (1.29)              (-0.33)              (-2.1)              (-0.40)
                             [0.0023]           [-0.0004]            [-0.0038]           [-0.0008]

       Mean of                 0.77                 0.37                0.10                0.14
      Dependent
       Variable

      Number of              800,782             800,782              800,782             800,782
     Observations


Notes:
    1) Data: pooled 1990-1996 waves of the SIPP. Sample includes all women between the ages of 17
       and 64 years of age regardless of employment status.
    2) Dependent variables: column 1: indicator variable that equals one if individual covered by health
       insurance from any source and zero otherwise; column 2: indicator variable that equals one if
       individual is covered by employer health insurance in own name and zero otherwise; column 3:
       indicator variable for Medicaid coverage; column 4: indicator variable for any type of government
       provided health insurance. Government provided coverage includes Medicare, Medicaid, other
       free or subsidized public assistance health insurance, or Armed Forces related health insurance
       provided by the government.
    3) Other regressors: Individual fixed effects, year fixed effects, Medicare hospital wage index, union
       coverage rate in the state, children’s Medicaid generosity index of the state, highest grade
       completed, marital status, number of children in the family, and age.




                                                   30
                                         Table 4
                                          SIPP
                    Whether Child Has Health Insurance Coverage
                      as a Function of Macroeconomic Conditions
            Logit Fixed Effects Coefficients, t Statistics and Marginal Effects

              Variable               Coverage         Coverage           Coverage
             Or Statistic            Through          Through            Through
                                    Any Source       Medicaid or        Government
                                                       SCHIP

              State                    0.0098            0.0416            0.0321
        Unemployment Rate               (1.07)           (4.02)            (3.29)
                                       [0.000]          [0.0104]          [0.0079]

              Per Capita               0.0102            -0.0190           0.0004
              Real G.S.P.               (1.24)            (-2.20)          (0.05)
                                       [0.000]          [-0.0047]         [0.0001]

         Mean of Dependent              0.684             0.190             0.217
             Variable

              Number of               703,109           703,109            703,109
             Observations


Notes:
    1) Data: pooled 1990-1996 waves of the SIPP. Sample includes all children under the age of 18.
    2) Dependent variables: column 1: indicator variable that equals one if child covered by any health
       insurance from any source and zero otherwise; column 2: indicator variable that equals one if child
       covered by Medicaid or SCHIP and zero otherwise; column 3: indicator variable that equals one if
       child has government-provided health insurance coverage and zero otherwise. Government
       provided coverage includes Medicaid, other free or subsidized public assistance health insurance,
       or Armed Forces related health insurance provided by the government. The list excludes
       Medicare since the SIPP did not ask about children’s Medicare status.
    3) Other regressors: Individual fixed effects, year fixed effects, Medicare hospital wage index, union
       coverage rate in the state, children’s Medicaid generosity index of the state, and age.




                                                   31
                                         Table 5
                                          SIPP
                             Whether Currently Employed
                      as a Function of Macroeconomic Conditions
            Logit Fixed Effects Coefficients, t Statistics and Marginal Effects

                                Variable                       Men         Women
                               Or Statistic

                                State                      -0.0926          -0.0449
                          Unemployment Rate                 (-11.58)         (-6.33)
                                                            [-0.023]       [-0.0111]

                               Per Capita                    0.0455         0.0134
                               Real G.S.P.                   (5.65)         (2.32)
                                                            [0.0113]       [0.0033]

                              Mean of                         0.802          0.657
                          Dependent Variable

                               Number of                     731,749        800,782
                               Observations


Notes:
    1) Data: pooled 1990-1996 waves of the SIPP. Sample includes all individuals between the ages of
       17 and 64 years of age regardless of employment status.
    2) Dependent variable equals one if employed during the survey month and zero otherwise.
    3) Other regressors: Individual fixed effects, year fixed effects, Medicare hospital wage index, union
       coverage rate in the state, children’s Medicaid generosity index of the state, highest grade
       completed, marital status, number of children in the family, and age.




                                                    32
                                        Table 6
                                         NLSY
                 Whether Current Employer Offers Health Insurance
                     as a Function of Macroeconomic Conditions
           Logit Fixed Effects Coefficients, t Statistics, and Marginal Effects

                              Variable                       Men           Women
                             Or Statistic

                              State                         -.0549          -.0223
                        Unemployment Rate                   (-4.66)         (-1.70)
                                                           [-.0028]        [-.0009]

                             Per Capita                     .0046            .0116
                             Real G.S.P.                    (0.76)           (1.64)
                                                           [.0002]          [.0005]

                              Part-Time                     -1.349          -.1.250
                               Worker                      (-27.21)        (-31.46)
                                                           [-.0693]        [-.0510]

                            Mean of                           .76             .76
                        Dependent Variable

                             Number of                      33,206          27,759
                            Observations



Notes:
    1) Data: 15 pooled years of the NLSY. Sample includes only those currently employed.
    2) Dependent variable equals one if current employer offers health insurance coverage and zero
       otherwise.
    3) Marginal probabilities are computed using the sample means of the regressors.
    4) Other regressors: Individual fixed effects, year fixed effects, Medicare hospital wage index,
       highest grade completed, age, family size, and indicator variables for marital status.




                                                   33
                                        Table 7
                                         NLSY
           Whether Employee Takes Up Employer Offer of Health Insurance
                     as a Function of Macroeconomic Conditions
           Logit Fixed Effects Coefficients, t Statistics, and Marginal Effects

                               Variable                      Men           Women
                              Or Statistic

                               State                         -.0248         .0613
                         Unemployment Rate                   (-.77)         (1.79)
                                                            [.0039]        [.0312]

                              Per Capita                    -.0003          -.0090
                              Real G.S.P.                    (-.02)          (-.60)
                                                           [-.0001]        [-.0033]

                               Part-Time                    -.4788          -.6243
                                Worker                      (-3.56)         (-6.86)
                                                           [-.0752]        [-.1118]

                             Mean of                           .85            .76
                         Dependent Variable

                              Number of                      8,992          8,669
                             Observations



Notes:
    1) Data: 15 pooled years of the NLSY. Sample includes only those currently employed.
    2) Dependent variable equals one if current employer offers health insurance coverage and zero
       otherwise.
    3) Marginal probabilities are computed using the sample means of the regressors.
    4) Other regressors: Individual fixed effects, year fixed effects, Medicare hospital wage index,
       highest grade completed, age, family size, and indicator variables for marital status.




                                                   34
                                        Table 8
                                       SIPP Men
                        Whether Covered by Health Insurance
         as a Function of Macroeconomic Conditions and Employment Status
           Logit Fixed Effects Coefficients, t Statistics, and Marginal Effects

                  Variable               Coverage           Coverage           Coverage
                 Or Statistic            Through            Through            Through
                                        Any Source            Own             Government
                                                            Employer

           State Unemployment              -0.0116            -0.0291            -0.0316
                   Rate                     (-1.28)            (-3.62)            (-2.05)
                                          [-0.0029]          [-0.0066]          [-0.0057]

                 Per Capita                 0.0195            0.0184             0.0247
                 Real G.S.P.                 (2.5)            (2.66)             (2.27)
                                           [0.0048]          [0.0042]           [0.0044]

                  Indicator:                0.3761            0.9651             -0.7077
                  Employed                  (20.71)           (50.04)            (-22.00)
                                           [0.0930]          [0.2204]           [-0.1268]

                 Indicator:                -0.6587            -1.7287            0.7113
             Part-Time Worker              (-36.37)           (-89.38)           (21.66)
                                          [-0.1628]          [-0.3949]          [0.1274]

            Mean of Dependent                0.79               0.55               0.09
                Variable

                 Number of                 731,749            731,749            731,749
                Observations

Notes:
    1) Data: pooled 1990-1996 waves of the SIPP. Sample includes all men between the ages of 17 and
       64 years of age regardless of employment status.
    2) Dependent variables: column 1: indicator variable that equals one if individual covered by health
       insurance from any source and zero otherwise; column 2: indicator variable that equals one if
       individual is covered by employer health insurance in own name and zero otherwise; column 3:
       indicator variable for any type of government provided health insurance. Government provided
       coverage includes Medicare, Medicaid, other free or subsidized public assistance health insurance,
       or Armed Forces related health insurance provided by the government.
    3) Other regressors: Individual fixed effects, year fixed effects, Medicare hospital wage index,
       percent unionization in state, children’s Medicaid eligibility index, highest grade completed,
       marital status, presence of children in the family, and age.




                                                    35
                                        Table 9
                                     SIPP Women
                        Whether Covered by Health Insurance
         as a Function of Macroeconomic Conditions and Employment Status
           Logit Fixed Effects Coefficients, t Statistics, and Marginal Effects

      Variable            Coverage             Coverage             Coverage           Coverage
     Or Statistic        Through Any           Through              Through            Through
                           Source                Own                Medicaid          Government
                                               Employer

       State                  0.0047             -0.0234             0.0182              -0.0240
   Unemployment               (0.52)              (-2.76)            (1.34)               (-2.06)
       Rate                  [0.0011]           [-0.0054]           [0.0030]             [-0.006]

      Per Capita              0.0087             -0.0048             -0.0210             -0.0014
      Real G.S.P.              (1.2)              (-0.74)             (-2.00)             (-0.16)
                             [0.0021]           [-0.0011]           [-0.0035]           [-0.0003]

      Indicator:              0.1259              1.275              -0.9753             -0.8698
      Employed                (7.18)             (64.88)             (-36.70)            (-36.96)
                             [0.0301]            [0.292]            [-0.1604]           [-0.2163]

      Indicator:             -0.4683              -1.827             0.8604              0.7412
      Part-Time              (-27.25)           (-104.62)            (31.07)             (30.50)
       Worker                [-0.112]            [-0.418]           [0.1415]            [0.1844]

       Mean of                 0.77                0.37                0.10                0.14
      Dependent
       Variable

      Number of              800,782             800,782             800,782             800,782
     Observations


Notes:
    1) Data: pooled 1990-1996 waves of the SIPP. Sample includes all women between the ages of 17
       and 64 years of age regardless of employment status.
    2) Dependent variables: column 1: indicator variable that equals one if individual covered by health
       insurance from any source and zero otherwise; column 2: indicator variable that equals one if
       individual is covered by employer health insurance in own name and zero otherwise; column 3:
       indicator variable for Medicaid coverage; column 4: indicator variable for any type of government
       provided health insurance. Government provided coverage includes Medicare, Medicaid, other
       free or subsidized public assistance health insurance, or Armed Forces related health insurance
       provided by the government.
    3) Other regressors: Individual fixed effects, year fixed effects, Medicare hospital wage index,
       highest grade completed, children’s Medicaid generosity index of the state, marital status, number
       of children in the family, and age.



                                                   36
                                       Appendix Table 1A
                                   Summary Statistics of SIPP Data

                 Variable                       Number of         Mean      Standard     Minimum          Maximum
                                               Observations                 Deviation
Indicator: covered by own employer HI           1,532,531         0.460       0.498           0               1.0
Indicator: covered by any HI                    1,532,531         0.846        0.36           0               1.0
Indicator: covered by Medicaid                  1,532,531          0.069      0.253           0               1.0
Indicator: covered by government HI             1,532,531         0.115       0.319           0               1.0
Indicator: national recession                   1,532,531         0.061       0.239           0               1.0
State unemployment rate                         1,532,531          5.942      1.704          1.9             12.80
Hospital wage index                             1,329,731        8232.01     952.08         4080            12456
Per capita real gross state product             1,532,531          24.08       6.33         11.54           104.01
State Medicaid generosity                       1,532,531           .30       0.102         0.114            .797
Union coverage                                  1,532,531         17.22       6.70           3.8            31.89
Indicator: female                               1,532,531         0.522       0.499           0               1.0
Year                                            1,532,531         1994.4      2.84          1990             2000
Indicator: High-school dropout                  1,532,531         0.163       0.369           0               1.0
Indicator: High-school graduate                 1,532,531         0.333       0.471           0               1.0
Indicator: Some college                         1,532,531          0.281      0.449           0               1.0
Indicator: College graduate                     1,532,531         0.128       0.334           0               1.0
Age                                             1,532,531        38.666       12.48          18               64
Number of children in family                    1,532,531         0.903       1.187           0               12
Indicator: employed                             1,532,531         0.726       0.446           0               1.0
Indicator: employer part time                   1,532,531         0.386       0.486           0               1.0
Indicator: married                              1,532,531         0.596       0.490           0               1.0
Indicator: widowed                              1,532,531         0.022       0.148           0               1.0
Indicator: separated or divorced                1,532,531          0.129      0.334           0               1.0
Indicator: child covered by any HI               703,109           0.86        0.34           0               1.0
Indicator: child covered by government HI        703,109          0.217       0.412           0               1.0

   Notes:
       1) The sample for all but the last two items consists of adults (age 18-64). The sample for the last two
          items is all children under age 18.




                                                       37
                                    Appendix Table 1B:
                                Summary Statistics of NLSY Data

               Variable                    Number of     Mean      Standard    Minimum   Maximum
                                          Observations             Deviation
Indicator: employer offers HI               102,135       .743        .44         0          1
Indicator: took up employer offer of HI      56,179       .592        .49         0          1
Indicator: national recession               102,135       .077        .27         0          1
State unemployment rate                     102,135        6.44      2.21        1.7       21.6
Medicare Hospital Wage Index                 81,080      8409.09    958.67      4089      14870
State Medicaid generosity                   102,135       17.86      7.46        4.4       36.3
Union coverage                              102,135       .231       .115       .028       .769
Indicator: female                           102,135       .469        .50         0          1
Indicator: black                            102,135       .267        .44         0          1
Indicator: Hispanic                         102,135       .173        .38         0          1
Year                                        102,135      199.48      4.81       1983      2000
Highest grade completed                     102,135       12.94      2.33         0         20
Age                                         102,135       29.42      5.27        18         44
Family size                                 102,135        3.05      1.67         1         15
Indicator: employed                         102,135       .930        .26         0          1
Indicator: married, spouse present          102,135       .481        .50         0          1
Indicator: other marital status             102,135       .154        .36         0          1




                                                  38
