                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           HOW DO LEGAL DIFFERENCES AND
                        LEARNING AFFECT FINANCIAL CONTRACTS?

                                             Steven Kaplan
                                             Frederic Martel
                                             Per Stromberg

                                         Working Paper 10097
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10097


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2003




This research has been supported by the Kauffman Foundation, by the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation
and the Olin Foundation through grants to the Center for the Study of the Economy and the State, and by the
Center For Research in Security Prices. Ola Bengtsson, Alejandro Hajdenberg, Jonas Lindström, and Dali
Ma provided excellent research assistance. We are grateful to the venture capital partnerships for providing
data. We have received useful comments from Jim Brander, Ron Giammarino, Lucy White and seminar
participants at the SIFR Conference on Venture Capital and University of British Columbia. Contact
information: Steven Kaplan, Per Strömberg: University of Chicago Graduate School of Business, 1101 East
58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637; e-mail: skaplan@uchicago.edu, per.stromberg@gsb.uchicago.edu. Frederic
Martel: UBS Global Asset Management, Gessnerallee 3-5, CH-8005 Zurich; IMD; and University of
Lausanne; e-mail: frederic.martel@ubs.com. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Steven Kaplan, Frederic Martel, and Per Stromberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
How Do Legal Differences and Learning Affect Financial Contracts?
Steven Kaplan, Frederic Martel, and Per Stromberg
NBER Working Paper No. 10096
November 2003
JEL No. G24, G32

                                            ABSTRACT

We analyze venture capital (VC) investments in twenty-three non-U.S. countries and compare them

to VC investments in the U.S. We describe how the contracts allocate cash flow, board, liquidation,

and other control rights. In univariate analyses, contracts differ across legal regimes. At the same

time, however, more experienced VCs implement U.S.-style contracts regardless of legal regime.

In most specifications, legal regime becomes insignificant controlling for VC sophistication. VCs

who use U.S.-style contracts fail significantly less often. Financial contracting theories in the

presence of fixed costs of learning, therefore, appear to explain contracts along a wide range of legal

regimes.

Steven N. Kaplan
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
skaplan@uchicago.edu

Frederic Martel
University of Lausanne IMD
and UBS Global Asset Management
frederic.martel@ubs.com

Per Stromberg
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
per.stromberg@ghsb.uchicago.edu
1.         Introduction

           Financial contracting plays an important role in aligning incentives and mitigating agency

conflicts between investors and entrepreneurs, thus allowing new ventures to obtain financing.1

Studies of U.S. venture capital (VC) investing, such as Sahlman (1990) and Kaplan and

Strömberg (2003 and 2004), show that investor contracts carefully allocate cash flow rights,

liquidation rights, and control rights between the entrepreneur and the VC investor in order to

mitigate agency conflicts. Kaplan and Stromberg (2003 and 2004) also show that the

characteristics of U.S. VC contracts correspond well to the (optimal) contracts predicted by

financial contracting theories.

           At the same time, the large and growing literature in law and finance finds that legal and

institutional differences among countries appear to be important for the development and nature

of financial markets, and also for economic growth.2 The ability to design investments and

financial contracts is potentially dependent on various elements of the institutional environment

– the nature of corporate and contract law, the quality of legal enforcement, accounting systems,

tax regulations, financial markets, etc. If the institutional environment affects the types of

contracts that can be written, this could change the types of contracts that are optimal.

           This raises the question of whether the financial contracts observed in the U.S. are

optimal in other institutional environments. Theories of financial contracting would suggest yes

(because they assume property rights are enforced and little else). Alternatively, sufficiently

great institutional differences might lead to a negative answer. In this paper, we address this

question by studying VC investments across different institutional environments – 145



1
    See Hart (2001).
2
    See King and Levine (1993), Laporta et al. (1997, 1998, and 2000), and Rajan and Zingales (2003).
investments in 107 companies in 23 countries by 70 different lead VCs. The sample companies

are concentrated in Western European countries and other relatively “developed” countries.

       First, we describe how the contracts allocate cash flow, board, liquidation, and other

control rights. In univariate analyses, the contracts differ significantly across legal regimes.

While convertible preferred is the most commonly used security, it is used much less frequently

outside the U.S. than in the U.S. Partly as a result, VCs investing outside the U.S. deals have

weaker liquidation and exit rights. Non-U.S. investments also are less likely to use

contingencies – including milestones, vesting provisions and anti-dilution rights – resulting in

less high-powered cash flow incentives compared to their US counterparts.

       Next, we consider how the contracts vary across legal regimes. We find that the

contracts vary systematically across those regimes. In particular, investments in common law

countries are more likely to look like U.S. contracts while investments elsewhere are likely to

differ. Liquidation preferences, anti-dilution protections, vesting provisions and redemption

rights are more typical in common law countries while milestones are less common. These

results are similar to those found in Lerner and Schoar (2003) who study VC and private equity

investments in developing countries.

       Although contractual differences correlate with the institutional environment, they cannot

fully explain these differences. For example, investors can implement seniority clauses, anti-

dilution protection, redemption rights and vesting in non-common law countries like Germany,

France, and Sweden. In fact, we find that some VC funds implement U.S. contractual features in

those countries and across all the institutional environments in which they invest. In univariate

analyses, as VC size, VC age, and VC experience with U.S. VCs increase, VCs are more likely

to implement U.S. style contractual terms. This suggests that while it may not be easy or




                                                  2
obvious how to adapt contracts, with enough effort (or legal fees), VCs can replicate most U.S.-

style contracts.

       This leads us to compare the importance of legal regime versus learning and experience.

We estimate the determinants of contracts using regressions that include both legal variables and

measures of VC “sophistication.” We find that U.S.-style contracts are more likely when the

lead VC has previously syndicated with U.S. VCs, when the lead VC is from the U.S., and when

the VC is larger and older. In the presence of the VC sophistication variables, institutional

differences are relatively less important. The legal variables are not significant in most

specifications.

       The results on VC sophistication suggest that the U.S. model and U.S. contracts may be

optimal outside the U.S. We explore this possibility by studying the survival of the 70 VCs

represented as lead investors in our sample. As of August 2003, 59 of the 70 are still active

while 11 have not survived. We then separate the VC funds depending on the securities they

used when acting as lead investors. None of the 37 funds that exclusively used convertible

preferred (and U.S. style contracts) has failed. In contrast, 34% of the 29 funds that exclusively

used common stock (and non-U.S. style contracts) have not survived. Said another way, of the

11 funds that have not survived, all but one never used convertible preferred. While this does

not prove causality, the result strongly suggests that better funds use U.S. style contracts.

       Overall, then, we interpret our results as being most consistent with an explanation in

which financial contracting theories in the presence of fixed costs of learning appear to explain

contracts along a wide range of legal regimes. Based on this, we would predict more

convergence in contracts over time.




                                                  3
        Ours is not the first paper to study VC contracts outside of the U.S.3 Unlike this paper,

however, most previous studies focus on a single country and do not compare contracts across

institutional environments. Also, most of the studies do not analyze the actual contracts, but,

instead, rely on survey evidence and self-reporting from VC firms. This is problematic because

the studies critically depend on the details of the survey design and template. For example, as

Kaplan and Strömberg (2003) demonstrate, securities with different names can implement

identical allocations of cash flow and control rights (such as convertible preferred vs. “senior”

common stock), while securities with the same name can differ substantially in their rights (e.g.

standard vs. participating preferred stock).

        In contrast to earlier studies, but similar to ours, contemporaneous work by Lerner and

Schoar (2003) uses actual contracts in private equity investments in developing countries. We

view their sample and paper as an interesting complement to ours. They find similar results in

that contracts are significantly related to legal origin. While they do not focus on the

sophistication and learning effects that we consider, their results on legal origin are robust to

including a dummy variable for U.S. or U.K. based organization. There are at least three

possible explanations for the different result. First, legal differences may be more of a constraint

in developing countries (although we do not find such a result in the few developing country

investments in our sample). Second, they study primarily private equity investments in more

mature businesses rather than VC investments. It may be more difficult to contract around

existing assets. Finally, their sample may include investors with government ties who may have

different incentives from the investors we study. In our conclusion, we discuss how the findings



3
 See Bascha and Walz (2001) for Germany, Bengtsson and Lindström (2000) and Isaksson, Cornelius, Junghagen,
and Landström (1999) for Sweden, Cumming (2000, 2001) for Canada, Lauper (2000) for Switzerland, and Hege,




                                                     4
of a recent paper by Acemoglu and Johnson (2003) are potentially helpful in reconciling our

results with those in Lerner and Schoar (2003).

        Our paper also complements earlier work on global venture capital activity. In a cross-

country study, Jeng and Wells (2000) show that factors such as IPO activity, government policies

toward start-ups, and labor market rigidities help explain differences in aggregate venture capital

activity between countries. Similarly, Mayer, Schoors, and Yafeh (2001) argue that country

differences in the composition of investors who provide funds to VC firms (banks, insurance

companies, pension funds, private corporations) result in different VC portfolio characteristics

across countries with respect to stage, geography, and industry focus.

        The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we discuss the sample. In section 3, we

present our univariate analyses of the sample contracts and consider the (univariate) relation of

those contracts to legal and institutional factors, as well as VC characteristics. In section 4, we

present our multivariate results. In section 5, we relate the contractual terms to VC survival. In

section 6, we conclude.



2.      Sample

        2.1     Description

        We analyze 145 investments in 107 companies in 23 countries by 70 different lead VCs.

We obtained the investments from two sources – directly from VCs whom we know who invest

outside the U.S. and indirectly with the help of a limited partner (institutional investor) who

invests in non-U.S. VC partnerships. All of the VC partnerships were for profit, non-

governmental entities.



Palomino, and Schwienbacher (2003) for Europe.



                                                  5
       For each company and for each financing round for the company, we asked the VC to

provide the (1) term sheet; (2) stock and security purchase agreements; (3) company’s business

plan; and (4) the VC’s internal analysis of the investment. The amount of information we

obtained differs across investments and the different VCs who provided info.

       Table 1 presents summary information. Panel A organizes the observations by country

and legal origin, and reports the number of financing rounds, number of companies, number of

VCs, and country institutional characteristics. Investments from countries with common law,

civil law, German law, and Scandinavian law origins are well-represented. In addition, we have

five investments from countries of communist background.

       Panel B indicates that the sample is relatively recent with all but 8 of the investment

rounds were completed after 1997. In the analysis that follows, we compare the contracts in

these investments to those in Kaplan and Stromberg (20003) who use a sample of U.S.

investments that is roughly two years older.

       Panel C presents the industry distribution of the portfolio companies in our sample. The

greatest percentage of companies, 58%, is in software and internet. Just over 10% of the

companies are in each of hardware, telecommunications, and life sciences.

       Panel D provides additional information about the investments. We have the first VC

round for 89% of the companies and roughly 2/3 of the investments are early stage, meaning that

the companies are quite young and have a limited operating history. Finally, the average

investment is between $6 and $7 million with a median of just over $3 million.



       2.2     Sample selection issues

       In this section, we discuss potential selection issues concerning our sample. Our

companies and financings are not a random sample in that we obtained the data from VC firms


                                                 6
with whom we have a direct or indirect relationship.

        It is possible that we have a bias toward the more successful investments of a particular

VC. We think this is unlikely because the investments we obtained from the VCs we contacted

directly included their most recent deals while the investments we obtained with the help of the

limited partner were not selected by the VCs. Even if some performance bias exists, we do not

think it is likely to affect our results because we do not attempt to measure performance of

individual investments. Rather, we try to characterize what contracts look like across different

countries.

        The more serious potential bias is that we have selected the VC firms. It is possible that

the average VC in our sample is different from the average VC in any of the countries we study.

If this is so, then our sample averages may be inaccurate. However, there is, again, no reason to

believe that our results regarding cross-sectional differences across legal regimes and types of

VCs are biased in any way.

        Nevertheless, we acknowledge that the sample is selected and it is difficult to know the

extent of any bias. We have discussed the more likely biases and do not believe there are any

obvious red flags.



3.      Contract characteristics: Univariate analyses

        In this section, we present univariate analyses of the sample contracts and consider the

(univariate) relation of those contracts to legal and institutional factors, as well as VC

characteristics.




                                                  7
         3.1.   Non-U.S. versus U.S. financings

         The first two columns of table 2 describe the contracts in our sample and compare them

to the U.S. contracts in Kaplan and Strömberg (2003). There is much more variation in the

types of securities used outside the U.S. Whereas over 95% of the U.S. financings employed

some type of convertible preferred stock, fewer than 54% of the non-U.S. financings employed

convertible preferred. Ordinary common stock is more typical outside the U.S., used in almost

28% of financings versus fewer than 1% in the U.S. Cumming (2001) and Lerner and Schoar

(2003) obtain similar results. Financings outside the U.S. also make use of senior common stock

14.5% of the time. Although called “common stock,” senior common stock resembles

convertible preferred in that it always has a liquidation preference senior to ordinary common.

         Kaplan and Strömberg (2003) show that VC financings separately allocate cash flow

rights, board rights, voting rights, liquidation rights, and other control rights. Panels B to E of

table 2 compare these rights in the non-U.S. sample to those in the U.S. sample of our previous

paper.

         Kaplan and Strömberg (2003) find that VCs use anti-dilution rights, contingencies or

milestones, and vesting in order to increase the sensitivity of the founder’s cash flow rights to

performance, consistent with principal-agent theories. Panel B compares incentive mechanisms

that affect founder cash flow rights. We find that these mechanisms – anti-dilution rights (56%

vs. 94%), funding milestones (39% vs. 53%), and founder vesting (37% vs. 44%) – are all less

common outside the U.S.

         Kaplan and Strömberg (2003) also show that the allocation of liquidation rights is an

important feature of U.S. VC contracts. In the U.S., VC securities are almost always senior

(97% of financings) to common stock in liquidation for an amount equal to or greater than the

amount invested. The seniority of the VC claim is a standard prediction of many financial


                                                  8
contracting theories, such as classical moral hazard theories (Holmstrom (1979)), signaling and

screening theories (Ross (1977) and Diamond (1991)), as well as the “stealing” theories of debt

(Hart and Moore (1998)). Panel C indicates that VC liquidation preferences are smaller in non-

U.S. financings. In 34% of the non-U.S. financings, the VC security has a liquidation preference

less than the amount invested. It also is less common for non-U.S. financings to have a

liquidation preference that exceeds the amount invested (48% vs. 68%).

       Panel D compares the VC’s ability to force the liquidation of its investment. Redemption

rights give the VCs the ability to put their shares back to the company at some future date. When

used, the rights typically provide bargaining power to force a sale. Redemption rights are

present in 72% of the U.S. financings and only 34% of the non-U.S. financings. VCs can obtain

similar bargaining power by including “drag-along” rights together with seniority.4 Drag-along

rights force founders to sell their shares if the VCs decide to sell the company. When drag-

along rights and other senior exit mechanisms are combined with redemption rights, we find that

the VCs can force an exit in almost 64% of the non-U.S. financings.

       Consistent with control theories (Aghion and Bolton (1992) and Dessein (2002)), Kaplan

and Strömberg (2003) show that U.S. contracts allocate substantial control rights such as board

seats and voting rights to the VC. Panel E shows that VCs in non-U.S. financings are less likely

to obtain board control of the portfolio company (12% vs. 25%), despite obtaining a similar

percentage of board seats.

       Overall, then, the first two columns of table 2 suggest the VC contracts outside the U.S.

have weaker rights of all types than those in the U.S.




                                                 9
           3.2     Relation to legal origin

           There is a large recent literature that studies how differences in legal origins and

institutions affect various aspects of financial market activity across countries.5 Countries with

civil law origins and weaker outside investor protection tend to have smaller and less liquid

capital markets, more concentrated corporate ownership, lower corporate dividends, and lower

valuations. A few papers also have attempted to link such factors specifically to the extent of

VC activity.6

           The legal system may affect the design of financial contracts in such a way that certain

contractual provisions may be infeasible or more costly to enforce. In addition, the contracts

may need to incorporate new protective mechanisms to make up for the legal deficiencies.

We now consider how the non-U.S. contracts in our sample vary with the legal origin of the

country in which the portfolio company is located. The last five columns of table 2 classify the

non-U.S. contracts in our sample into one of five different legal regimes – common law, civil

law, German law, Scandinavian law, and communist background. Except for communist

background with only five contracts, we have at least 26 contracts in the other four legal regimes.

In our discussion, we generally will not refer to the results for the communist background

countries because of the small number of observations.

           Table 2 shows that for most provisions, common law country contracts tend to be closer

to U.S.-style than the contracts in countries with other legal origins. Common law country deals

tend to make greater use of convertible preferred while Scandinavian law country deals tend to

make the least use of such securities. Common law country contracts (1) include more anti-



4
    For an analysis of drag-along rights, see Chemla, Habib, and Ljungqvist (2003).
5
    See Laporta et al. (1997, 1998, and 2000), Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998).




                                                        10
dilution protection; (2) make greater use of vesting provisions; (3) are more likely to have a

liquidation preference at least equal to the amount invested; (4) are more likely to have some

type of exit mechanism; and (5) are the least likely to keep the founder in control of the board.

The one exception is that the common law country deals are the least likely to use milestones.

           Overall, these results suggest that legal origins / legal regimes affect the nature and types

of contracts that are written. This is consistent with the evidence in the LaPorta et al. papers that

countries differ in their corporate law and in the ability to write and enforce contracts



           3.3     Relation to legal, tax, and accounting institutions

           The results in the previous section indicate that legal origins matter for contracts, but do

not indicate why. In this section, we consider whether seven specific measures of differences in

legal rules, tax rules, accounting rules, and market institutions drive those results.

           First, we consider the “rule of law” index used by LaPorta et al. (1997). The index is a

measure of the quality of a country’s legal and enforcement system.7 The first column of table 3

indicates that U.S. style contracts are negatively correlated with the rule of law measure.

Convertible preferred, anti-dilution rights, liquidation preference, and exit provision are more

common in countries with low rule of law. One might interpret this result as showing that U.S.

style contracts are more appropriate when rule of law is low. There are two problems with this

interpretation. First, the U.S. has the highest rule of law. Second, the results are largely driven

by the fact that non-U.S. contracts are more typical in Scandinavian countries that have a high

rule of law.



6
    See Black and Gilson (1998), Jeng and Wells (2000), and Mayer, Schoors, and Yafeh (2001)




                                                        11
         Apart from the legal system, corporate governance also may be affected by a country’s

accounting system (see Bushman and Smith (2001)). This is likely to be particularly true in the

case of contingencies or milestones that are use accounting-based performance measures. Under

a less reliable accounting system, such milestones might be less feasible, leading to fewer

contingencies. In the second column of table 3, we consider how the contracts in our sample

vary with the accounting standards of the company’s country, using the measure of accounting

standards from LaPorta et al. (1997). The column indicates that the contracts are qualitatively

identical across countries with strong and poor accounting standards.

         Third, contracts may be affected by the strength of a country’s bankruptcy laws and

creditor protection. In particular, one might expect creditor protection to have an effect on

liquidation rights. We use the index of creditor protection calculated in LaPorta et al. (1997).

Column 3 of table 3 indicates that contracts in high creditor protection countries have greater

liquidation rights and make greater use of exit provisions. Again, this result is somewhat

difficult to interpret as U.S. contracts have strong liquidation rights, but the U.S. has the lowest

creditor protection score.

         Next, we consider differences in minority shareholder protection. To the extent that

minority shareholders are not protected, it may be more important for the VCs to get explicit

control rights. We use the index of shareholder protection calculated in LaPorta et al. (1997).

Column four of table 3 indicates that there are no substantive differences across low and high

minority protection countries.

         Fifth, we consider restrictions on the ability of corporations to buy back their own shares.



7
 We assume that this measure (and other various measures we use), calculated in LaPorta et al. (1997), are still
valid for our slightly later sample period.




                                                         12
Such restrictions are potentially important in that they might make it more difficult to implement

redemption and vesting provisions that typically require the company to repurchase shares. We

distinguish between countries in which companies can or cannot repurchase more than ten

percent of their shares (See Sabri (2002)). Column five of table 3 indicates that differences in

repurchase rules are unrelated to the contract provisions in our sample.

       Sixth, we consider the tax environment that firms face. One area where taxation

differences might play an important role in contract design is the tax treatment of equity-based

compensation (including employee stock options). The European Venture Capital Association

(see EVCA (2001)) argues that the heavy taxation of stock option grants in Europe hampers the

ability of investors to provide incentives to portfolio company management. The EVCA’s

lobbying activity has recently led several countries to change their tax rules for employee stock

options to more closely resemble the U.S. treatment.8

       We distinguish between countries with favorable and unfavorable taxation of stock

options. We code as unfavorable those tax regimes that tax stock option gains at vesting (rather

than at exercise or sale) or tax option gains at marginal tax rates that exceed 40%. We might

expect to see less incentive compensation and less use of vesting in countries with unfavorable

taxation. Column six of table 3 indicates that the only significant difference across favorable and

unfavorable tax regimes is the use of anti-dilution provisions that are not particularly related to

tax. Vesting provisions are more common in favorable tax regimes, but not significantly so.

       Finally, we consider the liquidity of the stock markets in the portfolio company countries.

Black and Gilson (1998) argue that an active venture capital market relies heavily on the VCs’

ability to exit their portfolio investments through a public offering. In support of this argument,




                                                 13
Jeng and Wells (2000) find that VC investing is higher in countries with greater numbers and

values of initial public offerings of stock (IPOs). We distinguish IPO activity by whether the

country had more than thirty IPOs in 1999.9 We might expect the strength of exit provisions to

be related to this measure. In column 7 of table 3, the only significant difference across IPO

activity is that ordinary common is more prevalent in countries with high IPO activity.

           Overall, then, the direct measures of legal, tax, and accounting institutions that we have

explored are not particularly successful in explaining the previous results on the relation of the

contracts to legal origin.



           3.4      Implementation of U.S. style contracts outside the U.S.

           The results in the previous section suggest that legal, tax, and institutional differences are

unlikely to be the whole story in explaining the distribution of contracts that we observe. In this

section, we explain why those results may not be surprising – some VCs manage to implement

U.S. style contracts in all of the countries we study. Table 4 summarizes this discussion.

           First, even if convertible preferred stock is disfavored in corporate law, it is generally

possible to use senior common stock or combinations of common and non-convertible preferred

stock or debt to mimic the control and liquidation rights of convertible preferred.

           Second, even if the legal regime makes it difficult to impose standard anti-dilution

provisions, it is generally possible to mimic those provisions using warrants that are exercisable

conditional on a subsequent financing at a lower valuation.

           Third, even if vesting and other contingencies are hampered by unfavorable tax laws, it is



8
    Also, see Keuschnigg and Nielsen (2002) for a discussion of the impact of capital gains taxation on VC activity.




                                                           14
generally possible to use put options on the entrepreneur’s stock that are exercisable by the VC if

the entrepreneur leaves or misbehaves. In countries where additional equity for the entrepreneur

is taxed as compensation, it is possible to provide contingent equity by making the valuation or

financing contingent rather than the entrepreneur’s equity stake.

         Fourth, it seems unlikely that legal differences could explain the absence of liquidation

preference. VCs can use seniority clauses in all of the countries in our sample.

         Fifth, even if redemption rights are infeasible due to restrictions on a company buying

back its own stock, the VC can mimic these rights by combining a senior claim with drag-along

rights. This effectively gives the VC the right to liquidate because drag-along rights force all

shareholders to sell when the senior claimant decides to sell even if the senior claimant gets all or

most of the proceeds.

         Sixth, if the local legal, tax, and institutional environment simply gets too restrictive, it is

generally possible to reincorporate the company in a country that is less restrictive. As column 3

of table 1 shows, 21% of the companies in our sample do reincorporate in another country.

There is a net flow of companies from countries of German and Scandinavian legal origin to

countries of common law origin.

         These six examples indicate that while it may not be easy or obvious how to adapt a

particular contract, with enough effort and legal expertise, it appears possible to replicate most

U.S. style contractual mechanisms elsewhere.




9
 While this is admittedly a coarse measure of IPO activity, our results are qualitatively identical using other
measures, including the value of IPOs and both the number and value normalized by population or GDP.




                                                          15
       3.5     Relation to VC experience and sophistication

       The previous section describes how some VCs are able to get around institutional

constraints to implement U.S. style contracts. In this section, we examine the characteristics of

those VCs who do so. For each financing, we identify the lead VC based on the VC who invests

the greatest amount in that financing. The lead VC typically plays the greatest role in

negotiating the contract with the entrepreneur.

       In our analysis, we attempt to distinguish among the lead VCs by experience and

sophistication using three different variables. First, we distinguish between smaller and larger

VCs, using a breakpoint of (the sample median of) $200 million under management. Second, we

distinguish between younger and older VC firms, using a breakpoint of (the sample median age

of) four years. Third, we classify VCs according to their familiarity with the U.S. 37 financings

were led by VCs based in the U.S.; 87 financings were led by VCs who had previously

syndicated (or invested) with U.S. VCs; and 37 financings were led by VCs with no U.S.

experience. We determined if the VC had U.S. experience by examining the Venture Economics

financing database, the VentureOne financing database, and the individual VC websites.

       Table 5 indicates that U.S. style provisions are strongly and positively correlated with all

three VC experience variables. Larger VCs, older VCs, and VCs with U.S. experience are all

more likely to use convertible or participating preferred, stronger liquidation preferences, and

stronger exit provisions. Older VCs and VCs with U.S. experience also use more time vesting,

have stronger anti-dilution protection, and are less likely to leave the founder with board control.

It is only in the use of milestones where there are no clear differences across VC experience.

       The strong results for VC experience contrast with the much weaker results for legal, tax,

and accounting institutions. The univariate results, therefore, seem particularly consistent with

the importance of learning. The multivariate analysis in section 4 will allow us to test this.


                                                  16
       3.6     Relation to financing round characteristics

       It also is possible that the contractual characteristics vary with other characteristics of the

financing round. Accordingly, our final univariate analysis considers how contractual

characteristics vary with the size of the investment, whether the investment is the first by a VC,

and the age of the portfolio company.

       Column 1 of table 6 shows that larger financing rounds (greater than $3 million) tend to

use more U.S. style contracts. Larger rounds are more likely to use convertible preferred, have

stronger liquidation preferences, stronger exit provisions, and more VC board control.

       Column 2 of table 6 indicates that subsequent VC rounds also make somewhat greater

use of U.S. style contracts. Subsequent VC rounds are more likely to use convertible preferred,

have marginally stronger liquidation preferences, and more VC board control.

       Finally, column 3 of table 6 shows that younger portfolio companies are somewhat more

likely to have U.S. style contracts. They are more likely to use convertible preferred, have

stronger liquidation preferences and stronger exit provisions.



4.     Multivariate results

       At this point, we have found that VC contracts are highly related to a country’s legal

origin and measures of VC experience or sophistication. The contracts also are somewhat

related to deal characteristics and legal, accounting and institutional features. In this section, we

assess the relative importance of these different variables using multiple regression analyses.

       We use seven different contract characteristics as dependent variables: (i) whether the

round uses convertible or participating preferred; (ii) whether the round uses founder vesting;

(iii) whether the round uses milestones; (iv) whether the round uses anti-dilution protection; (v)


                                                  17
whether the liquidation preference is less than, equal to, or greater than the amount invested; (vi)

whether the round uses redemption rights; and (vii) whether the founder has control, shares

control, or does not have control of the board.

       Most of the regressions measure legal origin as a dummy variable equal to one if the

portfolio company is in a country with a common law legal origin. We also estimate some

regressions using the indices for accounting standards, creditor protection, minority protection,

and the dummy for option taxation. The reported regressions do not include share repurchase

restrictions or IPO activity. When these variables are included, they are never significant.

       The regressions measure VC sophistication using a dummy variable equal to one if the

lead VC is U.S.-based, a dummy variable equal to one if the lead VC is not U.S.-based, but has

previously syndicated with U.S. VCs, and a variable equal to the age (in years) of the VC firm at

the time of the financing.

       All of the regressions control for whether the round is the first VC round and portfolio

company age. They do not control for round size because that is arguably endogenous with the

contracts. The results are qualitatively similar when we control for round size. When the

regressions control for industry and year effects, we include four dummy variables for industry

(software and Internet, hardware, telecom, and life science) and four for year (1998 to 2001).

       In panel A of table 7, we estimate the regressions with the common law dummy and the

VC sophistication variables. These regressions do not control for industry and year effects. The

regressions strongly suggest that VC sophistication swamps the effect of legal origin. The

common law dummy is significant only for the use of anti-dilution provisions. In contrast, at

least one of the VC sophistication variables is significant in all seven specifications. U.S. style

contracts are significantly more likely with U.S.-based VCs for all of the specifications except

for the use of milestones. U.S. style contracts also are significantly more likely for VCs who


                                                  18
have syndicated with U.S. VCs in all of the specifications except the one using vesting. In

addition, the use of convertible preferred, anti-dilution protection, and liquidation preferences all

increase with VC age.

        Panel B of table 7 estimates the same regressions as in panel A, but controls for industry

and year effects. The common law origin variable is now significant in two of the regressions.

Convertible preferred and anti-dilution rights are more likely in countries of common law origin.

Again, however, at least one measure of VC sophistication is significant in all seven

specifications. With minor exceptions, the coefficients and significance levels are unchanged.

        Panel C of table 7 replaces the common law origin dummy with the more detailed

accounting, legal, and tax variables, but, again, controls for industry and year. We lose some

observations because we do not have the relevant indices for all of the countries in our sample.

The accounting, legal, and tax variables are at best modestly successful in explaining the use of

U.S.-style contracts. Accounting standards are significantly related to time vesting although not

to milestones. Minority protection is negatively related to liquidation preferences, while creditor

protection is positively related. Finally, favorable option taxation is positively related to the use

of convertible preferred and vesting.

        The VC sophistication results, in contrast, are qualitatively similar to those in panels A

and B, although the variables are no longer significant in the milestone specification.

        Finally, in panel D of table 7, we estimate regressions including the VC sophistication

variables, but excluding investments in common law countries, to determine if the VC

sophistication results hold outside of common law countries. The results are qualitatively and

statistically identical to those in panel C.

        Overall, then, the results in table 7 indicate that the VC sophistication variables

consistently have significant explanatory power while the legal and institutional variables do not.


                                                  19
5.      The relation of contractual terms to VC survival.

        The analysis so far suggests that the most sophisticated and experienced VCs are able to

implement U.S. style contracts across many different legal regimes. One interpretation of this

result is that U.S. style contracts are optimal or, at least, the most effective of available contracts.

This interpretation is consistent with Kaplan and Schoar (2003) who find that more experienced

VCs outperform less experienced VCs. Another interpretation, however, might be that VCs use

the contracts with which they are familiar. Because the more sophisticated and experienced

VCs are more familiar with U.S. contracts, they use them regardless of whether they are optimal.

        In this section, we attempt to distinguish between those two interpretations by looking at

the ex post performance of the lead VCs in our sample. If the first interpretation is accurate, then

the VCs who use U.S. style contracts should be more successful than those who do not. Under

the second interpretation, we would not expect to see a large difference.

        There are 70 different lead VCs in the financings in our sample. Although we cannot

collect ex post return information on these VCs, we can observe whether the VC firms are still

operating entities. We used Venture Economics, VentureOne, and the VC firm websites to

determine the current status of the VC firms. Table 8 reports that as of August 2003, 59 of the

70 lead VCs were still active and independent while 11 had failed or had been acquired.

        We then classify VCs according to whether they always used, sometimes used, or never

used convertible or participating preferred stock. We take the use of such stock as indicative of

using U.S. style contracts because this is true of virtually all the U.S. financings in Kaplan and

Strömberg (2003).

        The results are striking and highly statistically significant. Of the 29 VCs that never used

a preferred stock, 34% (or 10) have not survived. Of the 37 VCs that always used a preferred


                                                   20
stock, none has failed. The four VCs who sometimes used a preferred stock fall in between with

one of the four having not survived. Said another way, ten of the eleven VCs that have failed to

survive never used a preferred stock.

        The other two panels of the table separate VCs based in common law countries from VCs

based in non-common law countries. The outcomes for VCs in non-common law countries drive

the results. Still, the one failed VC firm in a common law country was one that never used a

preferred stock.

        Overall, then, while the survival and failure results do not prove causation, it is clear that

the more successful VCs use convertible or participating preferred rather than common stock.



6.      Summary and conclusion

        In this paper, we have compared VC contracts in twenty-three other countries to those in

the U.S. We have analyzed how the contracts allocate cash flow, board, liquidation, and other

control rights. In univariate analyses, we find that contracts differ across legal regimes. In

particular, U.S. style contracts are more typical in common law countries. However, there

appear to be few institutional impediments against implementing U.S.-style terms. We find that

more experienced and sophisticated VCs are able to implement U.S.-style contracts regardless of

legal regime. In multivariate specifications, measures of VC sophistication and experience are

more influential than legal regime or other legal, accounting, and institutional variables. Finally,

we consider the subsequent survival rate of the lead VCs in our sample. VCs who use U.S.-style

contracts are strikingly and significantly less likely to fail.

        We think the most plausible interpretation of our results is as follows. The contracts in

the U.S. have developed over several cycles and are effective. The results in Kaplan and

Strömberg (2003) suggest that many elements of these U.S. contracts are consistent with the


                                                   21
predictions of optimal contracting theories. Venture capital investing outside of the U.S. is

relatively more recent and the legal rules are different. Learning about optimal or effective

contracts takes time and effort. Even in cases where VCs would like to implement U.S. style

contracts, it may not be costless to do so. If contracts were important for VC success, one would

expect that over time, the more sophisticated and successful VCs would implement more

effective contracts. Furthermore, one might expect the evolution to accelerate in periods of high

volatility such as the bursting of the tech “bubble.”

       We believe the results have implications for the law and finance literature. The intuitions

and predictions of financial contracting theories appear to be valid across different institutional

and legal regimes. Based on this, we would expect more convergence toward U.S. style

contracts in the future, particularly as financial markets become more global.

       One caveat to this prediction is that our results are based on start-ups largely in developed

countries. There are two forces that may favor convergence for these types of firms. First,

enforcement of laws is generally not a major problem in most of the countries we study.

Second, it may be easier to write desirable contracts for new businesses than for existing ones.

The somewhat different results in Lerner and Schoar (2003) for private equity investments in

developing countries suggest that either or both of these forces may be quite important.

       In fact, our results in conjunction with those of Lerner and Schoar (2003) are remarkably

consistent with the findings and conjectures in Acemoglu and Johnson (2003). Acemoglu and

Johnson (2003) conjecture that:

        “individuals can structure contracts to reduce the adverse effects from contracting
       institutions ... Because of these adjustments, the usual eﬀect of rules governing contracts
       on investment and growth may be relatively limited; exceptions occur only when
       contracting institutions are extremely bad. In contrast, because enforceable contracts
       between the state and individuals are not possible, property rights institutions
       constraining arbitrary behavior and expropriation by the state and elites controlling the
       state have more important eﬀects on economic outcomes.”


                                                 22
Our results suggest that sophisticated investors contract around existing contracting institutions

to implement similar (optimal) contracts for (i) start-ups located in countries in which property

rights are enforced; and (ii) for start-ups in developing countries with poor property right

enforcement that are able to reincorporate in countries in which property rights are enforced. It

may be more difficult for more mature companies in developing countries to incorporate

elsewhere.




                                                 23
                                                          References

Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson, 2003, “Unbundling institutions,” NBER Working Paper No. 9934.

Aghion, Phillippe, and Patrick Bolton, 1992, "An incomplete contracts approach to financial contracting", Review of
     Economic Studies, 77: 338-401.

Arundel, Keith, 2001, “European Venture Capital – At an All Time High,” Journal of Private Equity, Summer, 43-51.

Bascha, Andreas, and Uwe Walz, 2001, “Financing Practices in the German Venture Capital Industry: An Empirical
      Assessment”, working paper, University of Thübingen.

Black, Bernard and Ronald Gilson, 1998, “Venture capital and the structure of capital markets: Banks versus stock markets,”
      Journal of Financial Economics.

Bushman, Robert, and Abbie Smith, 2001, “Financial Accounting Information and Corporate Governance”, Journal of
     Accounting and Economics 32, 237-333.

Chemla, G., M. Habib, and A. Ljungqvist, 2003, “An analysis of shareholder agreements,” Working paper, New York University.

Cumming, Douglas, 2000, “The Convertible Preferred Equity Puzzle in Canadian Venture Capital Finance,” working paper,
    University of Alberta.

Cumming, Douglas, 2001, “United States Venture Capital Contracting: Evidence from Investments in Foreign Securities,”
    working paper, University of Alberta.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Vojislav Maksimovic, 1998, “Law, Finance, and Firm Growth,” Journal of Finance 53:6, 2107-2137.

Ernst & Young, 2000a, The Global Executive 2000, www.ey.com .

Ernst & Young, 2000b, The Worldwide Corporate Tax Guide 2000, www.ey.com .

EVCA, 2001, “EVCA White Paper,” mimeo, European Private Equity & Venture Capital Association (www.evca.com).

Gilson, Ronald, and Theodore Baums, 1999, “The Legal Infrastructure of the German Venture Capital Market: Replicating the
      U.S. Template”, working paper, Stanford Law School.

Gompers, Paul and Josh Lerner, 1999, The Venture Capital Cycle. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

Hart, Oliver, 2001, “Financial Contracting”, Journal of Economic Literature 39, 1079-1100.

Hege, Ulrich, Frederic Palomino, and Armin Schwienbacher, 2003, “Determinants of venture capital performance: Europe and
      the United States,” working paper, HEC School of Management.

Jeng, Leslie, and Philippe Wells, 2000, “The Determinants of Venture Capital Funding: Evidence Across Countries”, Journal of
       Corporate Finance 6, 241-289.

Kaplan, Steven and A. Schoar, 2003, “Private Equity Performance: Returns, Persistence and Capital Flows,” Working Paper,
      University of Chicago, October 2003.

Kaplan, Steven and Per Strömberg. 2001, “Venture Capitalists As Principals: Contracting, Screening, and Monitoring,”
      American Economic Review 91:2, 426-430.

Kaplan, Steven and Per Strömberg, 2003, “Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real World: Evidence From Venture Capital
      Contracts,” Review of Economic Studies 70(2), 281-316.




                                                               24
Kaplan, Steven and Per Strömberg. 2004, “Contracts, Characteristics, and Actions: Evidence from Venture Capitalist Analyses”
      Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Keuschnigg, Christian, and Søren Bo Nielsen, 2002, “Start-ups, Venture Capitalists, and the Capital Gains Tax”, CEPR Working
     Paper No. 3263.

King, R., and R. Levine, 1993. Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 717-738.

LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 1999, “Corporate Ownership around the World,” Journal of
      Finance 54, 471-517.

LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1997, “Legal Determinants of External
      Finance”, Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.

LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, “Law and Finance”, Journal of Political
      Economy 106, 1113-1155.

LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2000, “Investor Protection and Corporate
      Governance”, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 3-27.

Lauper, Serge-Alexandre, 2000, “Structuring and Monitoring of Venture Capital Investments in Switzerland”, Masters in Finance
      Thesis, London Business School.

Lerner, Josh and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, “Private equity in the developing world: The determinants of transaction structures,”
      working paper, MIT.

Mayer, Colin, Koen Schoors, and Yishay Yafeh, 2001, “Sources of Funds and Investment Strategies of Venture Capital Funds:
     Evidence from Germany, Israel, Japan, and the UK, ” working paper, University of Oxford.

Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, 1998, “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American Economic Review 88, 559-586.

Sahlman, William, 1990, “The Structure and Governance of Venture Capital Organizations” Journal of Financial
     Economics 27, 473-521.




                                                               25
                                                               Table 1
                                                          Summary Information

   Summary information for 145 investments in 107 portfolio companies from 18 countries by 69 different lead VCs between
   1992 and 2001. The effective tax rate on option gains includes social security tax, when applicable, and is calculated based on
   Ernst & Young (2000a,b), using rules applicable on 1/1/2000. Information on legal origin, ‘Rule of law’, ‘Accounting
   standards’, ‘Creditor protection’, and ‘Minority protection’ (‘Anti-director rights’) are from LaPorta at al (1997). Number of
   IPOs’ is the average number of IPOs in the country 1999 and 2000 from FIBV (www.fibv.com). ‘$ VC funds invested per cap.’
   is calculated from the EVCA yearbook 2000, complemented with data from the Israeli VC associations. Data on share
   repurchase legislation is taken from Sabri (2002). ‘Share repurchases unrestricted’ refers to countries where corporations are
   allowed to buy back more than 10% of their shares.

           A.:       Portfolio company location and country data
Company’s         No. of. No. of     No. of      No. of Rule        Account.    Eff. tax   #IPOs ,     Creditor    Minority   Share
country of        fin.      portf.   comp’s      lead   of law      standard    on         average    protect.     protect.   repurchase
operations        rounds comp’s reincorp. VCs                       1990        options    1999-      score        score      unrestrict.
                            located from / to                                   gains      2000
US                0         0        0 / 10      13     10          71          0.40       847                1          5           Yes.
Hong Kong         1         1        0/0         0      8.22        69          0.15       64                 4          5           Yes.
India             4         4        1/0         2      4.17        57          0          52                 4          5           Yes.
Ireland           7         3        0/0         1      7.8         .           0.44       6                  1          4           No.
Israel            15        7        3/0         4      4.82        64          0          28                 4          3           No.
Singapore         2         1        0/0         1      8.57        78          0.28       70                 4          4           Yes.
UK                10        9        1/2         9      8.57        78          0          293                4          5           Yes.
Common law        39        25       5 / 151     30

Belgium           5         4        0/0          3        10       61          0          18                 2          0           No.
France            13        11       3/0          4        8.98     69          0.40       78                 0          3           No.
Greece            2         2        2/0          1        6.18     55          .          45                 1          2           No.
Luxembourg        1         1        0/1          0        10       .           0.53       16                 .          .             .
Netherlands       5         2        0/5          2        10       64          0          18                 2          2           No.
Civil law         26        20       5/6          10

Austria           1         1        0/1          1        10       54          0.61       6                  3          2           No.
Germany           14        10       0/0          6        9.23     62          0.56       160                3          1           No.
Korea             1         1        0/0          0        5.35     62          .          10                 3          2           Yes.
Switzerland       27        20       5/0          10       10       68          0          23                 1          2           Yes.
German law        43        32       5/1          17

Denmark           3         2        1/0          2        10       62          0.63       7                  3          2           No.
Iceland           1         1        1/0          0        10       .           0.10       9                   .          .          No.
Norway            3         1        1/0          1        10       74          0.63       18                 2          4           No.
Sweden            23        21       2/0          9        10       83          0.73       50                 2          3           No.
Finland           2         2        1/0          0        10       77          .          24                 1          3           No.
Scandin. law      32        27       5/0          12

Hungary           2         1        0/0          0        .        .           0.61       7                  .           .             .
Czech Rep.        1         1        1/0          0        .        .           .          .                  .           .             .
China             2         1        1/0          0        .        .           .          .                  .           .             .
Communist         5         3        2/0          0
background

Total             145       107      22 / 22




          1
              Includes one company reincorporated in Bahamas and two in Bermuda.
  B.:        Year of VC financing:
                               Pre 1998    1998        1999              2000        2001       Unknown
First financing round for co.  8           11          23                41          14         10
Financing rounds in sample     7           16          27                63          31         1

  C.        Industry Distribution of Companies
               Software &    Hardware & Telecom       Life Science   Other/Unknown
               Internet      high-tech
Companies      62            13           12          12             8
Fin. rounds    88            18           14          17             8


  D        Other deal characteristics
                                          % First     Firm age,      % Early       Financing
                                          round inv   mean (med.)    stage deals   committed,
                                                                                   $M
Earliest round we have for each company   88.9%       2.2 (1.0)      67.3%         6.2 (3.1)
All financing rounds we have              66.9%       2.5 (1.0)      65.5%         6.8 (3.4)
N                                         133         134            139           127
                                                                      Table 2
                                              VC contract characteristics across legal regimes
  Contract characteristics for 145 investments in 107 portfolio companies from 18 countries by 69 different lead VCs between
  1992 and 2001. Except where noted, the numbers in the table denotes the fraction of investments in the sample exhibiting a
  certain contract characteristics. U.S. sample statistics are taken from Kaplan and Strömberg (2003). Contract characteristics
  differ significantly across sub-samples the: 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% * levels.

Contract characteristics:         Compared to U.S.                                           Across legal regime:

                                        This.   US samp[e                                                      Scandi-            Communist
                                      sample    (K&S 2003)      Common         Civil            German         navian             background
A. Main VC security:
Convertible preferred                  53.8%    95.2%           66.7%          53.8%            48.8%          37.5%              100.0%*
Ordinary common stock                  27.6%    0.5%            7.7%           19.2%            37.2%          50.0%              0.0%**
Senior common stock                    14.5%    1.0%            25.6%          19.2%            11.6%          3.1%               0.0%
Convertible debt                        2.0%    1.9%            0.0%           3.8%             0.0%           6,2%               0.0%
Other security                          2.0%    1.0%            0.0%           3.8%             2.3%           3.1%               0.0%
Sample size                              145    213             39             26               43             32                 5

B. Residual cash flow rights and incentive mechanisms:
Founder stock vests over time         37.20% 43.6%              50.0%          20.0%            31.6%          46.7%              50.0%
              Sample size                 121 212               24             25               38             30                 4
Equity or funding milestones          38.90% 53.0%              29.6%          41.7%            42.5%          36.7%              60.0%
              Sample size                 126 212               27             24               40             30                 5
VC anti-dilution protection           56.40% 94.60%             88.5%          73.9%            50.0%          25.8%              50.0%***
              Sample size                      213              26             23               40             31                 4

C. Size of VC liquidation preference:
Less than invested funds              34.10%    3.00%           10.7%          25.0%            39.0%          59.4%              0.0%**
Equal to invested funds               17.80%    28.70%          39.3%          8.3%             17.1%          9.4%               0.0%**
More than invested funds              48.10%    68.40%          50.0%          66.7%            43.9%          31.2%              100.0%**
         Cumulative dividends         20.60%    43.8%           7.8%           20.8%            17.1%          29.0%              75.0%
        Participating preferred       34.60%    48.0%           48.2%          37.5%            29.3%          29.0%              25.0%
                (or equivalent)
      Other “booster” (e.g. 3x)       15.10%    2.4%            3.8%           20.8%            19.5%          6.4%               75.0%
Sample size                               129   213             28             24               41             32                 4

D. VC exit provisions:
VC has redemption rights               34.5%    71.8%           41.0%          34.6%            30.2%          28.1%              60.0%
Other senior exit mechanism            50.0%    -               66.7%          63.6%            45.7%          28.6%              75.0%
No senior exit mechanism               36.6%    28.2%           25.6%          26.9%            39.5%          56.2%              20.0%
Sample size                              145    213             39             26               43             32                 5

E. Board control
No. board seats, mean (med)         5.7 (5.0)   6.0 (6.0)       6.0 (6.3)      5.8 (5.0)        4.8 (5.0)      5.7 (5.0)          6.5 (7.0)**
% VC board seats                  37.0 (40.0)   41.4 (40.0)     32.0 (33.3)    40.4 (40.0)      42.2 (33.3)    34.3 (40.0)        38.6 (34.3)

Degree of board control:
       Founder controls board          27.6%    13.9%           18.0%          46.2%            18.6%          34.4%              40.0%
     Neither / state-contingent        60.0%    60.7%           71.8%          42.3%            65.1%          56.2%              40.0%
            VC controls board          12.4%    25.4%           10.3%          11.5%            16.3%          9.4%               20.0%
Sample size                              145    201             39             26               43             32                 5
                                                                                              Table 3
                                                                      VC contracts and other institutional characteristics
Contract characteristics for 145 investments in 107 portfolio companies from 18 countries by 69 different lead VCs between 1992 and 2001. ‘Rule of law, High’ refers to the
sub-sample of investments with a ‘Rule of law’ index of 10. ‘Accounting standards, High’ refers to the sub-sample of investments with an ‘Accounting standards’ index of 69 or
higher. ‘Creditor protection, High’ refers to the sub-sample of investments with a ‘Creditor protection‘ index of 3 or higher. ‘Minority protection, High’ refers to the sub-
sample of investments with a ‘Minority protection‘ index of 3 or higher. ‘Favorable options tax’ refers to the sub-sample of investments in countries where there is no tax on
employee stock options upon exercise. ‘Share repos unrestricted’ refers to the sub-sample of investments in countries where corporations are allowed to buy back more than
10% of their shares. ‘Per cap. VC invest.’ refers to the sub-sample of investments in countries with VC investment in 1999 above $41 per capita. ‘IPO activity, High’ refers to
the sub-sample of investments in countries with more than 30 IPO’s per year on average 1999-2000. Contractual provisions are significantly different across sub-samples at the:
1% ***; 5% **, and 10% * levels. Tests for degree of liquidation preference and degree of board control are joint across the three degrees of liquidation preference / board
control, using a Kruskal-Wallis test. All other tests refer to differences in means tests, using a rank-sum test.


  Contract characteristics:    Rule of law         Accounting         Creditor           Minority       Share repos        Favorable          IPO activity
                                                     standards       protection         Protection      unrestricted      options tax
                              High      Low       High Low          Low High           Low High         Yes No            Yes No             Low    High
  A. Main VC security:
  Convertible preferred       43.7      63.5**    51.5   55.8       49.4   60.3        51.7   55.2      44.4   56.4      53.7   53.9         61.6   45.8*
  Ordinary common             39.4      16.2***   32.3   23.4       36.8   24.1 ***    29.3   26.4      33.3   26.6      20.9   33.3*        20.6   34.7*
  Senior common stock         12.7      16.2       8.8   19.5*       8.1   13.8 ***    17.2   12.6      22.2   10.6*     25.4   5.1***       16.4   12.5
  Convertible debt             2.8      1.3        4.4   0.0         3.5   0.0          0.0   3.5        0.0   3.2        0.0   3.9           0.0   4.2
  Other security              1.41      2.7        2.9   1.3         2.3   1.7          1.7   2.3        0.0   3.2        0.0   3.9           1.4   2.8
  Sample size                   71      74          68   77           87   58            58   87                           67   78            73    72

  B. Residual cash flow
  rights and incentive
  mechanisms:
  Founder time vesting        38.8      35.2      42.1   32.8       35.4   40.5        28.8   43.5      46.2   32.5      41.8   33.3         37.9   36.5
  No. of obs.                  67       54         57    64          79    42           52    69         39    77         55    66            58    63

  Equity / funding            35.8      42.4      41.0   36.9       37.0   42.2        41.5   37.0      43.9   34.2      33.9   42.9         39.3   38.5
  milestones
  No. of obs.                 67        59          61   65           81   45            53   73         39    77          56   70             61   65

  VC anti-dilution            42.5      72.7***   52.5   60.0       50.6   68.3*       54.7   57.8      57.5   55.7      65.4   49.3**       68.2   44.3
  protection
  Sample size                      69   55          59   65           83   41            53   71         40    79          55   69             63   61
                                                                                           Table 3
                                                                VC contracts and other institutional characteristics, continued.

                               Rule of law        Accounting            Creditor           Minority         Share repos        Favorable         IPO activity
                                                   standards           protection         Protection        unrestricted      options tax
                              High    Low        High Low             Low High           Low High            Yes No           Yes No             Low     High
C. Liquidation pref.:
< invested funds              44.3    22.0**     41.9    26.9         43.4    17.4*      30.9    36.5       34.9    35.8      24.6    41.7       25.4    42.4
= invested funds              14.3    22.0**      8.1    26.9         10.8    30.4*      18.2    17.6       27.9    13.6      31.6    6.9        22.2    43.6
> invested funds              41.4    55.9**     50.0    46.3         45.8    52.2*      50.9    45.9       37.2    50.6      43.9    51.4       52.4    43.9
   Cumulative dividends       23.2    17.5       23.4    18.2         21.7    18.6       18.5    22.2       12.2    22.5      16.4    23.9       19.4    21.9
   Participating preferred    30.4    39.7       39.3    30.3         32.5    38.6       33.3    35.6       31.0    36.2      32.1    36.6       37.1    32.3
            Other (e.g. 3x    13.0    17.5       10.0    19.7         13.2    18.6       22.2    9.7*       12.2    13.8      14.6    15.5       17.7    12.5
               liquidation
               preference)
Sample size                     70    59           60    66             83    46           54    72           41    80          55    71           62    64

D. Exit provisions:
VC redemption rights          23.9    44.6***    33.8    35.1         26.4    46.6**     32.8    35.6       35.1    31.1      31.3    37.2       35.6    33.3
Other senior exit             41.9    60.4*      41.1    54.2         43.8    62.2*      55.3    46.0       51.4    47.1      52.9    47.5       51.8    48.2
No senior exit                46.5    27.0**     41.2    32.5         46.0    22.4***    32.8    39.1       35.6    38.3      32.8    39.7       32.9    40.3
Sample size                     71    74           68    77             87    58           58    87           45    94         67     78          73     72

E. Board control
No. seats, total, mean          5.4   6.1          6.1   5.2            5.7   5.7          5.0   6.1          5.4   6.1         5.4   5.9          5.7   5.7
(med)                         (5.0)   (6.0)**    (6.0)   (5.0)**      (5.0)   (6.0)      (5.0)   (6.0)**    (5.0)   (6.0)     (5.0)   (6.0) *    (5.0)   (5.5)
                                                         *                                       *                  **
% VC board seats, mean         37.1   37.5        35.6   39.1          38.0   35.7        41.2   34.9      35.6     38.0       36.3   38.1        37.5   37.0
(med)                        (40.0)   (38.8)    (38.8)   (40.0)      (40.0)   (33.3)    (40.0)   (40.0)    (33.3)   (40.0)   (33.3)   (40.0)    (40.0)   (37.5)

Degree of board control:
        Founder control       32.4    23.0       33.8         22.1    31.0    22.4       24.1    29.9       22.2    28.7      25.4    29.5       28.8    26.4
    Neither / state-cont.     54.9    64.9       55.9         63.6    55.2    67.2       62.1    58.6       66.7    58.5      61.2    59.0       57.5    62.5
            VC controls       12.7    12.2       10.3         14.3    13.8    10.3       13.8    11.5       11.1    12.8      13.4    11.5       13.7    11.1
Sample size                     71    74           68    77             87    58           58    87           45    94         67     78          73     72
                                                             Table 4
                                       Implementation of U.S. style contracts outside the U.S.

         U.S. contractual feature                Purpose and potential institutional               Alternative implementation
                                                            obstacles

       Convertible preferred stock              Purpose: Allocates cash-flow and              Common + Straight preferred stock.
                                                  control rights between VC and                 Common + Zero-coupon debt.
                                                           entrepreneur.                     Senior common stock with liquidation
                                               Problem: Convertible preferred stock                     preference.
                                                   disfavored in corporate law.                       Convertible debt.

Anti-dilution rights (Full ratchet): Upon a    Purpose: Protect VC from subsequent         Anti-dilution warrants: Warrants attached to
subsequent financing at a valuation lower           dilutive financing rounds.           the VC’s stock can be exercised by an investor
      than the original financing, the                                                     in case of a capital increase or in case of an
     conversion price of the original           Problem: Various, restrictions e.g. :     issuance of stock to finance the acquisition of
  convertible preferred stock is adjusted           Convertible preferred stock             another company, given that the price per
  downward to the issuance price of the            disfavored in corporate law;                share involved is below the original
   dilutive financing. Written into the             shareholder vote needed for          subscription price. The number of shares to be
         articles of incorporation.               adjustment to conversion price.             acquired this way will be such that the
                                                                                          resulting price obtained by the investors after
                                                                                             these transactions is equal to the original
                                                                                                        subscription price.

Vesting Provisions: Company will have a        Purpose: Make it costly for founder         “Good leaver” and “bad leaver” provisions:
  repurchase option to buy back at cost a      to leave firm prematurely. Increase                           (example)
  portion of the shares of common stock            pay-performance sensitivity.             “ ‘Good leavers’ (i.e founder employees
held by a certain shareholder (founder) if                                                  voluntarily terminating their employment
 such shareholder's employment with the          Problem: Vesting of shares may be         contract with the company) shall offer their
   company ends before some specified             treated as income, and as a result            shares in the company to the other
   date. A portion will be released each       vested shares are taxed at the ordinary        shareholders at a price incorporating a
month from the repurchase option based         income tax rate upon the vesting date.                  considerable penalty.
       upon continued employment.                                                         ‘Bad leavers’ (i.e. founders being terminated
                                                                                          as a result of material breach by the founder
                                                                                             employees of the applicable terms and
                                                                                         conditions of their employment contract with
                                                                                           the company) shall offer their shares to the
                                                                                          other shareholders of the company at a price
                                                                                            corresponding to the valuation of the last
                                                                                         financing less 25%. Agreement will terminate
                                                                                             upon an IPO or a sale of the company.”

   Equity milestones: Upon company              Granting / transferring of shares to        Contingent valuations: Upon company
   reaching a performance milestone,            founders will be treated as income,       reaching a performance milestone, investors
   additional shares will be issued to            and granted shares taxed at the         will put in additional funds in the company.
               founders.                            ordinary income tax rate.

Redemption provisions: (example) At the           Share repurchases restricted by        Drag-along provision: After five years, if
election of the holders of a majority of the              corporate law.                 investors offer to sell their shares to a 3rd party,
 preferred, the Company shall redeem the                                                 it may require all the other shareholders also to
outstanding preferred shares in two equal                                                sell or dispose of their shares on a pro rata
    installments beginning on the fifth                                                  basis and on the same terms to the 3rd party.
anniversary of the prior preferred closing                                                 Other exit provision: If listing does not occur
                   date.                                                                     in five years, the parties agree that upon
                                                                                              request of the majority of investors, the
                                                                                           company shall instruct an investment bank to
                                                                                           find a buyer for all of the company’s shares.
                                                                      Table 5
                                             VC contract characteristics and Lead VC experience
Contract characteristics for 145 investments in 107 portfolio companies from 18 countries by 69 different lead VCs between
1992 and 2001. The ‘Lead VC’ is defined as the VC committing the largest amount of funds in the syndicate in the current
financing round. ‘VC from US’ is a dummy equal to one if the Lead VC investor is located in the United States. ‘Syndicated
with U.S. VC’ is a dummy equal to one if the Lead VC investor is (1) not located in the United States, and (2) had either
previously invested in a portfolio company located in the United States or co-invested with a U.S.-based VC at the time of the
financing. ‘No US exp.’ is a dummy equal to one if both previous dummy variables are zero. Contractual provisions are
significantly different across sub-samples at the: 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% * levels. Tests for degree of liquidation preference
and degree of board control are joint across the three degrees of liquidation preference / board control, using a Kruskal-Wallis
test. All other tests refer to differences in means tests, using a rank-sum test.


                                     Lead VC funds under              Lead VC age             Lead VC degree of U.S. experience
                                         management
                                     >$200M      <=$200M            >=4 yrs    <4 yrs           VC from     Syndicated     No US exp.
                                                                                                     US     with US VC
 A. Main VC security:
 Conv. / part. preferred               80.8%     26.4%***            76.7%     30.6%***            94.7%      62.1%        10.8%***
 Ordinary common stock                 13.7%     41.7%***            16.4%     38.9%***             0.0%      18.4%        64.9%***
 Common w. liq. preference              4.1%     25.0%***             2.7%     26.4%***             0.0%      18.4%        13.5%
 Convertible debt                       0.0%     4.2%                 1.4%     2.8%                 0.0%       0.0%        8.1%
 Other                                  1.4%     2.8%                 2.7%     1.4%                 5.4%       1.2%        2.7%
 Sample size                               73    72                      73    72                      37       87         37

 B. Residual cash flow rights and incentive mechanisms:
 Founder time vesting                35.20% 38.80%                   50.9%     25.0%***            66.7%      40.3%        18.8%**
           Sample size                    54 67                          57    64                      15       72         32
 Equity / funding milestones         33.90% 43.30%                  45.90%     32.30%              25.0%      48.0%        22.6%*
           Sample size                    59 67                          61    65                      16       77         31
 VC anti-dilution protection         61.80% 52.20%                   73.3%     40.6%***            86.7%      67.6%        18.2%***
          Sample size                     55 69                          60    64                      15       74         33

 C. Liquidation pref.:
 Less than invested funds              17.2%     47.9%***            24.6%     42.6%***             0.0%      22.4%        77.1%***
 Equal to invested funds                5.2%     28.2%***             9.8%     25.0%***            18.8%      21.0%        11.4%***
 More than invested funds              77.6%     23.9%***            65.6%     32.4%***            81.2%      56.6%        11.4%***
        Cumulative dividends           32.1%     11.4%***            31.7%     10.6%***            25.0%      25.3%        9.1%
         Part. pref. (or equiv.)       57.9%     15.7%***            45.0%     25.4%**             62.5%      42.1%        0.0%***
     Other “booster” (e.g. 3x)         17.9%     12.9%               23.3%     7.6%**              12.5%      17.3%        12.1%
 Sample size                               58    71                      61    68                      16       76         35

 D. Exit provisions:
 VC has redemption rights              46.6%     22.2%***            48.0%     20.8%***            63.2%      35.6%        18.9%**
 Other senior exit                     55.1%     45.9%               48.8%     51.7%               33.3%      62.7%        24.1%***
 mechanism
 No senior exit mechanism              24.7%     48.6%***            30.1%     43.1%               21.0%      28.7%        64.9%***
 Sample size                               73    72                      73    72                      19       87         37

 E. Board control
 No. seats, total, mean (med)        5.9 (5.5)   5.5 (5.0)         6.1 (6.0)   5.3 (5.0) **     6.2 (6.5)    5.6 (6.0)     5.6 (5.0)
 % VC board seats                  40.9 (40.0)   34.0 (33.3)**   39.3 (40.0)   35.5 (33.3)    46.8 (42.9)   36.6 (33.3)    34.4 (31.0)**

 Degree of board control:
      Founder controls board          21.90%     33.30%              19.2%     36.1%**              5.3%      26.4%        37.8%**
    Neither / state-contingent        65.80%     54.20%              67.1%     52.8%**             63.2%      63.2%        54.0%**
           VC controls board          12.30%     12.50%              13.7%     11.1%**             31.6%      10.3%        8.1%**
 No. obs.                                  73    72                      73    72                      19       87         37
                                                                     Table 6
                                                    VC contracts and deal characteristics
Contract characteristics for 145 investments in 107 portfolio companies from 18 countries by 69 different lead VCs between
1992 and 2001. ‘Funds committed’ is the total VC funds committed in the financing round, expressed in U.S. dollars. Country,
deal and investor characteristics are significantly different at the: 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% * levels. Tests for degree of
liquidation preference and degree of board control are joint across the three degrees of liquidation preference / board control,
using a Kruskal-Wallis test. All other tests refer to differences in means tests, using a rank-sum test.

                                          Funds committed               First VC investment?                   Firm age
    A. Main VC security:                  >$3M <$3M                   First round Subs. round            < 2 years >= 2 years
    Conv. / part. preferred               68.2% 31.6%***                   44.9% 77.3%***                   61.0% 40.0%**
    Ordinary common stock                 21.6% 36.8%**                    31.5% 11.4%**                    23.2% 36.0%
    Common w. liq. preference              9.1% 22.8%**                    18.0% 11.4%                      11.6% 20.0%
    Convertible debt                       0.0% 5.3%                         3.4% 0.0%                       2.1% 2.0%
    Other                                  1.1% 3.5%                         2.3% 0.0%                       2.1% 2.0%
    Number of observations                    88 57                             89 44                           95 50

    B. Residual cash flow rights
    and incentive mechanisms:
    Founder time vesting                  40.0%    33.3%                  39.0%     34.4%                  42.1%     28.9%
    Number of observations                    70   51                         77    32                         76    45

    Equity / funding milestones           43.1%    33.3%                  39.0%     29.0%                  37.5%     41.3%
    Number of observations                    72   54                         77    38                         80    46

    VC anti-dilution protection           62.0%    49.1%                  52.0%     69.4%*                 56.4%     56.5%
    Number of observations                    71   53                         77    36                         78    46

    C. Liquidation pref.:
    Less than invested funds              26.7%    44.4%**                37.0%     16.7%*                 29.3%     42.6%**
    Equal to invested funds               16.0%    20.4%**                17.3%     22.2%*                 15.8%     21.3%**
    More than invested funds              57.3%    35.2%**                45.7%     61.1%*                 54.9%     36.2%**

         Cumulative dividends             23.6%    15.7%                  22.5%     11.4%                  24.4%     18.5%
      Part. preferred (or equiv.)         39.7%    27.8%                  32.5%     44.4%                  21.7%     42.0%**
       Other “booster” (e.g. 3x)          19.4%    9.3%                   15.0%     17.0%                   9.9%     24.4%**
    Sample size                               75   54                         81    36                         82    47

    D. Exit provisions:
    VC has redemption rights              43.2%    21.0%***               32.6%     38.6%                  34.7%     34.0%
    Other senior exit                     51.6%    47.9%                  47.9%     56.7%                  55.1%     41.5%
    mechanism
    No senior exit mechanism              30.7%    45.6%*                 38.2%     29.6%                  32.6%     44.0%
    Sample size                               88   57                         89    44                         95    50

    E. Board control
    No. seats, total, mean (med)       6.0 (6.0)   5.2 (5.0) **         5.5 (5.0)   5.9 (6.0)            5.8 (6.0)   5.5 (5.0)
    % VC board seats                 40.2 (40.0)   33.5 (33.3)**      35.6 (33.3)   41.2 (40.0)**      32.7 (35.4)   39.8 (40.0)*

    Degree of board control:
        Founder controls board            14.8%    47.4%***               32.6%     18.2%**                24.2%     34.0%
      Neither / state-contingent          70.4%    43.9%***               59.6%     59.1%**                63.2%     54.0%
              VC controls board           14.8%    8.8%***                 7.9%     22.7%**                12.6%     12.0%
    Sample size                               88   57                         89    44                         95    50
                                                                                  Table 7
                                                                           Multivariate analysis
Summary information for 145 investments in 107 portfolio companies from 18 countries by 69 different lead VCs between 1992 and 2001. ‘First VC round’ is a dummy
equal to one if the investment refers to the first round where any VC invested. ‘Age of firm’ is the age of the portfolio company at the time of the investment, in years.
‘Common law’ is a dummy equal to one if the portfolio company is located in a country with a common law legal system. ‘Lead VC has US experience’ is a dummy equal
to one if the lead VC has previously invested in a company with US-based VC funds as co-investors. ‘VC is based in the US’ is a dummy equal to one if the Lead VC
investor is located in the United States. ‘Non-U.S. VC with U.S. exper’ is a dummy equal to one if the Lead VC investor is (1) not located in the United States, and (2) had
either previously invested in a portfolio company located in the United States or co-invested with a U.S.-based VC at the time of the financing. ‘VC age’ is the age of the
VC firm in years. ‘Accounting standards’, ‘Creditor protection’, and ‘Minority protection’ (‘Anti-director rights’) are from LaPorta at al (1997). ‘Option tax favorable’ is a
dummy taking the value of one if employee and management stock options are not taxed at the point of exercise. Industry effects include dummies for 5 industries:
Internet/Software, High-tech/Hardware, Telecom, Medical, Other. Regression coefficients are significantly different from zero at the 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% * levels.
                                        Deal uses conv.    Vesting            Milestones        Anti-dilution         Liquidation pref.    Redemption          Board control
                                        pref. (probit)     (probit)           (probit)          (probit)              (ord. probit)        rights (probit)     (ord. probit)
  A. No industry and year effects::
  Constant                              -0.28 (0.40)*** -0.64 (0.38)*         -0.94 (0.41)**      -0.67 (0.37)                              -0.45 (0.35)
  First VC round                        -1.52 (0.39)***     0.13 (0.30)        0.29 (0.29)        -0.41 (0.30)          -0.46 (0.28)*       -0.22 (0.26)       -0.73 (0.24)***
  Age of firm                           -0.23 (0.07)       -0.10 (0.05)** -0.03 (0.03)            -0.01 (0.03)          -0.05 (0.03)*       -0.09 (0.03)**     -0.06 (0.03)**

 Common law                            0.57   (0.37)       0.47   (0.34)      -0.38   (0.31)      1.03   (0.40)***    0.14    (0.32)      -0.04   (0.28)      -0.06   (0.25)

 VC is based in US                     2.18   (0.70)***    1.09   (0.47)**    0.23    (0.48)      1.49   (0.54)***    1.70    (0.49)***    1.17   (0.43)***    1.23   (0.40)***
 Non-U.S. VC with U.S. exper.          1.19   (0.42)***    0.47   (0.37)      0.80    (0.35)**    0.86   (0.37)**     1.20    (0.33)***    0.55   (0.33)*      0.50   (0.28)*
 VC age                                0.13   (0.03)***   -0.01   (0.02)      0.00    (0.02)      0.04   (0.02)**     0.05    (0.02)**    -0.02   (0.01)      -0.01   (0.01)

 Industry and year effects             No                  No                 No                 No                   No                  No                  No
 Pseudo R2                            0.52                0.11                0.07                0.26                0.21                0.08                0.11
 No .of obs.                          124                 102                 108                106                   110                 124                 124

 B. Industry & year controls:
 First VC round                       -2.27   (0.65)***    0.07   (0.33)       0.45   (0.32)     -0.39   (0.32)       -0.51   (0.31)*     -0.44   (0.31)      -0.71   (0.26)***
 Age of firm                          -0.40   (0.13)***   -0.11   (0.05)**    -0.03   (0.04)      0.00   (0.04)       -0.05   (0.03)      -0.14   (0.05)**    -0.07   (0.03)**

 Common law                            0.97   (0.49)**     0.21   (0.41)      -0.24   (0.34)      1.10   (0.46) **    0.31    (0.35)      -0.20   (0.33)      0.03    (0.28)

 VC is based in US                     3.53   (0.78)***    1.49   (0.51)***    0.27   (0.55)      1.62   (0.64) **    1.74    (0.54)***    1.46   (0.49)***    1.13   (0.43)***
 Non-U.S. VC with U.S. exper.          2.01   (0.59)***    0.77   (0.40)*      0.86   (0.42)**    0.82   (0.42) **    1.12    (0.36)***    0.88   (0.39)**     0.47   (0.31)
 VC age                                0.14   (0.04)***   -0.01   (0.02)      -0.01   (0.02)      0.04   (0.02) **    0.06    (0.02)***   -0.03   (0.01)*     -0.01   (0.01)

 Industry & year effects              Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes
 Pseudo R2                            0.62                0.17                0.13               0.31                0.25                 0.18                0.14
 No .of obs.                          124                 102                 108                106                 110                  124                 124
                                                                                   Table 7
                                                                         Multivariate analysis, continued.

                                      Deal uses conv.     Vesting                Milestones       Anti-dilution          Liquidation pref.    Redemption           Board control
                                      pref. (probit)      (probit)               (probit)         (probit)               (ord. probit)        rights (probit)      (ord. probit)

C. Specific institutional controls:


First VC round                        -2.11   (0.51)***   -0.11      (0.38)       0.42   (0.35)    -0.58     (0.38)       -0.34   (0.34)      -0.47    (0.35)      -0.70   (0.28)**
Age of firm                           -0.51   (0.15)***   -0.19      (0.07)**    -0.03   (0.04)     0.00     (0.04)       -0.04   (0.03)      -0.18    (0.08)**    -0.07   (0.04)**

Accounting standards                  -0.02   (0.02)      0.07       (0.03)**    -0.03   (0.02)    -0.04     (0.03)        0.02   (0.02)      -0.03    (0.02)      -0.03   (0.02)
Creditor protection                    0.26   (0.16)      0.12       (0.13)      -0.09   (0.12)     0.06     (0.13)        0.37   (0.13)***   -0.02    (0.12)      -0.06   (0.10)
Minority protection                    0.11   (0.18)      0.02       (0.15)       0.15   (0.14)     0.06     (0.16)       -0.35   (0.14)**     0.12    (0.13)      -0.01   (0.12)
Option taxation favorable              0.75   (0.41)*     0.80       (0.38)**    -0.08   (0.34)     0.56     (0.37)       -0.04   (0.33)      -0.37    (0.32)       0.22   (0.28)

VC is based in US                     2.77    (0.78)***   1.05       (0.57)*      0.48   (0.58)     1.71     (0.61)***     2.20   (0.61)***    1.07    (0.53)**     1.24   (0.47)***
Non-U.S. VC with U.S. exper.          1.60    (0.55)***   1.09       (0.40)***    0.63   (0.41)     1.01     (0.42)***     1.42   (0.40)***    0.59    (0.40)       0.53   (0.32)*
VC age                                0.18    (0.05)***   0.00       (0.02)      -0.01   (0.02)     0.05     (0.02)**      0.05   (0.03)**    -0.01    (0.02)      -0.01   (0.02)

Industry & year effects               Yes                 Yes                    Yes               Yes                    Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Pseudo R2                             0.61                0.26                   0.12              0.29                   0.29                0.20                 0.16
No .of obs.                           110                  93                     96                94                     99                 110                  110

D. Excluding common law
countries:

First VC round                        -1.70   (0.68)**     0.00      (0.41)      0.53    (0.37)    -0.37     (0.39)       -0.46   (0.37)      -0.14    (0.39)      -0.57   (0.32)*
Age of firm                           -0.23   (0.10)**    -0.14      (0.12)      0.03    (0.07)    -0.16     (0.07)**     -0.14   (0.08)*     -0.10    (0.06)       0.04   (0.06)

VC is based in US                     3.76    (0.97)***   1.81       (0.69)***   0.33    (0.58)     1.15     (0.61)*       1.73   (0.61)***    1.72    (0.56)***    1.11   (0.48)**
Non-U.S. VC with U.S. exper.          2.21    (0.81)***   0.91       (0.50)*     0.60    (0.46)     0.79     (0.45)*       1.12   (0.39)***    1.00    (0.47)**     0.70   (0.35)**
VC age                                0.12    (0.03)***   0.01       (0.02)      0.01    (0.02)     0.04     (0.02)*       0.04   (0.02)      -0.01    (0.02)      -0.02   (0.02)

Industry & year effects               Yes                 Yes                    Yes                 Yes                    Yes                Yes                  Yes
Pseudo R2                             0.58                0.22                   0.14               0.31                   0.25                0.18                 0.11
No .of obs.                           88                  79                     81                 80                     83                  88                   88
                                                                                 Table 8
                                                                      Lead VC contracts and survival
Survival and failure statistics for 70 lead VCs from 18 countries making investments between 1992 and 2001. Failure rate is the percentage of the VC funds that had
closed down or been acquired by August 1, 2003. Survival and failure status was determined from Venture Economics, VentureOne, and VC firm websites. Preferred
stock represents the use of convertible or participating preferred stock. Chi square tests of difference in failure rates are significantly different at the 1% ***; 5% **,
and 10% * levels.

                                                                       Number of Lead VCs        Number of VCs failed or         Failure rate, %
                                                                           in sample              no longer independent
                                                                                                    by August 1 2003
                                Across all legal regimes

                    All Lead VCs                                                 70                         11                        16%

                    VCs always using preferred                                   37                          0                         0%
                    VCs sometimes using preferred                                 4                          1                        25%
                    VCs never using preferred                                    29                         10                        34%

                    Chi square test (2 df) = 14.87 ***

                              Non-common law VCs only

                    All Lead VCs                                                 40                         10                        30%

                    VCs using all preferred                                      14                          0                         0%
                    VCs sometimes using preferred                                3                           1                        33%
                    VCs never using preferred                                    23                          9                        39%

                    Chi square test (2 df) = 7.23 **

                                Common law VCs only

                    All Lead VCs                                                 30                          1                         3%

                    VCs using all preferred                                      23                          0                         0%
                    VCs sometimes using preferred                                 1                          0                         0%
                    VCs never using preferred                                    6                           1                        17%

                    Chi square test (2 df) = 4.14
