NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NONPARAMETRIC TESTS FOR COMMON VALUES
AT FIRST-PRICE SEALED BID AUCTIONS
Philip A. Haile
Han Hong
Matthew Shum
Working Paper 10105
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10105
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2003

We thank Don Andrews, Steve Berry, Ali Horta2csu, Tong Li, Harry Paarsch, Isabelle Perrigne, Rob Porter,
Quang Vuong, seminar participants at the Tow conference in Iowa, SITE, the World Congress of the
Econometric Society in Seattle, and several universities for insightful comments. We thank Hai Che, Kun
Huang, and Grigory Kosenok for research assistance. We are grateful to the NSF, SSHRC, Sloan Foundation,
and Vilas Trust for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Philip A. Haile, Han Hong, and Matthew Shum. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Nonparametric Tests for Common Values at First-Price Sealed-Bid Auctions
Philip A. Haile, Han Hong, and Matthew Shum
NBER Working Paper No. 10105
November 2003
JEL No. D4, D8, L1, C1, Q2
ABSTRACT
We develop tests for common values at first-price sealed-bid auctions. Our tests are nonparametric,
require observation only of the bids submitted at each auction, and are based on the fact that the
"winner's curse" arises only in common values auctions. The tests build on recently developed
methods for using observed bids to estimate each bidder's conditional expectation of the value of
winning the auction. Equilibrium behavior implies that in a private values auction these expectations
are invariant to the number of opponents each bidder faces, while with common values they are
decreasing in the number of opponents. This distinction forms the basis of our tests. We consider
both exogenous and endogenous variation in the number of bidders. Monte Carlo experiments show
that our tests can perform well in samples of moderate sizes. We apply our tests to two different
types of U.S. Forest Service timber auctions. For unit-price (“scaled”) sales often argued to fit a
private values model, our tests consistently fail to find evidence of common values. For “lumpsum”
sales, where a priori arguments for common values appear stronger, our tests yield mixed evidence
against the private values hypothesis.
Philip A. Haile
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
philip.haile@yale.edu
Han Hong
Department of Economics
Duke University
P. O. Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
hanhong@duke.edu

Matthew Shum
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
mshum@jhu.edu

1

1

Introduction

At least since the influential work of Hendricks and Porter (1988), studies of auction data
have played an important role in demonstrating the empirical relevance of economic models
of strategic interaction between agents with asymmetric information. However, a fundamental issue remains unresolved: how to choose between private and common values models
of bidders’ information. In a common values auction, information about the value of the
object for sale is spread among bidders; hence, a bidder would update his assessment of the
value of winning if he learned the private information of an opponent. In a private values
auction, by contrast, opponents’ private information would be of interest to a bidder only
for strategic reasons–learning an opponent’s assessment of the good would not aﬀect his
beliefs about his own valuation.
In this paper we propose nonparametric tests to distinguish between the common values
(CV) and private values (PV) paradigms based on observed bids at first-price sealed-bid
auctions. The distinction between these paradigms is fundamental in the theoretical literature on auctions, with important implications for bidding strategies and the design of
markets. While intuition is often oﬀered for when one might expect a private or common
values model to be more appropriate, a more formal approach would be valuable in many
applications. In fact, discriminating between common and private values was the motivation behind Paarsch’s (1992) pioneering work on structural estimation of auction models.
More generally, models in which strategic agents’ private information leads to adverse selection (a common values auction being just one example) have played a prominent role
in the theoretical economics literature, yet the prevalence and significance of this type of
informational asymmetry is not well established empirically. Because a first-price auction is
a market institution particularly well captured by a tractable theoretical model, data from
these auctions oﬀer a promising opportunity to test for adverse selection using structure
obtained from economic theory.
Several testing approaches explored previously rely heavily on parametric assumptions
about the distribution functions governing bidders’ private information (e.g. Paarsch (1992),
Sareen (1999)). Such tests necessarily confound evaluation of the economic hypotheses of
interest with evaluation of parametric distributional assumptions. Some prior work (e.g.,
Gilley and Karels (1981)) has suggested examining variation in bid levels with the number
of bidders as a test for common values. However, Pinkse and Tan (2002) have recently
shown that this type of reduced-form test generally cannot distinguish CV from PV models in first-price auctions: in equilibrium, strategic behavior can cause bids to increase or
decrease in the number of opponents under either paradigm. We overcome both of these

2
limitations by taking a nonparametric structural approach, exploiting the relationships between observable bids and bidders’ latent expectations implied by equilibrium bidding in a
model that nests the private and common values frameworks. Unlike tests of particular PV
or CV models (e.g., Paarsch (1992), Hendricks, Pinkse, and Porter (2003)), our approach
enables testing a null hypothesis including all PV models within the standard aﬃliated values framework (Milgrom and Weber (1982)) against an alternative including all CV models
in that framework. The price we pay for these advantages is reliance on an assumption of
equilibrium bidding. This is not an innocuous assumption. However, a first-price auction
is a market institution that seems particularly well suited to this structural approach.
The importance of tests for common values to empirical research on auctions is further
emphasized by recent results showing that CV models are identified only under strong conditions on the underlying information structure or on the types of data available (e.g., Athey
and Haile (2002)). Hence, a formal method for determining whether a CV or PV model
is more appropriate could oﬀer an important diagnostic tool for researchers hoping to use
demand estimates from bid data to guide the design of markets. Laﬀont and Vuong (1996)
have observed that any common values model is observationally equivalent to some private
values model, suggesting that such testing is impossible. However, they did not consider
the possibilities of binding reserve prices or variation in the numbers of bidders, either of
which could aid in distinguishing between the private and common values paradigms.
Our tests exploit variation in the number of bidders and are based on detecting the eﬀects
of the winner’s curse on equilibrium bidding. The winner’s curse is an adverse selection
phenomenon arising in CV but not PV auctions. Loosely, winning a CV auction reveals to
the winner that he was more optimistic about the object’s value than his opponents were.
This “bad news” (Milgrom (1981)) becomes worse as the number of opponents increases–
having the most optimistic signal among many bidders implies (on average) even greater
over-optimism than does being most optimistic among a few bidders. A rational bidder
anticipates this bad news and adjusts his expectation of the value of winning (and, therefore,
his bid) accordingly. In a PV auction, by contrast, the value a bidder places on the object
does not depend on his opponents’ information, so the number of bidders does not aﬀect
his expected value of the object conditional on winning. Relying on this distinction, our
testing approach is based on detecting the adjustments rational bidders make in order to
avoid the winner’s curse as the number of competitors changes. This is nontrivial because we
can observe only bids, and variation in the level of competition aﬀects the aggressiveness
of bidding even in a PV auction. However, economic theory enables us to separate this
competitive response from responses (if any) to the winner’s curse.

3
We consider several statistical tests, all involving distributions of bidders’ expected valuations (actually, particular conditional expectations of their valuations) in auctions with
varying numbers of bidders. In a PV environment, these distributions should not vary with
the number of bidders, whereas the CV alternative implies a first-order stochastic dominance
relation. Our testing problem is complicated by the fact that we cannot compare empirical
distributions of bidders’ expectations directly; rather, we can only compare empirical distributions of estimates of these expectations, obtained using nonparametric methods recently
developed by Guerre, Perrigne, and Vuong (2000) (hereafter GPV) and extended by Li,
Perrigne, and Vuong (2002), Li, Perrigne, and Vuong (2000) (together, LPV hereafter) and
by Hendricks, Pinkse, and Porter (2003) (hereafter HPP). This nonparametric first stage
raises several issues that can significantly complicate the asymptotic distributions of test
statistics. A further complication arising in many applications is the endogeneity of bidder
participation. After developing our tests for the base case of exogenous participation, we
consider several standard models of endogenous participation and provide conditions under
which our tests can be adapted.
While our testing approach is new, we are not the first to explore implications of the
winner’s curse as an approach for distinguishing PV from CV models. Hendricks, Pinkse
and Porter (2003, footnote 2) suggest a testing approach applicable when there is a binding
reserve price, in addition to several tests of a pure common values model that are applicable
when one observes, in addition to bids, the ex post realization of the object’s value. Although
our tests are applicable when there is a binding reserve price, this is not required–an
important advantage in many applications, including the drilling rights auctions studied by
HPP and the timber auctions we study below. In addition, our tests require observation only
of the bids–the only data available from most first-price auctions. For second-price and
English auctions, Paarsch (1991) and Bajari and Hortacsu (2003) have considered testing
for the winner’s curse using a simple regression approach. However, second-price sealedbid auctions are uncommon in practice, and the applicability of this approach to English
auctions is limited by the fact that the winner’s willingness to pay is never revealed (creating
a missing data problem) and further by ambiguity regarding the appropriate interpretation
of losing bids (e.g., Bikhchandani, Haile, and Riley (2002), Haile and Tamer (2003)). Athey
and Haile’s (2002) study of identification in auction models includes suﬃcient conditions
for discriminating between common and private values. However, they focus on cases in
which only a subset of the bids is observable, consider only exogenous participation, and do
not develop formal statistical tests.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section summarizes the

4
underlying model, the method for inferring bidders’ expectations of their valuations from
observed bids, and the main principle of our testing approach. In section 3 we provide
the details of two types of tests and develop the necessary asymptotic theory. In section
4 we report the results of Monte Carlo experiments demonstrating the performance of
our tests. In section 5 we show how the tests can be extended to environments with
endogenous participation, and section 6 presents an approach for incorporating auctionspecific covariates. Section 7 then presents the empirical application to U.S. Forest Service
auctions of timber harvesting contracts, where we consider data from two types of sales
that diﬀer in ways that seem likely a priori to aﬀect the significance of any common value
elements. We conclude in section 8.

2

Model and Testing Principle

The underlying theoretical framework is Milgrom and Weber’s (1982) general aﬃliated
values model. Throughout we denote random variables in upper case and their realizations
in lower case. We use boldface to denote vectors. An auction has N ∈ {n . . . n̄} risk-neutral
bidders, with n ≥ 2. Each bidder i has a valuation Ui ∈ (u, u) for the object and observes
a private signal Xi ∈ (x, x) of this valuation. We let X−i denote the vector of signals of
i’s opponents. Valuations and signals have joint distribution F̃n (U1 , . . . , Un , X1 , . . . , Xn ),
which is assumed to have a positive joint density on (u, u)n ×(x, x)n . We make the following
standard assumptions (see Milgrom and Weber (1982)).
Assumption 1 (Symmetry) F̃n (U1 , . . . , Un , X1 , . . . , Xn ) is exchangeable with respect to
the indices 1, . . . , n.1
Assumption 2 (Aﬃliation) U1 , . . . , Un , X1 , . . . , Xn are aﬃliated.
Assumption 3 (Nondegeneracy) E[Ui |Xi = x, X−i = x−i ] is strictly increasing in x ∀x−i .
Initially, we also assume that the number of bidders is not correlated with bidder valuations or signals:2
Assumption 4 (Exogenous Participation) For each n < n̄ and all (u1 , . . . , un , x1 , . . . , xn ),
F̃n (u1 , . . . , un , x1 , . . . , xn ) = F̃n̄ (u1 , . . . , un , ∞, . . . , ∞, x1 , . . . , xn , ∞, . . . , ∞).
1
2

We discuss relaxation of the symmetry assumption in section 8.
This assumption is not made by Milgrom and Weber (1982) because they consider fixed n.

5
Such exogenous variation in the number of bidders will arise naturally in some applications
but not others (cf. Athey and Haile (2002) and section 5 below). Endogenous participation
will be considered in section 5 after results for this base case are presented.
A seller conducts a first-price sealed-bid auction for a single object; i.e., sealed bids are
collected from all bidders, and the object is sold to the high bidder at a price equal to his
own bid.3 Under Assumptions 1—3, in an n-bidder auction there exists a unique symmetric
Bayesian Nash equilibrium in which each bidder employs a strictly increasing strategy sn (·).
Assuming equilibrium bidding by his opponents, bidder i chooses his bid b to maximize
E [(Ui − b)1{sn (xj ) ≤ b ∀j 6= i}|Xi = xi ]
As shown by Milgrom and Weber (1982), the first-order condition characterizing the equilibrium bid function is
s0 (x)Fn (x|x)
(1)
v(x, x, n) = sn (x) + n
∀x
fn (x|x)
where

¸
∙
0
v(x, x , n) ≡ E Ui |Xi = x, max Xj = x ,
0

j6=i

(2)

Fn (·|x) is the distribution of the maximum signal among a given bidder’s opponents conditional on his own signal being x, and fn (·|x) is the corresponding conditional density.
The conditional expectation v(x, x, n) in (1) gives a bidder’s expectation of his valuation
conditional on his signal and on his equilibrium bid being pivotal. Our testing approach
is based on the fact that this expectation is decreasing in n whenever valuations contain a
common value element. To show this, we first formally define private and common values.4
Definition 1 Bidders have private values iﬀ E[Ui |X1 , . . . , Xn ] = E[Ui |Xi ]; bidders have
common values iﬀ E[Ui |X1 , . . . , Xn ] strictly increases in Xj for j 6= i.
Note that the definition of common values incorporates a wide range of models with a
common value component, not just the special case of pure common values, where the value
of the object is unknown but identical for all bidders.5
3

We describe the auction as one in which bidders compete to buy. The translation to the procurement
setting, where bidders compete to sell, is straightforward.
4
Aﬃliation implies that E[Ui |X1 , . . . , Xn ] is nondecreasing in all Xj , and symmetry implies that when
the expectation strictly increases in some Xj , j 6= i, it must strictly increase in all Xj , j 6= i. For simplicity
our definition of common values excludes cases in which the winner’s curse arises for some realizations of
signals but not others. Without this, the results below would still hold but with weak inequalities replacing
some strict inequalities. Up to this simplification, our PV and CV definitions characterize a partition of the
set of models falling in Milgrom and Weber’s (1982) aﬃliated values framework.
5
Our terminology corresponds to that used by, e.g., Klemperer (1999) and Athey and Haile (2002),
although it is not the only one used in the literature. Some authors reserve the term “common values”

6
The following theorem gives the key result enabling discrimination between PV and CV
models.
Theorem 1 Under Assumptions 1—4, v(x, x, n) is invariant to n for all x in a PV model
but strictly decreasing in n for all x in a CV model.
Proof: Given symmetry, we focus on bidder 1 without loss of generality. With private
values, E[U1 |X1 , . . . , Xn ] = E[U1 |X1 ], which does not depend on n. With common values
v(x, x, n) ≡ E [U1 |X1 = X2 = x, X3 ≤ x, . . . , Xn−1 ≤ x, Xn ≤ x]
= EXn ≤x E [U1 |X1 = X2 = x, X3 ≤ x, . . . , Xn−1 ≤ x, Xn ]
< EXn E [U1 |X1 = X2 = x, X3 ≤ x, . . . , Xn−1 ≤ x, Xn ]
= E [U1 |X1 = X2 = x, X3 ≤ x, . . . , Xn−1 ≤ x]
≡ v(x, x; n − 1)
with the inequality following from the definition of common values.
¤
Informally, in equilibrium a rational bidder adjusts his expectation of his valuation downward to reflect the fact that he wins only when his own signal is higher than those of all
opponents. The size of this adjustment depends on the number of opponents: the information that the maximum signal among n is equal to x implies a higher expectation of Ui
than the information that the maximum among m > n is equal to x. Hence, the conditional
expectation v(x, x, n) decreases in n.
2.1

Structural Interpretation of Observed Bids

To use Theorem 1 to test for common values, we must be able to infer or estimate the
latent expectations v(xi , xi , n) for bidders in auctions with varying numbers of participants.
We assume that for each n the researcher observes the bids B1 , . . . , Bn from Tn n-bidder
P
auctions. We let T = n Tn and assume that for all n, TTn → ρn ∈ (0, 1) as T → ∞. Below
we will add the auction index t ∈ {1, . . . , T } to the notation defined above as necessary.
For simplicity we initially assume an identical object is sold at each auction. As shown
by GPV, standard nonparametric techniques can be applied to control for auction-specific
covariates. Below we will also suggest a more parsimonious alternative that may be more
for the special case we call pure common values and use the term “interdependent values” (e.g., Krishna
(2002)) or the less accurate “aﬃliated values” for the class of models we call common values. Additional
confusion sometimes arises because the partition of the Milgrom-Weber framework into CV and PV models
is only one of two partitions that might be of interest, the other being defined by whether bidders’ signals
are independent. Note in particular that dependence of bidders’ signals is neither necessary nor suﬃcient
for common values.

7
useful in applications with many covariates. We assume throughout that each auction is
independent of all others.6
As pointed out by GPV, the strict monotonicity of sn (·) implies that in equilibrium the
joint distribution of bidder signals is related to the joint distribution of bids through the
relations
Fn (y|x) = Gn (sn (y)|sn (x))
fn (y|x) = gn (sn (y)|sn (x)) s0n (y)

(3)

where Gn (·|sn (x)) is the equilibrium distribution of the highest bid among i’s competitors
conditional on i’s equilibrium bid being sn (x), and gn (·|sn (x)) is the corresponding conditional density. Because bi = sn (xi ) in equilibrium, the diﬀerential equation (1) can then be
rewritten
v(xi , xi , n) = bi +

Gn (bi |bi )
≡ ξ(bi ; n).
gn (bi |bi )

(4)

For simplicity we will refer to the expectation v(xi , xi , n) on the left side of (4) as bidder
i’s “value.” Although these values are not observed directly, the joint distribution of bids
(·|·)
is nonparametrically identified. Because xi = s−1
is. Hence, the ratio Ggnn(·|·)
n (bi ), equation
¢
¡ −1
(4) implies that each v sn (bi ) , s−1
n (bi ) , n is identified as well. This need not be suﬃcient
to identify the model (i.e., to identify F̃n (·)); however, identification of the distribution of
values v(Xi , Xi , n) will be suﬃcient for our purpose.
To address estimation, let Bit denote the bid made by bidder i at auction t, and let
∗
Bit represent the highest bid among i’s opponents. GPV and LPV suggest nonparametric
estimates of the form
¶
µ
n
T X
X
1
b − bit
1 (b∗it < b, nt = n)
K
Ĝn (b; b) =
Tn × hG × n t=1
hG
i=1
(5)
¶ µ
¶
µ
n
T
XX
b − b∗it
1
b − bit
K
.
ĝn (b; b) =
1(nt = n)K
Tn × h2g × n t=1
hg
hg
i=1

Here hG and hg are bandwidths and K(·) is a kernel. Ĝn (b; b) and ĝn (b; b) are nonparametric
estimates of
∂
Pr(Bit∗ ≤ m, Bit ≤ b)|m=b
Gn (b; b) ≡ Gn (b|b)gn (b) =
∂b
and
∂2
Pr(Bit∗ ≤ m, Bit ≤ b)|m=b
gn (b; b) ≡ gn (b|b)gn (b) =
∂m∂b
6

This is a standard assumption, but one that serves to qualify almost all empirical studies of bidding,
where data are taken from auctions in which bidders compete repeatedly over time.

8
respectively, where gn (·) is the marginal density of bids in equilibrium. Because
Gn (b; b)
Gn (b|b)
=
gn (b; b)
gn (b|b)

(6)

(b|b)
is a consistent estimator of Ggnn(b|b)
. Hence, by evaluating Ĝn (·, ·) and ĝn (·, ·) at each
observed bid, we can construct a pseudo-sample of consistent estimates of the realizations
of each Vit ≡ v(Xit , Xit , n) using (4):
Ĝn (b;b)
ĝn (b;b)

ˆ it ; nt ) = bit +
v̂it ≡ ξ(b

Ĝn (bit ; bit )
.
ĝn (bit ; bit )

(7)

This possibility was first articulated for the independent private values model by Laﬀont
and Vuong (1993) and GPV, and has been extended to aﬃliated values models by LPV and
HPP. Following this literature, we refer to each estimate v̂it as a “pseudo-value.”
2.2

Main Principle of the Test

Each pseudo-value v̂it obtained from (7) is an estimate of v(xit , xit , nt ). If we have pseudovalues from auctions with diﬀerent numbers of bidders, we can exploit Theorem 1 to develop
a test. Let Fv,n (·) denote the distribution of the random variable Vit = v(Xit , Xit , n).
Because Fv,n (v) = Pr (v(Xit , Xit , n) ≤ v), Theorem 1 and Assumption 4 immediately imply
that under the PV hypothesis, Fv,n (·) must be the same for all n, while under the CV
alternative, Fv,n (v) must strictly increase in n for all v.
Corollary 1 Under the private values hypothesis
Fv,n (v) = Fv,n+1 (v) = . . . = Fv,n̄ (v)

∀v.

(8)

∀v.

(9)

Under the common values hypothesis
Fv,n (v) < Fv,n+1 (v) < . . . < Fv,n̄ (v)

3

Tests for Stochastic Dominance

Corollary 1 suggests that a test for stochastic dominance applied to estimates of each Fv,n (·)
would provide a test for common values. If the values vit = v (xit , xit , n) were directly
observed, a wide variety of existing tests from the statistics and econometrics literature could
be used (e.g, McFadden (1989), Anderson (1996), Davidson and Duclos (2000), Barrett and
Donald (2003)). The empirical distribution function
T

F̂v,n (y) =

n

1 1 XX
1 (vit ≤ y, nt = n) .
Tn n t=1
i=1

9
is commonly used to form test statistics.
Our testing problem has the complication that each vit is not directly observed but
estimated. Hence, the empirical distributions we can construct are
T

F̂v̂,n (y) =

n

1 1 XX
1 (v̂it ≤ y, nt = n) .
Tn n t=1
i=1

Several diﬃculties are involved in formulating consistent tests based on these empirical
distributions and the testing principle above, and in deriving the large sample properties
of the test statistics. The primary diﬃculty is the dependence of the asymptotic distributions of test statistics on the first-step nonparametric estimation of pseudo-values. This
not only adds estimation error but also introduces finite sample dependence between nearby
pseudo-value estimates that must be accounted for in the asymptotic theory. A further complication is trimming, which is needed at the boundaries of the supports of the pseudo-value
distributions, because nonparametric density estimates appear in (7). Trimming introduces
theoretical diﬃculties that can depend on conditions that are hard to interpret in practice (see, for example, Lavergne and Vuong (1996)), and naive trimming rules can lead
to inconsistent tests. Finally, note that the validity of inference based on the bootstrap
or subsampling also relies on knowledge of convergence rates and asymptotic distributions
of test statistics, so the diﬃculties in deriving asymptotic distributions cannot be avoided
simply by employing resampling methods.
We consider two approaches that enable us to overcome these diﬃculties. The first
involves testing the implications of stochastic dominance for finite sets of functionals of
each Fv,n (·). This approach enables us to apply multivariate one-sided hypothesis tests
based on tractable asymptotic approximations. The second approach uses a generalized
version of familiar Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistics, with critical values approximated by
subsampling.
3.1

Multivariate One-Sided Hypothesis Tests for Stochastic Dominance

Let γn denote a finite vector of monotonic functionals of the distribution Fv,n (·). We will
consider tests of hypotheses of the form
H0 (PV) : γn = γn+1 = · · · = γn̄
H1 (CV) : γn > γn+1 > · · · > γn̄

10
¡
¢0
or, letting δm,n ≡ γm − γn and δ ≡ δn,n+1 , , . . . , δn̄−1,n̄ ,
H0 (PV) : δ = 0

(10)

H1 (CV) : δ > 0.
We consider two types of functionals γn .7 The first is a vector of quantiles of Fv,n (·).
The second is the mean. In the next two subsections we show that for both cases we can
construct consistent estimators of each γn (or the diﬀerence vector δ) with multivariate
normal asymptotic distributions. These results rely on the following assumptions.
Assumption 5
1. Each Gn (b; b) is R + 1 times diﬀerentiable in its first argument and
R times diﬀerentiable in its second argument. Each gn (b; b) is R times diﬀerentiable
in both arguments. The derivatives are bounded and continuous.
R
R
R r
K ( ) d = 0 for all r < R. | |R K ( ) d < ∞.
2. K ( ) d = 1 and
3. hG = hg = h. As T → ∞, h −→ 0, T h2 Á log T −→ ∞, T h2+2R −→ 0.

3.1.1

Tests based on Quantiles

Let b̂τ,n denote the τ th quantile of the empirical distribution of bids from all n-bidder
auctions, i.e.,
b̂τ,n = Ĝ−1
n (τ ) ≡ inf{b : Ĝn (b) ≥ τ }
P
P
T
n
1
where Ĝn (b) = nTn t=1 i=1 1 (bit ≤ b, nt = n). Similarly, let bτ,n denote the τ the quantile of the marginal distribution of bids, Gn (·), while xτ denotes the τ th quantile of the
marginal distribution Fx (·) of a bidder’s signal. Equation (4) and monotonicity of the
equilibrium bid function imply that vτ,n , the τ th quantile of Fv,n (·), can be estimated by
v̂τ,n = b̂τ,n +

Ĝn (b̂τ,n ; b̂τ,n )
ĝn (b̂τ,n ; b̂τ,n )

.

Because sample quantiles of the bid distribution converge to population quantiles at rate
√
Tn , the sampling variance of v̂τ,n − v(xτ , xτ , n) will be governed by the slow pointwise
nonparametric convergence rate of ĝn (·; ·).8 As shown in GPV, for fixed b, ĝn (b; b) converges

7
Because each null hypothesis we consider consists of a single point in the space of the “parameter” δ,
the diﬃculties discussed in Wolak (1991) do not arise here.
8
Note that Gn (b; b) is estimated more precisely than gn (b; b) for all bandwidth sequences h. For simplicity,
in Assumption 5 we have chosen hG = hg , in which case the sampling variance will be dominated by that
from estimation of gn (b; b). We have assumed undersmoothing rather than optimal smoothing to avoid
estimating the asymptotic bias term for inference purposes. An alternative is to choose diﬀerent sequences
for hG and hg . If we have chosen hG and hg close to their optimal range, the sampling variance will still be
dominated by that of ĝn (b; b) and the result of the theorem will not change. On the other hand if hG ≈ h2g
so that Ĝn (b; b) and ĝn (b; b) share the same magnitude of variance, then the convergence rate for Gn (b; b)
will be far from optimal.

11
q
at rate Tn h2g to gn (b; b). Theorem 2 then describes the limiting behavior of each v̂τ,n .
The proof is given in the appendix.
Theorem 2 Suppose
5 holds. Then as Tn −→ ∞ for each n,
³ Assumption
´
1
√
.
(i) b̂τ,n − bτ,n = Op
Tn
(ii) For each b such that gn (b; b) > 0,
!
Ã
h
p
¢i p
¡ −1
Ĝn (b; b) Gn (b|b)
−1
2
2
−
Tn h ξ̂(b; n) − v sn (b) , sn (b) , n = Tn h
ĝn (b; b)
gn (b|b)
Ã
!
∙Z Z
¸
¡ 0 ¢2
1 Gn (b|b)2
d
2
0
K
(e)
−→ N 0,
K
e
de
de
.
n gn (b|b)3 gn (b)
(iii) For
values
τ1 , . . . , τL´in (0, 1), the L-dimensional vector with elements
³ distinct
³
´
√
2
ˆ
Tn h ξ b̂τl ,n ; n − v (xτl , xτl , n) converges in distribution to Z ∼ N (0, Ω), where Ω is a
diagonal matrix with lth diagonal element
∙Z Z
¸
¡ 0 ¢2
Gn (sn (xτl )|sn (xτl ))2
1
2
0
K (e) K e de de .
Ωl =
n gn (sn (xτl )|sn (xτl ))3 gn (sn (xτl ))

3.1.2

Tests based on Means

An alternative to comparing quantiles is to compare means of the pseudo-value distributions.
We can estimate
Z
Ex [v(x, x, n)] = v dFv,n (v)

with the sample average of the pseudo-values in all n-bidder auctions:
T
n
1 XX
µ̂n =
1 (nt = n) v̂it .
n × Tn t=1

(11)

i=1

By Corollary 1, Ex [v(x, x, n)] is the same for all n under private values but strictly decreasing
in n with common values.
A complication in implementing a test is the need for a practical way of trimming boundary values of v̂it that preserves the interpretation of the null and alternative hypotheses. We
use a trimming rule that equalizes the quantiles trimmed from Fv̂,n (·) across all n. Because
equilibrium bid functions are strictly monotone, the pseudo-value at the τ th quantile of
Fv,n (·) is that of the bidder with signal at the τ th quantile of Fx (·). Hence, trimming bids

12
at the same quantile for all values of n also trims the same bidder types (signals) from all
distributions, thereby preserving the consistency of a test based on Corollary 1.
To make this precise, let b̂τ,n denote the τ th quantile of Ĝn (·) and recall that xτ is the
τ th quantile of the marginal distribution of a bidder’s signal. The quantile-trimmed mean
is then defined as
µn ≡ E [v(x, x, n) 1 (xτ ≤ x ≤ x1−τ )]
with sample analog
µ̂n,τ ≡

T
n
³
´
1 XX
v̂it 1 b̂τ,n ≤ bit ≤ b̂1−τ,n , nt = n .
n × Tn
t=1 i=1

We can then test the modified hypotheses
H0 : µn,τ = · · · = µn̄,τ

(12)

H1 : µn,τ > · · · > µn̄,τ

(13)

which are implied by (8) and (9), respectively. The next theorem shows the consistency
and asymptotic normality of each µ̂n,τ .
2

T)
1+2R −→ 0. Then
Theorem 3 Suppose Assumption 5 holds, (log
T h3 −→ 0 and T h
p
(i) µ̂n,τ −→ µn,τ .
√
d
(ii) Tn h (µ̂n,τ − µn,τ ) −→ N (0, σn ) where
"Z µZ
#" Z
#
¶
¡ 0¢ ¡ 0
¢ 0 2
1 b1−τ,n Gn (b; b)2
K
− d
d
gn (b)2 db .
K
σn =
n bτ,n
gn (b; b)3

(14)

√
The proof is given in the appendix. Note that the convergence rate of each µ̂n is Tn h.
√
√
While this is slower than the parametric rate Tn , it is faster than the Tn h2 rate obtained
√
for the quantile diﬀerences described above. Intuitively, the intermediate Tn h rate of
convergence arises because although ĝn (b; b) is an estimated bivariate density function, in
constructing the estimate µ̂n we average along the diagonal Bit∗ = Bit .9
9

While the test based on averaged pseudo-values converges faster than that based on a vector of quantiles,
the improvement of the convergence rate is not proportional because the conditions on bandwidths for
the partial mean case can be diﬀerent from those on the pointwise estimates. However, there are still
improvements after taking this into account, and this advantage of the means-based test is evident in
(unreported) Monte Carlo simulations.

13
3.1.3

Test Statistics

In this section we focus on a test for diﬀerences in the means of the pseudo-value distributions. An analogous test can be constructed using quantiles; however, because of the faster
rate of convergence of the means test and its superior performance in Monte Carlo simulations, we focus on this approach. A likelihood ratio (LR) test (e.g., Bartholomew (1959),
Wolak (1989)) or the weighted power test of Andrews (1998) provide possible approaches
for formulating test statistics based on the asymptotic normality results above. Because we
do not have a good a prior choice of the weighting function for Andrews’ weighted power
test, we have chosen to use the LR test.10
Let σn denote the asymptotic variance given in (14) for each value of n = n, . . . , n̄ and
¡
¢0
define an ≡ Tσnnh . Then the asymptotic covariance matrix of the vector µ̂n,τ . . . µ̂n̄,τ is
⎡

⎢
⎢
⎢
Σ=⎢
⎢
⎣

1
an

0

0

0

0
..
.
0

1
an+1

0
..
.

0
..
.

...

1
an̄

0
0

⎤

⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥.
⎥
⎦

The restricted maximum-likelihood estimate of the (quantile-trimmed) mean pseudo-value
under the null hypothesis (12) is given by
Pn̄
n=n an µ̂n,τ
.
µ̄ = Pn̄
n=n an

To test against the alternative (13), let µ∗n , . . . , µ∗n̄ denote the solution to
min

µn ,...,µn̄

n̄
X

n=n

an (µ̂n,τ − µn )2

s.t. µn ≥ µn+1 ≥ · · · ≥ µn̄ .

(15)

This solution can be found using the well-known “pool adjacent violators” algorithm (Ayer,
et al. (1955)), using the weights an . Define the test statistic
2

χ̄ =

n̄
X

n=n

¡
¢2
an µ∗n,τ − µ̄ .

The following corollary states that, under the null hypothesis, the LR statistic χ̄2 is asymptotically distributed as a mixture of Chi-square random variables. The proof is given in
Bartholomew (1959, Section 3).
10

Indeed, Monte Carlo results in Andrews (1998) comparing the LR test to his more general tests for
multivariate one-sided hypotheses, which are optimal in terms of a “weighted average power,” suggests that
the LR tests are “close to being optimal for a wide range of [average power] weighting functions” (pg. 158).

14
Corollary 2 Under the null PV hypothesis,
n̄−n+1
X
¢
¡
¢
¡ 2
Pr χ2k−1 ≥ c w(k; Σ)
Pr χ̄ ≥ c =
k=2

∀c > 0,

where χ2j denotes a standard Chi-square distribution with j degrees of freedom, and each
mixing weight w(k; Σ) is the probability that the solution to (15) has exactly k distinct
values when the vector {µ̂n,τ , . . . , µ̂n̄,τ } has a multivariate N (0, Σ) distribution.
In practice the weights w(k; Σ) can be obtained by simulation from the M V N (0, Σ̂)
distribution, where Σ̂ is a diagonal matrix with elements obtained from sample analogs of
(14). An alternative to using equation (14), explored below, is to estimate each element of
Σ using bootstrap distributions of mean pseudo-values.
3.2

A Sup-Norm Test

A second testing approach is based on a Kolmogorov-Smirnov-type (KS) statistic for a
k-sample test of equal distributions against an alternative of strict first-order stochastic
dominance. Consider the sum of supremum distances between successive empirical distributions of pseudo-values:
δT =

n−1
X

sup

n=n v∈[v,v̄]

n
o
F̂v̂,n+1 (v) − F̂v̂,n (v)

(16)

where [v, v̄] is a compact interval strictly bounded away from the boundaries of the support
of the pseudo-value distribution for all n.
The KS statistic δT is a limiting case of a more general class of test statistics of the form
δ̄T =

n−1
X

sup

½

n=n v∈[v,v̄]

T n+1
X
X
1
1 (nt = n + 1) Λ (v̂it − v)
(n + 1)Tn+1

1
−
nTn

t=1 i=1

n
T X
X
t=1 i=1

¾
1 (nt = n) Λ (v̂it − v)

¡ ¢
where Λ (·) is a diﬀerentiable strictly decreasing function. If we take Λ (·) to be 1 − ψ h·0 ,
where ψ (·) is a smooth distribution function with bounded support and h0 is a bandwidth
parameter, then δ̄T provides a smooth approximation to the KS statistic in (16), with
limh0 →0 δ̄T = δT . We will work with this generalized statistic.
Strict monotonicity of Λ(·) and uniform consistency of each estimate of En Λ(vit − v) on
the compact set v ∈ [v, v̄] imply that δ̄T → 0 as T → ∞ under H0 , while δ̄T → ∆ > 0 under

15
H1 . This forms a basis for testing. In particular, define the test statistic
ST = ηT δ̄T
where ηT is a normalizing sequence proportional to (T h)1/2 . Appendix C describes the
large sample behavior of this test statistic. In particular, we show there that ST has a
nondegenerate limiting distribution.
To approximate the asymptotic distribution of the test statistic, we use a subsampling
approach.11 Recall that the observables consist of the set of bids Bt = (B1t , . . . , Bnt t ) from
each auction t = 1, . . . , T . So we can write
¡
¢
δ̄T = δ̄T B1 , . . . , BTn , . . . , BT .

Let RT denote a sequence of subsample sizes and, for each n, let RnT be a sequence proportional to RT , with RnT < Tn . Let
¶
n µ
X
Tn
κT =
RnT
n=n

³
´
∗
∗
denote the number of subsets B1∗ , . . . BR
,
.
.
.
B
RnT of (B1 , . . . BT ) consisting of all bids
nT
from³RnT of the original Tn´n-bidder auctions, n = n, . . . n. Let δ̄T,RT ,i denote the statistic
∗
∗
obtained using the ith such subsample of bids. The sampling
, . . . BR
δ̄RT B1∗ , . . . BR
nT
nT
distribution ΦT of the test statistic ST is then approximated by
ΦT,RT (x) =

κT
¡
¢
1 X
1 ηRT δ̄T,RT ,i ≤ x .
κT

(17)

i=1

The critical value for a test at level α is taken to be the 1 − α quantile, Φ1−α
T,RT , of ΦT,RT .

³
´
Theorem 4 (i) Let RT → ∞ and RTT → 0 as T → ∞. Then under H0 , Pr ST > Φ1−α
T,RT →
α.
(ii) Assume
that as ´
T → ∞, RT → ∞, RTT → 0, and lim inf T (ηT /ηRT ) > 1. Then under
³
H1 , Pr ST > Φ1−α
T,RT

→ 1 as T → ∞.

The proof is omitted because the result follows from Theorem 2.6.1 of Politis, Romano,
and Wolf (1999), given the discussion above and the results in Appendix C. As usual, in
practice the empirical distribution in (17) is approximated using random subsampling.
11

See Linton, Massoumi, and Whang (2002) for a recent application of subsampling to tests for stochastic
dominance in a diﬀerent context.

16

4

Monte Carlo Simulations

Here we summarize the results of Monte Carlo experiments performed to evaluate our testing
approaches. We examine the performance of our tests on data generated by two PV models
and two CV models:
(PV1) independent private values, xi ∼ u[0, 1];
(PV2) independent private values, ln xi ∼ N (0, 1);
(CV1) common values, i.i.d. signals xi ∼ u[0, 1], ui =

xi
2

+

P

j6=i xj 12
2(n−1) ;

(CV2) pure common values, ui = u ∼ u[0, 1], conditionally independent signals xi uniform
on [0, u].13
Before reporting the results, we turn to Figure 1. Here we illustrate the empirical
distributions of pseudo-values obtained by applying the first-stage nonparametric estimators
using one simulated data set from each of the four models. We do this for n = 2, . . . , 5,
with Tn = 200. For the PV models, the estimated distributions are very close to each
other. For the CV models these distributions clearly suggest the first-order stochastic
dominance relation implied by the winner’s curse. Note that in both model CV1 and
model CV2, the eﬀect of a change in n on the distribution appears to be largest when
n is small. This is the case in many CV models and is quite intuitive: the diﬀerence
between E[U1 |X1 = maxj∈{2,...,n} Xj = x] and E[U1 |X1 = maxj∈{2,...,n+1} Xj = x] typically
shrinks as n grows. This is important because most auction data sets contain relatively few
observations for n large but many observations for n small–exactly where the eﬀects of the
winner’s curse are most pronounced.
We first consider the LR test based on quantile-trimmed means. Tables 1 and 2 summarize the test results, using tests with nominal size 5% and 10%. The last two rows in Table 1
indicate that in the PV models there is a tendency to over-reject when sample analogs of
(14) are used to construct the mixing weights in Corollary 2. For example, for tests with
nominal size 10% and data generated by the PV1 model, we reject 20.5% of the time when
the range of bidders is 2—4, and 39% of the time when the range of bidders is 2—5. The tests
do appear to have good power properties, rejecting the CV models in 70 to 100 percent of
the replications. However, the over-rejection under the null is a concern.
12

3n−2
Here v (x, x; n) = 4(n−1)
x, leading to the equilibrium bid function sn (x) = 3n−2
4n x. It is easy to see that
although v(x, x; n) is strictly decreasing in n, sn (x) strictly increases in n.
13
The symmetric equilibrium bid function for this model is given in Matthews (1984).

17
One possible reason for the over-rejections is that the asymptotic approximations of the
variances of the average pseudo-values derived in Theorem 3 may be poor at the modest
sample sizes we consider. We have considered an alternative of using bootstrap estimates of
the elements of Σ.14 We use a block bootstrap procedure that repeatedly selects an auction
from the original sample at random and includes all bids from that auction in the bootstrap
sample, thereby preserving any dependence between bids within each auction. The results,
reported in Table 2, indicate that the tendency towards over-rejection is attenuated when
we estimate these variances with the bootstrap. For a test with nominal size 10%, we now
reject no more than 14% of the time when the range of n is 2—4, and 18% of the time when
the range of n is 2—5. With a 5% nominal size, our rejection rates range between 4% and
12%. The power properties remain very good. These results are encouraging and suggest
use of the bootstrap in practice.
Table 3 provides results for the KS tests using the smoothed step function
Λ(vit − v) =

exp ((v − vit ) /h0 )
1 + exp ((v − vit ) /h0 )

with smoothing parameter h0 = 0.01.15 This test appears to perform extremely well. The
rejection rates for the two PV models are very close to the nominal sizes in all cases, and
the rejection rates for the CV models are extremely high.

5

Endogenous Participation

Thus far we have assumed that variation in bidder participation across auctions is exogenous to the joint distribution of bidders’ valuations and signals. Such exogenous variation
could arise, for example, from shocks to bidders’ costs of participation, variation in bidder
populations across markets, or seller restrictions on participation–e.g., in government auctions (McAfee and McMillan (1987)) or field experiments (Engelbrecht-Wiggans, List, and
Lucking-Reiley (1999)). However, in many applications participation may be endogenous.
Here we explore adaptation of our testing approach to such situations, considering several
diﬀerent models of participation.
14
Note that we are not bootstrapping the distribution of the test statistic given in Corollary 2, only the
component Σ. Bootstrapping the distribution of the test statistic would require resampling bids under the
null hypothesis on the latent values v(x, x, n).
15
We have incorporated the recentering approach suggested by Chernozhukov (2002) whereby, in each
subsample, the test statistic
by the original
test statistic. Hence
hP is recentered
³
³ the subsample test
´ full-sample
i
´
√
Pn̄−1
n̄−1
s
s
s
statistic is L ≡ RhR
supx F̂n+1 (x) − F̂n (x) is
n=n supx F̂n+1 (x) − F̂n (x) − K , where K ≡
n
¡ s √
¢
P
the full-sample statistic. The p-value is computed as S1 S
T hT K .
s=1 1 L >

18
5.1

Binding Reserve Prices

The most common model of endogenous participation is one in which the seller uses a
binding reserve price r, so that only bidders with suﬃciently favorable signals bid. We
continue to let N denote the number of potential bidders and will now let A denote the
number of actual bidders–those submitting bids of at least r. Variation in the number
of potential bidders is still taken to be exogenous; i.e., Assumption 4 is maintained in this
case. However, A will be determined endogenously. Because we consider sealed bid auctions
with private information, it is natural to assume bidders know the realization of N but not
that of A when choosing their bids, because A is determined by the realizations of the
signals.16 We still assume the researcher can observe N .17 As before, we let Fv,n (·) denote
the distribution of the values v(X, X, n) of the n potential bidders.
As shown by Milgrom and Weber (1982), given r and n, a bidder participates if and only
if his signal exceeds the “screening level”
½
∙
¸
¾
∗
(18)
x (r, n) = inf x : E Ui | Xi = x, max Xj ≤ x ≥ r .
j6=i

That is, a bidder participates only if he would be willing to pay the reserve price for the
good even when no other bidder were. In a PV auction, we may assume without loss of
generality that E[Ui |Xi = x] = x. Because E [ Ui | Xi = x, maxj6=i Xj ≤ x] = E[Ui |Xi = x]
in a PV model, equation (18) gives x∗ (r, n) = r. In a common values model, however,
E [ Ui | Xi = x, maxj6=i Xj ≤ x] decreases in n (the proof follows that of Theorem 1), implying
that x∗ (r, n) increases in n. This gives the following lemma.
Lemma 1 The screening level x∗ (r, n) is invariant to n in a PV model but strictly increasing in n in a CV model.
This result implies that our baseline testing approach must be modified to account for
the selection introduced by endogenous participation. For both PV and CV models, the
equilibrium participation rule implies that the marginal distribution of the signals of actual
bidders is the truncated distribution
Fx (x) − Fx (x∗ (r, n))
.
Fx (x|r, n) =
1 − Fx (x∗ (r, n))
16

Schneyerov (2002) considers a diﬀerent model in which bidders observe a signal of the number of actual
bidders after the participation decision but before bids are made.
17
See HPP for an example. If this is not the case, not only is testing diﬃcult, but the more fundamental
identification of bidders’ values v(x, x, n) generally fails. This is because bidding is based on a first-order
condition for bidders who condition on the realization of N when constructing their beliefs Gn (b|b) regarding
the most competitive opposing bid. In general, identification based on a first-order condition requires that
the researcher condition on the same information available to bidders.

19
Hence, letting
v∗ (r, n) = v (x∗ (r, n) , x∗ (r, n) , n)
the distribution of values for actual bidders is given by
A
(v) =
Fv,n

Fv,n (v) − Fv,n (v∗ (r, n))
1 − Fv,n (v ∗ (r, n))

∀v ≥ v ∗ (r, n).

(19)

(x)−Fx (r)
In a PV model, Fx (x|r, n) = Fx1−F
. Because neither this distribution nor the
x (r)
expectation v(x, x, n) varies with n in a PV model, it is still the case that the distribution
A (·) is too. However, the CV
Fv,n (·) is invariant to n in a PV model, implying that Fv,n
A (·). Because x∗ (r, n) increases with n under
case does not give a clean prediction about Fv,n
common values, changes in n aﬀect the marginal distribution of actual bidders’ values in
two ways: first by the fact that v(x, x, n) decreases in n for fixed x; second by the fact that
as n increases, only higher values of x are in the sample. The first eﬀect creates a tendency
toward the FOSD relation derived in Theorem 1 for CV models, while the second eﬀect
A (v) of an exogenous change
works in the opposite direction. This leaves the eﬀect on Fv,n
in n ambiguous in a CV model. However, we can obtain unambiguous testable predictions
under both the PV and CV hypotheses by exploiting the following result.

Lemma 2 With a binding reserve price r, Fv,n (v∗ (r, n)) is identified for all n.
Proof: Let F̃x,n (·) denote the joint distribution of signals X1 , . . . , Xn in an n-bidder auction.
Then
Fv,n (v∗ (r, n)) = Fx (x∗ (r, n))
= F̃x,n (x∗ (r, n), ∞, . . . , ∞)
n
X
k
Pr (A = n − k|N = n)
=
n

(20)

k=1

where the first equality follows from nondegeneracy and the last two follow from exchangeability.
¤
∗
∗
With Fv,n (v (r, n)) known for each n, we can then reconstruct Fv,n (v) for all v ≥ v (r, n).
In particular, from (19) we have
A
(v) + Fv,n (v ∗ (r, n))
Fv,n (v) = [1 − Fv,n (v ∗ (r, n))] Fv,n

With this we can give the main result of this section.
Theorem 5 Fv,n (v) is identified for all v ≥ v ∗ (r, n).

∀v ≥ v∗ (r, n).

(21)

20
Proof: With a binding reserve price
Gn (b|b) = Pr(A = 1|Bi = b, N = n) +

n
X
j=2

Pr(A = j,

max

k∈{1,2,...,j}\i

Bk ≤ b|Bi = b, N = n).

−1
Hence, the observables and the first-order condition (4) uniquely determine v(s−1
n (b), sn (b), n)
A (·). Lemma 2 and equafor all n and b ≥ sn (x∗ (r, n)). This determines the distribution Fv,n
tion (21) then give the result.
¤
Testable implications of the PV and CV models for the distribution Fv,n (v) were established in Corollary 1, and estimation is easily adapted from that for the baseline case using
sample analogs of the probabilities in the identification results above.18 However, note that
we cannot compare the distributions Fv,n (v) in their (truncated) left tails, but rather only
A (·). In particular, because x∗ (r, n)
in the regions of common support of the distributions Fv,n
is nondecreasing in n we can test19

H0 : Fv,n (v) = Fv,3 (v) = · · · = Fv,n̄ (v) ∀v ≥ v ∗ (r, n̄)

(22)

H1 : Fv,n (v) < Fv,3 (v) < · · · < Fv,n̄ (v) ∀v ≥ v ∗ (r, n̄)

(23)

against

which are implied by (8) and (9), respectively.20
While this provides an approach for consistent testing, the fact that we must restrict
the region of comparison could be a limitation in finite samples, particularly if the true
model is one in which the eﬀects of the winner’s curse are most pronounced for bidders with
signals in the left tail of the distribution. However, a significant diﬀerence between v ∗ (r, n̄)
and v∗ (r, n) for n < n̄ (the reason a test of (22) vs. (23) would involve a substantially
restricted support) is itself evidence inconsistent with the PV hypothesis but implied by
the CV hypothesis. Hence, a complementary testing approach is available based on the
following theorem.
Theorem 6 Under the PV hypothesis, Fv,n (v ∗ (r, n)) is identical for all n. Under the CV
hypothesis, Fv,n (v∗ (r, n)) is strictly increasing in n.
18

The definitions of Ĝn (b; b) and ĝn (b; b) would require the obvious modifications to account for the fact
that only a bids, not n, are observed in each auction with n potential bidders.
19
Each v ∗ (r, n) is just the lowest value of v(x, x, n) for an actual bidder and is therefore easily estimated
from the pseudo-values.
20
We have assumed here that r is fixed across auctions. This is not necessary. For example, if r is the
largest reserve price used, the approach here would enable identification of Fv,n (v) for all v > v ∗ (r, n).
Furthermore, as GPV have suggested, variation in r can enable one to trace out more of the distribution
Fv,n (·) by extending methods from the statistics literature on random truncation. A full development of
this extension is a topic unto itself and not pursued here.

21
Proof: Because Fv,n (v∗ (r, n)) = F (x∗ (r, n)), the result follows from Lemma 1.

¤

Consistent estimation of Fv,n (v ∗ (r, n)) for each n is easily accomplished with sample
analogs of the probabilities on the right-hand side of (20). A multivariate one-sided hypothesis test similar to those developed above could then be applied.
5.2

Costly Participation

Endogenous participation also arises when it is costly for bidders to participate. In some
applications preparing a bid may be time consuming. In others, learning the signal Xi
might require estimating costs based on detailed contract specifications, soliciting bids from
subcontractors, or exploratory work. Because bidders must recover participation costs on
average, for N large enough it is not an equilibrium for all bidders to participate, even if
all are certain to place a value on the good strictly above the reserve price (if any). We
consider two standard models of costly participation from the theoretical literature.
5.2.1

Bid Preparation Costs

Samuelson (1985) studied a model in which bidders first observe their signals and the reserve
price r, then decide whether to incur a cost c of preparing a bid. Samuelson considered
only the independent private values model; however, for our purposes this model of costly
participation is equivalent to one in which the seller charges a participation fee c (a bidder’s
participation decision and first-order condition are the same regardless of whether the fee is
paid to the seller, to an outside party, or simply “burned”). The case of a participation fee
paid to the seller has been treated by Milgrom and Weber (1982) for their general aﬃliated
values model. We will assume that their “regular case” (pp. 1112—1113) obtains.
Given r and n, participation is again determined by the realization of signals and a
screening level
½ Z x
¾
∗
[v(x, y, n) − r] dFn (y|x)] ≥ c .
x (r, c, n) = inf x :
−∞

Unlike the model in the preceding section, this screening level varies with n even with private
values, because Fn (x|x) varies with n. However, a valid testing approach can nonetheless
be developed in a manner nearly identical to that in the preceding section. In particular,
the argument used to prove Lemma 2 also implies the following.
Lemma 3 With a reserve price r and bid preparation cost c, Fv,n (v (x∗ (r, c, n) , x∗ (r, c, n) , n))
is identified from observation of A and N.

22
Letting v ∗ (r, n) now denote v(x∗ (r, c, n) , x∗ (r, c, n) , n), the first-order condition (4) and
equation (21) can then be used to construct consistent estimates of Fv,n (v) for all v ≥
v ∗ (r, n̄), enabling testing of the hypotheses (22) vs. (23) as in the preceding section.
5.2.2

Signal Acquisition Costs

A somewhat diﬀerent model is considered by Levin and Smith (1994).21 In their model,
each bidder chooses whether to incur cost c in order to learn (or to process) his signal Xi and
submit a bid. Bidders know N and observe the number of actual bidders before they bid.
In the symmetric equilibrium, each potential bidder’s participation decision is a binomial
randomization. With no reserve price, this leads to exogenous variation in A. Because A
is observed by bidders prior to bidding in their model, our analysis for the baseline case of
exogenous variation in N then carries through directly, substituting A for N.22
5.3

Unobserved Heterogeneity

The last model of endogenous participation we consider is the most challenging. Here
participation is determined in part by unobserved factors that also aﬀect the distribution
of bidders’ valuations. There are really two problems that arise in such an environment.
First, it is clear that if auctions with large numbers of bidders tend to be those in which
the good is known by bidders to be of particularly high (or low) value, tests based on
an assumption that variation in participation is exogenous can give misleading results.
Second, unobserved heterogeneity in first-price auctions introduces serious challenges to
the nonparametric identification of bidders’ valuations that underlies our approach (recall
footnote 17).23 Here we describe a structure under which both problems can be overcome,
using instrumental variables.
Suppose that the number of actual bidders, A, at each auction can be represented as a
function of two factors, Z and W . Z is an index capturing the eﬀects of factors observable
both to bidders and to the researcher. W summarizes the eﬀects factors observable only to
21

Li (2002) has considered parametric estimation of the symmetric IPV model for first-price auctions
under this entry model.
22
If, in addition, there were a binding reserve price, only bidders who paid the signal acquisition cost and
observed suﬃciently high signals would participate. The mixed strategies determining signal acquisition,
however, still result in exogenous variation in the number of “informed bidders,” I, a subset A of whom
would obtain suﬃciently high signals to bid. In this case testing would be possible following the approach
in section 5.1, but with I replacing N.
23
Krasnokutskaya (2003) has recently shown that methods from the literature on measurement error can
be used to enable estimation of a particular private values model in which unobserved heterogeneity enters
multiplicatively (or additively) and is independent of the idiosyncratic components (themselves independently distributed) of bidders’ values.

23
bidders. We make the following assumptions.
Assumption 6 Z ∈ R is independent of (U1 , . . . , Un̄ , X1 , . . . , Xn̄ , W ) .
Assumption 7 A = φ(Z, W ), with φ increasing in Z and strictly increasing in W.
Assumption 6 allows the possibility that the unobserved factor W is correlated with
(U1 , . . . , Un̄ , X1 , . . . , Xn̄ ), but requires that Z not be. We will see in the following section
that observables aﬀecting the distribution of valuations can be controlled for directly. Hence,
the availability of Z satisfying Assumption 6 is a standard exclusion restriction, and we will
refer to Z as the instrument. Changes in Z will provide exogenous variation in the level of
competition that is essential to our ability to detect the winner’s curse. Note that in some
applications Z might simply be the number of potential bidders, N . However, it need not
be. For example, we might have
A = υ(ζ) + W
where Z = υ(ζ) is a function (possibly unknown) of a vector of instrumental variables ζ.
In Assumption 7, monotonicity of φ(·) in Z is the requirement that the instrument be
positively correlated with the endogenous variable A. Weak monotonicity of φ(·) in the
unobservable W would be a normalization of W and could be assumed without loss. The
strict monotonicity assumed here is a restriction implying that (A, Z) are joint suﬃcient
statistics for W ; in particular
F̃n (U1 , . . . , Un , X1 , . . . , Xn |A, Z, W ) = F̃n (U1 , . . . , Un , X1 , . . . , Xn |A, Z).24
This property will enable us to retain identification of bidders’ values despite the presence
of unobservables.25
Define
∙
¸
v(x, x; a, z) ≡ E Ui |Xi = max Xj = x, φ(Z, W ) = a, Z = z .
(24)
j6=i

Let
Ga,z (b∗ |b) = Pr(max Bj ≤ b∗ |Bi = b, A = a, Z = z)
j6=i

24

If the relationship between A and W were only weakly monotone, conditioning on (A, Z) would be
equivalent to conditioning on (A, Z) and the event W ∈ W for some set W. In some applications this may
be suﬃcient to enable the use of the first-order condition (4) as a useful approximation.
25
This idea is related to that taken in a very diﬀerent problem by Olley and Pakes (1996).

24
and denote the corresponding conditional density by ga,z (b∗ |b). When bidders observe both
Z and W before choosing their bids, the suﬃcient statistic property implies that equilibrium
bidding can be characterized by the first-order condition (the analog of (4))
v(xi , xi ; a, z) = bi +

Ga,z (bi |bi )
.
ga,z (bi |bi )

(25)

Analogous to the baseline case, this first-order condition enables consistent estimation of
each v(xi , xi ; a, z), using straightforward modifications of the nonparametric estimators described above.
Now observe that
Pr (v (X, X; A, Z) ≤ v|Z = z) = Pr (v (X, X; φ(z, W ), z) ≤ v)
(26)
µ ∙
¸
¶
= Pr E U1 |X1 =
max
Xj = X, W, Z = z ≤ v
j∈{2,...,φ(z,W )}
µ ∙
¸
¶
= Pr E U1 |X1 =
max
Xj = X, W ≤ v
j∈{2,...,φ(z,W )}

where the final equality follows from Assumption 6. Assumption 7 and the proof of Theorem
1 imply that the final expression above is increasing in z in a CV auction but invariant to
z in a PV auction. Hence our testing approaches are still applicable if we exploit the
exogenous variation in the instrument Z rather than variation in N or A. In particular,
after estimating pseudo-values using equation (25), one can pool pseudo-values over all
values of a while holding z fixed to compare the sample analogs of the distributions in (26)
across values of z. We emphasize that while the comparison of distributions of pseudovalues forming the test is done pooling over a, the first-stage estimation of pseudo-values
using (25) must be done conditioning on both a and z.

6

Observable Heterogeneity

For simplicity we have thus far assumed that data were available from auctions of identical goods. In practice this is rarely the case. In our application below, as in many
others, we observe auction-specific characteristics that are likely to shift the distribution
of bidder valuations. The results above can be extended to incorporate observables using standard nonparametric techniques. Let Y be a vector of observables and define
Gn,y (b|b)
Gn,y (b|b) = Pr(maxj6=i Bj ≤ b|Bi = b, N = n, Y = y) etc. One simply substitutes gn,y
(b|b)
for

Gn (b|b)
gn (b|b)

on the right-hand side of the first-order condition (4) and
v(x, x, n, y) ≡ E[Ui |Xi = max Xj = x, Y = y]
j6=i

25
G

(b|b)

n,y
on the left-hand side. Standard smoothing techniques can be used to estimate gn,y
(b|b) , in
principle enabling one to apply our testing approaches. With many covariates, however,
estimation of the pseudo-values using smoothing techniques will require large data sets.
An alternative is available if we are willing to assume

v(x, x, n, y) = v(x, x, n) + Γ(y)

(27)

with Y independent of X1 , . . . , Xn . This additively separable structure is particularly useful
because it is preserved by equilibrium bidding.26
Lemma 4 Suppose that Y is independent of X and (27) holds. Then the equilibrium bid
function, conditional on Y = y, has the additively separable form s(x; n, y) = s(x; n)+Γ(y).
The proof follows the standard equilibrium derivation for a first-price auction (only the
boundary condition for the diﬀerential equation (1) changes) and is therefore omitted. An
important implication of this result is that we can account for observable heterogeneity in a
two-stage procedure that avoids the need to condition on (smooth over) Y when estimating
distributions and densities of bids. Let
s0 (n) = EX [s(X; n)]
and
Γ0 = EY [Γ(Y)].
We can then write the equilibrium bidding strategy as
s(x; n, y) = s0 (n) + Γ0 + Γ1 (y) + s1 (x; n)
where the stochastic term s1 (x; n) has mean zero conditional on (n, y). Now observe that
βit ≡ s0 (nt ) + Γ0 + s1 (xit ; nt )

(28)

is the bid that bidder i would have submitted in equilibrium in a generic (i.e., Γ1 (y) = 0)
n-bidder auction. Hence, given estimates Γ̂1 (y) of each Γ1 (y), we can construct estimates
β̂it = bit − Γ̂1 (y) of each βit . Our tests can then be applied using these “homogenized” bids.
To implement this approach, we first regress all observed bids on the covariates Y and a
set of dummy variables for each value of n. The sum of each residual and the corresponding
intercept estimate provides an estimate of each βit . These estimates are then treated as bids
26

If the covariates enter multiplicatively rather than additively, an analogous approach to that proposed
below can be applied.

26
in a sample of auctions of homogeneous goods. Note that the function Γ1 (·) is estimated
using all bids in the sample rather than separately for each value of n. This can make it
possible to incorporate a large set of covariates and can make a flexible specification of Γ1 (·)
feasible. Furthermore, the asymptotic distributions of the ultimate test statistics are not
aﬀected by this procedure as long as Γ̂1 (y) converges at a faster rate than the pseudo-value
estimates. This is guaranteed, for example, if Γ1 (·) is parametrically specified.
Adapting this approach to the models of endogenous participation discussed above is
straightforward. The case requiring modification is that in which instrumental variables
are used. There the intercept of the equilibrium bid functions s(x; a, y, w) will now vary
with both a and w (or, equivalently, with both a and z). Under the assumptions of section
5.3, one needs only to include in the regressions separate intercepts s0 (a, z) + Γ0 (replacing
s0 (n) + Γ0 in (28)) for each combination of a and z. The sum of the (a, z)-specific intercept
and the residuals from the corresponding auctions are then the homogenized bids.

7
7.1

Application to U.S. Forest Service Timber Auctions
Data and Background

We apply our tests to auctions held by the United States Forest Service (USFS). In each
sale, a contract for timber harvesting on Federal land was sold by first-price sealed bid
auction. Detailed descriptions of the contracts being sold and the auctions themselves can
be found in, e.g., Baldwin (1995), Baldwin, Marshall, and Richard (1997), Athey and Levin
(2001), Haile (2001), or Haile and Tamer (2003). Here we discuss a few key features that
are particularly relevant to our analysis.
We will separately consider two types of Forest Service auctions, for which the significance of common value elements may be diﬀerent. The first type is known as a lumpsum
sale. As the term suggests, here each bidder oﬀers a total bid for an entire tract of standing
timber. The winning bidder pays his bid regardless of the volume actually realized at the
time of harvest. Bidders, therefore, may face considerable common uncertainty over the
volume of timber on the tract. More significant, individual bidders often conduct a “cruise”
of the tract before the auction, creating a natural source of the private information essential to the CV model. Before each sale, however, the Forest Service conducts its own cruise
of the tract to provide bidders with estimates of (among other things) timber volumes by
species, harvesting costs, costs of manufacturing end products from the timber, and selling
prices of these end products. This creates a great deal of common knowledge information
about the tract. Whether scope remains for significant private information regarding de-

27
terminants of tract value common to all bidders is uncertain, although our a priori belief
was that lumpsum sales were likely possess common value elements.
The second type of auction is known as a “scaled sale.” Here, bids are made on a per
unit (thousand board-feet of timber) basis. The winner is selected based on these unit
prices and the ex ante estimates of timber volumes obtained from the Forest Service cruise.
However, payments to the Forest Service are based on the winning bidder’s unit prices
and the actual volumes, measured by a third party at the time of harvest. As a result,
the importance of common uncertainty regarding tract values may be reduced. In fact,
bidders are less likely to send their own cruisers to assess the tract value for a scaled sale
(National Resources Management Corporation (1997)). This may leave less scope for private
information regarding any shared determinants of bidders’ valuations and, therefore, less
scope for common values. Bidders may still have private information of an idiosyncratic
nature, e.g., regarding their own sales and inventories of end products, contracts for future
sales, or inventories of uncut timber from private timber sales. This has led several authors
(e.g., Baldwin, Marshall, and Richard (1997), Haile (2001), Haile and Tamer (2003)) to
assume a private values model for scaled sales.27 However, this is not without controversy;
Baldwin (1995) and Athey and Levin (2001) argue for a common values model even for
scaled sales.28
The auctions in our samples took place between 1982 and 1990 in Forest Service regions 1
and 5. Region 1 covers Montana, eastern Washington, Northern Idaho, North Dakota, and
northwestern South Dakota. The Region 5 data consist of sales in California. The restriction
to sales after 1981 is made due to policy changes in 1981 that (among other things) reduced
the significance of subcontracting as a factor aﬀecting bidder valuations, because resale
opportunities can alter bidding in ways that confound the empirical implications of the
winner’s curse (cf. Bikhchandani and Huang (1989), Haile (1999), and Haile (2001)). For
the same reason, we restrict attention to sales with no more than 12 months between the
auction and the harvest deadline.29 For consistency, we consider only sales in which the
Forest Service provided ex ante estimates of the tract values (based on the cruise) using
the predominant method of this time period, known as the “residual value method” (cf.
Baldwin, Marshall, and Richard (1997)). We exclude salvage sales, sales set aside for small
27

Other studies assuming private values at timber auctions (USFS and others) include Cummins (1994),
Elyakime, Laﬀont, Loisel, and Vuong (1994), Hansen (1985), Hansen (1986), Johnson (1979), Paarsch (1991),
and Paarsch (1997).
28
Other studies assuming common values models for Forest Service timber auctions include Chatterjee
and Harrison (1988), Lederer (1994), and Leﬄer, Rucker, and Munn (1994).
29
This is the same rule used by Haile and Tamer (2003) and the opposite of that used by Haile (2001) to
focus on sales with significant resale opportunities.

28
firms, and sales of contracts requiring the winner to construct roads.
Table 4 describes the resulting sample sizes for auctions with each number of bidders
n = 2, 3, . . . , 12. There are fairly few auctions with more than four bidders, particularly in
the sample of lumpsum sales. However, the unit of observation, both for estimation of the
pseudo-values and for estimation of the distribution of pseudo-values, is a bid. Our data
set contains 75 or more bids for auctions of up to seven bidders in both samples.
Our data include all bids30 for each auction, as well as a large number of auction-specific
observables. These include the year of the sale, the appraised value of the tract, the acreage
of the tract, the length (in months) of the contract term, the volume of timber sold by the
USFS in the same region over the previous six months, and USFS estimates of the volume
of timber on the tract, harvesting costs, costs of manufacturing end products, selling value
of the end products, and an index of the concentration of the timber volume across species
(cf. Haile (2001)). All dollar values are in constant 1983 dollars per thousand board-feet of
timber. Table 5 provides summary statistics.
7.2

Results

We first perform our tests on each sample under the assumption of exogenous participation.
We consider comparisons of auctions with up to 7 bidders, although we look at ranges
of 2—3, 2—4, 2—5, and 2—6 bidders as well. We use the method described in section 6 to
eliminate the eﬀects of observable heterogeneity with an initial linear regression of bids on
the covariates listed above. Figures 2 and 3 show the estimated distributions of pseudovalues for each of these comparisons. The distributions compared appear to be roughly
similar, although there is certainly some variation. Table 6 reports the formal test results,
where we set the number of resampling draws at 5000 for both types of tests. For each
specification we report the R2 from the regressions of bids on auction covariates, the means
of each estimated distribution of pseudo-values, and the p-value associated with each test
of the private values null hypothesis.
The fit of the bid regressions are generally very good (recall that bids are already normalized by the size of the tract), leaving plausible residual variation to be attributed to
bidders’ private information. The formal tests provide little evidence of common values.
For the scaled sales, only one of the ten test statistics suggests rejection of the PV null at
the 10 percent level. For the lumpsum sales, the p-values are generally smaller; however,
30
In practice separate prices are bid for each identified species on the tract. Following, e.g., Baldwin,
Marshall, and Richard (1997), Haile (2001), and Haile and Tamer (2003), we consider only the total bid of
each bidder, which is also the statistic used to determine the auction winner. See Athey and Levin (2001)
for an analysis of the distribution of bids across species.

29
only two of ten tests indicate rejection at a 10 percent level. Only in the sample of auctions
with 2—4 bidders do we obtain results suggesting rejection of the PV null from both types
of test.
One possible reason for a failure to reject the null is the presence of unobserved heterogeneity correlated with the number of bidders.31 If tracts of higher value in unobserved
dimensions also attracted more bidders, for example, there would be a tendency for the
distributions compared to shift in the direction opposite that predicted by the winner’s
curse. There is some suggestion of this in the graphs. Hence, we also perform the tests
using the model of endogenous participation with unobserved heterogeneity discussed in
section 5.3.32 As instruments, ζ, we use the numbers of sawmills and logging firms in the
county of each sale and its neighboring counties (cf. Haile (2001)). This approach adds a
second least-squares projection used to estimate Z = υ(ζ) = E[A|ζ]. We then construct a
discrete instrument W by splitting the sample into thirds (halves when we compare only 2and 3-bidder auctions) based on the number of predicted bidders.
Figures 4 and 5 show the resulting empirical distributions of pseudo-values compared in
each test. For the scaled sales, the distributions are generally close and exhibit no clear
ordering. For the lumpsum sales the distributions also appear to be fairly similar, although
most comparisons suggest the stochastic ordering predicted by a CV model. The formal
test results are given in Table 7. For the scaled sales we again find only one of ten tests
suggesting rejection of the PV null at a 10 percent level. Furthermore, the two samples for
which p-values below 0.15 are obtained are also the two samples for which the two types
of test yield substantially diﬀerent results. An examination of the corresponding graphs
in Figure 4 reveals that these are cases in which the empirical distributions are shifting
with n, but in a nonmonotonic fashion. For the lumpsum sales, three of ten tests yield
p-values below 0.05, and six of ten tests give p-values below 0.20. Among the KS tests,
which appeared to be the best performers in the Monte Carlo experiments, the p-values are
below 0.05 in two of five cases, and below 0.20 in four of five cases. However, while this
provides a much stronger suggestion of common values than the tests on the scaled sale
data, the results are clearly mixed.
As a specification check, we have examined the relationship between the estimated
pseudo-values and the associated bids. Under the maintained assumption of equilibrium
31

Haile (2001) provides some evidence using a diﬀerent sample of USFS auctions.
We continue to assume the absence of a binding reserve price. See, e.g., Mead, Schniepp, and Watson
(1981), Baldwin, Marshall, and Richard (1997), Haile (2001), Haile and Tamer (2003) for arguments that
Forest Service reserve prices are nonbinding, explanations for why this might be the case, and supporting
evidence.
32

30
−1
bidding in the Milgrom-Weber model, v(s−1
n (b), sn (b), n) must be strictly monotone in b.
While testing this restriction has been suggested by GPV and LPV, we are not aware of
any formal testing approach that is directly applicable. However, this does not appear to
be essential in our case. The importance of a formal test is in giving the appropriate allowance for deviations from strict monotonicity that would arise from sampling error. In
most cases we find no deviations from strict monotonicity whatsoever, so that no formal
test could reject. In particular, we have examined the relation between bids and estimated
pseudo-values in each subset of the data examined above. For the case in which no instrumental variables are used (so that the samples are divided based on the value of n) we find
violations only in the case of lumpsum sales with n = 6, and here only in the right tail.
When instrumental variables are used, the samples are split based on the value of both n
and the instrument, leading to smaller samples and greater sampling error. Nonetheless,
even here there are only a few violations. For scaled sales, violations occur at no more than
2 points (i.e., 2 bids) per subsample, and the magnitudes of the violations are extremely
small–on the order of 0.03 to 0.3 percent of the pseudo-values themselves. The handful of
larger violations for lumpsum sales again occur only when auctions with n = 6 are examined. These subsamples also account for two of three cases in which the means test and KS
test give qualitatively diﬀerent results.

8

Conclusions and Extensions

We have developed nonparametric tests for common values in first-price sealed-bid auctions.
The tests are nonparametric, require observation only of bids, and are consistent against all
common values alternatives within Milgrom and Weber’s (1982) general framework. The
tests perform well in Monte Carlo simulations and can be adapted to incorporate auctionspecific covariates as well as several models of endogenous participation. In addition to
providing an approach for formal testing, our approach of comparing distributions of pseudovalues obtained from auctions with diﬀerent numbers of bidders provides one natural way for
quantifying the magnitude of any deviation from a private values model. For example, our
estimates can be used to describe how much bidders adjust their expectations of the value
of winning in response to an exogenous increase in competition (on average, or at various
quantiles, etc.). This provides a natural measure of the severity of the winner’s curse.
Of course, in some applications one would like to address questions like how far wrong a
particular policy prescription would go if a private values model were incorrectly assumed.
Unfortunately, answering such a question will generally require identification of the model,
and such identification generally fails without strong functional form assumptions once the

31
PV hypothesis is dropped (see, e.g., Li, Perrigne and Vuong (2000) and Athey and Haile
(2002)). Indeed, the lack of nonparametric identification of CV models is one motivation
for developing formal tests for common values.
In our application to USFS timber sales, we consistently fail to find evidence of common
values at scaled sales. This is consistent with a priori arguments for private values at these
auctions oﬀered in the literature. We obtain mixed evidence against the PV hypothesis for
lumpsum sales, where the a priori case for common values seemed stronger. The estimates
published following the Forest Service cruise may be suﬃciently precise that they leave little
role for private information of a common values nature.33 In fact, the cruises performed by
the Forest Service for lumpsum sales are more thorough than those for scaled sales, a fact
reflected in the name “tree measurement sale” given to such sales by the Forest Service.
Hence, the intuitive argument for common values at the lumpsum sales might simply be
misleading. It is, of course, a desire to avoid relying on intuition alone that led us to pursue
a formal testing approach in the first place.
However, our tests are not without limitations that should be kept in mind when interpreting our empirical results and applying our tests elsewhere. While we have allowed a
rich class of models in our underlying framework, we have maintained the assumption of
equilibrium competitive bidding in a static game, ruling out collusion and dynamic factors
that might influence bidding decisions. While a verification of the monotonicity restriction
our assumptions imply provides some comfort, this specification test cannot detect all violations of these assumptions. Even if these assumptions are satisfied, our techniques for
dealing with endogenous participation and auction heterogeneity have required additional
assumptions and finite sample approximations. Finally, while our tests are consistent, the
eﬀects of the winner’s curse in the USFS auctions may be suﬃciently small that they are
diﬃcult to detect in the moderate sample sizes available. In this case a failure to reject the
PV null (here or elsewhere) should be viewed as evidence that any CV elements are fairly
small relative to other sources of variation in the data.
A further limitation of the approach as we have described it above is an assumption of
symmetry. However, this is not essential. One can extend our methods to detect common
value elements with asymmetric bidders (i.e., dropping the exchangeability assumption) as
long as at least one bidder participates in auctions with diﬀerent numbers of competitors.
A full treatment of this topic is left for future work. However, two basic modifications of our
approach are required. The first is that we must examine one bidder at a time. For example,
33
The fact that bidders conduct their own tract cruises does not contradict this, because the information
obtained from private cruises could relate primarily to firm-specific (private value) factors.

32
a test for the presence of common values for bidder 1 can be based on the distributions of
his values v1 (x, x, n), given in equilibrium by the first-order condition
v1 (x1t , x1t , nt ) = b1t +

∂
∗
∗
∂b Pr(maxj6=1 Bjt ≤ b , B1t ≤ b|Nt = nt )|b=b =b1t
.
2
∂
∗
∗
∂b∂b∗ Pr(maxj6=1 Bjt ≤ b , B1t ≤ b|Nt = nt )|b=b =b1t

(29)

The nonparametric estimators described previously are easily adapted to this case, using
the joint distribution of bids from the auctions bidder 1 participates in to estimate the
right-hand side of (29). Under the PV hypothesis, v1 (x, x, n) is constant across n. In order
to obtain a stochastic ordering under the CV alternative, however, we require the second
modification: in considering auctions with n = 2, 3, . . . , we must construct a sequence of
sets of opponents faced by bidder 1 in which the winner’s curse is becoming unambiguously
more severe, e.g., {bidder 2}, {bidder 2, bidder 3}, {bidder 2, bidder 3, bidder 4}, etc.
This structure ensures that the severity of the winner’s curse faced by bidder 1 is greater
in auctions with larger numbers of participants, even though opponents are not perfect
substitutes for each other. While estimation using a long sequence would require a great
deal of data, doing so for a shorter sequence (where the change in the severity of the winner’s
curse is typically largest anyway) may be feasible in some applications.

33

Appendix
A

Proof of Theorem 2
1. This is a standard result on the
Vaart (1999), Corollary 21.5).

√
Tn -convergence of sample to population quantiles (cf. van der

2. For simplicity we introduce the notation Itn = 1 (nt = n), Gn ≡ Gn (b; b), gn ≡ gn (b; b),
¡ it ¢
PT
Pn
and
Ĝn ≡ Ĝn (b; b) = nT1n h t=1 Itn i=1 1 (b∗it < b) K b−b
h
µ
¶ µ
¶
T
n
1 X nX
b − bit
b − b∗it
I
K
K
.
ĝn ≡ ĝn (b; b) =
nTn h2 t=1 t i=1
h
h

Then we can use a first-order Taylor expansion to write

¢
¡
¢ Ĝn Gn
¡
−
v̂ s−1 (b) , s−1 (b) , n − v s−1 (b) , s−1 (b) , n =
ĝn
gn
³
´
Ĝn − Gn Gn
=
− 2 (ĝn − gn ) + o Ĝn − Gn + o (ĝn − gn )
gn
gn
=

³
´
Ĝn − E Ĝn E Ĝn − Gn Gn
Gn
+
− 2 (ĝn − Eĝn ) − 2 (Eĝn − gn ) + o Ĝn − Gn + o (ĝn − gn ) .
gn
gn
gn
gn

Standard bias calculations for kernel estimators yield, by Assumption 5,
µ
¶
Z
Z
1
|E Ĝn − Gn | ≤ | (Gn (b; b + h ) − Gn (b; b)) K ( ) d | ≤ ChR | |R K ( ) d = o √
T h2
and
¯
¯Z Z
µ
¶
¯
¯
1
|Eĝn − gn | ≤ ¯¯
(gn (b + h ; b + h 0 ) − gn (b; b)) K ( ) K ( 0 ) d d 0 ¯¯ ≤ C 0 hR = o √
T h2
where C and C 0 are constants. Next it will be shown that
µ
¶
¶
µZ Z
p
1
d
2
0 2
0
2
Tn h (ĝn − Eĝn ) −→ N 0,
K (e) K (e ) de de gn (b; b) .
n

For this purpose it suﬃces to show that
¶
³p
´ 1 µZ Z
2
lim V ar
Tn h2 (ĝn (b; b) − Eĝn (b; b)) =
K (e)2 K (e0 ) de de0 gn (b; b) .
Tn →∞
n

This is verified by the following calculation:
Ã
µ
¶ µ ∗
¶¸ !
T X
n ∙
X
bit − b
bit − b
1
K
V ar √
K
Itn
h
h
Tn h2 · n t=1 i=1
Ã n ∙ µ
Ã
¶ µ ∗
¶¸!!
X
1
bit − b
bit − b
V ar
K
=Tn
K
Tn n2 h2
h
h
i=1
½
∙ µ
¶ µ ∗
¶¸
bit − b
bit − b
1
K
= 2 V ar K
nh
h
h
¾
¶ µ ∗
¶
µ
¶ µ ∗
¶¸
∙ µ
bjt − b
bit − b
bjt − b
bit − b
.
K
,K
K
+ (n − 1) Cov K
h
h
h
h
j6=i

34
It is a standard result that
¶ µ ∗
¶¶
µ µ
¡ ¢
bit − b
bit − b
K
= O h2
E K
h
h

and it can be verified that for j 6= i
¶ µ ∗
¶ µ
¶ µ ∗
¶¸
∙ µ
¡ ¢
bjt − b
bit − b
bjt − b
bit − b
K
K
K
= O h4 .
E K
h
h
h
h

Therefore we can write

" µ
¶2 µ ∗
¶2 #
¡ ¢
bit − b
bit − b
1
E K
K
+ O h4
2
nh
h
h
µ
¶2 µ 0
¶2
Z Z
¡ ¢
1
−b
1
−b
=
K
K
gn ( , 0 ) d d 0 + O h4
2
n
h
h
h
¶
µZ Z
1
2
=
K (e)2 K (e0 ) de de0 gn (b; b) + o (1)
n

³p
´
V ar
Tn h2 (ĝn (b; b) − Eĝn (b; b)) =

where the last equality uses the substitutions e = ( − b) Áh and e0 = ( 0 − b) Áh. Finally the
same type of variance calculation shows that
³
´´
³p
Tn h2 Ĝn − E Ĝn
−→ 0.
V ar
Hence the proof for part 2 is complete.

√
3. Because the sample quantiles of the bid distribution converge at rate Tn to the population
quantile, which is faster than the convergence rate for the pseudo-values, for large Tn the
sampling error in the τ th quantile of the bid distribution does not aﬀect the large sample
properties of the estimated quantiles of the pseudo-value distribution. Hence, for each τ ∈
{τ1 , . . . , τl }
µ
¶
µ
¶
´
³
´
³
´ ´
³ ³
1
1
−1
−1
= op
.
(30)
v̂ sn b̂τl ,n , sn b̂τl ,n , n − v̂ (xτ , xτ , n) = Op √
Tn h2
Tn
This implies that the limiting distribution of the vector with elements
´
³ ³
p
¡
¢´
Tn h2 ξˆ b̂τl ,n ; n − v Fx−1 (τ ) , Fx−1 (τ ) , n
τ = {τ1 , . . . , τL }

is the same as that of the vector with elements
´
³
√
T h2 ξˆ (sn (xτ ) ; n) − v (xτ , xτ , n)

τ = {τ1 , . . . , τL }.

In part 2 we showed that each element of this vector is asymptotically normal with limit
variance given by the corresponding diagonal element of Ω. It remains to show that the oﬀdiagonal elements are 0. For this purpose it suﬃces to show, using the standard result that
kernel estimates at two distinct points (here, two quantiles bτ ≡ s(xτ ) and bτ 0 ≡ s(xτ 0 )) are
asymptotically independent, i.e., that
³p
´ p
´´
³
³
Tn h2 ξˆ (bτ ; n) − v (xτ , xτ , n) , Tn h2 ξˆ (bτ 0 ; n) − v (xτ 0 , xτ 0 , n) = 0.
lim Cov
Tn →∞

35
Using the bias calculation and convergence rates derived in part 2, it suﬃces for this purpose
to show that
³p
´
p
lim Cov
Tn h2 (ĝn (bτ ; bτ ) − Egn (bτ ; bτ )) , Tn h2 (ĝn (bτ 0 ; bτ 0 ) − Egn (bτ 0 ; bτ 0 )) = 0
Tn →∞

To show this, first observe that the left-hand side can be written
"
µ
µ
¶ µ ∗
¶
¶ µ ∗
¶ #
n
n
T X
T X
X
X
bit − bτ
1
bit − bτ 0
bit − bτ
bit − bτ 0
1
n
K
K
K
It , √
K
Itn
Cov √
h
h
h
h
Tn h2 n t=1 i=1
Tn h2 n t=1 i=1
" n
µ
¶ µ ∗
¶#
n
X µ bit − bτ ¶ µ b∗ − bτ ¶ X
bit − bτ 0
1
bit − bτ 0
it
K
K
= 2 2 Cov
K
,
K
.
n h
h
h
h
h
i=1
i=1

Using the fact that for each i
∙ µ
¶ µ ∗
¶¸
¡ ¢
bit − bτ
bit − bτ
E K
K
= O h2
h
h

and for each i 6= j
∙ µ
¶ µ ∗
¶ µ
¶ µ ∗
¶¸
¡ ¢
bjt − bτ 0
bit − bτ
bit − bτ
bjt − bτ 0
E K
K
K
K
= O h4
h
h
h
h

we can further rewrite the covariance function as
∙ µ
¶ µ ∗
¶ µ
¶ µ ∗
¶¸
n
n
¡ ¢
bjt − bτ 0
bit − bτ
1 XX
bit − bτ
bjt − bτ 0
E
K
K
K
K
+ O h2
2
2
n h i=1 j=1
h
h
h
h
∙
µ
¶
µ
¶
µ
¶
µ
¶¸
n
¡ ¢
bit − bτ
1 X
b∗it − bτ
bit − bτ 0
b∗it − bτ 0
E K
= 2 2
K
K
K
+ O h2
n h i=1
h
h
h
h
µ
¶ µ
¶
Z Z
¡ ¢
bτ − bτ 0
bτ − bτ 0
1
=
K (e) K (e0 ) K e +
K e0 +
gn (bτ + he, bτ + he0 ) de de0 + O h2 → 0.
n
h
h

B

Proof of Theorem 3

First note that Assumption 5 directly implies the following uniform rates of convergence for Ĝn (b; b)
and ĝn (b; b) (see Horowitz (1998) and Guerre, Perrigne, and Vuong (2000)).
Ãr
!
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
¡ ¢
log T
¯
¯
¯
¯
sup ¯G̃n (b; b) ¯ ≡ sup ¯Ĝn (b; b) − Gn (b; b) ¯ = Op
+ O hR
Th
b∈R
b∈R
Ãr
!
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
¡ ¢
log
T
sup ¯¯g̃n (b; b) ¯¯ ≡ sup ¯¯ĝn (b; b) − gn (b; b) ¯¯ = Op
+ O hR .
2
Th
b∈R
b∈R

Since part (i)
¡ is an immediate ¢consequence of part (ii), we proceed to prove part (ii) directly. Letting
ξ (b; n) = v s−1 (b) , s−1 (b) , n , we can decompose the left side of part (ii) as
p
Tn h (µ̂n,τ − E [ξ (b; n) 1 (bτ,n ≤ b ≤ b1−τ,n )])
Ã
!
Ã
!
n
T
´
³
p
1 XX n
Ĝn (bit ; bit )
= Tn h
I
bit +
1 b̂τ,n ≤ bit ≤ b̂1−τ,n − E [ξ (b; n) 1 (bτ,n ≤ b ≤ b1−τ,n ])
Tn n t=1 i=1 t
ĝn (bit ; bit )
=µ̂1n,τ + µ̂2n,τ + µ̂3n,τ + µ̂4n,τ

36
where we have again let Itn = 1 (nt = n), and
Ã
!
n
T
´
´
p
1 X X Ĝn (bit ; bit ) Gn (bit ; bit ) ³ ³
1
−
1 b̂τ,n ≤ bit ≤ b̂1−τ,n − 1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n ) Itn
µ̂n,τ = Tn h
Tn n t=1 i=1 ĝn (bit ; bit )
gn (bit ; bit )
"
#
n
T
p
1 X X Ĝn (bit ; bit ) Gn (bit ; bit )
2
µ̂n,τ = Tn h
−
1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n ) Itn
nTn t=1 i=1 ĝn (bit ; bit )
gn (bit ; bit )
¶
n µ
T
´
´
p
1 XX
Gn (bit ; bit ) ³ ³
µ̂3n,τ = Tn h
bit +
1 b̂τ,n ≤ bit ≤ b̂1−τ,n − 1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n ) Itn
nTn t=1 i=1
gn (bit ; bit )

µ̂4n,τ

n
T
´
³ ³
´
p
1 XX
= Tn h
ξ (bit ; n) 1 b̂τ,n ≤ bit ≤ b̂1−τ,n − 1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n ) Itn
nTn t=1 i=1
¶
¶
n µµ
T
p
1 XX
Gn (bit ; bit )
= Tn h
bit +
1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n ) − E [ξ (b; n) 1 (bτ,n ≤ b ≤ b1−τ,n )] Itn
nTn t=1 i=1
gn (bit ; bit )
n
T
p
1 XX
= Tn h
(ξ (bit ; n) 1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n ) − E [ξ (b; n) 1 (bτ,n ≤ b ≤ b1−τ,n )]) Itn .
nTn t=1 i=1

We consider the properties of each of these terms in turn. For µ̂4n,τ , the law of large numbers gives
√
µ̂4n,τ = h Op (1) = op (1) .
The function in the summand of µ̂3n,τ satisfies stochastic equicontinuity conditions (a type I function
of Andrews (1994)). Hence using the parametric convergence rates of b̂τ and b̂1−τ ,
³
³
´
´
p
µ̂3n,τ = Tn h Eb ξ (b; n) 1 b̂τ,n ≤ b ≤ b̂1−τ,n − Eb [ξ (b; n) 1 (bτ,n ≤ b ≤ b1−τ,n )] + op (1)
µ
¶
³ ³
´
³
´´
p
p
1
=C Tn h O b̂τ,n − bτ,n + O b̂1−τ,n − b1−τ,n + op (1) = Tn hOp √
+ op (1) = op (1) .
Tn

Similarly, the function in the summand of µ̂1n,τ also satisfies stochastic equicontinuity conditions
(product of type I and type III functions in Andrews (1994)), and hence
Ã
!
´
´
³ ³
p
Ĝ
G
(b;
b)
(b;
b)
n
n
µ̂1n,τ = Tn hEb
−
1 b̂τ ≤ b ≤ b̂1−τ − 1 (bτ,n ≤ b ≤ b1−τ,n ) + op (1)
ĝn (b; b)
gn (b; b)
Ã
¯
¯!
´
³
´´
³ ³
¯ Ĝn (b; b) Gn (b; b) ¯ p
¯
¯
=Op
sup
+
O
b̂
+ op (1)
T
h
O
b̂
−
b
−
b
−
n
τ,n
τ,n
1−τ,n
1−τ,n
¯
gn (b; b) ¯
b∈[bτ −˜,b1−τ +˜] ĝn (b; b)
µ
¶
p
1
=op (1) Tn hOp √
+ op (1) = op (1) .
Tn
Combining the above results, we have thus far shown that
p
Tn h (µ̂n,τ − E [ξ (b; n) 1 (bτ,n ≤ b ≤ b1−τ,n )]) = µ̂2n,τ + op (1) .

The term µ̂2n,τ can be further decomposed using a second order Taylor expansion:
µ̂2n,τ = µ̂5n,τ + µ̂6n,τ + µ̂7n,τ

37
where
n
T
´
³
p
1 XX
1
µ̂5n,τ = Tn h
Ĝn (bit ; bit ) − Gn (bit ; bit ) 1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n ) Itn
nTn t=1 i=1 gn (bit ; bit )

µ̂6n,τ = −

T
n
p
1 X X Gn (bit ; bit )
Tn h
(ĝn (bit ; bit ) − gn (bit ; bit )) 1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n ) Itn
nTn t=1 i=1 gn (bit ; bit )2

n
T
³
´2
p
1 XX 1
µ̂7n,τ = Tn h
hn (bit ) Ĝn (bit ; bit ) − Gn (bit ; bit ) 1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n ) Itn
nTn t=1 i=1

T
n
p
1 XX 2
+ Tn h
h (bit ) (ĝn (bit ; bit ) − gn (bit ; bit ))2 1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n ) Itn .
nTn t=1 i=1 n

Here the functions h1n (·) and h2n (·) denote the second derivatives with respect to Gn (·) and gn (·)
evaluated at some mean values between Ĝn (·) and Gn (·) and between ĝn (·) and gn (·). We first
bound µ̂7n,τ using the uniform convergence rates of Ĝn (·) and ĝn (·):
¯
¯
µ µ
¶
µ
¶¶
p
¯ 7 ¯
¯µn,τ ¯ ≤C Tn h Op log T + h2R + Op log T + h2R
¯
¯
Tn h
Tn h2
µ
¶
p
log T
log T
=Op √
+ Tn h1+4R = op (1) .
+√
3
Tn h
Tn h
Now consider

n
T
p
1 X X Gn (bit ; bit )
µ̂6n,τ = − Tn h
(ĝn (bit ; bit ) − E [ĝn (bit ; bit ) 1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n )]) Itn
nTn t=1 i=1 gn (bit ; bit )2

−

T
n
p
1 X X Gn (bit ; bit )
Tn h
(E [ĝn (bit ; bit )] − gn (bit ; bit )) 1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n ) Itn
nTn t=1 i=1 gn (bit ; bit )2

n
T
p
1 X X Gn (bit ; bit )
= − Tn h
(ĝn (bit ; bit ) − E [ĝn (bit ; bit ) 1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n )]) Itn + op (1)
nTn t=1 i=1 gn (bit ; bit )2

≡ µ̂8n,τ + op (1)

because by assumption the bias in the second term on the right-hand side of the first line is of order
´
³p
p
¡ ¢
Tn hO hR = O
Tn h1+2R = o (1) .
Next we show that
Ã
µ̂8n,τ

d

−→ N

0, Ω =

"Z µZ

0

0

K ( )K ( − )d

0

¶2

# " Z −1
#!
1 Fb (1−τ ) Gn (b; b)2
2
d
.
3 gn (b) db
n Fb−1 (τ )
gn (b; b)

This follows from a limit variance calculation for U -statistics. Letting bt represent the vector of all
bids at auction t, we can write
µ̂8n,τ

T
T
p
1 XX
= Tn h 2 2
m (bt , bs ) Itn Isn
n Tn t=1 s=1

38
where
m (bt , bs ) =

µ
∙
¶ µ ∗
¶
n X
n
X
bsj − bti
bsj − bti
Gn (bit ; bit ) 1
K
K
g 2 (b ; b ) h2
h
h
i=1 j=1 n it it
µ
¶ µ ∗
¶¸
bsj − bti
bsj − bti
1
K
1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n ) .
−E 2K
h
h
h

Using lemma 8.4 of Newey and McFadden (1994), we can verify that
µp
µ
¶
¶
p
1
E|m (bt , bt ) |
1
Tn h
= Op
Tn h
= op (1) , and
= Op √
Tn
Tn h
Tn h
q
µp
¶
µ
¶
p
Em (bt , bs )2
1
1
Tn h
= Op
Tn h √
= Op √
= op (1) .
Tn
Tn h2
Tn h3
It then follows from Lemma 8.4 of Newey and McFadden (1994) that
" T
#
T
X
X
p
1
8
n
n
E (m (bt , bs ) |bt ) It +
E (m (bt , bs ) |bs ) Is + op (1) .
µ̂n,τ = Tn h 2
n Tn t=1
s=1
The first term is asymptotically negligible, because
T
p
1 X
Tn h 2
E (m (bt , bs ) |bt ) Itn
n Tn t=1

T
p
¡ ¢¤
1 X£
= Tn h
gn (bit ; bit ) 1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n ) − E [gn (bit ; bit ) 1 (bτ,n ≤ bit ≤ b1−τ,n )] Itn + O hR
nTn t=1
µ
¶
³p
´
p
1
Tn h1+2R = op (1) .
+O
= Tn hOp √
Tn

It remains only to verify by straightforward though somewhat tedious calculation that
Ã
!
T
p
1 X
n
V ar
Tn h 2
E (m (bt , bs ) |bs ) Is
n Tn s=1
⎞
⎛
µ
¶ µ ∗
¶
n Z b1−τ
X
−
b
b
b
1
G
(b;
b)
−
b
1
sj
n
sj
K
=hV ar ⎝
K
gn (b) db⎠
n j=1 bτ
gn2 (b; b) h2
h
h
!
ÃZ
µ
¶ µ ∗
¶
b1−τ
bsj − b
Gn (b; b) 1
1
bsj − b
=h V ar
K
K
gn (b) db + o (1)
n
gn2 (b; b) h2
h
h
bτ
!2
ÃZ
µ
¶ µ ∗
¶
b1−τ
bsj − b
1
bsj − b
Gn (b; b) 1
=h E
K
K
gn (b) db + o (1)
n
gn2 (b; b) h2
h
h
bτ
"Z µZ
#
¶2 # " Z G−1
n (1−τ ) G2 (b; b)
1
n
0
0
0
2
−→ Ω ≡
K ( )K ( − )d
d
g (b) db .
n G−1
gn3 (b; b) n
n (τ )

39
Finally, we note that if we apply the calculations performed for µ̂6n,τ to µ̂5n,τ , we see that
¢
¡
¢
¡
and V ar µ̂5n,τ = o (1)
E µ̂5n,τ = o (1)
p

which then implies that µ̂5n,τ −→ 0. The proof is now completed by putting these terms together.¤

C

Large Sample Behavior of the Generalized KS Statistic

Here we describe the asymptotic behavior of the generalized KS statistic ST = ηT δ̄T under H0 . As
we show, ST converges to a maximum functional of a zero-mean Gaussian process with variancecovariance function described below.
For notational simplicity we consider the case in which only one value of n is used in calculating
δ̄T (i.e., when only two distributions are compared). The general case is a straightforward extension.
We have
)
(
n
T n+1
T
X
X
1 XX n
1
n+1
δ̄T = sup
I
Λ (v̂it − v) −
I Λ (v̂it − v)
(n + 1)Tn+1 t=1 i=1 t
nTn t=1 i=1 t
v∈[v,v̄]
≡ sup L (v) .
v∈[v,v̄]

We can then write
(

)
n
T n+1
T
X
X
1
1 XX
n+1
n
L (v) =
Λ (vit − v) It
−
Λ (vit − v) It
(n + 1)Tn+1 t=1 i=1
nTn t=1 i=1
|
{z
}
+

(
|

L1 (v)

1
(n + 1)Tn+1

T n+1
X
X
t=1 i=1

Λ (v̂it −

v) Itn+1

)
T n+1
X
X
1
n+1
−
Λ (vit − v) It
(n + 1)Tn+1 t=1 i=1
{z
}

Ln+1
(v)
2

)
Tn X
T
n
n
1 X
1 XX
n
n
−
Λ (v̂it − v) It −
Λ (vit − v) It
nTn t=1 i=1
nTn t=1 i=1
|
{z
}
(

Ln
2 (v)

Because L1 (v) = Op

³

√1
T

´

uniformly in v, we can write

ηT δ̄T = ηT sup
v∈[v,v̄]

¢
¡ n
(v) + op (1) .
−L2 (v) + Ln+1
2

We begin by studying the behavior of Ln2 (v) for a fixed v. Using a first-order Taylor approximation,
we have
ηT Ln2 (v) = νn

n
T
p
1 XX
Tn h
λ (vit − v) (v̂it − vit ) Itn + op (1) ≡ νn L̃n2 (v) + op (1)
nTn t=1 i=1

p
where λ (·) = Λ0 (·) and νn = limT →∞ T /Tn . L̃n2 (v) is very similar in structure to partial mean
statistic examined in appendix B, and we therefore only reproduce the key steps of the analysis of

40
this term. Observe that
n
T
p
1 XX
n
λ (vit − v)
L̃2 (v) = Tn h
nTn t=1 i=1

Ã

Ĝn (bit ; bit ) Gn (bit ; bit )
−
ĝn (bit ; bit )
gn (bit ; bit )

!

Itn

Tn X
n
p
1 X
Gn (bit ; bit )
= Tn h
λ (vit − v)
(ĝn (bit ; bit ) − gn (bit ; bit )) Itn + op (1)
nTn t=1 i=1
gn (bit ; bit )2

Tn X
n
p
1 X
Gn (bit ; bit )
n
= Tn h
λ (vit − v)
2 (ĝn (bit ; bit ) − Eĝn (bit ; bit )) It + op (1)
nTn t=1 i=1
gn (bit ; bit )

≡Qn (v) − EQn (v) + op (1) ,

where, after rewriting vit as v (bit ), Qn (v) is defined as
µ
¶ µ
¶
T
n
T
n
p
bit − b∗js
1 XXXX
Gn (bit ; bit ) 1
bit − bjs
λ (v (bit ) − v)
K
Q (v) = Tn h 2 2
K
Itn Isn .
2
n Tn t=1 s=1 i=1 j=1
h
h
gn (bit ; bit ) h2
n

Using U-statistic projection results, we can approximate Qn (v) − EQn (v) by P n (v) − EP n (v) +
op (1), where
µ
¶ µ
¶
T
n Z
p
bit − b∗js
1 X nX
Gn (bit ; bit ) 1
bit − bjs
P n (v) ≡ Tn h
Is
K
λ (v (bit ) − v)
K
gn (bit ) dbit
2
nTn s=1
h
h
gn (bit ; bit ) h2
j=1

µ
¶
n Z
T
bjs − b∗js
1 X nX
Gn (bjs + h ; bjs + h ) 1
√
√
K ( )K
=
I
λ (v (bjs + h ) − v)
+
gn (bjs + h ) d
2
h
n Tn s=1 s j=1
h
gn (bjs + h ; bjs + h )
µ
¶
Z
n
T
bjs − b∗js
Gn (bjs ; bjs )
1
1 X nX
K ( )K
I
λ (v (bjs ) − v)
gn (bjs ) √
+
d + op (1)
= √
h
n Tn s=1 s j=1
h
gn (bjs ; bjs )2

≡P̄ n (v) + op (1) .

It remains to calculate the limit of the covariance function of the process P̄ n (v) : v ∈ [v, v̄]. First
observe that
Ã
µ
¶ !
Z
¡ n
¢ 1
bjs − b∗js
Gn (bjs ; bjs )
1
K ( )K
V ar P̄ (v) = V ar λ (v (bjs ) − v)
gn (bjs ) √
+
d (1 + o (1))
n
h
h
gn (bjs ; bjs )2
⎤
⎡Ã
µ
¶ !2
Z
bjs − b∗js
1 ⎣
Gn (bjs ; bjs )
1
⎦ (1 + o (1)) .
√
K ( )K
= E
λ (v (bjs ) − v)
+
d
2 gn (bjs )
n
h
h
gn (bjs ; bjs )

The expectations term above is given by
⎫
⎧
!2 Z
µZ
µ
¶ ¶2
Z ⎨Ã
⎬
∗
Gn (bs ; bs )
1
bs − bs
∗
∗
g
(b
)
g
(b
|b
)
db
g
(b
)
db
K
(
)
K
+
d
λ (v (bs ) − v)
n s
n s s
s n s
⎭ s
⎩
h
h
gn (bs ; bs )2
⎧
⎫
!2 Z µZ
¶2
Z ⎨Ã
⎬
Gn (bs ; bs )
=
λ (v (bs ) − v)
g
(b
)
g
(b
+
zh|b
)
dz
g
(b
)
db
K
(
)
K
(
−
z)
d
n s
n s
s
n s
⎩
⎭ s
gn (bs ; bs )2
#
"Z µZ
¶2 # "Z
2
2
2 Gn (bs ; bs ) gn (bs )
=
K ( ) K ( − z) d
dz
λ (v (bs ) − v)
dbs + o (1) .
3
gn (bs ; bs )

41
¡
¢
Next, we calculate Cov P̄ n (v) , P̄ n (v 0 ) for v 6= v 0 :

½ X
¶
µ
Z
n
¡
¢
1
Gn (bis ; bis )
1
bis − b∗is
√
Cov P̄ n (v) , P̄ n (v 0 ) = Cov
λ (v (bis ) − v)
g
(b
)
+
d ,
K
(
)
K
n is
n i=1
h
h
gn (bis ; bis )2
µ
¶ ¾
Z
n
bjs − b∗js
Gn (b; bjs )
1
1X
√
K
(
)
K
λ (v (bjs ) − v 0 )
g
(b
)
+
d .
n js
n j=1
h
h
gn (bjs ; bjs )2
The cross covariance terms for i 6= j will be of order h. Therefore we can write
¡
¢
Cov P̄ n (v) , P̄ n (v 0 ) =
⎫
⎧
"
#2 ∙Z
µ
¶ ¸2 ⎬
∗
−
b
b
G
1 ⎨
(b
;
b
)
1
js
js
n
js
js
+ o (1) .
E λ (v (bjs ) − v) λ (v (bjs ) − v 0 )
K ( )K
+
d
2 gn (bjs )
⎭
n ⎩
h
h
gn (bjs ; bjs )

Using the same change of variables used above (and omitting subscripts for simplicity), we obtain
¡
¢
Cov P̄ n (v) , P̄ n (v 0 )
⎫
⎧
"
#2 Z ∙Z
¸2
Z
⎬
1 ⎨
G
(b;
b)
n
=
g
(b)
g
(b
+
zh|b)
dz
g (b) db + o (1)
K
(
)
K
(
−
z)
d
λ (v (b) − v) λ (v (b) − v 0 )
n
n
⎭ n
n ⎩
gn (b; b)2
1
=
n

Z

0

λ (v (b) − v) λ (v (b) − v )

G2n (b; b) gn (b)2
3

gn (b; b)

db

Z ∙Z

K ( ) K ( − z) d

¸2

dz + o (1) .

¡
¢
¡
¢
Hence, limT →∞ V ar P̄ n (v) is a special case of limT →∞ Cov P̄ n (v) , P̄ n (v 0 ) when v = v 0 .
Combining the results above, we derive that, under the PV null hypothesis,
d

ηT δ̄T −→ sup G (v)
v∈[v,v̄]

where G (v) is a zero-mean Gaussian process defined on v ∈ [v, v̄] with
¡
¢
¡
¢
2
V ar (G (v)) = νn2 lim V ar P̄n (v) + νn+1
lim V ar P̄n+1 (v)
T →∞

T →∞

and

¡
¢
¡
¢
2
Cov (G (v) , G (v 0 )) = νn2 lim Cov P̄n (v) , P̄n (v 0 ) + νn+1
lim Cov P̄n+1 (v) , P̄n+1 (v 0 ) .
T →∞

T →∞

The existence of this nondegenerate limit distribution is the essential result validating the use of
resampling methods to construct the critical values of the test. In practice, resampling methods are
typically the only feasible methods for approximating the asymptotic distributions of functionals of
general Gaussian processes which are diﬃcult to simulate directly.

References
Anderson, G. (1996): “Nonparametric Tests of Stochastic Dominance in Income Distributions,” Econometrica, 64, 1183—1194.
Andrews, D. (1994): “Empirical Process Methods in Econometrics,” in Handbook of
Econometrics, Vol. 4, ed. by R. Engle, and D. McFadden. North Holland.
(1998): “Hypothesis Testing With a Restricted Parameter Space,” Journal of
Econometrics, 86, 155—199.
Athey, S., and P. Haile (2002): “Identification of Standard Auction Models,” Econometrica, 70, 2107—2140.
Athey, S., and J. Levin (2001): “Information and Competition in U.S. Forest Serve
Timber Auctions,” Journal of Political Economy, 109, 375—417.
Ayer, M., D. Brunk, G. Ewing, W. Reid, and E. Silverman (1955): “An Empirical
Distribution Function for Sampling with Incomplete Information,” Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 26, 641—647.
Bajari, P., and A. Hortacsu (2003): “Winner’s Curse, Reserve Prices, and Endogenous
Entry: Empirical Insights from eBay Auctions,” RAND Journal of Economics, 34, 329—
355.
Baldwin, L. (1995): “Risk Aversion in Forest Service Timber Auctions,” working paper,
RAND Corporation.
Baldwin, L., R. Marshall, and J.-F. Richard (1997): “Bidder Collusion at Forest
Service Timber Sales,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, 657—699.
Barrett, G., and S. Donald (2003): “Consistent Tests for Stochastic Dominance,”
Econometrica, 71, 71—104.
Bartholomew, D. (1959):
Biometrika, 46, 36—48.

“A Test of Homogeneity for Ordered Alternatives,”

Bikhchandani, S., P. Haile, and J. Riley (2002): “Symmetric Separating Equilibria
in English Auctions,” Games and Economic Behavior, 38, 19—27.
Bikhchandani, S., and C. Huang (1989): “Auctions with Resale Markets: An Exploratory Model of Treasury Bill Markets,” Review of Financial Studies, 2, 311—339.
Chatterjee, K., and T. Harrison (1988): “The Value of Information in Competitive
Bidding,” European Journal of Operational Research, 36, 322—333.
Chernozhukov, V. (2002): “Inference on Quantile Regression Process, An Alternative,”
mimeo., MIT.

Cummins, J. (1994): “Investment Under Uncertainty: Estimates from Panel Data on
Pacific Northwest Forest Products Firms,” working paper, Columbia University.
Davidson, R., and J.-Y. Duclos (2000): “Statistical Inference for Stochastic Dominance
and for the Measurement of Poverty and Inequality,” Econometrica, 68, 1435—1464.
Elyakime, B., J. Laffont, P. Loisel, and Q. Vuong (1994): “First-Price Sealed-Bid
Auctions with Secret Reserve Prices,” Annales d’Economie et Statistiques, 34, 115—141.
Engelbrecht-Wiggans, R., J. List, and D. Lucking-Reiley (1999): “Demand Reduction in Multi-unit Auctions with Varying Numbers of Bidders: Theory and Field
Experiments,” working paper, Vanderbilt University.
Gilley, O., and G. Karels (1981): “The Competitive Eﬀect in Bonus Bidding: New
Evidence,” Bell Journal of Economics, 12, 637—648.
Guerre, E., I. Perrigne, and Q. Vuong (2000): “Optimal Nonparametric Estimation
of First-Price Auctions,” Econometrica, 68, 525—74.
Haile, P. (1999): “Auctions with Resale,” mimeo, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
(2001): “Auctions with Resale Markets: An Application to U.S. Forest Service
Timber Sales,” American Economic Review, 92, 399—427.
Haile, P., and E. Tamer (2003): “Inference with an Incomplete Model of English Auctions,” Journal of Political Economy, 111, 1—51.
Hansen, R. (1985): “Empirical Testing of Auction Theory,” American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceedings, 75, 156—159.
(1986): “Sealed-Bid Versus Open Auctions: The Evidence,” Economic Inquiry,
24, 125—143.
Hendricks, K., J. Pinkse, and R. Porter (2003): “Empirical Implications of Equilibrium Bidding in First-Price, Symmetric, Common-Value Auctions,” Review of Economic
Studies, 70, 115—146.
Hendricks, K., and R. Porter (1988): “An Empirical Study of an Auction with Asymmetric Information,” American Economic Review, 78, 865—883.
Horowitz, J. (1998): “Bootstrap Methods for Median Regression Models,” Econometrica,
66, 1327—1352.
Johnson, R. (1979): “Oral Auction Versus Sealed Bids: An Empirical Investigation,”
Natural Resources Journal, 19, 315—335.
Klemperer, P. (1999): “Auction Theory: A Guide to the Literature,” Journal of Economic Surveys, 13, 227—286.

Krasnokutskaya, E. (2003): “Identification and Estimation of Auction Models under
Unobserved Auction Heterogeneity,” working paper, Yale University.
Krishna, V. (2002): Auction Theory. Academic Press.
Laffont, J. J., and Q. Vuong (1993): “Structural Econometric Analysis of Descending
Auctions,” European Economic Review, 37, 329—341.
(1996): “Structural Analysis of Auction Data,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 86, 414—420.
Lavergne, P., and Q. Vuong (1996): “Nonparametric Selection of Regressors: the
Nonnested Case,” Econometrica, 64, 207—219.
Lederer, P. (1994): “Predicting the Winner’s Curse,” Decision Sciences, 25, 79—101.
Leffler, K., R. Rucker, and I. Munn (1994): “Transaction Costs and the Collection of
Information: Presale Measurement on Private Timber Sales,” working paper, University
of Washington.
Levin, D., and J. Smith (1994): “Equilbrium in Auctions with Entry,” American Economic Review, 84, 585—599.
Li, T. (2002): “Econometrics of First Price Auctions with Entry and Binding Reservation
Prices,” working paper, Indiana University.
Li, T., I. Perrigne, and Q. Vuong (2000): “Conditionally Independent Private Information in OCS Wildcat Auctions,” Journal of Econometrics, 98, 129—161.
(2002): “Structural Estimation of the Aﬃliated Private Value Auction Model,”
RAND Journal of Economics, 33, 171—193.
Linton, O., E. Massoumi, and Y. Whang (2002): “Consistent Testing for Stochastic
Dominance: A Subsampling Approach,” mimeo., LSE.
McAfee, P., and J. McMillan (1987): Incentives in Government Contracting. University of Toronto Press.
McFadden, D. (1989): “Testing for Stochastic Dominance,” in Studies in the Economics
of Uncertainty, ed. by T. B. Fomby, and T. K. Seo. Springer-Verlag.
Mead, W., M. Schniepp, and R. Watson (1981): “The Eﬀectiveness of Competition and
Appraisals in the Auction Markets for National Forest Timber in the Pacific Northwest,”
Washington: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service.
Milgrom, P. (1981): “Good News and Bad News: Representation Theorems and Applications,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 13, 380—391.

Milgrom, P., and R. Weber (1982): “A Theory of Auctions and Competitive Bidding,”
Econometrica, 50, 1089—1122.
National Resources Management Corporation (1997): “A Nationwide Study Comparing Tree Measurement and Scaled Sale Methods for Selling United States Forest Service Timber,” Report to the U.S. Forest Service, Department of Agriculture.
Newey, W., and D. McFadden (1994): “Large Sample Estimation and Hypothesis Testing,” in Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 4, ed. by R. Engle, and D. McFadden. North
Holland.
Olley, S., and A. Pakes (1996): “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 64, 1263—1297.
Paarsch, H. (1991): “Empirical Models of Auctions and an Application to British
Columbian Timber,” University of Western Ontario, Department of Economics Technical
Report 91-19.
(1992): “Deciding Between the Common and Private Value Paradigms in Empirical
Models of Auctions,” Journal of Econometrics, 51, 191—215.
(1997): “Deriving an Estimate of the Optimal Reserve Price: An Application to
British Columbian Timber Sales,” Journal of Econometrics, 78, 333—357.
Pinkse, J., and G. Tan (2002): “The Aﬃliation Eﬀect in First-Price Auctions,” mimeo,
Penn State University.
Politis, D., J. Romano, and M. Wolf (1999): Subsampling. Springer Verlag.
Samuelson, W. F. (1985): “Competitive Bidding with Entry Costs,” Economics Letters,
17, 53—57.
Sareen, S. (1999): “Posterior Odds Comparison of a Symmetric Low-Price, Sealed-Bid
Auction Within the Common Value and the Independent Private Value Paradigms,”
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 14, 651—676.
Schneyerov, A. (2002): “Applying Auction Theory to Municipal Bond Auctions: Market
Power and the Winner’s Curse,” mimeo., University of British Columbia.
van der Vaart, A. (1999): Asymptotic Statistics. Cambridge University Press.
Wolak, F. (1989): “Testing Inequality Constraints in Linear Econometric Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 41, 205—235.
(1991): “The Local Nature of Hypothesis Tests Involving Inequality Constraints
in Nonlinear Models,” Econometrica, 59, 981—995.

Table 1: Monte Carlo Results
200 replications of each experiment.
PV1
CV1
PV2
Range of n:
2—4 2—5 2—4 2—5 2—4 3—5
Tn
200 200 200 200 200 200
share of p-values < 10% 0.21 0.39 1.00 1.00 0.12 0.27
share of p-values < 5%
0.11 0.29 1.00 1.00 0.05 0.18

CV2
3—5 3—6
200 200
0.94 0.99
0.91 0.99

Table 2: Monte Carlo Results
Bootstrap Estimation of Σ
200 replications of each experiment.
PV1
CV1
PV2
Range of n:
2—4 2—5 2—4 3—6 2—4 3—5
Tn
200 200 200 200 200 200
share of p-values < 10% 0.14 0.18 1.00 1.00 0.13 0.21
share of p-values < 5%
0.10 0.12 1.00 1.00 0.04 0.11

CV2
3—5 3—6
200 200
0.80 0.91
0.70 0.83

Table 3: Monte Carlo Results
K-S Test using subsampled critical values.a
200 replications of each experiment.
Range of n:
Tb
Rc
Sd
%(reject at 5%)
%(reject at 10%)

Range of n:
T
R
S
%(reject at 5%)
%(reject at 10%)
a

2—3
200
50
151
0.01
0.06

PV1
2—4
200
50
151
0.01
0.07

2—3
200
50
151
0.01
0.02

PV2
2—4
200
50
151
0.01
0.04

1

The bandwidth sequence is hT = O(T − 4 ).
Number of auctions.
c
Number of auctions in each subsampled dataset.
d
Number of subsamples taken.
b

2—5
200
50
151
0.01
0.11

2—5
200
50
151
0.02
0.15

2—3
200
50
151
0.59
0.88

CV1
2—4 2—5
200 200
50
50
151 151
0.92 0.80
0.99 0.99

2—3
200
50
151
0.44
0.86

CV2
2—4 2—5
200 200
50
50
151 151
0.82 0.91
1.00 1.00

Table 4: Data Configuration
USFS Timber Auctions
Scaled Sales
number of number of
auctions
bids

Lumpsum Sales
number of number of
auctions
bids

n=2
n=3
n=4
n=5
n=6
n=7
n=8
n=9
n = 10
n = 11
n = 12

63
39
42
33
23
14
4
9
11
1
4

126
117
168
165
138
98
32
81
110
11
48

54
40
33
16
18
11
6
7
3
0
3

108
120
132
80
108
77
48
63
30
0
36

TOTAL

243

1094

191

802

Table 5: Summary Statistics
USFS Timber Auctions
Scaled Sales
mean std dev
number of bidders
winning bid
appraised value
estimated volume
est. manuf cost
est. harvest cost
est. selling value
species concentration
6-month inventory
contract term
acres
region 5 dummy

4.50
80.50
36.12
609.89
141.51
120.57
312.04
0.5267
334161
7.31
697.78
0.8519

2.47
51.49
32.56
640.50
45.79
29.55
75.85
0.5003
120445
3.27
2925.45

Lumpsum Sales
mean std dev
4.20
77.53
36.10
390.04
153.46
118.36
335.74
0.5497
389821
6.39
266.82
0.6806

2.30
46.57
29.08
555.86
43.08
24.92
96.88
0.4988
139625
3.63
615.28

Table 6: Test Results
Without Instrumental Variables

Scaled Sales
range of n
bid regression R2
means

p-values:
means test
K-S test

2-3
.730
27.06
28.25

2-4
.668
31.25
33.46
41.35

2-5
.753
31.07
33.51
40.32
37.23

2-6
.712
29.45
32.78
37.79
34.87
39.29

2-7
.702
26.14
30.14
35.34
30.31
35.79
49.76

.505
.223

.670
.708

.737
.065

.795
.597

.845
.630

Lumpsum Sales
range of n
bid regression R2
means

p-values:
means test
K-S test

2-3
.752
23.73
23.85

2-4
.736
22.02
24.60
17.97

2-5
.627
3.52
5.85
0.90
15.12

2-6
.574
8.09
10.62
6.48
17.32
17.35

2-7
.566
9.67
12.09
8.15
18.68
18.67
10.71

.499
.314

.090
.114

.621
.197

.807
.705

.788
.039

Table 7: Test Results
With Instrumental Variables

Scaled Sales
range of n
IV regression R2
bid regression R2
means

p-values:
means test
K-S test

2-3
.172
.740
24.34
23.74

2-4
.134
.671
37.13
46.55
36.77

2-5
.178
.758
34.53
37.45
41.09

2-6
.190
.722
32.92
29.35
32.75

2-7
.215
.724
34.27
29.66
37.74

.442
.301

.343
.034

.668
.675

.488
.451

.627
.138

Lumpsum Sales
range of n
IV regression R2
bid regression R2
means

p-values:
means test
K-S test

2-3
.387
.754
28.98
24.11

2-4
.258
.745
35.43
24.84
24.18

2-5
.291
.642
7.15
3.48
10.29

2-6
.292
.639
33.15
29.84
28.39

2-7
.321
.633
28.33
24.94
22.82

.135
.172

.028
.021

.586
.452

.376
.103

.287
.043

Figure 1. Empirical Distributions of Pseudo-values
From One Monte Carlo Sample

Figure 2. Empirical Distributions of Pseudo-values
Scaled Sales

Figure 3. Empirical Distributions of Pseudo-values
Lumpsum Sales

Figure 4. Empirical Distributions of Pseudo-values
Scaled Sales, Using Instrumental Variables

Figure 5. Empirical Distributions of Pseudo-values
Lumpsum Sales, Using Instrumental Variables

