                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             STAKEHOLDERS, TRANSPARENCY AND CAPITAL STRUCTURE

                                            Andres Almazan
                                             Javier Suarez
                                            Sheridan Titman

                                         Working Paper 10101
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10101


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2003




We are grateful to comments from Aydogan Alti, Kent Daniel, Adolfo DeMotta, Mark Flannery, Xavier
Freixas, Ron Gianmarino, David Hirshleifer, Giovanna Nicodano, Robert Prentice, Chris Parsons, Todd
Pulvino, Siew Hong Teoh, and seminar participants at University of Amsterdam, Arizona State University,
ESCP-EAP, INSEAD, McGill University, NYU, Northwestern University, Ohio State University, Oxford,
Pompeu Fabra, UCLA, University of Texas, Tulane University, the CEPR Workshop on European Corporate
Governance and the New Economy, and 2003 WFA meetings at Los Cabos, Mexico. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Andres Almazan, Javier Suarez, and Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Stakeholders, Transparency and Capital Structure
Andres Almazan, Javier Suarez, and Sheridan Titman
NBER Working Paper No. 10101
November 2003
JEL No. G3

                                           ABSTRACT

Firms that are more highly levered are forced to raise capital more often, a process that generates

information about them. Of course transparency can improve the allocation of capital. However,

when the information about the firm affects the terms under which the firm transacts with its

customers and employees, transparency can have an offsetting negative effect. Under relatively

general conditions, good news improves these terms of trade less than bad news worsens them,

implying that increased transparency can lower firm value. In addition, we show that transparency

can reduce the incentives of firms and stakeholders to undertake relationship specific investments.

The negative effects of transparency can lead firms to pass up positive NPV investments that require

external funding and to choose more conservative capital structures that they would otherwise

choose. These effects should be especially important for technology firms that require a reputation

for being on the “leading edge.”

Andres Almazan
University of Texas at Austin
aalmazan@mail.utexas.edu

Javier Suarez
CEMFI and CEPR
suarez@cemfi.es

Sheridan Titman
Department of Finance
The University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1179
and NBER
titman@mail.utexas.edu
1         Introduction

The transparency of a Þrm is often deÞned as the extent to which outsiders can
evaluate the Þrm’s operations. In some situations it is beneÞcial for Þrms to be
transparent and invite the scrutiny of outsiders. However, as we stress in this paper,
this is not always the case. SpeciÞcally, we show that when a Þrm’s prospects depend
on its long-term relationships with its stakeholders, external scrutiny can create costs
that reduce Þrm value.
        This paper explores the interaction of two ideas. The Þrst idea is that there is a
fundamental linkage between capital structure and transparency. SpeciÞcally, since
more levered Þrms require more frequent access to external capital markets, they are
subject to greater market scrutiny. The second idea is that if the success of a Þrm
is related to the stakeholders’ perception of the Þrm, (i.e., the Þrm’s “image”), then
inßuencing the process by which information about the Þrm is generated (i.e., how
the Þrm’s image is formed) becomes important to the Þrm. As we argue, Þrms that
are more conservatively Þnanced are better able to accomplish this objective.
        To understand the importance of stakeholders’ perceptions, and the link between
capital structure and market scrutiny, consider the situation at Enron in the year
leading up to its bankruptcy. In 2001, Enron was ranked by Fortune magazine as the
22nd best company to work for and was perceived to be the market leader. Given
their favorable image, Enron was able to attract top graduates who were willing to
toil long hours to gain the experience that one can only acquire by working with
the very best.1 However, Enron was also very highly levered and in the fall of 2002,
after experiencing downturns in a number of its business units, they needed to raise
    1
    In the ‘Vision and Values’ video that Enron sent to its new recruits, Jeﬀ Skilling, at the time
Enron’s CEO, promised the workers that: “when you work for Enron you are going to see the newest
thing, the newest products, the newest services, the newest way to think about things,” (taken from
Swartz and Watkins, (2003)).


                                                1
substantial amounts of external capital. During its attempt to raise capital it became
apparent that Enron’s organization was deeply ßawed. At this point, an association
with Enron became a liability, making it diﬃcult for Enron to keep workers and other
stakeholders as committed to the Þrm as they were before. Perhaps, the subsequent
implosion of Enron would have occurred in any event. However, personnel problems,
as well as problems with other stakeholders, that were caused by the revelation of
negative information about the Þrm, certainly hastened their demise.
       Anecdotal evidence suggests that the link between the process by which Þrms
raise external capital, and the extent to which their Þrms are scrutinized, plays an
important role in determining Þrms’ Þnancing choices. For example, a recent Wall
Street Journal article states that, despite the opportunity to save on Þnancing costs,
many Þrms avoided reÞnancing their debt following the recent drop in interest rates
because of these concerns:

         “This year’s spate of accounting and other governance scandals has meant
         that many companies are afraid to simply test the waters: even if a com-
         pany wants to shoot for a lower rate, cutting its Þnancing costs in the pro-
         cess, a bond deal that goes awry could have a damaging ripple eﬀect, rais-
         ing questions about a company’s Þnancial health and potentially weighing
         on its stock price at a time when investors are particularly punishing.”2

       To better understand the costs associated with scrutiny, and its link to the capital
structure choice, we develop a model that allows us to analyze how transparency
aﬀects (i) the Þrm’s cost of retaining its workers, (ii) the Þrm’s incentives to make
relationship speciÞc investments, and (iii) the employees incentive to exert eﬀort.3
   2
     From “The ReÞnancing Boom Hasn’t Hit Corporations” by Craig Karmin, published in WSJ
10/15/2002. In the article, the head of the U.S. capital markets at Credit Suisse First Boston
declares: “chief Þnancial oﬃcers are saying for a relatively small amount of savings, ‘I don’t want to
expose myself to that risk.’”
   3
     Although our argument applies to a broad range of stakeholders, for concreteness, our focus is
primarily on employees. In Section 8, we explicitly discuss of how the arguments can be extended
to the relationship of the Þrm with other stakeholders.

                                                  2
SpeciÞcally we consider a setting where a Þrm employs workers of diﬀerent (and
unobservable) types. Some workers develop marketable human capital by working
for leading Þrms, and hence are willing to substitute monetary compensation for
on-the-job training. Others, however, are unable to either develop or market their
human capital, and hence only respond to monetary incentives. In this setting, the
information that is generated from, say, an equity issue may reveal that the Þrm is
not longer an industry leader, which would make the Þrm a less attractive employer
for those workers who beneÞt from the experience of working for a leading Þrm. Of
course, on the positive side, market scrutiny may reveal information that enhances
the Þrm’s image, which would make it easier to retain these employees. However, as
it turns out, because not all workers beneÞt from working for a leader, the beneÞts of
potential salary reductions do not fully oﬀset the costs of potential salary increases.
Hence, on average, the news generated by the equity issue increases the Þrm’s expected
employment costs and thereby reduces Þrm value.
   Building on the basic intuition that the revelation of information can aﬀect the
Þrm’s relation with its stakeholders, we show that transparency and hence, high
leverage, can be especially costly when: (i) the human capital development of certain
workers (and hence the cost of retaining them) depend on (non-contractible) invest-
ments that the Þrm must make, (ii) worker eﬀort is an essential input and workers
devote less eﬀort if they believe that their employer may no longer be a leader, and
(iii) Þrms have investment opportunities that require external Þnancing. In this last
case, to avoid the cost of information revelation that arises when raising external
Þnancing, Þrms may choose to pass up positive NPV investments.
   Our analysis is related to several strands of the literature. First, our assump-
tion that raising external capital subjects Þrms to more scrutiny is consistent with
empirical studies of the equity issue process. For example, Hansen and Torregrosa

                                          3
(1992) provide evidence of underwriters’ monitoring in equity oﬀerings that is con-
sistent with information production by underwriters as part of their “due diligence.”
More recently, Altinkiliç and Hansen (2003 forthcoming) provide evidence that the
process of pricing and underwriting secondary equity oﬀers increases volatility around
the issue, suggesting that information is being generated about the oﬀering Þrm. In
addition, Gibson et al. (2003 forthcoming) present evidence that institutions, which
tend to acquire information prior to making additions to their portfolios, increase
their holdings around secondary equity oﬀerings.
       There is also a large theoretical literature on the eﬀect of transparency on Þrm
value in general,4 as well as a more speciÞc literature that examines the link between
capital structure and information generation. In particular, Easterbrook (1984) ar-
gues that Þrms that are forced to pay out a higher fraction of their cash ßow are
subject to greater scrutiny because of their need to access external capital, and that
such a scrutiny beneÞts Þrms by reducing agency problems between shareholders and
managers.5 The scrutiny associated with the reÞnancing or renegotiation of existing
debt is also implicit in Jensen’s (1986) free cash ßow argument, which states that high
leverage makes it more diﬃcult to undertake negative-NPV investments that cannot
be Þnanced internally.6 Holmstrom and Tirole (1993), who consider the relationship
between capital structure and the liquidity of the Þrm’s securities, also examine how
diﬀerent capital structures produce diﬀerent incentives for the production of informa-
tion about a Þrm.7 In contrast to our model, the above papers suggest that greater
transparency improves Þrm value. However, Perotti and von Thadden (2000) provide
   4
      For a recent survey on this literature see Verrecchia (2001) and the comments by Dye (2001).
   5
      Similarly, since more transparent Þrms are likely to be more eﬃciently priced, they are also
likely to make better investment choices and thus be more valuable on average. See, for example,
Subrahmanyam and Titman (1999).
    6
      See also Hart and Moore (1995).
    7
      The trade-oﬀs involved in the choice between more and less liquid securities is also analyzed by
Boot and Thakor (1993) and Fulghieri and Lukin (2001).


                                                  4
a model with costs associated with making a Þrm’s strategies more transparent to
its competitors, which also has the implication that Þrms have an incentive to make
Þnancing choices that limit transparency.8
      In addition, although the logic of our argument is very diﬀerent, we share a number
of implications with Myers and Majluf (1984). In particular, the Myers and Majluf
model also suggests that highly levered Þrms that require external equity issues may
pass up positive NPV investments. In contrast to Myers and Majluf, where Þrms pass
up equity issues because of adverse selection problems, Þrms pass up equity issues in
our model because the information generated by an equity issue can actually destroy
value. As Dybvig and Zender (1991) and Hart (1993) have discussed, an explicit
commitment by Þrms to issue equity would solve the underinvestment problem in
Myers and Majluf. However, in our model, unless such a commitment can be designed
to avoid scrutiny, it will not eliminate the incentives to be conservatively Þnanced.9
      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the economic
setting. The basic model is developed and analyzed in Sections 3 and 4. In Section 5
we consider the richer case in which the Þrm controls both its capital structure and an
investment that increases the value of its workers’ relationship with the Þrm. Section
6 analyzes the interaction between transparency and endogenous eﬀort decisions by
the workers. Section 7 shows how concerns about transparency can generate an
underinvestment problem. Section 8 discusses the implications and some alternative
interpretations of the results and Section 9 concludes the paper. In the appendix,
we discuss the robustness of our Þndings to a richer contracting environment, i.e.,
long-term contracts.
  8
      Teoh (1997) also considers a setting in which greater transparency can reduce Þrm value.
  9
      See Section 7 for further discussion on this issue.




                                                  5
2       The economic setting

Consider a Þrm that operates in a risk-neutral economy where the market rate of
return is normalized to zero. There are four relevant dates in the life of the Þrm, t =
0, 1, 2, 3. The Þrm chooses its capital structure at t = 0. It hires its workers at t = 1
and provides them with some Þrm-speciÞc training that makes them irreplaceable
in future dates. At t = 2 the workers recontract with the Þrm. If all workers are
retained, the Þrm generates a revenue of Y at t = 3 while if it retains a fraction
0 < η < 1 of them the Þrm produces the corresponding output fraction ηY .10
      The workers are hired at t = 1 from a population of ex-ante identical workers with
a reservation utility U ≥ 0. The workers do not know their type when they are hired
but privately learn this information during their training. SpeciÞcally, a proportion
µ of the workers, which we call quick learners, will have at t = 2 a reservation utility
Uh . The remaining proportion (1 − µ), which we call slow learners, will have at
t = 2 a reservation utility, Ul . We denote by ∆U the quick learners’ reservation
utility premium, Uh − Ul > 0, and assume, for simplicity, that workers are equally
productive within the Þrm.
      An additional important diﬀerence between worker types is that quick learners
beneÞt from working for leading Þrms (henceforth, leaders) by obtaining an additional
experience gain of z. Intuitively, we think of a leader as a Þrm which sets the future
technological and organizational standards for its industry and hence has the potential
to provide its workers with an especially valuable experience. In contrast, we assume
that non-leading Þrms (henceforth, losers) provide no experience gains to any of its
workers (quick or slow learners) and that slow learners obtain no experience gains
even if they work for a leader. The size of the experience gain z is determined by
 10
      As explained later, Y is the revenue of an all-equity Þrm net of potential beneÞts from leverage.



                                                   6
non-veriÞable investments (e.g., R&D activities) that cost the Þrm C(z), with C 0 > 0,
C 00 > 0, and occur after workers have been hired.
       The Þrm chooses an initial capital structure at t = 0, that we denote d. We assume
that Þrms with higher leverage ratios are more likely to require external Þnancing
before t = 2. The idea is that Þrms that are required to pay out more of their
earnings to debtholders are more likely to realize a Þnancial shortfall. To conserve on
notation, we also denote d as the probability that the Þrm will raise external capital
at t = 2.
       Initially, the Þrm has a probability γ of being a leader and a probability 1 − γ of
not being a leader. We assume that if the Þrm raises capital at t = 2, information is
generated that allows both workers and the entrepreneur to update these probabilities.
Hence, with a probability d, the Þrm’s type is revealed to all parties right at t = 2,
while with a probability 1 − d, the Þrm’s type is not revealed until t = 3.
       Workers have no wealth and enjoy limited liability so the wages w1 and w2 that
they obtain at t = 1 at t = 2, respectively, must be non-negative. We assume
that the Þrm interacts with its workers through spot labor markets where workers
commit their labor and wages are set for just one period.11 So a worker hired at
t = 1 is free to leave the Þrm at t = 2 and the Þrm is free to lay oﬀ its workers.
However, the Þrm needs its workers to produce and, assuming that µY > ∆U + µUl
and (1 − µ)Y > Ul − µUh + µz, it will Þnd it optimal to make wage oﬀers at t = 2
that are suﬃcient to induce all workers to stay.12 The stated assumptions essentially
require that the additional revenues generated by the workers are large relative to
their reservation utilities and both types of workers are present in the population in
  11
    In the appendix, we explore how long-term contracts would aﬀect our results.
  12
    The worker retention problem is similar to the screening problem of a monopolist who faces
customers of two unobservable types and Þnds it proÞtable to serve both of them at uniform prices.
See Maskin and Riley (1984).



                                                7
non-negligible proportions.13
       Finally, we capture the standard advantages and disadvantages of leverage by
postulating that debt adds some net beneÞts X(d) to the Þrm’s potential revenue
Y.14 Consistent with the traditional trade-oﬀ theories of capital structure, we assume
that X(d) is a single-peaked function that reaches a maximum for some interior value
d∗ of the leverage ratio.15
       The sequence of events in the model that we have just described is summarized
in Figure 1.



          t=0                      t=1                         t=2                        t=3

    Capital Structure        Hiring Wage, w1        Type Revealed with prob= d       Final Revenue
    Decision, d              Firm Invests, z        Retention Wage, w2

                                 Figure 1: Sequence of Events.

3        Capital structure and retention wages

We start by considering the wage that the Þrm must oﬀer to retain both types of
workers at date 2. To examine the advantages and disadvantages of transparency, we
compare the wage when the Þrm’s type is not revealed, with the expected wage when
the Þrm’s type is revealed. As we show, the wage that allows the Þrm to retain both
types of worker provides one of the two types with rents, the size of which depends
on whether or not the Þrm’s type is revealed.
  13
     For a non-leading Þrm, retaining all worker types rather than only the slow learners pushes the
wage bill up to µUh (to retain the quick learners), giving an additional compensation of (1 − µ)(Uh −
Ul ) to the slow learners. Similarly, for a leading Þrm, retaining all workers rather than only the
quick learners pushes the wage bill up to (1 − µ)Ul (to retain the slow learners), giving an additional
compensation of µ[Ul − (Uh − z)] to the quick learners.
  14
     So Y represents the revenue of an all-equity Þrm while X(d) is the incremental revenue (net of
Þnancial distress costs) due to the positive (tax-related or incentive-related) eﬀects of leverage.
  15
     To guarantee that d∗ ∈ (0, 1), we assume X 0 (1) ≤ 0 ≤ X 0 (0) and X 00 < 0.


                                                  8
3.1     Retention wages

Three possible states can occur at t = 2: what we call the opaque state in which the
Þrm’s type remains unknown (s = u), and the transparent states, in which the Þrm
is revealed to be a leader (s = g) or a loser (s = b). If the Þrm’s type is not revealed,
the minimum wage required to retain both types of worker is

                               w u = max{Ul , Uh − γz},                              (1)

where Ul is the minimum wage required to retain a slow learner (his reservation utility)
and Uh − γz is the minimum wage required to retain a quick learner (his reservation
utility minus the expected experience gain).
   If the Þrm is revealed to be a leader, the wage required to retain both types is

                                w g = max{Ul , Uh − z}                               (2)

where the wage required to retain a slow learner is again Ul , but the wage required
to retain a quick learner is now Uh − z since, due to transparency, a quick learner is
now certain about his experience gain, z.
   Finally, if the Þrm is revealed to be a loser, the minimum wage that retains both
worker types is
                               wb = max{Ul , Uh } = Uh ,                             (3)

since, due to transparency, a quick learner knows that his experience gain will be
zero.
   Clearly, the required wage is lower when the Þrm is revealed to be a leader rather
than a loser (wg < wb ) and when its type remains unknown rather than revealed as
a loser (wu < w b ). Moreover, wg ≤ w u , where this inequality holds strictly when
∆U > γz. To understand this last result, note that:


                                            9
  1. If ∆U ≤ γz, the opaque Þrm is attractive enough to the quick learner so that the
      retention wage is the reservation utility of a slow learner. Hence wg = wu = Ul .

  2. If γz < ∆U < z, the retention wage of a leading Þrm is determined by the
      reservation wage of a slow learner, but that of a opaque Þrm is determined by
      the reservation wage of a quick learner. Hence wg = Ul and w u = Uh − γz,
      which implies that w g < w u .

  3. If ∆U ≥ z, retaining a quick learner is always more diﬃcult than retaining a
      slow learner. Hence w g = Uh −z and w u = Uh −γz, which also implies wg < w u .

   Intuitively, if there is only one type of worker, the expected wage paid by a Þrm
that is transparent equals the wage paid by a Þrm that is opaque. However, with
multiple type workers, this need not be the case, since at least one of the types earn
rents in each of the three possible states, and as we show, the expected value of these
rents is higher for a transparent Þrm.

3.2    Expected labor retention costs

Let w2 (d) denote the Þrm’s expected retention wage as a function of the Þrm’s leverage
ratio that, under our assumptions, is measured by the probability d that the Þrm’s
type is disclosed at t = 2. Clearly,

                       w2 (d) = d[γwg + (1 − γ)w b ] + (1 − d)w u ,

where the expressions for wg , wb , and wu , given above, lead to the following lemma:

Lemma 1 The expected retention wage is given by
                          
                           Ul + (1 − γ)∆U d,
                                                  if ∆U ≤ γz,
               w2 (d) =     Uh − γz + γ(z − ∆U )d, if γz < ∆U < z,                 (4)
                          
                          
                            Uh − γz,               if ∆U ≥ z.

                                           10
Hence, the expected labor retention costs per worker are either independent of (if
∆U ≤ γz) or increasing in (if ∆U > γz) the Þrm´s leverage ratio d.


       In words, when the quick learners’ reservation utility premium exceeds their po-
tential experience gains (i.e., ∆U ≥ z), retention wages are driven by the requirements
of the quick learners in all three possible states. SpeciÞcally, the expected wage across
transparent states, γwg +(1 −γ)w b = Uh − γz, equals the wage required in the opaque
state, w u = Uh − γz, hence the expected retention costs are independent of the Þrm’s
transparency. However, when z is suﬃciently high, slow learners become the most
costly workers to retain in the opaque as well as the good state.16 When this is the
case, the retention wage paid in the opaque state, wu , is strictly lower than the ex-
pected retention wage paid across transparent states, γw g + (1 − γ)wb . Due to the
shift in the worker type whose wage requirement binds for the determination of the
retention wage, the additional compensation that the Þrm must incur when bad news
about its type is revealed (s = b) is not fully compensated by the wage reduction in
case of good news (s = g). Thus, on average, labor retention costs are smaller if the
Þrm’s type is not revealed.


4        Capital structure and total labor costs

The analysis in the previous section shows that the workers of one of the two types
earn rents at t = 2. This does not necessarily imply that workers expect to earn rents
throughout their entire relationship with the Þrm. Indeed, as we show below, if the
workers’ wealth constraints are not binding, they will oﬀset their expected rents at
  16
    In particular, wu reßects the requirement of just one type–slow learners if ∆U < γz and quick
learners if γz < ∆U < z. Instead, γwg +(1−γ)wb mixes the requirements of both worker types since
wg is always driven by the requirements of slow learners and wb is always driven by the requirements
of quick learners.




                                                11
t = 2 by accepting a lower wage at t = 1. In this case, transparency need not directly
aﬀect total expected wages and, thereby, need not distort the leverage decision d.

4.1        Total labor costs

Let w1 (d) denote the wage oﬀered by the Þrm to the workers at t = 1. As forward-
looking workers anticipate the rents that they may obtain at t = 2, w1 (d) must
satisfy:
                         w1 (d) + [w2 (d) + µγz] − (Ul + µ∆U) ≥ U ,                                (5)

where the term in brackets accounts for the expected wage and experience gains
obtained at t = 2, and the term in parenthesis reßects a worker’s expected reservation
utility at that date.17 The diﬀerence between the terms in brackets and parentheses,
which is always positive, measures the rents that workers obtain at t = 2, as a result
of asymmetric information about their types.
       According to (4), depending on the size of ∆U relative to γz and z, we should
distinguish three diﬀerent parametric regimes. To simplify the presentation, we will
focus on the intermediate regime, with ∆U ∈ (γz, z), which is the richest one in that
the expected retention wage is aﬀected by both the leverage ratio d and the size of
the experience gain z:18

                               w2 (d) = Uh − γz + γ(z − ∆U )d.                                     (6)

       Under (6), the minimum value of w1 (d) that satisÞes (5) is given by

                      wb1 (d) = U − (1 − µ)(∆U − γz) − γ(z − ∆U )d,                                (7)
  17
     We assume that all workers, irrespectively of being hired by the Þrm or not, learn their type and,
thus, their continuation reservation utility before t = 2. The experience gains that quick learners
may obtain in other Þrms (if any) are implicitly included in Uh .
  18
     Notice that in the other two cases either d or z have no eﬀect on the expected retention wage.




                                                  12
which shows that the expectation of rents at t = 2 makes the worker willing to accept
a wage at t = 1 lower than his reservation utility at that date, U . Such a wage is
decreasing in d because leverage increases the Þrm’s transparency and this, in turn,
increases the expected retention wage.
   If wb1 (d) ≥ 0, the workers’ wealth constraints (that is, the requirement of w1 ≥ 0)
are not binding and (5) can hold with equality, so the Þrm’s total labor costs per
worker are
               W (d) = wb1 (d) + w2 (d) = U + (Ul + µ∆U ) − µγz ≡ w.

Basically, w is the workers’ average reservation utility net of expected experience
gains, which does not depend on d. However, if wb1 (d) < 0, then the wealth constraint
is binding, so w1 (d) = 0 and the Þrm’s total labor costs per worker are W (d) = w2 (d).
In this case, the workers earn rents, and these rents are increasing in d (recall Lemma
1). More formally, from (7), we can distinguish three cases:

  1. If U − (1 − µ)(∆U − γz) ≤ 0, then, for all d, wb1 (d) ≤ 0 and W (d) = w2 (d).

  2. If 0 < U − (1 − µ)(∆U − γz) < γ(z − ∆U ), then there exists some

                                 U − (1 − µ)(∆U − γz)
                            d≡                        ∈ (0, 1)                       (8)
                                      γ(z − ∆U )

     such that wb1 (d) ≥ 0 so W (d) = w for d ≤ d, while wb1 (d) < 0 so W (d) = w2 (d)
     for d > d.

  3. If U − (1 − µ)(∆U − γz) ≥ γ(z − ∆U), then, for all d, wb1 (d) > 0 and W (d) = w.

   In words, in Case 1 the workers’ reservation utility is so small that even if the Þrm
is totally opaque (d = 0), their wealth constraint is binding and they extract rents
from the Þrm. Case 3 corresponds to the opposite situation: the workers’ reservation
utility is so large that even a fully transparent Þrm (d = 1) necessitates a positive

                                          13
initial wage to attract workers to the Þrm (and workers receive no rents from the Þrm).
In Case 2, the intermediate situation occurs: workers receive rents for high leverage
ratios (d > d), but not for low ones (d ≤ d). This discussion can be summarized as
follows:

Proposition 1 The total expected labor costs per worker are given by W (d) = max{w,
w2 (d)}, which is increasing in the Þrm’s leverage ratio d when the workers’ wealth
constraint is binding and, otherwise, is independent of d.

4.2    The capital structure choice

At t = 0, if the number of workers hired by the Þrm is normalized to one, the present
value of its revenue plus the other net beneÞts of debt Þnancing, net of the total
expected labor costs is
                              V (d) ≡ Y + X(d) − W (d).                               (9)

Thus, except if d = d, in which case W (d) is non-diﬀerentiable, the Þrm’s optimal
leverage ratio solves the Þrst order condition:

                                    X 0 (d) = W 0 (d),                               (10)

which states that the “traditional” marginal beneÞts from leverage, X 0 (d), must equal
its marginal cost due to greater transparency, W 0 (d).
   The form of W (d) allows us to distinguish three cases:

   1. d < d. In this case, we have W (d) = w so (10) becomes X 0 (d) = 0, whose
      solution is d = d∗ . Hence if d∗ < d, the Þrm’s optimal leverage ratio is d∗ , which
      is determined by the traditional trade-oﬀs captured by X(d).

   2. d > d. In this case, we have W (d) = w2 (d) so, using (6), (10) becomes X 0 (d) =
      γ(z − ∆U ), whose solution is d = db < d∗ . Hence if db > d, the Þrm’s optimal
                        b which is smaller than d∗ due to the costs of transparency.
      leverage ratio is d,

                                           14
    3. d = d. Given the form of W (d), having a maximum at the non-diﬀerentiability
                                                                b d∗ ].
       point d requires 0 ≤ X 0 (d) ≤ γ(z − ∆U ), that is, d ∈ [d,


Summing up:


Proposition 2 When the workers’ wealth constraints are binding (d < d∗ ), the Þrm
                                               b d} < d∗ . Otherwise, its leverage
chooses a conservative leverage ratio, d = max{d,
ratio is determined by the traditional trade-oﬀs, d = d∗ .


    Hence, whenever the workers’ wealth constraints are binding (d < d∗ ), the cost
of transparency distorts the Þrm’s capital structure decision towards a conservative
leverage ratio d < d∗ . Notice from (8) that d is a linearly increasing function of the
workers’ reservation utility at t = 1. Thus, Þnancial conservatism arises when the
initial reservation utility U is small, since in this case the initial wage constraint is
more likely to bind. Transparency is costly in this case because the higher future
labor retention costs cannot be fully oﬀset by a lower initial wage.19


5      Capital structure and experience gains

In this section we endogenize the experience gains z, which we assume are enhanced
by investments undertaken by the Þrm during the workers’ training period, i.e., after
they have been hired (t = 1) but before the possible disclosure of Þrm type (t = 2).
The investments that we have in mind include training programs that allow workers
to acquire the Þrm’s know-how, R&D investments that widen the applicability of the
Þrm’s proprietary technologies, or the establishment of conÞdentiality procedures and
  19
     Interestingly, irrespective of the size of workers’ initial reservation utility, our analysis predicts
that capital structure and, more generally, a Þrm’s transparency, has implications for the time proÞle
of workers’ compensation. Opaqueness is related to ßatter wage proÞles than transparency. Then,
as the leverage ratio d increases, initial wages fall and both the average and the dispersion of future
wages increase.


                                                    15
licensing practices that limit the ability of outsiders to develop comparable human
capital. As we show, the Þrm’s capital structure has an inßuence on the investment
z, which in turn aﬀects the relationship between the Þrm and its employees.
       We assume that these investments, while observable for both the Þrm and the
workers, are unveriÞable and hence non-contractible.20 For simplicity, we model them
as a direct choice of z at a cost given by a strictly increasing and strictly convex
function C(z). For brevity, we focus on the same case analyzed in Section 4 by
assuming that the choice of z is restricted to an interval [z, z] ⊂ (∆U, ∆U/γ).21
Additionally, in order to highlight the eﬀects channelled through the investment level
z, we initially assume that U is large enough for the worker’s wealth constraint not
to be binding so that total labor costs, expressed as

                                w ≡ U + (Ul + γ∆U ) − µγz,                                   (11)

do not directly depend on the leverage ratio d. At the end of this section we brießy
comment on the case in which U is small and, hence, total labor costs are increasing
in d, as in (6).

5.1       The case where z is contractible

We start by examining the relationship between capital structure and the experi-
ence enhancing investment z in a Þrst-best world in which the latter is contractible.
This provides a benchmark that allows us to determine the eﬀect of having a non-
contractible z. Since workers are assumed to have no wealth constraints, total Þrm
value includes the worker’s expected gains from the z investment, µγz, which the
  20
     Grossman and Hart (1986) emphasize the importance of relationship-speciÞc investments in
their theory of the Þrm. See also Hart (1995).
  21
     Thus, we require that ∆U ∈ (γz, z) as in the case in which our previous analysis has focused.
Technically, this would be guaranteed, without further constraints, if limz+ →∆U C 0 (z) = 0 and
limz− → ∆U
         γ
           C 0 (z) = +∞.


                                               16
Þrm appropriates by oﬀering a lower initial wage.22 So, neglecting constants, value
maximization requires

                                  max             X(d) + [µγz − C(z)].                           (12)
                              d∈[0,1], z∈[z,z]

Thus, the Þrst-best solution (d∗ , z ∗ ) is implicitly deÞned by the Þrst order conditions

                                                 X 0 (d∗ ) = 0,                                  (13)

                                             µγ = C 0 (z ∗ ).                                    (14)

Clearly, in the Þrst-best world the capital structure decision d∗ and the investment
decision z ∗ are separable. The leverage ratio d∗ is determined by the standard trade-
oﬀs–exactly as in the case of exogenous z and nonbinding wealth constraints consid-
ered in the previous section–while the investment z ∗ equalizes the marginal (social)
value of the investment to its marginal cost.

5.2       Analysis when z is not contractible

We now solve the model for the case where the investment z is not contractible. As we
show, the resulting level of z is a monotonically decreasing function of d, and the Þrm
might even commit to choose the Þrst-best z by adopting the appropriate leverage
ratio. In general, however, because choosing a leverage ratio diﬀerent from d∗ also
has costs, a novel trade-oﬀ emerges and the Þrst-best z will not be implemented.
       We proceed by backward induction: when z is chosen, the leverage ratio d and
the worker’s initial wage w1 (d) have already been Þxed. So z is set to maximize the
Þrm’s continuation value, which is aﬀected by z through its eﬀect on the expected
labor retention costs,

                              w2 (d, z) = Uh − γz + γ(z − ∆U)d,                                  (15)
  22
    Notice that the marginal value of the z investment, µγ, is less than one because only quick
learners in winner Þrms enjoy the experience gain. As it will be clear, our results generalize as long
as the marginal valuations of the investments remain diﬀerent across worker types.

                                                      17
and the investment cost, C(z). Thus, ignoring constants in the objective function,
the Þrm solves
                                 max      γ(1 − d)z − C(z),
                                z∈[z,z]

which has the Þrst order condition

                                     (1 − d)γ = C 0 (z).                              (16)

For each possible value of d, this equation deÞnes the solution z = h(d), where, by the
implicit function theorem, h0 (d) = −γ/C 00 (z) < 0. This implies the following lemma.

Lemma 2 When the investment z is not contractible, its level h(d) is a decreasing
function of the Þrm’s leverage ratio d.

    Equation (16) captures an important feature of the analysis. In contrast to the
Þrst-best case, the investment z and the capital structure decision d are not separable.
SpeciÞcally, a more conservative capital structure leads the Þrm to invest more in its
relationship with the workers, because greater opacity makes retention wages more
sensitive to changes in expected experience gains. So the capital structure decision
can work as a commitment device, allowing the Þrm to set z at the appropriate level.
The use of such a device, however, is not costless because the leverage ratio which
implements the Þrst-best level of z is generally diﬀerent from the Þrst-best leverage
ratio d∗ .
    SpeciÞcally, the second-best leverage ratio, d∗∗ , is set taking into account its eﬀect
on the investment z, and thus solves

                           max X(d) + [γµh(d) − C(h(d))],                             (17)
                           d∈[0,1]


where we have substituted h(d) for z in the terms (in brackets) which account for
the eﬀect of the investment on labor costs and, thereby, on Þrm value. Under our

                                             18
assumptions, the objective function in the above maximization is quasi-concave so a
necessary and suﬃcient condition for a maximum is:

                         X 0 (d∗∗ ) = −h0 (d∗∗ )[γµ − C 0 (h(d∗∗ ))],                 (18)

which uniquely determines d∗∗ and, recursively, z ∗∗ = h(d∗∗ ).
   It is clear from (13) and (14) that, if h(d∗ ) = z ∗ , then d∗∗ = d∗ solves (18)
and, thus, the second-best solution coincides with the Þrst-best solution. Generally,
however, one of the following cases will arise:

  1. The Þrst-best leverage ratio d∗ induces a level of z lower than the Þrst-best level,
      z ∗ . In other words, d∗ makes the Þrm too transparent for the implementation
      of z ∗ . Then (18) is solved with a conservative capital structure, d∗∗ < d∗ , that
      partially corrects the problem of underinvestment in z: h(d∗∗ ) ∈ (h(d∗ ), z ∗ ).

  2. The Þrst-best leverage ratio d∗ induces a level of z that exceeds the Þrst-best
      level, z ∗ . That is, d∗ makes the Þrm too opaque for the implementation of z ∗ .
      Then (18) is solved for an aggressive capital structure, d∗∗ > d∗ , that partially
      corrects the problem of overinvestment in z: h(d∗∗ ) ∈ (z ∗ , h(d∗ )).

   A parameter that determines which of the above cases holds is µ, i.e., the pro-
portion of quick learners in the population of workers. SpeciÞcally, by comparing
(13) and (16), and noting that if h(d∗ ) = z ∗ then µ = µ∗ ≡ 1 − d∗ , we establish the
following result:


Proposition 3 When the proportion of quick learners in the population of workers is
above (below) a critical level µ∗ , the Þrm chooses a conservative (aggressive) leverage
ratio d and underinvests (overinvests) in z. Furthermore, as the proportion of quick
learners increases, the Þrm reduces its leverage ratio d and raises its z investment.

                                             19
       These results are related to the time inconsistency problem that aﬀects the decision
to invest in z. Forward-looking workers are willing to compensate the Þrm for their
expected experience gains by reducing their initial wages. However, the Þrm decides
on the investment z after the initial wages are already Þxed, and hence, it only
considers the eﬀect of z on retention wages. A more conservative capital structure
results in less transparency and, thus, a greater incentive to invest in z. Hence, by
selecting its capital structure, a Þrm commits to a speciÞc investment in z. When
the optimal z is high, and the Þrm anticipates a problem of underinvestment in z, it
can partially correct it by choosing a conservative capital structure. Similarly, if the
Þrm is ex post tempted to overinvest in z, it can mitigate the problem by choosing
an aggressive capital structure.23
       The second part of the proposition establishes that Þnancial conservatism increases
with the proportion of workers that can beneÞt from the z investment. This is because,
when workers are hired (and do not know their type), if they are more likely to be
quick learners, they are willing to accept larger initial wage cuts in exchange for the
expected experience gains, implying that the optimal z is higher.

5.3       Binding wealth constraints

We Þnalize this section with a brief discussion of the case in which the low value
of workers’ initial reservation utility, U , makes their wealth constraints binding (so
that w1 = 0). In this case, the future rents that workers appropriate under greater
transparency cannot be transferred back to the Þrm. Hence, in addition to the eﬀect
channelled through the investment z, the leverage ratio d has a direct eﬀect on the
  23
    To understand why it is possible to have incentives to overinvest as well as underinvest one
should note that although the quick learners beneÞt from a higher z, a higher z reduces second
period wages and, thus, reduces the rents appropriated by the slow learners. Notice that, as shown
by (14), the ex ante optimal z increases with the proportion of quick learners, µ, while, as shown by
(16), the ex-post choice of z does not directly depend on µ but on the leverage ratio d.


                                                 20
Þrm’s total labor costs, as already discussed in Section 4. Since in this case the initial
wage is set at the minimum level, the ex ante value and the continuation value of the
Þrm (which are the relevant criteria for the choice of d and z, respectively) coincide
and equal
                                X(d) − w2 (d, z) − C(z),                             (19)

where w2 (d, z) is given by (15). Maximizing expression (19) with respect to d and z
leads to the following proposition:


Proposition 4 When workers’ wealth constraints are binding, the Þrm always chooses
a conservative leverage ratio, d˜ < d∗ , which is independent of the proportion of quick
learners in the population of workers. Over- and under-investment in z are possible.


    This results leads us back to the logic of Proposition 2. When workers’ wealth
constraints are binding, all labor costs are incurred after the investment z takes
place so the capital structure decision plays no role as a commitment device. The
endogeneity of z does not alter the conclusions reached about the capital structure
choice under exogenous z: Þnancial conservatism makes the Þrm less transparent,
which by reducing the wages required to retain the workers, saves on total expected
labor costs.


6     Workers’ eﬀort

Previous sections identify two cases in which transparency reduces Þrm value: either
by increasing labor costs in the presence of workers’ wealth constraints, or by altering
the Þrm’s incentive to undertake investments that enhance the workers’ human capi-
tal. In this section, we complete the analysis by considering the case of moral hazard
on the workers’ side. We show that an additional negative eﬀect of transparency on


                                           21
Þrm value can arise when workers exert some unobservable eﬀort that increases both
Þrm output and the value of their human capital. SpeciÞcally, under certain condi-
tions, transparency hurts Þrm value because it leads to reductions in eﬀort when the
Þrm is revealed to be a loser.
       As in previous sections, we show that whether or not workers’ wealth constraints
bind is important to determine the eﬀects of transparency on Þrm value. Therefore,
we Þrst analyze the scenario in which workers’ wealth constraints are binding (so that
the total wage bill is determined by the retention wage bill) and then examine the
scenario in which they are not. In both scenarios we will assume, for simplicity, that
the experience gain z is exogenous and that, the eﬀort problem aﬀects both worker
types equally.
       SpeciÞcally, we consider a setting like the one described in Sections 3 and 4: the
Þrm is interested in retaining some previously trained workers. In addition, we assume
that, after the Þrm’s type is possibly revealed at t = 2, each worker makes a costly
non-observable eﬀort decision e which aﬀects both the Þrm’s output and the worker’s
human capital. SpeciÞcally, we consider a representative worker, whose contribution
to the Þrm’s output is Y (e), where Y 0 > 0 and Y 00 < 0.24 Eﬀort has a positive eﬀect
on the worker’s human capital, increasing his human capital by e, but only if the Þrm
is a leader. Finally, eﬀort has a cost K(e) to the worker, where K 0 > 0 and K 00 > 0.
       The worker chooses e so as to maximize the value of his expected human capital
gains net of the cost K(e), but fails to internalize the eﬀect of eﬀort on Þrm output,
Y (e), so his eﬀort is below the Þrst-best level. Formally, in each state s, es ≡ arg
maxe πs e − K(e), where πs denotes the probability that the Þrm is a leader in such
  24
    In this context, if each individual worker’s contribution to Þrm output is not observable, free
rider problems make performance-based compensation ineﬀective in providing workers with incen-
tives for exerting eﬀort. Hence, we abstain from explicitly analyzing the role of performance-based
compensation.



                                                22
a state (so πg = 1, πb = 0, and πu = γ). Clearly, eb < eu < eg .
   As a Þrst step in determining how the worker’s eﬀort choice aﬀects our results, we
demonstrate the following lemma:

Lemma 3 If K 000 > 0 (= 0), then the worker’s average eﬀort under transparency,
γeg + (1 − γ)eb , is smaller than (exactly as large as) under opaqueness, eu .

   Transparency aﬀects workers’ eﬀort and, hence, Þrm value through three diﬀerent
channels. The Þrst channel relates to the average level of eﬀort, which by Lemma 3,
depends on the convexity of the function that describes the worker’s cost of eﬀort,
K(e). The other two channels have to do with the eﬀect of transparency on the
allocation of eﬀort across states. From the perspective of the worker, eﬀort is better
allocated when the Þrm is transparent, i.e., the worker increases eﬀort when the Þrm
is a leader (and the human capital gain is positive) and reduces it when the Þrm is
a loser (and eﬀort does not enhance his human capital). However, if transparency
makes eﬀort diﬀer across states, but keeps it the same on average, the concavity of
Y (e) implies that expected output will be reduced.
   To evaluate which of the eﬀects of transparency dominate, we Þrst consider the
case in which workers’ wealth constraints are binding: the Þrm’s total expected labor
costs are determined by the expected retention wages and, therefore, is independent
of the anticipated eﬀect of the worker’s eﬀort on his ex ante utility. In this case, the
eﬀect of eﬀort on the Þrm’s expected output clearly dominates:

Proposition 5 If K 000 ≥ 0 and workers’ wealth constraints are binding, transparency
reduces Þrm value.

   Notice that Proposition 5 provides a suﬃcient condition, K 000 ≥ 0, for the expected
output eﬀect to be positive. If K 000 < 0, then transparency produces two opposite

                                          23
eﬀects: (i) an increase in average eﬀort, and (ii) an increase in eﬀort variability across
states. Due to the concavity of Y (e), the second eﬀect is a source of potential expected
output losses. Thus, with K 000 < 0, the overall eﬀect of transparency depends on the
relative curvatures of K(e) and Y (e).
   When workers’ wealth constraints are non-binding, the Þrm’s total expected labor
costs reßect the need to compensate workers for their reservation utility and their
eﬀort costs, but are reduced by the value of workers’ expected experience and human
capital gains. In Section 4, where adverse selection was the only concern for workers’
retention, we established that if wealth constraints do not bind, transparency was
irrelevant for Þrm value. However, when transparency aﬀects workers’ incentives, it
reduces Þrm value if and only if the following inequality holds:

  Y (eu )—[γY (eg )+(1—γ)Y (eb )] > {γ[eg —K(eg )]+(1—γ)[eb —K(eb )]}—[γeu —K(eu )].     (20)

To explain this condition, notice that the LHS is the diﬀerence between the Þrm’s
expected output under opacity and transparency, respectively, and the RHS is the
diﬀerence between the worker’s net gain from his eﬀort decision (human capital gain
net of the cost of eﬀort) under transparency and opacity, respectively. In general,
whether (20) holds or not depends on the relative curvature of the functions Y (e)
and K(e).
   In order to gain more intuition, consider the quadratic case with Y (e) = y(e− h2 e2 )
and K(e) = k2 e2 , where y, h, and k are positive constants. In this case, we have eu = γk ,
eg = k1 , and eb = 0, and (20) becomes:
                                            Ã       !
                                 γ(1 − γ)       yh
                                                   −1 >0                                 (21)
                                    2k           k

Hence:

Proposition 6 In the quadratic case with Y (e) = y(e − h2 e2 ) and K(e) =              k 2
                                                                                       2
                                                                                         e,   if

                                            24
workers’ wealth constraints are not binding, transparency reduces Þrm value if and
only if yh > k.


    In words, transparency reduces Þrm value if the curvature of the (concave) output-
eﬀort schedule is larger than the curvature of the (convex) cost-eﬀort schedule. In
other words, the relative value of transparency over opacity is reduced if output eﬀects
are sizeable (high y), if output exhibits strongly decreasing returns to eﬀort (high h),
and if eﬀort costs are small (low k). Intuitively, transparency is especially costly when
human capital gains associated with working for a leader are high relative to eﬀort
costs and when eﬀort has a major eﬀect on output. When this is the case, workers will
exert substantial eﬀort whenever there is a positive chance that the Þrm is a leader,
which increases output considerably relative to the case where the Þrm is known to
be a loser.


7     Capital structure and underinvestment

In previous sections, we focused on the dynamics of the relationship between the
Þrm and its workers, providing a microfoundation for the cost of transparency. In
this section, we take the existence of these costs as given and consider the situation
where the Þrm has an investment opportunity that, depending on its initial capital
structure, may require the Þrm to raise external capital. We show that, to avoid
the expected costs associated with the information that is generated in the process
of raising external capital, the Þrm may pass up positive NPV investments. As in
Myers and Majluf (1984), the Þrm, anticipating this possibility, may choose a more
conservative capital structure (e.g., one that provides more Þnancial slack).
    Suppose that at date t = 1 the Þrm generates a random cash ßow F̃ , faces a
repayment obligation D, arising from its previously chosen leverage ratio, and receives


                                           25
a positive NPV investment opportunity that requires an outlay of I that yields AI >
I, at t = 2. Assume, for simplicity, that the access to external capital markets reveals
the Þrm’s type with probability one and, hence, increases the Þrm’s expected labor
retention costs in the way analyzed in Section 3. Finally, to rule out debt overhang
problems à la Myers (1977), assume that the Þrm’s expected output at t = 3 allows
it to meet all relevant Þnancial obligations and wages.
   Clearly, if F̃ > D + I, the Þrm will be able to both pay D and invest I without
relying on external Þnance, so the investment will be initiated. At the other extreme,
if F̃ < D, the payment of D will require access to external capital markets even
without investing, so funding the investment will entail no additional transparency
cost and, hence, will be initiated. In the intermediate cases with F̃ ∈ (D, D + I),
however, the Þrm can meet its debt payments D with internally generated cash,
but investing I requires external Þnancing that would not otherwise be needed. In
this case, the transparency cost generated from raising external capital may exceed
the positive NPV of the investment opportunity, leading the Þrm to pass up the
investment. SpeciÞcally, by Lemma 1, transparency implies a rise in expected labor
retention costs of γ(z − ∆U ) so we can conclude that the Þrm will undertake its
investment opportunity if and only if the intrinsic NPV of the investment, (A − 1)I,
exceeds this extra cost.
   If instead of having a Þxed size, the investment can be proportionally scaled within
an interval [0, I ∗ ], then for intermediate realizations of F̃ the optimal solution to the
investment problem may consist of investing as much as can be internally Þnanced,
i.e., F̃ − D. More precisely:


Proposition 7 Suppose the investment opportunity can be developed at any scale
I ∈ [0, I ∗ ], yielding AI. Then, there is a critical value F = max{D, D + I ∗ − γ(z−∆U
                                                                                   A−1
                                                                                        )
                                                                                          }


                                            26
such that: (i) if F̃ ∈ (F , D +I ∗ ), the Þrm invests as much as can be internally funded,
F̃ − D, and (ii) otherwise, it invests at full scale, I ∗ .


       Since the incidence of the underinvestment problem is positively related to D
and thus to the Þrm’s initial leverage, an implication of Proposition 7 is that Þrms
with good future investment prospects may try to avoid the underinvestment problem
by choosing conservative capital structures that provide them with suﬃcient Þnancial
slack. Although this implication is similar to Myers and Majluf (1984), the underlying
problem in our model cannot, in contrast, be solved by ex ante committing the
Þrm to issuing equity or to maximize total market value.25 Only a commitment
that allows the Þrm to issue equity without generating information would solve the
problem. But this commitment is hardly feasible, since it would involve third parties
such as underwriters and investors whose own interests (and Þduciary duties) call for
obtaining information about Þrms that issue equity.


8        Discussion

We organize the discussion of our results in three parts. First, we discuss how the
intuition developed in the paper can be extended to stakeholders other than workers.
Second, we elaborate on the key assumption that information is generated about a
Þrm when it goes to capital markets. Finally, we discuss some empirical implications
of the analysis.
  25
    These commitments might take the form of a contract obligation by the Þrm to issue equity when
certain trigger events (such as a deterioration of Þnancial ratios) occur. Alternatively, as noted by
Dybvig and Zender (1991) and Hart (1993), Þrms might oﬀer their managers compensation contracts
based on total value rather equity value. The dilution of extant equityholders emphasized by Myers
and Majluf (1984) would then become relevant to the managers when deciding on equity issuance.




                                                 27
8.1    Stakeholders other than workers

Our model focuses on the dynamics of the relationship between the Þrm and its
workers. However, the intuition we have developed is more general and can be applied
to almost any situation in which information about a Þrm’s type inßuences the terms
of trade between the Þrm and its stakeholders. To illustrate the generality of our
argument, this subsection discusses the relation between a Þrm and its customers. As
we argue, there is a direct parallel between a situation in which customers develop
human capital using a Þrm’s product and one in which workers develop human capital
working for a Þrm.
   To understand this, consider a Þrm that, at some initial date, sells a product like
a computer system to two classes of customers (sophisticated and unsophisticated)
who can purchase an upgraded version of the system at some future date. If the
Þrm is a leading innovator, future generations of the system can improve in ways that
beneÞt the Þrm’s more sophisticated customers, who can better take advantage of the
new improvements. However, if the Þrm is not viewed as a leading innovator, these
sophisticated customers continue to buy the system from the Þrm at the second date
only if the price of the system is reduced. Unsophisticated customers, who are not
interested in the improvements, are not willing to pay as much for the system as the
sophisticated customers if the Þrm is a leading innovator. However, since these less
sophisticated customers are not concerned about the improvements, and Þnd it more
diﬃcult to change systems, they are willing to pay more for the system in the event
that the Þrm is not a leading innovator.
   With minor adaptations, the analysis in Section 3 can be applied to show that
in order to sell the system to both sophisticated and unsophisticated customers, the
Þrm prices the product so that the sophisticated customers realize consumer surplus



                                           28
when the Þrm is revealed to be an innovator and unsophisticated customers realize
consumer surplus when the Þrm is revealed not to be an innovator. In this case, it
follows that the average price of the system across the states in which the Þrm’s type
is revealed, is lower than in the state in which it remains unknown. In other words,
greater transparency leads to lower expected future sale prices. From here, the logic
of Section 4 can also be applied.
   This parallel can also be extended to the analysis in Sections 5 and 6. As in
Section 5, since the ability of Þrms to capture the beneÞts of their innovations is
aﬀected by their transparency, their incentive to invest in innovations that beneÞt
their sophisticated customers is aﬀected by their capital structure. In addition, fol-
lowing the logic described in Section 6, transparency can also aﬀect their customers’
incentives to devote time to learn how to use the system more eﬀectively. This can be
particularly important in situations in which the expertise developed by one customer
enhances the value of the product to other potential customers, e.g., when network
externalities exist.

8.2    Capital markets and information revelation

Since the link between raising external equity and information generation is such a
key assumption in our model, it warrants additional discussion. There are two poten-
tial interpretations of this assumption. One is that raising capital provides outsiders
with the opportunity to scrutinize the Þrm. In other words, raising capital may force
Þrms to disclose pieces of internal information which, when combined with other in-
formation known by outsiders, provide a clear assessment of the Þrm’s prospects. The
second interpretation is that raising capital gives outsiders the incentive to scrutinize
the Þrm. This incentive may stem from the legal mandate for investment banks to in-




                                           29
vestigate Þrms (i.e., perform due diligence) before issuing their shares.26 Beyond this
legal mandate, several reasons, including potential fraud that can arise when Þrms
raise capital, provide incentives for investment bankers to investigate Þrms when they
raise new funds.27 Although, for the purpose of our model, either interpretation is
appropriate, most of our discussion focuses on the second interpretation.
       Although previous arguments suggest that, in the process of raising capital, the
generation of some information may be unavoidable, in practice Þrms may try to
regulate the extent to which information is generated when they raise capital. Firms
can and often do issue equity without going through an underwriter. For example,
they can privately place their shares or they can shelf register their shares and then
slowly sell them in the market without going through the book-building process.28
       The existing evidence suggests that Þrms issue equity via private placements in
situations where scrutiny is likely to be costly. For example, Hertzel, et al. (2003)
Þnd that Þrms that issue equity privately have generally done poorly in the recent
past. To the extent that the asymmetry between the beneÞts of revealing good
news and the costs of revealing bad news is more pronounced when Þrms are doing
poorly, this observation is consistent with our model. However, private placements
cannot be viewed as a costless mechanism for issuing equity without scrutiny. Indeed,
as documented by Hertzel et al. (2003), shares that are privately placed sell for a
substantial discount (in their sample of about 16%). Moreover, although information
  26
     For instance, the Securities Act of 1933 (Section II (b)) holds the investment banker involved
in new securities issues liable unless he can prove that “he had, after reasonable investigation,
reasonable ground to believe and did believe, at the time such part of the investigation statement
became eﬀective, that the statements therein were true.”
  27
     In addition to investigating the Þrm on their own, they generally go through a book-building
process where they solicit and aggregate information from investors.
  28
     Blackwell, et al. (1990) show evidence that underwriters require a “premium” for shelf issues
which is higher with Þrms with higher expected due diligence liabilities. They interpret these Þndings
as suggestive that underwriters see shelf registration as eroding due diligence and, price this erosion
accordingly.



                                                  30
is not publicly revealed from the private sale of shares, the buyers generally get a
substantial amount of information from the issuing Þrms and generally perform their
own investigation.
       It is much less likely that Þrms use shelf registrations to avoid the costs of market
scrutiny. First, very little equity is issued in this way, and casual empiricism suggests
that shelf registration is used mainly by the most established Þrms. Second, under-
writers are still subject to some legal liability (which may explain why only the most
established Þrms use this option). Furthermore, regardless of how the new shares are
issued, potential buyers must be induced to add them to their portfolios.29 Perhaps
the absence of an underwriter implies that insuﬃcient information is provided in a
centralized manner, but this does not necessarily mean that no information is pro-
duced. Indeed, some investors have their own due diligence requirements and may
thus be induced to collect the information individually.
       Finally, an equity issue may generate information simply because it attracts at-
tention to the Þrm. In particular, an equity issue may work as a focal point, which
concentrates the attention of investors who may Þnd it easier to evaluate compa-
nies when other investors are also evaluating the company. In this sense, an equity
issue may be no diﬀerent than a purely cosmetic event like a stock split, which in-
duces investors to collect information only because they believe other investors will
be investigating the Þrm.30
  29
     Gibson et al. (2003) present evidence that institutional investors purchase securities (i.e., in-
crease their holdings) around secondary equity oﬀerings. This evidence is suggestive because insti-
tutions are better positioned than individual investors to demand information from Þrms and their
investment bankers and have the resources and expertise to investigate the issuers themselves.
  30
     Grinblatt, et al. (1984) show evidence that suggests that Þrms may split their stock to signal
that they want to be scrutinized.




                                                 31
8.3       Empirical implications

The capital structure choice in our model is determined by the expected negative ef-
fects of information revelation along with the costs and beneÞts of debt Þnancing that
have traditionally been considered in the literature.31 In the analysis, the negative
eﬀects of information revelation are a function of (i) the proportion of workers (or
other stakeholders) who acquire human capital when working for an innovative Þrm,
(ii) whether there are constraints that require the Þrm to pay a minimum wage, (iii)
whether Þrms need to make non-veriÞable investments to train their workers, and (iv)
whether workers require eﬀort to develop human capital.
       Our analysis generates cross-sectional and time-series implications that provide
alternative interpretations of a number of empirical Þndings as well as new impli-
cations that are potentially testable. The cross-sectional implications arise because
the eﬀects described in this paper apply to some Þrms more than others. In partic-
ular, our model suggests that leverage should be lower for Þrms with the following
characteristics:


   1. Firms in industries where being at the “cutting edge” and being a technical
         laggard makes a big diﬀerence. This is particularly the case when employees
         (and other stakeholders) develop signiÞcant human capital by working with
         leaders, but not with laggards.

   2. Firms whose stakeholders can make discretionary investments (e.g., employee
         eﬀort) that increase Þrm productivity. This eﬀect is especially important when
         the accumulation of human capital or experience gains provide the primary
         source of motivation for the investments.
  31
    Although our model focuses on the negative aspects of scrutiny, one can envision an extension
of our model where Þrms issue equity to invite scrutiny in situations where scrutiny is beneÞcial.



                                               32
  3. Firms which are likely to have positive investment opportunities in the future.


   Our model suggests that Þrms with the above characteristics will experience sig-
niÞcant losses if unfavorable information about their capabilities are revealed. These
Þrms will thus Þnd it especially costly to be scrutinized during downturns (i.e., when
their ability to generate cash ßow is low), and will thus prefer low leverage ratios
that allow them to avoid external capital markets in these situations. Hence, our
model is consistent with the observation that technology companies, for which these
concerns are especially important, tend to have much lower leverage ratios than com-
modity companies, which are likely to be less concerned about the perceptions of their
stakeholders.
   Since our theory was developed to explain why Þrms tend to avoid equity of-
fers during downturns, it is useful to consider counterexamples to this observation.
SpeciÞcally, banks, insurance companies, and utilities do on occasion issue equity
during downturns. These are all examples of regulated entities that are subject to
external scrutiny regardless of whether they issue equity. As an interesting anecdotal
example, many of the merchant energy companies chose to issue equity after Enron’s
bankruptcy. This is again a case of Þrms that were being scrutinized anyway taking
steps to shore up their balance sheets during a downturn. Finally, as we mentioned
above, those Þrms that issue equity during downturns that are not already scrutinized
often issue the equity privately, to avoid the public scrutiny.
   It is also interesting to consider the timing of equity issues. Korajckzyk et al.
(1991) Þnd that Þrms tend to issue securities right after accounting information is
released, precisely the time in which the market is better informed about the Þrm. In
addition, Chang et. al (2003) Þnd that Þrms that are covered by more equity analysts
tend to issue equity more than Þrms with less analyst coverage. However, when those


                                          33
Þrms with less analyst coverage do issue equity, they generally issue larger amounts.
While the literature has interpreted these and related Þndings as evidence of adverse
selection eﬀects, transparency concerns can provide an alternative interpretation.


9        Concluding remarks

We have developed a simple model where a Þrm’s proÞtability depends on how it is
perceived by its stakeholders.32 If stakeholders perceive that the Þrm is no longer a
leader, the Þrm will Þnd it more expensive to retain its customers and employees, and
this will, in turn, lower the Þrm’s proÞts.
       Our model shows that the eﬀects of favorable and unfavorable information about
the Þrm’s prospects may be asymmetric. SpeciÞcally, the negative eﬀect of unfavor-
able information may exceed the positive eﬀect of positive information. As a result,
during downturns, when uncertainty about the Þrm’s prospects is high, Þrms Þnd it
costly to take actions, like issuing equity, that generate information about its type.
       The link between transparency concerns and Þnancing choices explored in this pa-
per complements the adverse selection model considered by Myers and Majluf (1984).
In particular, both models explain the observation that U.S. corporations tend to be
relatively conservatively Þnanced, and both explain why Þrms are often reluctant to
issue equity.33 An advantage of the model over Myers and Majluf is that we can ex-
plain why Þrms choose not to take steps that allow them to commit to equity issues
  32
     Titman (1984) also suggests that stakeholder considerations inßuence the Þrm’s capital structure
choices. In Titman’s model, capital structure choices aﬀect the likelihood of bankruptcy, control
changes and the Þrm liquidation decision which can impose costs on stakeholders. In contrast, in
the model in this paper, capital structure aﬀects whether information is revealed about the Þrm
which, in turn, aﬀects the Þrm’s willingness to make investments that beneÞt their stakeholders,
as well as the willingness of stakeholders to expend resources (e.g., workers’ eﬀort) that beneÞt the
Þrm.
  33
     See Graham (2000) for an estimation of the reduction in value due to conservatism and Minton
and Wruck (2001) for an empirical analysis of the main features of conservatively Þnanced Þrms.



                                                 34
when they are doing poorly. In contrast to Myers and Majluf, our model cannot ex-
plain the negative returns associated with equity oﬀers, which suggests that adverse
selection clearly plays some role in the equity issuance choice.
       Perhaps, a model that combines the insights of Myers and Majluf and our model
may increase our understanding of announcement returns. For example, although
announcement returns are generally negative, there are a number of cases where stock
prices react very favorably to the announcement of an equity issue. One possibility is
that investors interpret such announcements as indicating that management welcomes
more scrutiny, which would be the case when they believe that favorable information
is likely to be generated by the underwriting process. This is an issue that warrants
further empirical as well as theoretical research.
       Finally, although our emphasis has been on the eﬀect of capital structure on
information revelation, our analysis can also be applied to other choices that can
aﬀect a Þrm’s transparency. For example, a Þrm may put in place a more detailed
accounting system or hire a more competent auditor, or it may take other actions
that increase the attention of market analysts. In addition, Þrms may avoid actions,
in addition to raising capital, that generate information. Examples of these actions
could include the termination of a CEO, changing accounting and investment banking
relationships, and forming strategic partnerships and mergers that require extensive
due diligence.34 Extending the logic of our model to consider these other actions is
an interesting area for future research.
  34
     For instance Branderburger and Nalebuﬀ (1996), p. 214, discuss the case of Continental Insur-
ance whose board decided to not entertain a lucrative takeover oﬀer from CNA that was conditional
on due diligence. The board was concerned about the revealed information “including the poten-
tial adverse eﬀects a possible decision by CNA (following such due diligence) not to make an oﬀer
could have on market and rating agencies’ views of the company and on the willingness of insurance
partners to proceed with transactions” [Continental’s proxy statement, March 29, 1995].




                                               35
10     Appendix: On the possibility of long-term con-
       tracts

In this appendix, we revisit the scenarios in which, according to the analysis in Sec-
tions 3, 4 and 5, transparency concerns distort a Þrm’s capital structure decision.
   In the scenario in which workers’ wealth constraints are binding and experience
gains are exogenous (Section 4), the question is whether a long-term contract can
isolate the Þrm’s total expected labor costs from the eﬀects of transparency, making
the distortion of the Þrm’s capital structure unnecessary. The short answer is no,
except in the trivial–and unrealistic–case in which workers can fully commit to
work for the Þrm up to termination. In such a case, workers would accept a total
intertemporal wage of w when hired and the Þrm’s capital structure decision would
be determined by the standard tradeoﬀs.
   Notice that even if workers cannot directly commit to work for the Þrm for more
than one period, the equivalent implication can be obtained by introducing some
pecuniary penalty, L, imposed on workers who depart early. The penalty L reduces
workers’ retention wage to w2 = w2 (d) − L only if their initial wage is (at least)
w1 = L, in which case, the total expected labor costs per worker would be w1 + w2 =
L + [w2 (d) − L] = w2 (d), as in the case without penalties analyzed in Section 4.
   In the scenario considered in Section 5, i.e., non-binding wealth constraints and
endogenous z, long-term contracts can improve matters only if they contribute to a
better alignment between the Þrm’s ex post incentive to invest in z (that depends on
the sensitivity of retention wages to z) and the objective of ex ante value maximiza-
tion (that calls for minimizing the sum of labor and z costs). However, long-term
wage contracts, do not address the fundamental non-contractibility of z. They either
preserve the original sensitivity of w2 to z or fully eliminate it, in which case the Þrm


                                           36
has no incentive to invest in z.35
       This polar no-investment solution is surely inferior to the solution without long-
term contracts characterized in Section 5 if the proportion of quick learners in the
population of workers is above the critical level µ∗ since, in such a case, the Þrm
already underinvests in z (see Proposition 3); investing zero would simply aggravate
the problem. In contrast, if the proportion of quick learners in the population of
workers is below µ∗ (so that the Þrm overinvests in z), it is possible that, by fully
eliminating the sensitivity of the retention wages to z, Þrm value increases relative
to the solution characterized in (18). Actually, in this case, the optimal investment
in z lies somewhere between the amount invested when all of the workers receive
either short-term or long-term contracts. As a result, the Þrm could implement the
Þrst-best investment level by oﬀering long-term contracts to some of the workers and
short-term contracts to the rest. In addition, this argument suggests that the problem
of overinvestment in z (and the remedy based on an aggressive capital structure) is
less pervasive than the problem of underinvestment in z (and the remedy based on a
conservative capital structure).




  35
    Indeed, the sensitivity of w2 to z can be eliminated by either committing the Þrm to a very high
retention wage, so that workers are willing to stay in all states, irrespective of the value of z, or by
Þxing a very high penalty for the workers who leave early, so that workers are willing to stay at a
zero retention wage in all states, irrespective of the value of z. In either case, because w2 does not
depend on z, the Þrm loses its incentive to invest in z, regardless of its capital structure choice.




                                                  37
References

[1] Altinkiliç O. and R. S. Hansen (2003 forthcoming), Discounting and underpricing
   in seasoned equity oﬀers, Journal of Financial Economics.

[2] Blackwell, D., W. Marr, and M. Spivey, (1990), Shelf registration and the reduced
   due diligence argument: Implications of the underwriter certiÞcation and the
   implicit insurance hypotheses, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,
   25, 245-59.

[3] Brandenburger, A and B. Nalebuﬀ (1996), Co-opetition, Currency and Double-
   day, New York.

[4] Boot, A. and A. Thakor (1993), Security design, Journal of Finance, 48, 1349-78.

[5] Chang, X., S. Dasgupta and G. Hilary (2003), Analyst following and capital
   structure, University of Hong Kong Working Paper.

[6] Dybvig, P. and J. Zender (1991), Capital structure and dividend irrelevance with
   Asymmetric Information, Review of Financial Studies 4, 201-19.

[7] Dye, R. (2001), An evaluation of “Essays on Disclosure” and the disclosure Liter-
   ature in Accounting, Journal of Accounting and Economics 32, 1-3, pp. 181-235.

[8] Easterbrook, F. (1984), Two agency-cost explanations of dividends, American
   Economic Review 74, 650-659.

[9] Fulghieri, P. and D. Lukin, (2001) Information production, dilution costs, and
   optimal security design, Journal of Financial Economics, 61, 3-42.




                                        38
[10] Gibson, S., A. SaÞeddine, and R. Sonti (2003 forthcoming) Smart investments
    by smart money: evidence from seasoned equity oﬀerings, Journal of Financial
    Economics.

[11] Graham, J. (2000), How big are the tax beneÞts of debt?, Journal of Finance
    55, 1901-42.

[12] Grinblatt, M.S., Masulis, R.W. and S. Titman (1984) The Valuation Eﬀects of
    Stock Splits and Stock Dividends, Journal of Financial Economics, 13, 461-90.

[13] Grossman, S., and O. Hart (1986), The costs and beneÞts of ownership: A theory
    of vertical and lateral integration, Journal of Political Economy 94, 691-719.

[14] Hansen, R. and P. Torregrosa (1992), Underwriter Compensation and Corporate
    Monitoring, Journal of Finance 47, 1537-55.

[15] Hart, O. (1993), Theories of optimal capital structure: A managerial discretion
    perspective. In Margaret Blair (ed.), The Deal Decade: What Takeovers and
    Leveraged Buyouts Mean for Corporate Governance. Washington: Brookings In-
    stitution.

[16] Hart, O. (1995), Firms, contracts and Þnancial structure, Clarendon Press Ox-
    ford.

[17] Hart, O. and J. Moore (1995), Debt and seniority: An analysis of the role of hard
    claims in constraining management, American Economic Review, 85, 567-85.

[18] Hertzel, M., M. Lemmon, J. Linck, and L. Rees (2002), Long-run performance
    following private placements of equity, Journal of Finance, 52, 2595-2617.

[19] Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole (1993), Market liquidity and performance monitor-
    ing, Journal of Political Economy, 101, 678-709.

                                         39
[20] Jensen, M. (1986), Agency costs of free cash ßow, corporate Þnance, and
    takeovers, American Economic Review, 76, 323-29.

[21] Korajczyk, R., D. Lucas and R. McDonald (1991), The eﬀect of information
    releases on the pricing and timing of equity issues, Review of Financial Studies,
    4, 685-708.

[22] Maskin, E., and J. Riley (1984), Monopoly with incomplete information, Rand
    Journal of Economics 15, 171-96.

[23] Minton, B.A. and K. H. Wruck (2001), Financial conservatism: Evidence on
    capital structure from low leverage Þrms, mimeo The Ohio State University.

[24] Myers, S. (1977), Determinants of corporate borrowing, Journal of Financial
    Economics 5, 147-175.

[25] Myers, S., and N. Majluf (1984), Corporate Þnancing and investment decisions
    when Þrms have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial
    Economics 13, 187-221.

[26] Perotti, E. and E.-L. von Thadden (2003), Strategic transparency and informed
    trading: Will capital market integration force convergence of corporate gover-
    nance?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 38, 61-85.

[27] Subrahmanyam, A., and S. Titman (1999), The going public decision and the
    development of Þnancial markets, Journal of Finance 54, 1045-1082.

[28] Swartz, M. and S. Watkings (2003), Power failure: The inside story of the col-
    lapse of Enron, Doubleday, New York.

[29] Teoh, S., (1997), Information Disclosure and Voluntary Contributions to Public
    Goods, RAND Journal of Economics, 28, 385-406.

                                        40
[30] Titman, S., (1984), The eﬀect of capital structure on a Þrm’s liquidation decision,
    Journal of Financial Economics 13, 137-151.

[31] Verrecchia, R. (2001), Essays on disclosure, Journal of Accounting and Eco-
    nomics 32, 97-180.




                                          41
