                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             FIRM LOCATION AND THE CREATION
                            AND UTILIZATION OF HUMAN CAPITAL

                                            Andres Almazan
                                            Adolfo de Motta
                                            Sheridan Titman

                                         Working Paper 10106
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10106


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2003




We would like to thank seminar participants at Carnegie Mellon University, CEMFI, Columbia University,
UBC, USC, and University of Texas and to Aydogan Alti, Ty Callahan and Frederic Robert-Nicoud for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Andres Almazan, Adolfo de Motta, Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Firm Location and the Creation and Utilization of Human Capital
Andres Almazan, Adolfo de Motta, and Sheridan Titman
NBER Working Paper No. 10106
November 2003
JEL No. R3, L2

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper presents a theory of location choice that draws on insights from the incomplete contracts

and investment flexibility (real option) literatures. We provide conditions under which human capital

is more efficiently created and better utilized within industrial clusters that contain similar firms.

Our analysis indicates that location choices are influenced by the extent to which training costs are

borne by firms versus employees as well as by the uncertainty about future productivity shocks and

the ability of firms to modify the scale of their operations. Extensions of our model consider, among

other things, endogenous technological choices by firms in clusters and how behavioral biases (i.e.,

managerial overconfidence about their firms' prospects) can affect firms' location choices.

Andres Almazan
University of Texas at Austin
andres.almazan@bus.utexas.edu

Adolfo de Motta
McGill University
adolfo.demotta@mcgill.ca

Sheridan Titman
Department of Finance
The University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1179
and NBER
titman@mail.utexas.edu
1         Introduction

One of the fundamental issues in economics relates to the location of production.
Where Þrms and industries locate is a primary determinant of the economic growth
of both regional and national economies. These choices aﬀect the design of our cities
as well as the pattern of trade between nations.
        This paper examines the location choice of Þrms within knowledge-based indus-
tries (e.g., software and pharmaceutical development). SpeciÞcally, we consider the
incentives of these Þrms to locate either together, within geographical clusters, or in
a number of geographically separate regions. The issue of industrial clustering dates
back at least to Marshall (1890) and has received substantial attention in the recent
literature.1 By focusing on transportation costs and exogenous natural advantages,
the early literature explains why Þrms in some industries tend to locate in a number
of geographically separate regions.2 This literature, however, is much less applicable
to knowledge-based Þrms whose products are almost costless to transport and which
employ very little in the way of resources other than human capital.3 More applicable
are the arguments that focus on the advantages of clustering that arise because of
the beneÞts of a more active market for skilled labor and the potential for knowledge
spillovers.
        The discussion in most of the recent literature, which points to Silicon Valley
    1
     There is an extensive urban economics literature that addresses location issues for generic in-
dustries. For excellent reviews see Fujita, Krugman and Venables (1999), Fujita and Thisse (2002)
and Duranton and Puga (2003).
   2
     Ellison and Glaeser (1999) Þnd that proxies related to natural advantages can explain roughly
20% of their empirical measures of agglomeration.
   3
     Abstracting from transportation costs seems particularly suitable to explain location in
knowledge-based industries. Moreover, Glaeser and Kohlhase (2003) have reported that transporta-
tion costs for manufacturing goods have fallen by over 90% in the last century, and argue that, to a
large extent, the world is better characterized as a place where “it is essentially free to move goods,
but expensive to move people.” This suggests that the issues that we discuss here may be more
broadly applicable.



                                                  1
as the quintessential example, is that strong economic forces lead knowledge-based
industries to cluster.4 However, this literature generally ignores those cases of suc-
cessful knowledge-based Þrms that locate away from industrial clusters. The most
notable case is Microsoft, which became the industry leader after locating in Seattle,
which at the time was not a center for software development. Another notable case
is Nations-Bank, a North Carolina Bank which became one of the largest banks in
the U.S. after taking over Bank of America.5
       The model developed in this paper is consistent with the Silicon Valley phenomena
as well as with the observation that some knowledge-based Þrms choose to locate on
their own. The model is based on the idea that a key distinction between locating
within a cluster rather than in isolation has to do with the competitiveness of the
market for skilled labor. SpeciÞcally, since we assume that it is costly for workers to
change locations, an isolated Þrm can become a monopsonist in the market for the
specialized labor while, within a cluster, workers with industry speciÞc skills can sell
their labor in a competitive labor market. As Manes and Andrews (1994, p. 120)
describe it, the structure of labor markets played a central role in Microsoft’s location
decision:

         “Paul Allen increasingly argued for a move back to familiar Seattle turf.
         Hiring might be simpler in Silicon Valley, but keeping employees would
         clearly be harder, a major consideration in a business where the primary
         assets walk out the door every night (...) The tremendous demand for
         their services had made Bay Area engineers notoriously Þckle; at the Þrst
         sign of dissatisfaction, they would Þnd a position across the street or check
         out a ‘job fair’ brimming with oﬀers.”
   4
     In addition to the above cited papers in the economics literature, there is also a discussion of
these issues in the management literature. In particular, see Porter (1990). See also Saxenian (1994)
for a forceful discussion of these issues in the case of Silicon Valley.
   5
     Ellison and Glaeser (1997) document that while a slight degree of concentration is widespread,
the more extreme concentration of industries such as automobile and computer exists only in a
smaller subset of industries.


                                                 2
       As the preceding quote illustrates, a competitive labor market can be a two-
edged sword. It can help Þrms hire labor when they are expanding, but it can also
make it diﬃcult to retain labor. Moreover, as we illustrate in our model, labor is
more eﬃciently utilized within clusters since they can be redeployed to the most pro-
ductive Þrms. SpeciÞcally, within clusters, Þrms that realize favorable Þrm-speciÞc
productivity shocks beneÞt from hiring workers that leave Þrms that suﬀer unfavor-
able Þrm-speciÞc shocks.6 This aspect of our model extends the analysis in Krugman
(1991) that considers the advantage of labor market pooling.7
       The case for clustering becomes less straightforward when we consider how workers
acquire their specialized skills. Following Rotemberg and Saloner (2000), we show that
there is an added advantage associated with clustering if developing human capital
requires that the worker expends eﬀort. However, if the development of these skills
requires an investment (e.g., training) by the Þrm, then there is an oﬀsetting cost
associated with clustering.8 In other words, within a cluster, employees appropriate
the value of the skills (and technology) acquired on the job because they can sell
their skills at a competitive price to their employer’s competitors. Hence, they have
an incentive to put in the eﬀort required to acquire such skills. However, anticipating
this, Þrms within a cluster have less incentive to invest in their employees’ human
capital, and thus provide less training than their more isolated counterparts.
       Our model captures the interaction between these forces in a parsimonious way
   6
     There is a second line of research that examines the advantages of thick labor markets that arise
from better matching workers with Þrms. Papers that address the role of the market in improving
the quality of matching include Helsley and Strange (1990, 1991) and Combes and Duranton (2001).
Mortesen and Pissarides (1999) and Pissarides (2000) review the search literature which addresses
the role of market in improving the chances of matching.
   7
     Dumais, Ellison and Glaeser (1997) examine this issue empirically. SpeciÞcally, they provide
evidence that plants locate near other industries when they share the same type of labor, and
conclude that “labor market pooling is a dominant force in explaining the agglomeration of industry.”
   8
     Matouschek and Robert-Nicoud (2003) provide a related analysis of the eﬀect of human capital
investments on Þrms’ location decisions. See also Grossman and Hart (1986) for a similar trade-oﬀ
in their analysis of vertical integration.


                                                  3
that explicitly illustrates that the creation and allocation of human capital are two
sides of the same coin: the way that human capital is allocated determines how it
is created. Moreover, the model identiÞes several characteristics that predict which
knowledge-based industries are likely to exhibit clustering. For example, when the
potential for industry-wide growth is not excessive and when Þrm-level uncertainty is
high, then industries are likely to exhibit clustering. There is also likely to be more
clustering in industries where the workers must exert eﬀort to acquire their skills but
less clustering in growing industries where Þrms must provide signiÞcant training for
their workers.
      The model also provides implications about how diﬀerences between Þrms within
an industry aﬀect their location choices. SpeciÞcally, Þrms with better growth prospects
are likely to be better positioned to beneÞt from their workers’ contribution to their
own training and from hiring workers that are trained by their competitors. This
result provides an alternative interpretation to the empirical Þndings by Henderson
(1986) and Ciccone and Hall (1996) that productivity increases with the density of
the economic activity and by Holmes and Stevens (2002) that plant sizes are higher
within industry clusters.9 The conventional interpretation of these Þndings is that
because of various externalities, productivity is higher in clusters. In contrast, our
results raise the possibility that clusters tend to attract the most eﬃcient Þrms, rather
than make existing Þrms more eﬃcient.
      We consider three extensions of the main analysis. In the Þrst extension, we intro-
duce uncertainty about aggregate productivity (i.e., systematic shocks) and analyze
the relative advantages of clusters versus isolation. We Þnd that a greater degree
of aggregate uncertainty reduces Þrms’ incentives to cluster. This is because higher
  9
    There are a number of empirical studies that examine issues that relate to productivity and
agglomeration. For an excellent review, see Rosenthal and Strange (2003).



                                              4
aggregate uncertainty in clusters limits Þrms’ abilities to reallocate human capital
among themselves and also because, as we show, Þrms in clusters are not as well
positioned to incorporate information about changes in productivity.
   The second extension, which allows Þrms to design their production processes in
ways that make them more or less compatible with other Þrms, explores the possibility
that technological choices diﬀer in clusters versus isolation. SpeciÞcally, we consider
the incentives of Þrms to deviate from industry norms in clusters. The analysis
identiÞes two opposing eﬀects. By deviating from industry norms, Þrms increase Þrm
speciÞc risk, which in turn increases the redeployment beneÞts of clustering. However,
if the labor employed by Þrms with very diﬀerent technologies are less compatible,
a countervailing eﬀect emerges. The relative importance of these eﬀects determines
whether clusters prevail in industries in which experimentation and the introduction
of new technologies is central.
   In the third and Þnal extension we consider how behavioral biases aﬀect Þrms’
location decisions. SpeciÞcally, we show that overconÞdent entrepreneurs are more
likely to be attracted to clusters because they overvalue the beneÞts associated with
the ability to hire workers that are trained by their competitors. Within our setting,
overconÞdence can have social beneÞts as well as costs. In isolation, overconÞdence is
costly because it leads to too much training. However, within a cluster, since rational
entrepreneurs train too few workers, it is possible that social eﬃciency and Þrms’
proÞts can be improved when entrepreneurs are overconÞdent.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the model
and section 3 analyzes it. Section 4 considers the issue of location for heterogenous
Þrms and section 5 presents the analysis of location when workers can also invest.
Section 6 considers location when Þrms also can choose their technologies and section
7 analyzes how overconÞdence may aﬀect Þrms’ location choices. Section 8 presents

                                          5
some conclusions of the analysis. Proofs and other technical derivations are relegated
to the appendix.


2        The model

We consider a risk neutral economy populated by a continuum of ex-ante identical
entrepreneurs (i.e., Þrms), and an unlimited supply of unskilled workers with reser-
vation wage wR . Firms have access to perfect capital markets and are endowed with
an investment project described below.
       As described in Figure 1, there are three relevant dates in the economy, t = 0, 1,
and 2. At t = 0, Þrms permanently locate. Firms choose whether to locate in a
regional economy that includes other Þrms that employ and train similar workers (i.e.,
within a cluster), or alternatively, to locate away from the cluster (i.e., in isolation).
       At t = 1, the production process starts with an initial stage during which Þrm i
hires a certain number of unskilled workers H1i and then trains h1i of those hired.10
The actual training is ex post observable but is not veriÞable and hence, the workers
cannot sign a contract with the Þrm guaranteeing that they will be trained.
       At t = 2, the growth stage, the Þrm receives a productivity shock. After observing
the shock, Þrms can contract or expand their operations by either laying oﬀ some of its
existing workers or, within clusters, by hiring new workers who have obtained training
with one of the Þrm’s competitors. The main diﬀerence between locating within a
cluster rather than in isolation is the access that Þrms have to trained workers in the
growth stage. While in a cluster skilled workers are hired in a competitive market, in
isolation, Þrms have exclusive access to the workers they train at t = 1, and behave
as monopsonists in the labor market. For simplicity, we assume that Þrms cannot
  10
    For most of the analysis, we assume that training is costly to the Þrm but requires no eﬀort
from the worker. In section 5, we relax this assumption and examine the case in which workers’
eﬀort aﬀect the eﬀectiveness of the Þrm’s training.

                                               6
train new workers at t = 2. The number of trained workers employed by Þrm i at this
date is denoted as h2i .
                     t=0                   t=1                  t=2

                Firms Locate         Initial Stage         Growth Stage
                                                           Productivity Shock, ai
                                     Firms scale, h1i
                                                            Firms scale, h2i

                                Figure 1: Sequence of Events
       Firms have the following production functions at t = 1 and t = 2:

                                   h2                               (h2i − h1i )2
               Q1 (h1i ) = αh1i − τ 1i   and Q2 (h2i ) = ai h2i − β               .
                                    2                                    2

       Q1 (h1i ) and Q2 (h2i ) correspond to the production functions during the initial stage
and the growth stage respectively. In each stage, each Þrm determines the scale of
its operations: h1i during the initial stage, (i.e., the amount of workers trained at
t = 1) and h2i during the growth stage (i.e., the amount of trained workers employed
at t = 2). We refer to α > 0 as Þrm productivity in the initial stage and to τ > 0
as the importance of the Þrm’s training costs. In addition, we refer to ai as the Þrm
productivity in the growth stage and to β > 0 as the intensity of the Þrm’s adjustment
costs, which make the Þrm production at t = 2 depend on the initial scale h1i .11
       Parameters α, τ and β are deterministic, identical for all Þrms, and known at t = 0
before production starts. In contrast, ai is the realization of a random variable ãi , a
Þrm-idiosyncratic productivity shock that occurs at t = 2 prior to production. The
shock ãi is distributed according to the c.d.f. F (ãi ) with density f (ãi ), and bounded
support [aL , aH ]. We assume that aL > 0 and (aH − aL ) ( βτ + 1) < α, which simpliÞes
the analysis by avoiding non-negativity constraints, and we denote E(ãi ) ≡ ā and
E(ãi − ā)2 ≡ σ 2 . Shocks are independent across Þrms, speciÞcally, we assume that if
  11
    The presence of symmetric adjustment costs and the technological linkage between the periods
simpliÞes the analysis but are not necessary for the trade-oﬀ between human capital development
and allocation that emerges from the model.

                                                 7
a continuum of Þrms populates a cluster then the empirical distribution of realized
shocks, F (ai ), is identical to the ex-ante c.d.f., F (ãi ), i.e., no aggregate uncertainty
exists.12
       Notice that we are implicity assuming that the marginal productivity of untrained
unskilled workers is the same inside and outside the Þrm. That is, unless worker
training is provided, the Þrm has no special advantage in employing unskilled workers.
This assumption implies that Þrms beneÞt from employing unskilled workers only
when they can compensate them at a salary below their reservation wage.13
       We Þnish the presentation of the model by specifying three important assumptions
of our model. First, we assume short term labor contracts that cannot be contingent
on training. Hence, our analysis of the contracting issues draws on the literature
on incomplete contracts, i.e., Grossman and Hart (1986), and on the eﬀects of the
inalienability of human capital, i.e., Hart and Moore (1994).14 Second, we assume
that trained workers must stay in their respective locations (i.e., regions) after they
are trained. This assumption captures the idea that individuals initially locate in the
region oﬀering the best employment opportunities, but after establishing roots in the
community Þnd it costly to relocate. Finally, since we are primarily interested in the
interaction between location and the development and utilization of human capital,
we abstract from the eﬀects that location may have on product market competition.
SpeciÞcally, we assume a constant price for a Þrm’s output (that we normalize to one)
  12
     In section 6, we relax this assumption and examine location choices in the presence of aggregate
uncertainty on productivity shocks.
  13
     To save on notation, we have omitted the eﬀect that untrained workers can have on a Þrm’s
production. Because, as stated in the main text, we assume that the productivity of unskilled
workers outside (i.e., wR ) and inside the Þrm is the same, our results are unchanged if we specify
Qj (hji , u) = Qj (hji ) + (θ − wR ) · u = Qj (hji ) (for j = 1, 2) where u is the amount of untrained
workers employed and θ is their marginal productivity inside the Þrm (which is equal to wR ).
  14
     In section 5, we revisit this issue and analyze the location problem when both the Þrm and
workers can make non-contractible relation speciÞc investments. There, we discuss why long-term
contracts themselves can create misincentives in Þrm-worker relationships.



                                                  8
and that Þrms’ products can be transported costlessly within a competitive market.


3        Analysis of the model

We Þrst consider the production and training decisions in isolation and then within
an industrial cluster. In each case, we proceed backwards; we start with the scale
decision at the growth stage, h2i , and then consider the scale decision at the initial
stage, h1i .

3.1       Isolation

In isolation, the analysis of the growth stage is straightforward. At t = 2, the Þrm acts
as a monopsonist in the market for skilled workers, and thus pays them the reservation
wage for their services, wR which we normalize to zero.15 Since the supply of skilled
workers is limited by the amount of workers that the Þrm itself trains at t = 1 (i.e.,
h2i ≤ h1i ), after ãi is realized, the Þrm solves:

                                                          (h2i − h1i )2
                                  max          ai h2i − β               .                      (1)
                               h2i ∈[0,h1i ]                   2

Solving (1) the demand for skilled labor is h∗2i = h1i (i.e., the Þrm retains all the
workers it trains at t = 1).
       At t = 1, the Þrm decides how many workers to hire and to train. On-the-job
training is valuable to workers but is costly to Þrms and, more importantly, is non-
contractible among parties. This means that Þrms will provide training according to
their internal trade-oﬀs without fully incorporating the positive eﬀect of training on
workers, a fact that, as we show, will play a crucial role in clusters. Formally, let H1i
be the number of workers hired, and then, among those hired, let h1i be the number
  15
   This is without loss of generality as long as aL ≥ wR = 0, that is the productivity of a skilled
worker inside the Þrm is always higher than outside the Þrm.



                                                      9
of them assigned to positions that provide on-the-job training.16 Hence, Þrm i solves

                                                      h21i
                                 max αh1i − τ              + E(ãi h1i ),                         (2)
                                h1i ,H1i               2

subject to:

                                              h1i ≤ H1i .                                         (3)

                                                                                   ∗
       Since unskilled workers are equally productive inside and outside the Þrm, H1i
                                                  ∗
remains indeterminate in equilibrium (other than Hi1 ≥ h∗1i ). Therefore, we solve to
obtain h∗1i and then simply set H1i
                                 ∗
                                    = h∗1i :

                                                           h21i
                                    max αh1i − τ                + āh1i .                         (4)
                                       h1i                  2

From (4), we derive the Þrst order condition (f.o.c.) to obtain:

                                                      α + ā
                                             h∗1i =          ,                                    (5)
                                                        τ

which, as showed before, also equals h∗2i . Substituting in (2) yields the Þrm’s value in
isolation at t = 0, ViI :

                                        α2 αā ā2    (α + ā)2
                               ViI =       +   +    =           .                                 (6)
                                        2τ   τ   2τ      2τ

3.2       Clustering
3.2.1      The growth decision

At t = 2, the growth decision by Þrm i is the solution to the following problem:

                                              (h2i − h1i )2
                               max ai h2i − β               − wh2i                                (7)
                                h2i                2
  16
     The explicit distinction between hired, H1i , and trained workers, h1i , is consistent with but
not essential for the analysis of the Þrm’s decision in isolation. However, we choose to keep the
distinction in the isolation analysis to maintain parallelism with the cluster analysis below, where
such a distinction plays a crucial role. Also notice that although workers hired at t = 1 must receive
the reservation wage the expressions are simpliÞed due to the normalization wR = 0.

                                                      10
where w is the wage paid to the skilled workers at t = 2. From the f.o.c., we obtain
Þrm i0 s demand for skilled workers, h∗2i :

                                                                 ai − w
                                             h∗2i = h1i +               .                                     (8)
                                                                    β

According to (8), Þrm i hires (Þres) additional workers if its realized productivity, ai ,
is greater (smaller) than the wage at t = 2, w. The importance of the adjustment
costs (measured by β) determines the sensitivity of the Þrm’s demand for skilled
workers to ai .
       To determine the wage that clears the market in the cluster at t = 2, i.e., w, we
need to consider (i) the aggregate demand for skilled workers, D2H :17
                        Z   aH            ai − w               ā − w Z aH
                D2H ≡            (h1i +          )f (ai )dai =       +     h1i f (ai )dai                     (9)
                            aL               β                    β    aL


and (ii) the aggregate supply of skilled workers:
                                                     Z   aH
                                           S2H   ≡            h1i f(ai )dai .                                (10)
                                                     aL


Market clearing, i.e., D2H = S2H , yields the equilibrium wage which is equal to the
average productivity of the Þrms in the cluster, i.e., w = ā.

3.2.2       The initial scale decision

At t = 1, because on-the-job training is non-contractible among parties, Þrms will
provide such training according to their internal trade-oﬀs without fully incorporating
the positive eﬀect of training on workers. Consequently, workers will be wary of taking
lower wages against promises of future skills that will not necessarily be provided.
We model this time-inconsistency by considering that, Þrst, a Þrm hires a certain
number of workers H1i at t = 1 and then, among those hired, the Þrm allocates
  17
                                                                                R aH
       Notice that, by virtue of the independence of technology shocks,          aL    ai f (ai )dai = ā.



                                                          11
h1i of them to positions that provide on-the-job training. This optimal training
decision is anticipated (i.e., rationally expected) by workers who condition their initial
salary demands at t = 0, w0i , on the total number of workers hired by the Þrm.
SpeciÞcally, workers consider the probability of being trained as the ratio of the
anticipated number of workers trained, he1i , to the number hired, H1i , and reduce
their salary accordingly. Formally, Þrm i maximizes expected proÞts by solving:
                           Ã                 "                               #!
                                    h2                        (h∗ − h1i )2
              max           αh1i − τ 1i + E (ãi − w) h∗2i − β 2i                 − w0i H1i ,
           h1i ,H1i ,w0i             2                            2
                                                                                                (11)

subject to:

                                           h1i ≤ H1i
                                                   he1i
                                           w0i = −      w.                                      (12)
                                                   H1i

       Constraint (12) captures the fact that the Þrm may choose not to train some of the
hired workers while constraint (12) considers the salary reduction from the reservation
wage, which is normalized to zero, that workers will accept when hired by the Þrm
as compensation for their expected human capital acquisition (i.e., a participation
constraint for workers). Notice that with the initial salary reduction, −w0i , workers
“pay” at t = 1 for their (anticipated) training. SpeciÞcally, a worker is trained with
                 he1i
probability      H1i
                      ,    and, if trained, her salary increases at t = 2 by w.18 Substituting
                                        ∗
constraint (12) into (11) reveals that H1i is indeterminate in equilibrium (other than
 ∗
H1i ≥ h∗1i ). This is due to our assumption that unskilled workers are equally produc-
tive inside and outside the Þrm. Consequently, without loss of generality, we assume
that the Þrm hires only the workers that it can credibly claim to train, which implies
      ∗
that H1i = h∗1i . Given this, the following problem can be solved to obtain Þrm i’s
  18
    This contrasts with the case of isolation in which workers do not reduce their wages, i.e., w0i =
 R
w = 0, because workers realize they will not capture any of the value of their developed human
capital (i.e., in isolation the Þrm behaves as a monopsonist at t = 2).

                                                   12
optimal scale h∗1i :
                                          "                                        #
                            h2                        (h∗ − h1i )2
                max αh1i − τ 1i + E (ãi − w) h∗2i − β 2i          + he1i w.                           (13)
                 h1i         2                            2

       Substituting w = ā and h∗2i = h1i + aiβ−ā , and considering that the anticipated level
of training he1i is not a choice variable for the Þrm,19 problem (13) can be reduced to:

                                                                h21i
                                        max αh1i − τ                 ,                                 (14)
                                          h1i                    2

which, when solved, implies

                                                          α
                                                 h∗1i =     .                                          (15)
                                                          τ

       Expression (15) shows that, in clusters, a Þrm’s initial scale decision is “myopic,”
i.e., it is not aﬀected by its expected productivity ā. While, all else equal, a higher
expected productivity increases the Þrms’ incentive to invest in human capital, it also
increases the wage at t = 2, and hence, reduces the Þrms’ incentive to create human
capital. In an economy of identical Þrms, these two eﬀects oﬀset each other leading
to the Þrms’ myopia on their initial scale decisions.
       Finally, in (11), we can compute the Þrm value at t = 0 in the cluster, ViC :

                                                 α2 αā σ 2
                                      ViC =         +   +    ,                                         (16)
                                                 2τ   τ   2β

which can be decomposed into three terms: (i) the value created from production
                                         α2
in the Þrst period (i.e., Q(h∗i1 ) =     2τ
                                            ),   (ii) the value of the human capital created by
the Þrm (as measured by the wages obtained by the workers trained by the Þrm, i.e.,
he1i w = ατ ā) and (iii) the value of the option to adapt the scale of production in the
                                                                         (h∗2i −h1i )2         σ2
cluster after the shock is realized (i.e., E[(ãi − w) h∗2i − β                2
                                                                                       ]   =   2β
                                                                                                  ).
  19
    To be sure, even though in a (rational expectations) equilibrium the actual level of training
equals the workers’ conjecture, he1i = h∗1i , the conjectured level of training cannot be aﬀected by the
Þrm.

                                                    13
3.3    The choice of location

When deciding their locations, Þrms face a trade-oﬀ between the advantages of isola-
tion on the creation of human capital and the advantages of clusters on the utilization
of human capital. This trade-oﬀ, which is apparent by comparing (6) and (16), is
described in the following proposition:


Proposition 1 The diﬀerence in Þrm value in the cluster versus in isolation is

                                                  σ2  ā2
                                  ViC − ViI =        − .                                (17)
                                                  2β 2τ

   Proposition 1 summarizes the main implications of the analysis so far. In indus-
tries where trained workers are more productive, i.e., larger ā, the relative value of
isolation increases. In contrast, when there is more uncertainty about which Þrms
will be most productive, i.e., when σ 2 is larger, the relative value of clustering is
higher. In addition, the relative value of clusters vis-à-vis isolation is also related to
the importance of the Þrm’s adjustment costs and the cost of creating human capital.
SpeciÞcally, large adjustment costs (i.e., high β) reduce the value of ßexibility in the
cluster, and hence, of clustering, while large costs of creating human capital (i.e., high
τ ), make the acquisition of human capital from clusters relatively more attractive,
and hence, promotes clusters.
   More intuition about the location trade-oﬀ can be gained by examining how a
social planner would allocate resources in this economy. The social planner must
consider two issues: the optimal creation of human capital at t = 1, and its optimal
utilization at t = 2. The competitive market in the cluster allocates skilled workers
(once trained) optimally. Hence, the social planner would simply replicate the worker
allocation that occurs in the cluster: h∗2i = h1i + aiβ−ā . Therefore, the planner’s problem
is reduced to Þnding the optimal Þrm scale at t = 1 in the presence of a competitive

                                             14
labor market, but without the time inconsistency problem in the creation of human
capital by Þrms (e.g., by assuming that Þrms internalize the future salary gains that
workers obtain from Þrm training). Formally, the problem would be identical to the
clustering program but where the term he1i w is replaced by h1i w:
                                           "                            #
                            h21i                ∗      (h∗2i − h1i )2
               max αh1i − τ      + E (ãi − w) h2i − β                + h1i w.            (18)
                h1i          2                               2
                                  α+ā
From the f.o.c., we get hF1iB =    τ
                                       ,   and substituting in (18) the “Þrst best” Þrm value
is obtained:

                                           α2 αā ā2    σ2
                               ViF B =        +   +    +    .                             (19)
                                           2τ   τ   2τ   2β

Notice that in the social planner’s solution, Þrms would utilize human capital as they
do in the cluster, but would create human capital as they do in isolation. Formally,
this is reßected in an additional positive component (with respect to the value in
                                                                                      2
isolation) due to the optimal reallocation of human capital, i.e., ViF B = ViI + σ2β , and
a positive additional component (with respect to the value in clusters) due to the
                                                                ā2
optimal investment in human capital, i.e., ViF B = ViC +        2τ
                                                                    .

3.4    An alternative speciÞcation

We conclude this section by brießy discussing an alternative speciÞcation that pro-
duces a trade-oﬀ that is similar to the one obtained here. SpeciÞcally, rather than
assuming that training is not contractible, we could have assumed that the workers
lack the resources to pay-up front for their training, i.e., there is a minimum wage on
the Þrst date that exceeds the equilibrium wage that includes the discount workers
are willing to take to receive their training. Of course, both assumptions require, ad-
ditionally, the inalienability of workers’ human capital once acquired (i.e., that Þrms
become residual claimants of their workers’ human capital).


                                                 15
    Intuitively, with either friction, Þrms within clusters do not fully internalize the
improvements in their workers’ human capital, and thus underinvest in their worker’s
training. In the case that we consider, the fact that training is not contractible
creates a time inconsistency problem (namely, once workers agree to reduce their
initial salaries, Þrms feel tempted not to honor their training commitment). Similarly,
when there is a minimum wage at t = 0, Þrms in clusters may not be able to beneÞt
from training their workers, and may thus undertrain their workers when they cannot
make binding commitments. In contrast, an isolated Þrm can capture the beneÞt of
training their workers in the Þrst period because they can underpay them relative
to their productivity in the last period. As was the case in the previous model, this
implies that Þrms are more likely to isolate when the gains associated with human
capital creation are the highest.
    We chose to present the model with the non-contractibility assumption in order
to simplify the analysis and to facilitate welfare comparisons. However, we feel the
limited liability (i.e., minimum wage) alternative can be a compelling assumption in
some circumstances and constitutes, in any case, an additional foundation for our
analysis that reinforces our results.


4     The location choice of heterogeneous Þrms

Up to this point, we have considered an economy of (ex-ante) identical Þrms. In this
section, we introduce Þrm heterogeneity to the analysis. We proceed as follows: First,
we present a partial equilibrium analysis, where we take as given the presence of a
cluster with salary w and examine the location choice of Þrm i, which is assumed
to be too small to aﬀect w. Once we characterize the individual Þrm’s incentives to
cluster, we consider the general equilibrium analysis where all Þrms simultaneously



                                           16
choose where to locate, and examine the endogenous formation of clusters.

4.1      The location decision of an individual Þrm

Consider Þrm i with productivity ãi which is distributed with c.d.f. Fi (ãi ) and density
fi (ãi ), and where ãi ∈ [aLi , aHi ] with aLi > 0. Let āi ≡ E(ãi ) and σ 2 ≡ E(ãi − āi ).
Firm’s i value in isolation immediately follows from (6) in the previous section, i.e.,
        α2       αāi       ā2i
ViI =   2τ
             +    τ
                        +   2τ
                                 .   However, to derive its value in the cluster, we must modify the
analysis to take into account that, in general, āi 6= w. Following similar steps as before
(see the appendix for details), we Þnd the human capital created at t = 1,

                                                                α + (āi − w)
                                                       h∗1i =                                                        (20)
                                                                      τ

and the value of a clustered Þrm,

                                             α2 αāi E (ãi − w)2 ā2i − w 2
                                     ViC =      +   +            +           .                                       (21)
                                             2τ   τ       2β           2τ

Notice that if a Þrm’s expected productivity is equal to the cluster wage, i.e., āi = w,
the expressions obtained in the case with homogenous Þrms hold. That is, (20)
                                              α                                                  α2       αāi       σ2
converges to (15), i.e., h∗1i =               τ
                                                   and (21) converges to (16), i.e., ViC =       2τ
                                                                                                      +    τ
                                                                                                                 +   2β
                                                                                                                        .
   To examine Þrm i’s incentives to join a cluster with wage w, we subtract (6) from
(21) and rearrange terms to obtain

                                                               E (ãi − w)2 w2
                                             ViC   −   ViI   =             −    .                                    (22)
                                                                    2β       2τ

As was the case with homogenous Þrms, the decision is determined by the trade-oﬀ
                                                                                                      E(ãi −w)2
between the beneÞts of the cluster (i.e., redeployment of human capital,                                  2β
                                                                                                                 )   and
                                                                          w2
its costs (i.e., underinvestment in human capital,                         τ
                                                                               ). Further intuition, however, can
be gained by expressing (22) as

                                                             (ai − w)2 + σ 2 w2
                                         ViC − ViI =                        −    ,                                   (23)
                                                                   2β         2τ

                                                                  17
from which we can see that the beneÞts of redeploying human capital stem from: (i)
ex-ante diﬀerences between expected productivity and the cluster average productiv-
             (ai −w)2
ity, i.e.,       2β
                      ,   and (ii) ex-post diﬀerences among Þrms’ realized productivities, i.e.,
σ2
2β
   .   In other words, the beneÞts of joining a cluster come from date t = 2 diﬀerences
in productivity that may or may not be anticipated.
                                              (ai −w)2
       Notice that the Þrst eﬀect (i.e.,          2β
                                                       )   induces clustering even in the absence of
uncertainty (i.e., σ 2 = 0), because Þrms with expected productivity that is greater
(smaller) than the wage expect to hire (Þre) workers at t = 2 (i.e., E (h∗2i ) − h1i =
āi −w
    β
       ).   Because of the decreasing returns to scale in the creation of human capital,
there is an eﬃciency gain associated with having the Þrms with a low need for human
capital at t = 2 train more workers than they need and indirectly transfer those work-
ers to higher productivity Þrms, which create less human capital than they want to
employ. Although a Þrm does not directly compensate its competitors for the trained
workers that join their Þrms, indirect compensation accrues to the net providers of
human capital who, when located in clusters, can oﬀer a lower wage rate at t = 1.20
       An examination of (23) allows us to consider the factors that inßuence a Þrm’s
decision to join the cluster:

Proposition 2 Clusters are more attractive for Þrms with: (i) higher variance pro-
ductivity, σ 2 , (ii) lower adjustment costs, β, (iii) higher costs of creating human
capital, τ , and (iv) expected productivity that diﬀers more from the cluster wage, i.e.,
higher |ai − w|.


       Proposition 2 shows that clusters are relatively more valuable when either an-
  20
    Consulting Þrms generally need substantially more associates (i.e., the more junior consultants)
than partners, and as a result, a number of associates eventually go to work for their clients. This
observation can be viewed from the perspective of our model if we view the consulting Þrms as
expecting date t = 2 productivity that induce them to shed employees. As such, our model provides
a rationale for why consulting Þrms and their clients may beneÞt from locating near each other.


                                                     18
ticipated (i.e., |ai − w|) or unanticipated (i.e., σ 2 ) diﬀerences in productivity give a
reason to redeploy human capital and also when such a redeployment is not expensive
(i.e., low β).21 Furthermore, if Þrms are not eﬃcient at producing human capital (i.e.,
low τ ) the underinvestment problem in clusters is ameliorated (the diﬀerence between
                                                                            w
the production of human capital in clusters and in isolation is             τ
                                                                              ).
       Finally, we can check that an increase in the wage reduces the incentives to cluster
         d(ViC −ViI )
(i.e.,       dw
                        < 0) unless āi < (1 − βτ )w. While, in general, a higher wage exacer-
bates the underinvestment problem and reduces the incentive to cluster, Þrms whose
productivities are suﬃciently below the wage (āi < (1 − βτ )w) can beneÞt from higher
cluster wages. For these Þrms (which are on average “big sellers” of human capital
in the cluster), the higher wage produces an increase in the expected revenue from
the human capital sold that more than oﬀsets the additional revenue lost due to an
exacerbated underinvestment problem.22

4.2        Endogenous clusters with heterogeneous Þrms

In the previous section, we examined the incentives of Þrms to join an existing cluster
with an exogenous wage, w. This section examines the endogenous formation of clus-
ters, i.e., the simultaneous decision of Þrms that can isolate themselves or can locate
within an endogenously formed cluster.
       For simplicity, we assume that there is a continuum of Þrms with random expected
productivities ãi = ai + ε̃i where ε̃i are zero-mean i.i.d. random variables, and g(āi )
  21
      Notice that for Þrms with expected productivity above the wage, āi > w, higher productivity
increases the Þrms’ incentive to cluster. However, the opposite holds for Þrms with expected pro-
ductivity below the cluster wage. Taken together, this implies that the incentives to cluster are the
lowest for Þrms with expected productivity that equals the wage in the cluster.
                d(ViC −ViI )   dV C   dh∗                              āi −w
   22
      Formally,     dw       = dwi = w dw1i + E [h∗2i − h∗1i ] = − w
                                                                   τ −     β . An increase in the wage
reduces the creation of human capital at t = 1 (Þrst term) and increases the beneÞts of “selling”
human capital at t = 2 (second term). Therefore, if a Þrm sells enough human capital (i.e., if w−āβ
                                                                                                     i


is large enough), a Þrm can beneÞt from a higher wage.



                                                  19
is the frequency of āi in the population. We assume that ai is positive and with
bounded support, i.e., ai ∈ [aL , aH ]. We consider equilibria characterized by the
formation of a unique cluster C which may contain a positive mass of Þrms, with
the rest of the Þrms choosing isolated locations.23 Under these conditions, because
shocks are independent across Þrms, the average productivity in the cluster (i.e., the
                                                                R
cluster wage) is deterministic and given by w = āC =            i∈C   āi g(āi ).
       The following proposition, which is proved in the appendix, describes the various
equilibria that are possible in this setting:


Proposition 3 The following types of equilibria can emerge in the above described
setting: (i) an equilibrium where all Þrms are isolated, (ii) an equilibrium where all
Þrms locate within a single cluster, and (iii) an equilibrium where Þrms with both the
highest and lowest expected productivities join a cluster and where the middle Þrms
locate in isolation. The equilibrium that emerges depends on the population of Þrm
characteristics, however, for certain Þrm characteristics, multiple equilibria arise.


       Proposition 3 states that there may be multiple equilibria where only those Þrms
with the largest and the smallest future expected productivities cluster. In the ap-
pendix, we provide a simple example in which two alternative clusters of diﬀerent
sizes and wages can emerge in equilibrium. SpeciÞcally, if Þrms expect a low wage at
t = 2 in the cluster, most Þrms join the cluster and the cluster wage is indeed low.
Alternatively, if Þrms expect a high t = 2 cluster wage, fewer Þrms join the cluster,
and the cluster wage ends up being high. In the example, the low-wage, larger cluster
dominates (in a Pareto sense) the high-wage, smaller cluster, suggesting that policy
  23
     For simplicity, we do not consider the possibility that more than one cluster can simultaneously
arise. This would simply complicate the analysis without providing additional insights. In fact, in
the case of multiple coexisting clusters, it is easy to show that all of them would have the same
average productivity (i.e., cluster wage) and would exhibit the same properties as the ones described
below.


                                                 20
initiatives that promote larger clusters can be welfare-improving.
       The possibility of (self-fulÞlling) multiple equilibria suggests a potential role for
public intervention.24 SpeciÞcally, in the example, a contingent policy of wage sub-
sidies (e.g., an oﬀer to subsidize wages in the event that equilibrium wages exceed
the level that occurs in the good equilibrium) will attract more of the low expected
productivity Þrms to the cluster, which in turn generates lower wages, so that the
subsidy will not in fact be required.25


5        Location analysis when workers also invest

Up to now, we have focused on the case where training is not aﬀected by the workers’
eﬀort. This section extends the analysis to consider the location choice when both
workers and Þrms can aﬀect the creation of human capital. Formally, we assume that
during the initial stage, each worker can exert costly eﬀort l, which enhances the
human capital provided by the Þrm. SpeciÞcally, we assume that eﬀort multiplies the
                                                                                                   2
worker’s acquired human capital by a factor (1 + l) and costs the worker C(l) = k l2 .
                                                        2
Hence, each worker solves maxl (w (1 + l) − k l2 ) and thus exerts eﬀort,

                                                      w
                                              l∗ =      .                                        (24)
                                                      k

In addition, as in the basic case, we assume that the investment in human capital at
t = 1 (by both the Þrm and its workers, i.e., (1 + l)hl1i ) aﬀects the Þrm’s adjustment
  24
      Public intervention may be required to the extent that the private sector fails to solve the
coordination problem. See Rauch (1993) for an analysis of the role of history in the location of
industrial clusters and how developers of industrial parks can partly overcome historical inertia.
   25
      A number of individuals have argued for policy initiatives that promote clustering in knowledge
based industries. For example, Lawrence Summers, the president of Harvard University expressed
the following opinion on the importance of promoting clustering at the Massachusetts Life Sciences
Summit held in Boston on 09/12/2003: “I am convinced that, as strong as (...) the life science cluster
is today without combined eﬀorts, it can be far stronger Þve years from now and still stronger a
decade from now. And with all of our cooperation, Harvard is certainly prepared to do its part. I
believe we can do a great deal for science, for humanity, and for the economy of this area.”


                                                 21
costs at t = 2. Formally, this implies that Þrm i’s production function at t = 2 is

                                                  (hl2i − (1 + l)hl1i )2
                               Q2 = ai h2i − β                           ,               (25)
                                                            2

where we have used the super-index l to distinguish this case from the case in which
workers’ eﬀort cannot aﬀect their human capital.

5.1    Homogeneous Þrms

We consider in this sectionthe case where Þrms have identical distributions of their
future productivities, i.e., Fi (ãi ) = F (ãi ) for all i. Because in isolation Þrm’s monop-
sony power allows them to capture all the beneÞts from the workers’ human capital,
workers have no incentives to contribute to their training (i.e., l∗ = 0). Therefore, the
value of the isolated Þrm, Vi,lI , is still given by ViI from equation (6) i.e., the value in
isolation when workers’ eﬀort does not aﬀect the creation of human capital:

                                                  α2 αā ā2
                                  Vi,lI = ViI =      +   + .                             (26)
                                                  2τ   τ  2τ

   In clusters, however, since workers capture the beneÞts of the increase in their
human capital, they do have an incentive to exert eﬀort. In this case, Þrms solve at
t = 2 the following problem:

                                          (hl2i − (1 + l)hl1i )2
                        max ai hl2i − β                          − wh2i ,                (27)
                         l
                         h2i                        2

whose f.o.c. implies that

                                                           ai − w
                                   hl∗           l
                                    2i = (1 + l)h1i +             .                      (28)
                                                              β

   Because the supply of human capital per Þrm is hl2i = (1 + l)hl1i , market clearing
yields w = ā. Then, proceeding as in previous sections, we can solve Þrm i’s problem



                                                   22
                                                     2
                                           (hl1i )                         α 26
at t = 1, (i.e., maxhl1i   αhl1i   −τ         2
                                                         ) to obtain hl∗
                                                                      1i = τ .  Substituting hl∗    l∗
                                                                                              1i , h2i and l
                                                                                                             ∗


in the Þrm’s objective function, we obtain the Þrm value in clusters, Vi,lC :

                                                  α2 αā σ 2 α ā2
                                    Vi,lC =          +   +   +     ,                                     (29)
                                                  2τ   τ   2β k 2τ

and subtracting (26) from (29), we obtain the net beneÞt of clustering:
                                                                      µ       ¶
                                                            σ2   ā2    α
                                   Vi,lC   −   Vi,lI      =    −     1−   .                              (30)
                                                            2β 2τ       k

       From (30), we can make two observations. First, in addition to the factors pre-
viously identiÞed (i.e., σ, β, τ , and ā), two other factors aﬀecting Þrm location arise
(i.e., α and k). In particular, clustering is more valuable when workers contribute
substantially to the creation of human capital (i.e., low k and hence high l∗ ) and also
when Þrms invest heavily in training at t = 1 (i.e., high α and hence high hl∗
                                                                            1i ). This

last result holds because of the complementarity between Þrm training and worker
eﬀort, i.e., because workers’ eﬀort multiplies the human capital provided by Þrms.27
       Second, we can identify a suﬃcient condition for clustering to dominate isolation
(i.e., α > k). This condition illustrates an additional rationale for Þrms to cluster
even when there is (i) no uncertainty about Þrm productivity (i.e., σ 2 = 0) and (ii) no
ex-ante diﬀerences in productivity (i.e., Fi (ãi ) = F (ãi )). Intuitively, clusters induce
workers to contribute to the creation of human capital by mitigating workers’ hold-up
concerns. This happens because, in contrast to isolation, where Þrms capture the gain
associated with the additional human capital created by workers, in clusters workers
with more human capital receive higher wages at t = 2.28
                                                                                         ∗
  26
     Notice that workers’ eﬀort does not aﬀect the Þrm’s investment, i.e., hl1i = h∗1i = ατ as given
by (15). This is in contrast with the result obtained in the next subsection, when diﬀerences in
productivity across Þrms are introduced.
  27
     A recent paper by Rosenthal and Strange (2002) shows that, after controlling for worker spe-
ciÞc characteristics, professional workers work longer hours in urban clusters which suggests that,
consistent with the analysis here, cities encourage hard work.
  28
     We are not the Þrst to identify the role of the markets in mitigating hold-up problems. This

                                                               23
5.2     Heterogeneous Þrms

This section extends the previous analysis to the case of heterogeneous Þrms (i.e., to
a setting like the one in section 4.2). The main purpose is to examine whether the
ability of workers to contribute to their human capital can have diﬀerent eﬀects on
the incentives of heterogeneous Þrms to cluster.
    In isolation, the analysis remains unchanged because workers do not have incen-
tives to invest in human capital. In clusters, however, the analysis changes. Substi-
tuting hl∗
        2i (given by (28)) into the Þrm’s objective function at t = 1 and simplifying

the following problem for Þrm i at t = 1:

                                           (hl1i )2
                           max αhl1i − τ            + (āi − w)(1 + l∗ )hl1i .                  (31)
                            l
                            h1i              2

    Notice that now, in contrast to the case with identical Þrms, workers’ incentives
aﬀects the Þrm’s incentive to create human capital at t = 1 (i.e., note the factor
(1 + l∗ )). The reason is that workers’ investment in human capital, because of the
adjustment costs, increases the Þrm’s demand for skilled labor at t = 2.29 Solving we
Þnd,

                                           α + (āi − w)(1 + l∗ )
                                  hl∗
                                   1i =                           ,                             (32)
                                                     τ

and the Þrm value in the cluster, Vi,lC , which can be expressed as:
                       ·          µ         ¶¸       h³                 ´                i
                                        w
        Vi,lC = ViC + l∗ · hl∗
                            1i āi −             +    Q(hl∗        ∗        l∗    ∗
                                                         1i ) − Q(h1i ) + (h1i − h1i )āi ,
                                        2
                                                                                                (33)

where h∗1i and ViC are, respectively, the demand for labor and value of the clustered
Þrm when workers cannot invest in human capital, i.e., expressions (20) and (21).
role has been recently considered in the Urban Economics literature, i.e., Rotemberg and Saloner
(2000), and Matouschek and Robert-Nicoud (2003) and in the International Trade literature, i.e.,
McLaren (2000), and Grossman and Helpman (2002).
                                                 l        l 2
  29
     Note that the adjustment costs, i.e., −β (h2i −(1+l)h
                                                      2
                                                          1i )
                                                               depends on workers and Þrm investments
                                                                                               ai −w
in human capital (i.e., l and hl1i respectively). Hence, as shown in (28), hl∗            l
                                                                             2i = (1 + l)h1i +    β .


                                                     24
       From expression (33), we can see the diﬀerence in value arising from the workers’
investment in human capital. We denote this diﬀerence as ∆Vi,lC ≡ (Vi,lC −ViC ) and refer
to it as the “eﬀort-eﬀects.” SpeciÞcally, these eﬀects are: (i) a direct eﬀect due to the
additional creation of human capital by workers (i.e., the term in the Þrst bracket)30
and (ii) an indirect eﬀect stemming from the adjustment of the Þrm’s demand for labor
at t = 1 induced by workers’ eﬀort (i.e., term in the second bracket).31 Expressing
the eﬀort-eﬀects as
                                                      "                   #·                       ¸
                                   αw       w    (āi − w)w                     āi w
                        ∆Vi,lC   =    (āi − ) +                                      + (2āi + w) ,          (34)
                                   τk       2         2τ k                        k
                                                                                           w
reveals that ∆Vi,lC is positive for āi > w, negative for āi <                            2
                                                                                             ,   and ambiguous for
the remaining range. It can also be easily shown that ∆Vi,lC increases with the Þrm’s
expected productivity āi . Hence, the following proposition can be stated:

Proposition 4 Workers’ investment in human capital (i.e., the eﬀort-eﬀects) in-
crease the incentives of high productivity Þrms (āi > w) to cluster and of low produc-
                             w
tivity Þrms (āi <           2
                               ) to isolate.    Furthermore, the eﬀort-eﬀects increase with a Þrm’s
                             d(∆Vi,l C)
productivity (i.e.,             dāi
                                        > 0).

       While it is easy to understand why the investment in human capital can promote
clustering (in isolation workers do not invest in human capital), it is less straightfor-
ward to understand why it can lead Þrms to isolate. The potential incentive to isolate
occurs because workers do not in general exert the eﬀort most preferred by Þrms,
and in some cases, exert too much eﬀort. To be sure, while workers make their eﬀort
  30
     This term corresponds to the additional human capital produced      by workers, l · hl∗1i , multiplied
                                                                    l∗
by the expected proÞts of per unit of human capital, (i.e., āi − k 2 = āi − w2 ). The expected proÞts
per unit consist of what the Þrm expects to obtain at t = 2, (i.e., āi − w) plus the reduction in its
labor costs at t = 1 (i.e., w − k 2l ).
  31
     Notice that, due to the eﬀort-eﬀects, both hl∗                                              l∗
                                                 1i and (due to the adjustment costs) E(h2i ) change
            ∗
by (āi −w)l
         τ    . These adjustments yield an additional revenue to the Þrm of Q(hl∗                    ∗
                                                                                        1i ) − Q(h1i ) =
          2
2l∗ +l∗                                                       (āi −w)l∗
   2τ         (āi − w)2 at t = 1, and of (hl∗    ∗
                                            1i − h1i )āi =         τ    āi   at t = 2.

                                                              25
                                                                                                                             2
decision at t = 1 based on the wage they expect to receive (i.e., maxl (wl − k l2 )), Þrms
expect to receive from that eﬀort only the Þrm’s expected productivity, āi (net of the
                                                            2
cost of eﬀort) at t = 2 (i.e., āi l − k l2 ).32 SpeciÞcally, if āi < w (āi > w) workers’ eﬀort
is too large (too small) from the point of view of the Þrm. Furthermore, when the
                                                                                              w
Þrm’s expected productivity is small enough (i.e., āi <                                      2
                                                                                                ),   workers’ eﬀort actually
reduces the value of the Þrm (i.e., the Þrm would be better oﬀ if workers exert no
eﬀort rather than l∗ ).
       The prior discussion focuses on the beneÞts of the eﬀort-eﬀects on clustering.33 To
examine how workers’ eﬀort aﬀect the comparative statics on Þrm location discussed
in section 4, we need to consider the other factors that inßuence clustering and how
they interact with the eﬀort-eﬀects. For brevity, we focus next on the eﬀect of a Þrm’s
expected productivity on location.
       As proposition 4 states, workers’ eﬀort induces high productivity Þrms (āi > w)
to cluster, and low productivity Þrms (āi < w) to isolate. In contrast, as result (iv) in
proposition 2 shows, without workers’ eﬀort, the incentive to join the cluster increases
for Þrms with extreme (i.e., very high and very low) expected productivity (i.e.,
d(ViC −ViI )         āi −w
    dāi
                 =       β
                            )   so that, clusters exhibit a U-shape. The joint consideration of these
two results implies that workers’ eﬀort reinforces the tendency of high productivity
Þrms (āi > w) to cluster and weakens the tendency of low productivity Þrms (āi < w)
to do so.34 In fact, as the following proposition states, under certain conditions,
“eﬀort-eﬀects” dominate and reverse the tendency of low productivity Þrms to join
the cluster:
  32
     Notice that, due to the adjustment costs, worker eﬀort increases the Þrm’s demand for skilled
labor at t = 2, which has an expected productivity of āi .
  33                                                  I
     Eﬀort-eﬀects do not aﬀect isolated Þrms, since Vi,l = ViI . Hence, ∆Vi,lC
                                                                                  is also a measure of how
                                                                       C      I
these eﬀort-eﬀects aﬀect Þrms clustering vis-a-vis isolation, i.e., (Vi,l − Vi,l )−(ViC − ViI )= ∆Vi,lC
                                                                                                        .
                                      C     I                                                     C     I
  34                              d(Vi,l −Vi,l )       d(ViC −ViI )                           d(Vi,l −Vi,l )       d(ViC −ViI )
       That is, if āi > w,           dāi         >       dāi       > 0 while if āi < w,       dāi         >       dāi       although
    C     I
d(Vi,l −Vi,l )
    dāi         may still be negative.


                                                                       26
Proposition 5 For a suﬃciently large α, the incentive to cluster increases with the
                                     C −V I )
                                 d(Vi,l   i,l
Þrm expected productivity,           dāi
                                                > 0.


    The intuition for the proposition is as follows: As discussed above, workers fail to
consider the full eﬀects of their eﬀort on Þrm value, so Þrms can even experience a
reduction in value due to their workers’ eﬀort. This externality is more pronounced
when α is larger because, in this case, Þrms choose a higher hl∗
                                                              1i , and workers choose

a higher eﬀort, i.e., l∗ hl∗
                          1i .

    The discussion above, although made in the context of a given wage (i.e., partial
equilibrium) has implications on the issue of the endogenous formation of clusters.
In contrast to the case without eﬀort-eﬀects, where Þrms with low as well as high
productivity have the highest incentives to cluster, eﬀort-eﬀects produce an additional
impetus for Þrms with the highest productivity to join the cluster. This suggests that
the empirical evidence on the beneÞts of clusters should be cautiously interpreted.
For instance, an alternative interpretation to the Þndings by Henderson (1986) and
Ciccone and Hall (1996), that productivity increases with the density of the economic
activity and by Holmes and Stevens (2002), that plant sizes are higher within industry
clusters, is that clusters attract the most eﬃcient Þrms, rather than make existing
Þrms more eﬃcient.
    We Þnish this section with a brief mention of one important assumption that we
maintain throughout the analysis: the fact that we do not allow long-term contracts
between workers and Þrms. While realistic legal reasons can justify this assumption,
this section provides an additional justiÞcation for the exclusion of long-term con-
tracts. Consistent with Grossman and Hart (1986), the impossibility to contract in
the actual provision of human capital (both by Þrms and by workers) can severely
reduce the ability of long-term contracts (e.g., a guaranteed wage set at t = 1 in


                                                       27
exchange for the worker’s labor services at t = 2) to induce the eﬃcient human cap-
ital investment. In this setting, unless workers receive some beneÞts at the margin
from their investments in human capital, they fail to provide eﬀort and, hence, a
suboptimal creation of human capital would prevail.35


6      Aggregate uncertainty, Þrm-speciÞc risk and tech-
       nology standards

So far, we have considered Þrm speciÞc shocks and hence, our economy has been char-
acterized by no aggregate uncertainty. In this section, we Þrst introduce uncertainty
about aggregate productivity (i.e., systematic shocks), and then we allow Þrms to
design their production processes in ways that make them more or less sensitive to
these systematic shocks. To simplify the exposition, we perform the analysis in the
basic setting of sections 3 and 4 which abstracts from workers’ eﬀort in the creation
of human capital.

6.1     Location and aggregate uncertainty

We introduce aggregate uncertainty (i.e., correlated productivity shocks) by modeling
a Þrm’s random productivity at t = 2 as:

                                 ãi = ā + γ 1/2 ṽ + (1 − γ)1/2 b̃i                           (35)

where ā > 0 is deterministic and ṽ, a systematic shock, and b̃i , a Þrm-idiosyncratic
shock, are two independent random variables.36 We assume that 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1, E(b̃i ) =
  35
     The analysis also suggests that there may be diﬀerences in how workers are compensated in
clusters vis-a-vis isolated Þrms. In isolation, inducing worker eﬀort is the more important incentive
problem, suggesting that it may be optimal to consider incentive compensation contracts. In clusters,
worker retention is the more important concern for Þrms, so we may expect to see longer-term
compensation contracts to address this issue. Although we have abstracted from these issues in our
model, these compensation issues would be interesting to explore in future work.
  36
     Our previous analysis can be seen as a particular case of this model in which γ = 0.


                                                 28
E(ṽ) = 0, V ar(ṽ) ≡ σv2 , and V ar(b̃i ) ≡ σb2 (and hence, V (ãi ) ≡ σ 2 = γσv2 + (1 − γ)σb2 ).
In addition, we further decompose the systematic shock ṽ into

                                       ṽ = θ1/2 ṽ1 + (1 − θ)1/2 ṽ2                        (36)

                                                         2                    2
where 0 ≤ θ ≤ 1, E(ṽ1 ) = E(ṽ2 ) = 0 and V ar(ṽ1 ) ≡ σv1 and V ar(ṽ2 ) ≡ σv2 . We
assume that the realization of ṽ1 (i.e., v1 ) is known to Þrms after they locate at t = 0
but before they make their training decisions at t = 1 (i.e., h1i ). However, v2 , the
realization of ṽ2 , is known by Þrms only after they have chosen h1i . The parameter θ
measures how much of the aggregate shock is known by Þrms before they make their
training choices.
   As before, a Þrm’s location choice boils down to a comparison of its value in
isolation and in the cluster. In isolation, the human capital created at t = 1, h1i ,
depends on the Þrm’s expected productivity at t = 2, which, for a given realization
of ṽ1 is: E(ãi |v1 ) = ā + θγv1 . Hence, Þrm value conditional on v1 (i.e., ViI |v1 ) can be
obtained after substituting E(ãi |v1 ) for ā in (6)
                                  [α + E(ãi |v1 )]2   (α + ā + θ1/2 γ 1/2 v1 )2
                      ViI |v1   =                    =                            .          (37)
                                        2τ                       2τ
The (unconditional) Þrm value can then be determined by integrating over all possible
values of v1 :
                                               (α + ā)2 θγσv1
                                                             2
                                       ViI =            +      .                             (38)
                                                  2τ      2τ
   Equation (38) shows that although, an isolated Þrm Þnds the distinction between
aggregate and Þrm-speciÞc uncertainty irrelevant, the Þrm achieves a higher value
                     2
                  θγσv1
(i.e., the term    2τ
                          in (38)) when it can incorporate more information (i.e., the shock
v1 ) into their investment decision, h1i .
   In clusters, however, the distinction between aggregate and Þrm-speciÞc risk is
relevant because aggregate shocks, since they aﬀect all Þrms, inßuence the wage at

                                                    29
t = 2. To Þnd the value of a clustered Þrm, we Þrst obtain Þrm and wage values
conditional on given realizations of v1 and v2 , and then, we successively integrate
over v2 and v1 to Þnd the ex-ante (unconditional) Þrm and wage values.
          For a given v1 and v2 , market clearing implies that w|v1 , v2 = ā + γ(θ1/2 v1 + (1 −
θ)1/2 v2 ). Furthermore, the value of a Þrm with realized productivity ai (i.e., v1 , v2 , bi )
is

                                             α2 α(ā + θ1/2 γ 1/2 v1 ) (1 − γ)bi 2
                       ViC |v1 , v2 , bi =      +                     +            .                 (39)
                                             2τ         τ                  2β

Taking expectations over v2 and bi , we Þnd that the expected wage is E(w|v1 ) =
ā + θ 1/2 v1 and that the Þrm value conditional on v1 is:

                                       α2 α(ā + θ 1/2 γ 1/2 v1 ) (1 − γ)σb2
                           ViC |v1 =      +                      +           .                       (40)
                                       2τ          τ                 2β

Finally, by integrating over v1 we Þnd the ex-ante wage, E(w) = ā, and Þrm value,

                                                α2 αā (1 − γ)σb2
                                       ViC =       +   +          .                                  (41)
                                                2τ   τ    2β

Examining (41), note that, in contrast to the case of isolation, Þrms in clusters do
not take advantage of the early release of information about the aggregate shock,
v1 , and, as a result, Þrm value is not aﬀected by ṽ1 . Notice that in the cluster, the
creation of human capital at t = 1 is independent of the aggregate productivity shock
(i.e., h1i = ατ ). While a positive shock in a Þrm’s expected productivity increases, all
else equal, its creation of human capital, a positive aggregate shock also increases the
wage at t = 2 (i.e., w = ā + v1 ) which reduces the Þrm’s incentives to create human
capital.37 In other words, as (20) shows, the creation of human capital by a clustered
     Formally, h1i = ατ + E(ãi |v1 ) − E(w|v1 ) = ατ . The fact that E(ãi |v1 ) = E(w|v1 ) is an artifact
     37

of the production function that we consider. However, the presence of two oﬀsetting eﬀects is quite
general: an increase in expected productivity tends to increase wages and, hence, to discourage
Þrms’ creation of human capital.



                                                       30
Þrm is not determined by its expected productivity, but by the diﬀerence between
                                                            α+(āi −w)
expected productivity and the cluster wage, (i.e., h∗1i =       τ
                                                                       ).
   Also, from (41), notice that the value of clustered Þrms depends on the Þrm-
speciÞc variance, σb2 , but not the variance of the systematic shock, σv2 . This is because
clusters enhance Þrm value by reallocating human capital from Þrms with low produc-
tivity shocks to Þrms with high productivity shocks. In the limiting case where the
shocks are perfectly correlated, i.e., γ = 1, there would be no reallocation of human
capital in the cluster and, hence, no beneÞt to clustering.
   To summarize, one can combine (38) with (41) and express the gains to cluster as

                                       (1 − γ)σb2 θγσv1
                                                      2
                                                         ā2
                         ViC − ViI =             −      − ,                           (42)
                                          2β       2τ    2τ

which leads us to state the following proposition:


Proposition 6 For a given level of total risk, the value of clustering vis-a-vis isola-
tion increases with the relative importance of Þrm-speciÞc risk (low γ) and the level
of the aggregate risk that is not anticipated (low θ).


   Proposition 6 suggests that, empirically, clusters are more valuable in industries
in which Þrms’ productivity experience highly idiosyncratic shocks (i.e., high σb2 ), and
in which aggregate industry productivity is diﬃcult to predict (i.e., low θ).

6.2    Firm-speciÞc risk and technological standards

In this section, we endogenize the technology choice and consider choices involving
the sensitivities of technologies to Þrm-speciÞc and systematic risks. SpeciÞcally, we
assume that Þrms can increase their exposure to Þrm-speciÞc risk (and decrease sys-
tematic risk) by selecting a production process that deviates somewhat from what
we will refer to as “the standard production process.” As we have shown, in clusters,

                                            31
there is a beneÞt associated with increasing Þrm-speciÞc risk that can lead clustered
Þrms to deviate from the industry standard. Oﬀsetting this beneÞt is the possibil-
ity that the adjustment costs associated with transferring workers from one Þrm to
another are higher if a Þrm chooses a less standard production process.
       To examine the choice of technological standards, we endogenize the parameter
that captures the intensity of the adjustment costs at t = 2 (i.e., βi ). In particular,
we assume that a higher βi is associated with a less standard production process and
therefore, with an increase in the Þrm’s exposure to idiosyncratic risk, i.e., in (35) we
set (1 − γ) = g(βi ) where 0 < g(βi ) < 1, g 0 > 0 and g 00 < 0, and hence:

                            ãi = ā + (1 − g(βi ))1/2 ṽ + g(βi )1/2 b̃i ,                  (43)

where, as before, ṽ is a systematic shock and b̃i is a Þrm speciÞc shock. Shocks ṽ
and b̃i are independent, with zero mean, and variances σv2 and σb2 respectively, and
therefore,

                                σi2 = [1 − g(βi )]σv2 + g(βi )σb2 .                          (44)

       Firms choose their technology (i.e., βi ) after locating, but before starting the
initial stage of production. For simplicity, we assume that both the industry and the
Þrm-speciÞc shocks are unanticipated, i.e., θ = 0.
                                                                                          (α+ā)2
       Consistent with our analysis in section 6.1, in isolation, Þrm value is ViI =        2τ
                                                                                                  ,
which is not aﬀected by adjustment costs and the choice of risk.38 However, in clusters,
these choices do aﬀect Þrm value:39

                                          α2 αā g(βi )σb2
                                  ViC =      +   +         .                                 (45)
                                          2τ   τ   2βi
  38
     This is because (i) in isolation, Þrms do not adjust their scale at t = 2 and (ii) the shocks
(Þrm-speciÞc and aggregate) are unanticipated.
  39
     It is easy to check that, in this case, w = ā, h∗1i = ατ , and h∗2i = h∗1i + aiβ−w
                                                                                      i
                                                                                         .


                                                 32
Therefore, comparing Þrm values in clusters vis-à-vis in isolation, we get:

                                                  g(βi )σb2  ā2
                                  ViC − ViI =               − .                                (46)
                                                    2βi      2τ

       As (46) shows, a more idiosyncratic technology, (i.e., a higher βi ) produces two
opposing eﬀects: (i) it makes the redeployability of human capital costlier and hence,
reduces the value of locating in the cluster and (ii) it makes the possibility of rede-
ploying human capital more valuable (i.e., higher idiosyncratic variance g(βi )σb2 ) and
hence, increases the value of clustering. From the f.o.c. in (45) (i.e., maxβi ViC ), we
obtain:

                                     β ∗ g 0 (β ∗ ) − g(β ∗ ) = 0.                             (47)

       As a Þnal observation notice that previous results suggest that, empirically, the
choice of technology by a Þrm is correlated with its location. This is because while
idiosyncratic risk and low adjustment costs increase the real option value of being in
the cluster, they do not have any impact on isolated Þrms. Therefore, if there is, say,
a trade-oﬀ between the mean and variance of diﬀerent technologies, an isolated Þrm
will choose the technology that maximizes expected productivity, while clustered Þrms
will face a trade-oﬀ between expected productivity and speciÞcity (i.e., idiosyncratic
risk and adjustment costs).40 SpeciÞcally, Þrms within a cluster are willing to take
on more risk, subject to being not too incompatible with their competitors.


7        OverconÞdence and the location choice

Up to this point we have assumed that entrepreneurs make rational location choices.
However, there is substantial evidence in the psychology literature that suggests that
  40
    Isolated Þrms may actually choose technologies that are more or less risky than the technologies
chosen by clustered Þrms. Firms within clusters beneÞt from (idiosyncratic) risk but also, from
being compatible with other Þrms within the cluster.

                                                 33
individuals are overconÞdent about their abilities (e.g., Einhorn 1980), and there is
an extensive literature that explores the implications of overconÞdence on economic
behavior.
       To explore the eﬀect of overconÞdence on the location choice, we extend the basic
model from sections 2 and 3 to allow for the possibility that entrepreneurs have biased
perceptions of their Þrms’ expected productivity. SpeciÞcally, at t = 0, entrepreneur i
wrongly believes that Þrm i’s expected productivity is above the average productivity
of the economy, āoi = ā + ∆ with ∆ > 0, but correctly believes that the rest of the
Þrms have the same expected productivity ā. Workers understand that entrepreneurs
are overconÞdent and act accordingly.41
       In isolation, the analysis with overconÞdence corresponds to the analysis in the
                                                       ∗                ∗   α+āoi
basic model with productivity āoi , so h2 = h∗1 and h1 =                    τ
                                                                                   .   Hence, from (6), the
                                  I
“perceived” Þrm value at t = 0, Vi,o can be expressed as:

                                              I                      ∆ ∆
                                            Vi,o = ViI + (α + ā +    ) ,                              (48)
                                                                     2 τ
                 α2       αā       ā2
where ViI =      2τ
                      +   τ
                                +    2
                                        .   We can also compute the Þrm value under the “true”
                                    I
distribution of Þrm productivity, Vi,T :

                                                    I            ∆2
                                                  Vi,T = ViI −      .                                  (49)
                                                                 2τ

Notice that while overconÞdence increases the perceived value (which is the value on
                                             I
which the Þrm bases its location decision) Vi,o > ViI , it induces Þrms to overinvest in
human capital and hence, reduces the true Þrm value (which we use to analyze the
                                                I
welfare implications of the location choice), Vi,T < ViI .
       In clusters, overconÞdence increases the creation of human capital by Þrms, i.e.
  41
    In this setting, it is irrelevant what a given Þrm i thinks about other Þrms’ overconÞdence. As
we show below, this is because w, the only variable that may alter Þrms’ decisions, is not aﬀected
by Þrms’ overconÞdence.


                                                           34
 ∗                                                                                   ∗       ∗
h1i =       α+∆
             τ
                  and the demand for skilled workers at t = 2, i.e., h2i = h1i + ai −w
                                                                                    β
                                                                                       .42 Notice
that, at t = 2, overconÞdence increases the aggregate supply and demand of skilled
labor at t = 2 by the same amount and, hence, leaves unaﬀected the cluster wage,
w = ā.43 Therefore, substituting previous expressions in (16), we obtain
                                                                           Ã             !
                                 C                 ∆               ∆2          1 1
                               Vi,o     =   ViC   + (α + ā + ∆) +              −  ,             (50)
                                                   τ               2           β τ
                     α2       αā       σ2
where ViC =          2τ
                          +   τ
                                    +   2β
                                           ,   and computing the expectation of Þrm value under the
true distribution of Þrm productivity, we get

                                                    C                  ∆ ∆
                                                  Vi,T = ViC + (ā −    ) .                      (51)
                                                                       2 τ
Expression (50) shows that, as in isolation, overconÞdence increases perceived value,
  C
Vi,o > ViC . Furthermore, in contrast to isolation, Vi,T
                                                      C
                                                         > ViC for moderate over-
                                C
conÞdence, i.e., ∆ < 2ā, and Vi,T < ViC for excessive overconÞdence, i.e., ∆ > 2ā.
Intuitively, overconÞdence allows the Þrm to commit to training more workers and
hence, ameliorates the problem of underinvestment of human capital. However, ex-
cessive overconÞdence can lead to the creation of too much human capital and reduce
Þrm value.
       Given the above analysis, it is straightforward to show that overconÞdence in-
creases the tendency of Þrms to cluster. SpeciÞcally,

                                           C                               ∆2
                                        (Vi,o − ViC ) − (Vi,o
                                                           I
                                                              − ViI ) =       > 0.               (52)
                                                                           2β
This is consistent with results from previous sections which indicate that Þrms with
(expected) productivity above the cluster average have an incentive to join the cluster.
In addition, overconÞdence has welfare eﬀects. We summarize all these results in the
following proposition:
        ∗     ∗                                                        ∗
  42
     h2i = h1i + ai β−w follows immediately from (8) and h1i = α+∆
                                                                τ  follows from (20).
  43
     Although the wage remains unchanged, the linkages between periods that appear as a conse-
quence of adjustments costs have important eﬀects on the welfare results discussed below.

                                                             35
                                                                                         σ2           ā2
Proposition 7 Assume that without overconÞdence Þrms cluster, (i.e.,                     β
                                                                                               >       τ
                                                                                                          ),
then overconÞdence increases welfare (i.e., true Þrm value) if and only if ∆ < 2ā.
                                                                                    σ2        ā2
Assume alternatively that without overconÞdence Þrms isolate (i.e.,                 β
                                                                                         <     τ
                                                                                                  )   and
                   2       1                      2    σ2
deÞne ∆0 ≡ ( βāτ − σ 2 ) 2 and ∆1 ≡ 2ā − ( āτ −     β
                                                          )   then overconÞdence:
(i) leaves Þrms in isolation and reduces welfare if ∆ < ∆0 .
(ii) leads Þrms to cluster if ∆0 < ∆, and increases welfare if and only if ∆0 < ∆ < ∆1 .


       We Þnish this section discussing the robustness of its main result, namely, the fact
that overconÞdence leads to more clustering.44 While a comprehensive analysis of the
eﬀects of overconÞdence on Þrm location is beyond the scope of this paper, we can
examine some of the eﬀects previously discussed. For instance, when one considers
worker eﬀort, overconÞdence will enter the location choice through an additional
channel. In particular, as we showed in section 5, when workers contribute to the
creation of their human capital, Þrms with relatively high productivity beneÞt from
being in a cluster, while Þrms with relatively low productivity beneÞt from being in
isolation. In the terminology of section 5, eﬀort-eﬀects are positive for Þrms which
have or believe they have future productivity that is above the average. This reinforces
the conclusion that clusters are more likely to emerge when Þrms are overconÞdent
about their future productivities.
       We also could have considered an analysis in which workers, as well as entre-
preneurs are subject to overconÞdence. In this case, a relatively straightforward
extension of our model would suggest an additional force that encourages clustering.
SpeciÞcally, since high ability workers capture the gains associated with their superior
human capital within a cluster, but not when they are isolated, workers who believe
  44
    A parallel analysis with “underconÞdence” (i.e., ∆ < 0) may have some similar eﬀects on location
but will not lead to value creation in clusters. The reason is that while overconÞdence serves as a
commitment to train workers, alleviating the time inconsistency problem, underconÞdence will have
the opposite eﬀect.


                                                36
that they have superior ability will prefer locating within the cluster, leading to lower
expected wages that attract Þrms.45


8        Concluding remarks

In the early literature on location choice, transportation costs play a key role. Cities
arise because of proximity to transportation hubs (e.g., ports) as well as to relatively
immobile factors of production. While these theories are still quite important, they
do not really apply to what we refer to as knowledge-based Þrms, which require skilled
labor, very little transportation costs, and have no exogenous natural locations. There
is substantial evidence that the share of aggregate output coming from knowledge-
based Þrms continues to increase, so it is natural to ask whether this trend will have
an inßuence on the development of our urban areas.46
       In contrast to most of the discussion in the literature, the model developed in this
paper suggests that Þrms in knowledge-based industries will not necessarily choose to
cluster. SpeciÞcally, we show that the incentive for Þrms to locate in industry clusters
is determined by how skills are developed, the nature of uncertainty, the expected
growth rate of the industry and the ability of Þrms to expand and contract. When
workers contribute to their own training, and when there is a substantial amount
of Þrm speciÞc uncertainty, there are likely to be substantial gains to clustering.
  45
     However, not every conceivable extension of the model would lead toward a clustering eﬀect
of overconÞdence. For instance, if a Þrm is overconÞdent about its ability to train workers (i.e.,
low τo ) or about the industry prospects (i.e., high ā), then overconÞdence exacerbates the perceived
                                                           āo
underinvestment problem in clusters (i.e., hIi − hC i = τo ), and may foster isolation. We thank Ed
Glaeser for suggesting these qualiÞcations to our conclusions.
  46
     Consistent with the increased importance of what we have characterized as knowledge-based
Þrms, a recent paper by Glaeser and Kohlhase (2003) provide evidence that indicates that trans-
portation costs for goods declined considerably in the 20th century, while transportation costs for
people increased. They Þnd that the U.S. population has moved away from transportation hubs to
regions with better consumption opportunities (e.g., better weather). However, they do not examine
whether cities have become more economically focused, which one would expect if knowledge-based
Þrms tend to cluster to take advantage of knowledge spillovers.


                                                 37
However, in growing industries, in which Þrms invest substantial amounts in their
workers’ human capital, Þrms may be better oﬀ locating apart.
       A number of policy issues are raised by the analysis. First, when there are eco-
nomic advantages associated with clustering, there can be coordination issues that
policymakers need to address. For example, our model suggests that there can be
ineﬃcient equilibria where too few Þrms cluster, which in turn, suggests that there
may be potential gains from policies that indirectly promote clusters, perhaps by of-
fering training subsidies. On the other hand, if entrepreneurs are overconÞdent there
can be too much clustering, which suggests that policies that promote clustering can
potentially be misguided.
       Policymakers also like to think about issues relating to competing clusters. Indeed,
representatives of the high tech community in Austin, Texas think about competing
with the Silicon Valley cluster and the Hong Kong Þnancial community often express
concerns about their competitive advantage relative to Singapore. Since our model is
restricted to equilibria with single clusters, we do not address this issue directly, how-
ever, the analysis has implications that can be extended to evaluate the competitive
advantage of diﬀerent clusters.47 SpeciÞcally, the more successful clusters are likely
to be those that attract Þrms that are diﬀerent in dimensions that make them sensi-
tive to diﬀerent economic shocks, yet similar enough to share resources. In addition,
clusters will be more successful in regions where workers have the ability to acquire
human capital without a substantial investment by Þrms. Indeed, Saxenian (1994),
in a study of the computer industries in Silicon Valley and Route 128, concluded that
Silicon Valley was much more successful that Boston in the 1980s because cross-Þrm
networking opportunities in Silicon Valley facilitated the reallocation of workers be-
  47
    See Porter (1990) for an extensive discussion on this topic which includes both the implications
on productive decisions by Þrms as well as on public policy.



                                                38
tween Þrms (i.e., reduced adjustment costs) and helped the more industrious workers
develop their human capital.
   Finally, it should be noted that factors that determine the extent to which Þrms
isolate and cluster in physical space can also be applied to the extent to which Þrms
locate in other dimensions as well. For example, competitors may be better able to
pool labor and other inputs if the Þrms have similar products, similar production
processes, and similar organizational structures. We believe that the analysis in
this paper can be applied to address issues relating to industrial clustering on these
dimensions, as well as to a theory of corporate inertia, that would arise if corporations
are reluctant to adopt innovations because of costs associated with deviating from the
cluster.




                                           39
9       Technical Appendix
9.1       Proofs

Proposition 1

It follows immediately from the text.

Proposition 2
                                      d(ViC −ViI )                      d(ViC −ViI )                     2     2          d(ViC −ViI )
Taking derivatives in (23):               dσ2
                                                         =    1
                                                             2β
                                                                  >0,       dτ
                                                                                       = − (āi −w)
                                                                                                 2β 2
                                                                                                      +σ
                                                                                                         < 0,                 dβ
                                                                                                                                          =
w2                d(ViC −ViI )       |āi −w|
2τ 2
       > 0, and     d|āi −w|
                                 =        β
                                                > 0.
Proposition 3

(i) Because aL ≤ w ≤ aH , a suﬃcient condition for isolation is that, for the maximal

diﬀerences with the wage, Þrms of extreme proÞtability (i.e., aL and aH ) Þnd isolation
                                                                           (āL −āH )2 +σ2           āH 2
desirable. That is, if āi = aL and w = āH , then                                2β
                                                                                                  −    2τ
                                                                                                              < 0 and if āi = aH
                         (āH −āL )2 +σ2        āL 2
and w = āL , then              2β
                                             −    2τ
                                                         < 0.
                                                                                                                   (āi −ā)2 +σ 2       ā2
(ii) If all Þrms cluster, then w = ā. Substituting w for ā in (23) yields                                              2β
                                                                                                                                     −   2τ
                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                σ2         a2
Hence, a suﬃcient condition for the cluster to exist is                         β
                                                                                       >   τ
                                                                                              .
             d(ViC −ViI )        āi −w
(iii) From       dāi
                            =        β
                                        ,   it follows that if Þrm k (Þrm j ) with expected productivity

āk < w (āj > w ) belongs to the cluster, then Þrm k 0 (Þrm j 0 ) with āk0 < āk (āj 0 > āj )
will also belong to the cluster. Therefore, a partial cluster will be composed of all the Þrms

whose expected productivities belong to the set [aL , acL ]∪[acH , aH ], where ācL and ācH are the

cluster limits. To characterize these cluster limits we need to solve for the āi ’s that leave

Þrms indiﬀerent between the cluster and isolation. Setting ViC − ViI = 0 in (23), we get

ācL (w) = w−( βτ w2 −σ 2 )1/2 and ācH (w) = w+( βτ w2 −σ 2 )1/2 . Hence, an equilibrium where
                                 / (ācL , ācH ) cluster is characterized by the simultaneous
only Þrms with productivities ai ∈

                                                                             / (ācL , ācH )] .
solution of the limit equations and the wage equation, i.e., w = E [āi |āi ∈

Proposition 4
                                                 w
From (34), notice that if (āi −                 2
                                                   )     < 0 then ∆Vi,lC < 0, while if (āi − w) > 0 then


                                                                  40
                                              d∆Vi,lC                                        ³            ´               2
                                                                             dhl∗                     w            (2l∗ +l∗ )(āi −w)            (2āi −w)l∗
∆Vi,lC > 0. From (33),                         dāi
                                                         = l∗ hl∗
                                                               1i +
                                                                               1i ∗
                                                                             dāi
                                                                                  l           āi −   2
                                                                                                              −            τ
                                                                                                                                           +           τ
                                                                                                                                                                  =
              (1+l∗ )l∗ (āi − w                    ∗2                   2l∗ (āi − w
                                                                                                                   ³                    ´
                                 )           (2l∗ +l    )(āi −w)                     )                       l∗              1+l∗
l∗ hl∗
    1i +               τ
                               2
                                     −                 τ
                                                                     +           τ
                                                                                    2
                                                                                              = l∗ hl∗
                                                                                                    1i +      τ
                                                                                                                     āi +     2
                                                                                                                                   w           > 0.
Proposition 5
                                                                    C                                     ∗
                                                              d∆Vi,l           l∗ (āi + 1+l   w)
From the proof of proposition 4,                               dāi
                                                                        = l∗ hl∗
                                                                              1i +      τ
                                                                                           2
                                                                                                    and taking the derivative in
                                              d(ViC −ViI )                                       C −V I )
                                                                                             d(Vi,l              d∆V C   d(ViC −ViI )
(23) with respect to āi ,                        dāi
                                                                = āi −w
                                                                      β
                                                                         . Adding up:             dāi
                                                                                                        i,l
                                                                                                             = dāii,l +     dāi
                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                               C      I
                                                                                          d(Vi,l −Vi,l )
Furthermore, if α (and hence, hl∗
                               1i )                             is large enough then           dāi
                                                                                                            > 0.
Proposition 6

It follows immediately from the text.

Proposition 7

Because overconÞdence induces clustering, Þrms that would cluster in the absence of over-

conÞdence will also cluster in the presence of overconÞdence. Therefore, overconÞdence
                                                                                                                                                ∆
changes true Þrm value according to (51), which is positive if and only if ā >                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                  .

However, Þrms that isolate in the absence of overconÞdence (i.e., ViC − ViI < 0) may
                                      C      I
cluster due to overconÞdence (i.e., Vi,o − Vi,o > 0). SpeciÞcally, from (52) and (17):
                                                                                                                                  2
                        σ2         ā2         ∆2
  C
Vi,o     I
     − Vi,o =           2β
                             −     2τ
                                         +     2β
                                                       which is positive if and only if: ∆ > ( βā
                                                                                               2τ
                                                                                                   − σ 2 )1/2 ≡ ∆0 .
                                                                                                                                            I −V I )
                                                                                                                                        d(Vi,T  i
Therefore, if ∆ < ∆0 Þrms remain isolated and, welfare is reduced (i.e.,                                                                     d∆
                                                                                                                                                            < 0).
                                                                                                                          ³                ´
                                                       C                                                                               ∆           σ2       ā2
Otherwise, if ∆ > ∆0 Þrms cluster, and in that case: Vi,T − ViI = ā −                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                               +   2β
                                                                                                                                                        −   2τ
                                                                                                                                                                  >
                             ā2         σ2
0 ⇔ ∆ < 2ā − ( τ −                      β
                                              ) ≡ ∆1 .

9.2        Other technical derivations

Equation (16)
                                                                                     ãi −ā                                      α
Substituting in (13) w = ā, h∗2i = h1i +                                               β
                                                                                             ,    and he1i = h∗1i =               τ
                                                                                                                                    ,      implies ViC =
α2       α2                                                       (ãi −ā)2
τ
     −   2τ
              + E[(ãi − ā)( ατ +                ãi −ā
                                                     β
                                                          )   −       2β
                                                                             ]   +    αā
                                                                                      τ
                                                                                          ,   which simpliÞed yields (16).

Equation (19)
                                                                                 ãi −ā                                      α+ā
Substituting in (18) w = ā, h∗2i = h1i +                                           β
                                                                                         ,    and he1i = h∗1i =                τ
                                                                                                                                   ,    implies ViF B =
                        2                                                                     2
α(α+ā)
   τ
          − (α+ā)
              2τ
                   + E[(ãi − ā)( α+ā
                                    τ
                                        + ãiβ−ā ) − (ãi2β
                                                          −ā)
                                                               ] + (α+ā)ā
                                                                     τ
                                                                            , which simpliÞed yields (19).

                                                                                 41
Equation (21)
                                                                       ãi −w                                       α+(āi −w)
Substituting in (13) w = ā, h∗2i = h1i +                                  β
                                                                              ,   and he1i = h∗1i =                     τ
                                                                                                                                      implies, ViC =
α(α+(āi −w))              (α+(āi −w))2                                                                 (ãi −w)2
     τ
                    −           2τ
                                           + E[(ãi − w)( α+(āτi −w) +                  ãi −w
                                                                                             β
                                                                                                )   −         2β
                                                                                                                   ]      +    (α+(āi −w))w
                                                                                                                                     τ
                                                                                                                                             ,           which

simpliÞed yields (21).

Equation (29)
                                               τ (hl1i )2                                     (hl∗        l 2
                                                                                                2i −(1+l)h1i )
                                                                                                                      e                2
Starting from Vi,lC = αhl1i −                      2
                                                            + E[(ãi − w) hl∗
                                                                           2i − β                     2
                                                                                                               ] + hl1i (w(1 + l) − kl2 )
                                                                                   ai −w                 w                 e                         α
and substituting w = ā, hl∗           l
                          2i = (1 + l)h1i +                                           β
                                                                                         ,   l =         k
                                                                                                              and hl1i = hl∗
                                                                                                                          1i =                       τ
                                                                                                                                                         then,
           α2          α2                                                 ai −ā         (ai −ā)2                                       k( kā )2
Vi,lC =    τ
                  −    2τ
                             + E[(ãi − ā)( ατ (1 + kā ) +                β
                                                                                 )   −      2β
                                                                                                   ]    + ατ (ā(1 + āk ) −                2
                                                                                                                                                     ) which
simpliÞed yields (29).

Equation (33)
                                                                         ai −w                                                                       e
Starting as in the derivation of (29) and substituting hl∗        ∗ l
                                                        2i = (1 +l )h1i + β    and hl1i = hl1i
                                      ∗2
                                  τ hl1i       E(ãi −w)2              k·l                          ∗2
then, Vi,lC = αhl∗
                1i −                 2
                                           +      + hl∗
                                                   2β
                                                                ∗                                l∗
                                                      1i [(1 + l )āi − 2 ]. Then, expressing Q(hi ) =
                                                         2
                (hl∗
                  1i )
                       2                           (h∗ )
αhl∗
  1i − τ          2
                           and Q(h∗i ) = αh∗1i − τ 1i2 and simplifying we get (33).

Equation (34)
                                                                                                                      2
                                                                 τ (hl∗  2                                   τ (h∗1i )                α+(āi −w)(1+l∗ )
                                                                     1i )
Substituting in (33), Q(hl∗      l∗
                         i ) = αh1i −                                2
                                                                           ,   Q(h∗i ) = αh∗1i −                 2
                                                                                                                          , hl∗
                                                                                                                             1i =             τ
                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                 w            ³                ´    [( w )2 + 2w ](āi −w)2
          α+(āi −w)                       w                                     w α+(āi −w)(1+ k )                      w
h∗1i =        τ
                            and l∗ =       k
                                             , we obtain ∆Vi,lC           =      k         τ
                                                                                                                 āi −    2
                                                                                                                               −       k       k
                                                                                                                                               2τ
                                                                                                                                                            ]+
w
k
  (āi −w)āi
     τ
                , and simplifying we get (34).

Equation (39)
                                                                        τ h21i                                            (h∗2i −h1i )2
From (13), we get ViC |υ1 , υ2 , bi = αh1i −                              2
                                                                                 + E[(ãi − w) h∗2i − β                         2
                                                                                                                                        |υ1 , υ2 , bi ]     +
                                                                                                    h                                           i
he1i E [w|υ1 ] . Then, recognizing that w|υ1 , υ2 = ā + γ 1/2 θ 1/2 υ1 + (1 − θ)1/2 υ2 , h∗2i =
         (1−γ)1/2 b̃i                                   α
h1i +        β
                      ,      and he1i = h∗1i =          τ
                                                          ,   ViC |υ1 , υ2 , bi can be simpliÞed to obtain (39).
Equation (49)
                               α+ā+∆
Plug h∗2i = h∗1i =               τ
                                           in (4) and simplify to get (49).

Equation (50)
                                                             ·                                               ¸
                     C                     τ h21i                                         (h∗ −h )2
Start from         Vi,o     = αh1i −         2
                                                    + Eo (ãi −         w) h∗2i      −   β 2i 2 1i               + he1i w, and insert w = ā,
                                                                                                                                                  2
h∗2i = h1i + (ãi −w)
                  β
                      , he1i = h∗1i =                α+∆
                                                      τ
                                                         ,                                      C
                                                                 and Eo (ãi ) = ā+∆ to get, Vi,o =                               α(α+∆)
                                                                                                                                      τ
                                                                                                                                          − (α+∆)
                                                                                                                                              2τ
                                                                                                                                                            +

                                                                          42
                        ãi −ā          (ãi −ā)2         (α+∆)ā
Eo [(ãi − ā)( α+∆
                 τ
                    +      β
                                )   −        2β
                                                    ]   +      τ
                                                                    ,   which simpliÞed is (50).

Equation (51)
                                    ãi −ā                               α+∆
Plug w = ā, h∗2i = h1i +              β
                                            ,   and he1i = h∗1i =          τ
                                                                                 in (13) and simplify to get (51).



Example of multiple (Pareto ranked) equilibria.
                                                                 11                 189
Individual Þrms technologies: β = 1; τ =                          8
                                                                    ,   and σ 2 =   11
                                                                                          and the empirical distribution

of āi is piecewise uniform (i.e., uniform in subintervals [2,3], [3,4], [4,6], [6,9] and [9,10]) such
                                                                                                                  Rx
that G(2)=0; G(3)=0.2; G(4)=0.6; G(6)=0.72; G(9)=0.8; G(10)=1, where G(x)≡                                         2   g(āi ).
Under these conditions, and using the expressions derived in the proof of proposition 3

above, the following clusters can emerge:

(1) A “high-wage” cluster with w = 6 and limits {acL , acH } = {3, 9}. That is: w = E[āi |

    / [3, 9]] = 6; acL (6) = 3 and acH (6) = 9.
āi ∈
(2) A “low-wage” cluster with w = 5 and limits {acL , acH } = {4, 6}. That is: w = E[āi |

    / [4, 6]] = 5; acL (5) = 4 and acH (5) = 6.
āi ∈
Notice that the low-wage cluster Pareto-dominates the high-cluster one, because, even the

lowest expected productivity Þrm (i.e., aL = 2) beneÞts from having a w = 5 rather than
                                d(ViC −ViI )                −(āi −w)− β w              3
                                                                                 −āi + 11 w             3
w = 6. In other words,              dw
                                                    =              β
                                                                       τ
                                                                             =        β
                                                                                               < 0 ⇐⇒   11
                                                                                                           w   < ai , which
holds for aL = 2, w = 6.




                                                                  43
                               REFERENCES

Ciccone, A. and Hall, Robert E. “Productivity and the Density of Economic
    Activity.” American Economic Review,1996, Vol. 86, pp. 54-70.

Combes, Pierre-Phillippe and Duranton, Gilles. “Labour Pooling, Labour
    Poaching, and Spatial Clustering.” Center for Economic Policy Research (Lon-
    don) Discussion Paper No. 2975, 2001.

Dumais, Guy, Ellison, Glenn and Glaeser, Edward, L. ”Dynamic Concen-
    tration as a Dynamic Process”, 1997, NBER Working Paper no. 6270.

Duranton, Gilles and Puga, Diego. “Microfoundations of Urban Agglomeration
    Economies.” London School of Economics and University of Toronto, 2003.

Einhorn, Hillel J. “OverconÞdence in Judgement.” New Directions for Methodol-
    ogy of Social and Behavioral Science 4, 1-16.

Ellison, Glenn and Glaeser, Edward L. “Geographic Concentration in U.S.
    Manufacturing Industries: A Dartboard Approach.” Journal of Political Econ-
    omy, 1997, 109(5), pp. 889-927.

Fujita, Masahisa, Krugman, Paul and Venables, Anthony J. The Spatial
    Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.

Fujita, Masahisa, Thisse, Jaques-Francois. Economics of Agglomeration. Cam-
    bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Ellison, Glenn and Glaeser, Edward L. “The Geographic Concentration of In-
    dustry: Does Natural Advantage Explain Agglomeration?” American Economic
    Review, 1999, Vol. 89, No. 2, pp. 311-316.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Kohlhase, Janet E. “Cities, Regions and the Decline
    of Transportation Costs.” HIER Working Paper No. 2014, July 2003.

                                       44
Grossman, Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan. “Integration in a Global Econ-
    omy.” National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge) Working Paper No.
    8728, 2002.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Hart, Oliver D. “The Costs and BeneÞts of Own-
    ership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration.” The Journal of Political
    Economy, 1986, 96(4), pp. 691-719.

Hart, O. and Moore, John. “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of
    Human Capital.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1994, 109, pp. 841-79.

Helsley, Robert W. and Strange, William C. “Matching and Agglomeration
    Economies in a System of Cities.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 1990,
    20(2), pp. 189-212.

Helsley, Robert W. and Strange, William C. “Agglomeration Economies and
    Urban Capital Markets.” Journal of Urban Economics, 1991, 29(1), pp. 96-112.

Henderson, J. Vernon. “Eﬃciency of Resource Usage and City Size.” Journal of
    Urban Economics, 1986, 19, pp. 47-70.

Holmes, Thomas. J. and Stevens, John J. “Geographic Concentration and
    Establishment Scale” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2002, 84(4), pp. 682-
    691.

Krugman, Paul. Geography and Trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.

Manes Stephen and Andrews,Paul. Gates: How Microsoft’s Mogul Reinvented
    an Industry-And Made Himself the Richest Man in America. New York: Touch-
    stone Books, 1994.

McLaren, John. “Globalization and Vertical Structure.” American Economic
    Review, 2000, 90(5), pp. 1239-1254.


                                       45
Marshall, Alfred. Principles of Economics. London: Macmillan, 1890.

Mortesen, Dale T. and Pissarides, Christopher A. “New Developments of
    Models of Search in the Labor Market.” In Orley Ashenfelter and David Cars
    (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3., pp. 2567-2627. Amsterdam:
    Elsevier, 1999.

Matouschek, Niko and Robert-Nicoud, Frederic. “The Role of Human Cap-
    ital Investments in the Location Decision of Firms.” Northwestern University
    and University of Geneva, 2003.

Porter, Michael E. The Competitive Advantage of Nations. New York : Free
    Press, 1990.

Pissarides, Christopher. Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. Cambridge MA:
    MIT Press, 2000.

Rauch, James E. “Does History Matter Only When It Matters Little? The Case
    of City-Industry Location.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1993, 108
    (3), pp. 843-867.

Rosenthal, Stuart S. and William C. Strange. “The Urban Rat Race,” Syra-
    cuse University Working Paper, 2002.

Rotemberg, Julio J. and Garth Saloner. “Competition and Human Capital
    Accumulation: A Theory of Interregional Specialization and Trade. ” Regional
    Science and Urban Economics, 2000, 30(4), pp. 373-404.

Saxenian, Annalee. Regional Advantage. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
    Press, 1994.




                                      46
