NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PATENTS AND R&D AS REAL OPTIONS
Eduardo S. Schwartz
Working Paper 10114
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10114
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2003

I am grateful for the comments of Mark Moon, Jason Hsu, Marc Kelly, and seminar participants at CEMFI
in Madrid, University of Valencia, Itam in Mexico City, RiskLab Conference in Madrid, UCLA School of
Public Health, University of Maryland, New York University, Emery University, Universidad Catolica in
Santiago and CIRANO in Montreal. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Eduardo S. Schwartz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Patents and R&D as Real Options
Eduardo S. Schwartz
NBER Working Paper No. 10114
November 2003
JEL No. G31, O22, O32
ABSTRACT
This article develops and implements a simulation approach to value patents and patent-protected R&D
projects based on the Real Options approach. It takes into account uncertainty in the cost-to-completion of
the project, uncertainty in the cash flows to be generated from the project, and the possibility of catastrophic
events that could put an end to the effort before it is completed. It also allows for the possibility of
abandoning the project when costs turn out to be larger than expected or when estimated cash flows turn out
to be smaller than anticipated. This abandonment option represents a very substantial part of the project's
value when the project is marginal or/and when uncertainty is large.
The model presented can be used to evaluate the effects of regulation on the cost of innovation and the
amount on innovative output. The main focus of the article is the pharmaceutical industry. The framework,
however, applies just as well to other research-intensive industries such as software or hardware development.

Eduardo S. Schwartz
Anderson School at UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
eschwart@anderson.ucla.edu

1. Introduction
The pharmaceutical industry has become a research-oriented sector that makes a major
contribution to health care. The success of the industry in generating a stream of new
drugs with important therapeutic benefits has created an intense public policy debate over
issues such as the financing of the cost of research, the prices charged for its products and
the socially optimal degree of patent protection.1
There is a trade-off between promoting innovative efforts and securing
competitive market outcomes. The expected monopoly profits from ethical drug sales
during the life of the patent compensate the innovator for its risky investment, while the
onset of competition after the expiration of the patent limits the deadweight losses to
society that arise from monopoly pricing under the patent. The research-oriented sector
of the pharmaceutical industry relies heavily on the patent system.
“Because regulation has had important effects on the cost of innovation in the
pharmaceutical industry, a great deal of research has been done on the innovation end of
the trade-off between innovation and competition. The cost of innovation, the effect of
regulation on cost and innovative output, and the dependence of pharmaceutical
manufacturers’ rents on innovation have been much studied.”2
In this article I take the regulatory environment as given and concentrate on the
valuation of an R&D project that is patent protected. I also present a methodology to
determine the value of a patent to develop a particular product (e.g. a drug). The model
presented, however, can be used to evaluate the effects of regulation on the cost of
innovation and the amount on innovative output. This can be accomplished by analyzing

1
2

This discussion is based on Caves et al. (1991).
Caves et al. (1991), page 2.

3

the effect on valuation and optimal abandonment policy of changes in the regulatory
parameters in the model. The focus of this article is the pharmaceutical industry. The
framework, however, applies just as well to other research-intensive industries such as
software or hardware development.
The analysis of R&D projects is one of the most difficult investment problems.
The development of a drug, for example, can take ten or more years to complete. During
all this period, investments have to be made without reaping any of the possible benefits
of the investment, and with a significant probability of having to put an end to the effort
for technical or economic reasons. In addition, even for successful efforts, there is
uncertainty about the actual costs of development. Further, after the drug has been
successfully developed and approved by the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) there is
substantial uncertainty about the sales and cash flows that it will generate. To value the
R&D project or patent, these cash flows have to be assessed long before they are realized.
The approach taken in this article is to treat the R&D project or the patent as a
complex option on the variables underlying the value of the project, which in this case are
the expected costs to completion and the estimated cash flows after completion.
Uncertainty is introduced in the analysis by allowing these variables to follow stochastic
processes through time. This type of approach, generally known as the Real Options
approach, has been successfully applied to value mines (Brennan and Schwartz (1985)),
oil leases (Paddock, et al. (1988)), and many other real assets.3
Several papers in the economics and finance literature study the issue of
investment in patents and R&D. For example, Pakes (1985) provides an empirical

4

characterization of the dynamic relationship among the number of successful patent
applications of industrial firms and the stock market valuation of the firm. Pakes (1986)
looks at the annual renewal fee patent-holders must pay in order to keep their patents in
force, and develops and estimates a model which allows to recover the distribution of
returns for holding patents at each age over the lifespan of patents. Bloom and Van
Reenen (2000) look at the impact of patents on productivity and market value using
patent citations as a proxy for innovation. Parry, Rose and Smith (1999) study the
appropriate sources of financing for biotechnology firms and conclude that, contrary to
the pecking order theory of capital structure, equity or equity-type securities issues are at
the top of the pecking order.
Childs and Triantis (1999) examine dynamic R&D investment policies and the
valuation of R&D programs in a real options framework. They focus on the interactions
across projects and look at optimal policies for a firm with multiple R&D projects that
can run in parallel or sequentially. They also introduce capital rationing constraints and
competition into the analysis. Myers and Howe (1997) present a life cycle model of
investments in pharmaceutical R&D programs. Uncertainty is explicitly accounted in the
model, which is solved using Monte Carlo simulation.
There are two papers that are closest to this one. The first one is Schwartz and
Moon (2000) which deals with some of the same issues discussed in this paper. There
are important differences, however, both in the formulation of the problem and in the
solution procedure between Schwartz and Moon and this article. In Schwartz and Moon,
once investment in R&D is completed, the owner of the project receives the value of the

3

There is a large and growing literature on Real Options. See for example Dixit and Pindyck (1994) and

5

approved drug in the form of a single cash flow. In that framework calendar time does
not enter into the solution of the problem. In this paper, more realistically, upon approval
the owner starts receiving cash flows with timing, and possibly duration, depending on
the duration of the R&D investment. If a patent is obtained before the completion of the
R&D investment, the duration of the cash flows will depend critically on the duration of
the investment; that is, it will be path dependant. Since now both the duration of the
investment and the duration of the cash flows are random variables, the problem cannot
be easily solved directly from the partial differential equation. In this paper, the problem
is solved by Monte Carlo simulation adapting the procedure developed by Longstaff and
Schwartz (2001) for valuing American type options. This provides for the option to
abandon the project if investment costs turn out to be higher and/or cash flows turn out to
be lower than anticipated. The simulation approach used is not only easily applied to
multifactor and path dependant problems, but it is also very intuitive, flexible and
transparent. In addition, it provides insights that are lost in the more complex numerical
solution to the partial differential equation.
The second paper that is closely related is Berk, Green and Naik (2003). They
also focus on the development of a single R&D project and take as exogenous the process
describing the cash flows the project will generate. However, since the focus of this paper
is patent-protected R&D projects, not only the level of cash flows is uncertain but also
the duration of these cash flows. They assume that the cash flows last for ever which
simplifies the value of the completed project to the continuously compounded version of
the growing perpetuity formula. In addition, they take as exogenous the technology for
randomly advancing through stages of the project whereas I take as exogenous the
Trigeorgis (1996).
6

stochastic process for the expected cost to completion of the project (as in Pindyck
(1993). While their formulation is more fundamental in this respect, it makes it harder to
employ in practice to value R&D projects.
The theoretical model is developed in Section 2. Section 3 gives a detailed
implementation of the approach using data that is representative of the pharmaceutical
industry to value a particular drug development project. Sensitivity of the project value
to the key parameters in the model is also presented. Section 4 discusses some possible
extensions of the model to take into account more realistic situations that were omitted in
the simple model developed in Section 2. Finally, Section 5 gives some concluding
remarks. The details of the Monte Carlo simulation methodology are presented in the
Appendix.
2. Model
Consider an investment in R&D that takes time to complete. The maximum rate at which
the owner of the project can invest is I m and the total cost to completion is a random
~
~
variable K with expected value K = E[K ] . When, and if, the project is completed the

owner starts receiving the benefits of the investment represented by the net cash flow rate
C, which follows a stochastic process to be described below.
Assume that a patent protecting the R&D project expires at time T, after which a
successful project will be subject to a more intense competition such that cash flows will
decrease substantially. In this framework, both the time to completion of the project and
duration of the cash flows protected by the patent are random variables.
To reflect the fact that many R&D projects fail, assume that during the period of
investment there is a Poisson probability λ per unit of time that the project will fail and

7

its value will jump to zero. This probability of failure is what Schwartz and Moon (2000)
call catastrophic events, such as the situation where another firm wins the race to obtain a
patent on the product, or the drug turns out to have a terrible side effect.

In the

framework below we concentrate on another reason to stop the project: the optimal
exercise of the abandonment option when costs turn out to be higher than expected and/or
cash flows turn out to be to lower than anticipated. This abandonment option can have
substantial value when the project is marginal, or when uncertainty is large as is the case
for most R&D projects.
2.1 Investment Cost Uncertainty
The dynamics of the expected cost to completion of the R&D project is described by the
controlled diffusion process:4
1
2

(1) dK = − Idt + σ ( IK ) dz

where dz is an increment to a Gauss Wiener process that is assumed to be uncorrelated
with the market portfolio.5 The first term is the control of the diffusion process: as
investment proceeds, the estimated remaining cost to completion decreases. The second
term corresponds to what Pindyck calls technical uncertainty which is related to the
physical difficulty of completing the project and therefore can only resolved by investing
in the project. More complex specifications of the expected cost dynamics can easily be
incorporated in the analysis, such as including input cost uncertainty.6 The advantage of
the simple specification in equation (1) is that it gives rise to a bang-bang solution for the
optimal control (optimal investment is either at the maximum possible rate or at zero)
4

See Pindyck (1993) and Schwartz and Moon (2000). Note that any alternative process could be used
without major changes in the analysis that follows.
5
The implication of this is that cost uncertainty will not have a risk premium associated to it.

8

when the cost and cash flow processes are uncorrelated, and that the variance of the cost
to completion has a simple analytical expression7:

σ 2K 2
~
(2) Var ( K ) =
2 −σ 2
This expression, which relates the variance of the project’s total cost and the volatility
parameter σ , can be used to infer reasonable values for this volatility parameter.
2.2 Cash Flow Uncertainty
The dynamics of the net cash flow rate is described by the Geometric Brownian
motion:8,9
(3) dC = αCdt + φCdw
where dw in an increment to a Gauss Wiener process which is correlated with the market
portfolio and which may also be correlated with the uncertainty in the expected cost to
completion of the project. The drift in the cash flow process reflects the characteristics of
a particular R&D program. Note that these cash flows start to be received by the owner
of the project only after the investment has been completed. Before that time they
represent the current cash flow the project would have produced if it were completed.
These cash flow change as more information is obtained through investment and through
an increased knowledge of the market for the product. The correlation between cost and
cash flow uncertainty, ρ , also reflects the characteristics of a particular R&D program.
In some cases, for example, higher than predicted investment costs may also translate

6

Input cost uncertainty will be discussed in Section 4.
See Pindyck (1993).
8
This is the stochastic process used in Schwartz and Zozaya (2001a and 2001b). Other processes, such as
an Arithmetic Brownian motion, could be used without changing the nature of the analysis.
9
These cash flows are net of production and marketing costs to be made once the R&D is complete.
7

9

into lower than predicted cash flows: this would imply a negative correlation between
costs and cash flows.
Equation (3) represents the dynamics of the true process for the cash flows. For
valuation purposes, however, the risk neutral or risk adjusted process for the cash flows
will be used:
(4) dC = (α − η )Cdt + φCdw = α * Cdt + φCdw
where η is the risk premium associated with the cash flow process (to be defined below)
and α * is the risk adjusted drift.
2.3 Value of Project once Investment has been Completed
When the investment in the R&D project has been successfully completed, the value of
the project depends only on the net cash flows to be generated from the project. Let
V(C,t) be the value of the project at time t for cash flows C, and assume that the patent
for the product expires at time T. Also assume that the residual value of the project,
represented by the possible cash flows generated after the patent expires, is a multiple M
of the cash flows at time T10. Different specifications of the post-patent cash flows will
be discussed in Section 4.
Standard arguments imply that the value of the project must satisfy the partial
differential equation:
1
(5) φ 2 C 2VCC + α * CVC + Vt − rV + C = 0
2

with boundary condition:
(6) V (C , T ) = M • C
It can easily be verified that the complete solution to this PDE is given by:

10

(7) V (C , t ) =

C
[1 − exp( −( r − α *)(T − t ))] + MC exp( −(r − α *)(T − t ))
r −α *

The first term in Equation (7) represents the present value of the cash flows up to the
expiration of the patent and the second term represents the present value of the terminal
value of the project. Note that the value of the project after the investment is completed
is linear in the cash flows and does not depend on the volatility of the cash flows. This
will not be the case, however, during the period of investment, which is the main focus of
this paper.
Applying Ito’s Lemma to Equation (7) and using (3), after some manipulation the
(true) stochastic process for the value of the successful project can be shown to be:
(8)

dV
= ( r + η )dt + φdw
V

Equation (8) verifies that the volatility of the total return on the successful project
and its risk premium are the same as the volatility of the cash flows and the risk premium
associated with the cash flow process, respectively. The returns on successful R&D
projects can then be used to estimate cash flow volatility and the risk premium
parameter.11 Assuming the Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing model of Merton (1973)
applies, the risk premium is equal to the beta of the successful project times the risk
premium on the market portfolio:
(9) η = β (rm − r )

10

If the market becomes perfectly competitive after the patent expires, M would be equal to zero.
It should be pointed out that this is not a trivial matter since traded “pure play” successful R&D projects
would be needed. But, even when traditional discounted cash flow methods of valuation are used, risk
adjusted discount rates are required.

11

11

Equation (9) provides for an easy way for estimating the risk premium in the model. The
assumptions employed here would the same ones used when the CAPM is used to
determine the risk adjusted discount rate in NPV calculations.
2.4 Value of the Investment Opportunity
Before the investment is completed, the value of the R&D project at time t, F(C,K,t),
depends both on the cash flow rate the project would have produced if it were completed
and on the expected costs to completion, and calendar time. This value must satisfy the
following partial differential equation:12
1

1
1
Max I [ φ 2 C 2 FCC + σ 2 ( IK ) FKK + φσρC ( IK ) 2 FCK + α * CFC −
(10)
2
2
IFK + Ft − (r + λ ) F − I ] = 0

subject to the boundary condition:
(11) F (C ,0,τ ) = V (C ,τ )
where the left-hand side of the boundary condition comes from Equation (7) and λ is the
Poisson probability per unit of time that the project will fail.
The difficulty with boundary condition (11) is that the completion date of the
investment, τ , is a random variable. The value of the R&D project at completion
depends not only on the cash flows at that time, but also on how long the investment took
place, because the duration of the cash flows is limited to the expiration of the patent. In
this case, Equation (10) cannot be easily solved by conventional numerical methods.
In the Appendix, a simulation method is proposed that solves Equation (10) with
boundary condition (11) under two simplifying assumptions:

12

Schwartz and Moon (2000) derive a similar equation but with the fundamental difference that it is
independent of calendar time. The resulting elliptic partial differential equation can then be solved by
standard finite difference procedured.

12

(a) The investment strategy takes two possible extremes values: to invest at the
maximum possible rate or not to invest at all. This bang-bang policy is exactly
optimal only for the case where the cost and cash flow processes are uncorrelated.
The possibility of investment at a lower level than the maximum possible rate,
however, is unlikely to have a significant effect for low correlation values.
(b) Once the project is abandoned, it will not be started again.

That is, only the

abandonment option is considered in the analysis, not the options to delay investing
and to stop and restart investment in the future if future cash flow estimates
improve.13 It is important to consider, however, that as time passes, the duration of
the cash flows decreases since there is an expiration date for the pa tent. This makes
delaying investment extremely costly.
2.5 Critical Values for Costs and Cash Flows
The solution to (10) and (11) also gives the critical values for the state variables which
separates investment form abandonment. For every level of the cash flow rate there is a
critical cost to completion, K*(C), above which it is not optimal to invest in the project.
Equivalently, for every level of cost to completion there is a critical cash flow rate,
C*(K), below which it is not optimal to invest in the project. The value of the project or
patent when it is not optimal to invest is zero. These functions define a critical curve in
the K-C space. This curve would naturally be a function of time and of all the other fixed
parameters of the valuation problem.
2.6 Valuation under Certainty
Traditional NPV valuations discount the net cash flows to a project at a risk-adjusted
discount rate. For comparison purposes, the R&D investment problem described above

13

can be analyzed in this framework by setting the cost and cash flow volatilities equal to
zero. The relevant risk premium and the probability of failure can then be incorporated in
the discount rate.

This analysis would correspond exactly to the traditional NPV

valuation.
Under certainty, the time to completion of the investment would be deterministic
and equal to:
(12) TK =

K
Im

and the NPV of the project would be:
(13) NPV = V (C , TK ) exp(−[(r + λ ) − (α − η )]TK ) −

Im
[1 − exp(−(r + λ )TK )]
r+λ

The first term represents the present value of the cash flows at time TK (from Equation
(7)) discounted at the appropriate risky rate, and the second term represents the integral
of the (discounted) investment costs until completion.
2.7 Volatility and Beta of R&D Project
Using Ito’s Lemma and stochastic processes (1) and (3), it is easy to derive the volatility
and the beta of the investment opportunity:
(14) σ F2 = (

φCFC
F

) 2 + IK (

σFK
F

1

) 2 + 2( IK ) 2 (

(15) β F = β (

13

In Section 4 I discuss this in more detail.

14

CFC
)
F

φσρCFC FK
F2

)

The beta of the project equals the beta of the successful project times the elasticity
of the project’s value to changes in cash flows. The volatility of project depends on the
volatilities of the two stochastic processes and their correlation.14
3. Implementation of the Approach
3.1 Data for Drug Development Project
To illustrate the implementation of the methodology proposed in this article, I evaluate an
R&D project for the development of an ethical drug using, as much as possible, typical
parameter values from the pharmaceutical industry. A typical self-originated new drug
introduction requires over US$100 million of out-of-pocket expenditures15, so I will take
$100 million to be the expected cost to completion of the project. Since the average time
to complete is 10 years16 I will assume that the maximum investment rate is $10 million
per year. This is a simplification of reality since different phases of the R&D project
require different levels of investment17.
DiMasi et al. (1995, pp. 204) find that “only 23% of the new drug candidates that
enter phase I clinical trials will eventually be approved by the FDA”. But this success
rate takes into account both the failures due to catastrophic events and the optimal
exercise of the abandonment option. Assuming that one half of the projects fail due to
catastrophic events, and considering an average time to completion of the investment is
10 years, the Poisson probability of failure can be computed as:
exp(−λTK ) = exp(−10λ ) = 0.50

λ = 0.07

14

Apart from the covariance term these formulas are the same as those found in Schwartz and Moon
(2000).
15
See DiMasi et al. (1991).
16
See DiMasi et al. (1995).
17
This issue will be discussed in more detail in Section 4.

15

The volatility parameter in equation (1) is inferred from the variance of the costs
to completion in equation (2). For a volatility parameter equal to 0.5, the standard
deviation of the cost to completion is $37.8 million (for an expected costs to completion
of $100 million)18.
The Uruguay Rounds Agreements Act (Public Law 103-465), which became
effective on June 8, 1995, changed the patent term in the United States. Before June 8,
1995, patents typically had 17 years of patent life from the date the patent was issued.
Patents granted after the June 8, 1995 date now have a 20-year patent life from the date of
the first filing of the patent application.19 However, innovative pharmaceutical products
undergo, on average, more than 10 years of development and regulatory approval before
coming to market. This reduces the effective patent life of innovative pharmaceutical
products to less than 10 years. I assume that the total life of the project is 20 years of
which, on average, 10 years will be devoted to the development of the drug and 10 years
will be generating cash flows. Note that the choice of the starting point of the life of the
patent to evaluate the project is arbitrary. The project can just as well be evaluated, with
the necessary adjustments in costs and time to completion, a few years into the patent or
even before the patent has been obtained.
The estimated cash flows of the project are assumed to be $20 million per year20
and growing stochastically at 2% per year (the rate of inflation) according to Equation
(3). The cash flow volatility parameter in (3) and (8) is obtained as the average implied
volatility for traded call options of nine pharmaceutical companies (0.35). The beta to be

18

This standard deviation is smaller, but of the same order of magnitude, than the standard deviation
reported in Table 2 of DiMasi et al. (1991) for 93 randomly selected new chemical entities.
19
U.S. Food and Drug Administration – Center for Drug Evaluation and Research Website.
20
This is consistent with the average cash flows reported in Grabowski and Vernon (1994).

16

used to compute the risk premium in Equation (9) is also obtained as the average beta of
the same pharmaceutical companies (0.6).21

Using a risk premium on the market

portfolio of 6%, the resulting risk premium associated with the cash flow process is 3.6%.
The correlation between the stochastic processes for cost and cash flows depends
on the characteristics of the R&D project, and, in general, it is probably small22. Since
more successful projects take a shorter time to develop and cost less, cash flows from
these projects might be larger. In this case a negative correlation might be reasonable. In
the base case I assume a correlation of –0.1 and in the comparative statics section I
analyze the sensitivity of the results to changes in this parameter.
At the expiration of the patent, the entry of generic drug products significantly
decreases the cash flows to the patent-holder.23 To take into account the cash flows
generated after the expiration of the patent, I assume that the terminal value of the project
is five times the terminal cash flow rate.
In the simulation approach developed in this article it would be relatively easy to
include stochastic interest rates, but, for simplicity, I assume that the risk-free rate of
interest is constant and equal to 5%. Finally, the step size for the simulations and the
evaluation of the abandonment option is one quarter of a year, and the number of
simulations performed is 100,000. Table 1 summarizes the parameters described above.
3.2 Valuation of Drug Development Project
Figure 1 shows a randomly selected path of costs and (true) cash flows using the
parameters in Table 1. For this particular path, investment takes 8.5 years to complete.
21

Clearly, more accurate estimates of the volatility of the cash flows and the beta coefficient could be
obtained from pure equity firms that produce only one drug.
22
The fact that all drugs must go through the same general regulatory process might suggest a low
correlation.

17

Estimated cash flows at the evaluation time (time 0) are $5 million per quarter. At the
time they start to be generated in year 8.5, however, they are only $2.74 million per
quarter. During the duration of the investment, the cash flows represent the cash flows
that would occur if the project was completed. At the expiration of the patent, cash flows
grow to $6.60 million. It should be pointed out that Figure 1 illustrates only one of the
100,000 paths generated for the evaluation, and might not represent a typical or average
path.
Table 2 displays the valuation results for five different seeds for the random
number generator. The first row gives the value of the project with the abandonment
option, the second row gives the proportion of paths in which it is optimal to abandon the
project, and the third row gives the value of the project using the same simulations but
not allowing abandonment.
The real options value of the project (with the abandonment option) lies between
$12.9 and $14.0 million, with a mean of $13.4 million. The standard deviation of the
mean in all cases is very close to $0.4 million, so all values lye well within two standard
deviations from the mean. The proportion of paths abandoned lies between 39.9% and
42.5% with a mean of 41.0%. The value of the project without the option to abandon lies
between $4.8 and $5.7 million, with a mean of $5.2 million (again the standard deviation
of the mean is around $0.4 million). The approximate value of the abandonment option
is $8.2 million, which in this case represents a very large proportion of the value of the
project. In 41% of the paths this option is optimally exercised.
The percentage of paths abandoned each quarter for the first four years is shown
in Table 3. At the end of the first quarter 2.58% of the paths are optimally abandoned.
23

See Grabowski and Vernon (1992).
18

Conditional on not having been abandoned before, 5.85% are abandoned at the end of the
second quarter, and so on. Most of the abandonment decisions are taken in the first two
years, but some reduced percentages occur well beyond the fourth year. Note that all
these abandonment decisions correspond to the risk-neutral paths. The proportion of
abandonment using the true paths would be somewhat smaller.
The net present value of this project, assuming certainty, and computed using
Equation (13) is -$7.4 million. A simple NPV calculation used to value the project would
suggest that it should not be undertaken. It is rather surprising to see the big difference
that exists between the value of the project without the option to abandon and the simple
NPV: $12.6 million. The reason for this is Jensen’s inequality: the expected value of a
convex function is larger than the function of the expected value. Figure 2 shows that the
NPV of the project is a convex function of the cost to completion. This effect is
magnified when there is a negative correlation between cash flows and costs to
completion since more extreme valuations are possible.
The simulated cost distribution is depicted in Figure 3. Note that approximately
2.3% of the paths get to the expiration of the patent without being completed. These
would certainly be abandoned much earlier in the respective simulation. The mean of the
simulated costs is $99.8 million, very close to the $100 million assumed ex-ante, but the
standard deviation is $34.8 million, somewhat smaller that the $37.8 million assumed exante.24
3.3 Sensitivity Analysis
3.3.1 Uncertainty Parameters

24

This is due to the truncation of the distribution at 20 years.

19

Table 4 shows the effect of the uncertainty parameters (volatilities and correlation) on the
value of the R&D opportunity. The top panel shows the effect of changing the cost
uncertainty parameter while keeping all the other parameters as in Table 1. As is typical
in option pricing, the value of the project unambiguously increases with cost uncertainty.
The probability of abandonment goes down with increased cost uncertainty since in this
framework the only way to “learn” about the project costs is by investing: with more
uncertainty there is more to learn by investing. Interestingly, the value of the project
without the option to abandon increases even more in value with increased uncertainty.
The result of this is that the value of the option to abandon actually slightly decreases in
value with increased cost uncertainty. The option to abandon is less valuable because it
is used less often.
The middle panel in Table 4 gives the same information as the top panel, but for
changes in cash flow uncertainty. The value of the project also increases with cash flow
uncertainty, but in this case the probability of abandonment increases. More uncertainty
in the cash flows increases the probability of good outcomes, but it also increases the
probability of bad outcomes and therefore, the probability of abandonment. The option to
abandon, then, is more valuable as indicated in the last column of the table.
The above analysis indicates that cost uncertainty and cash flow uncertainty have
a different effect on the project. Though increases in both lead to increases in the value
of the project, the probability of abandonment and the value of the option to abandon
move in the opposite direction. Another way of presenting this result is that higher cash
flow (value) uncertainty leads to delay investment (as is traditional in option pricing),

20

whereas higher cost uncertainty leads to advance investment (since you only learn by
investing).
The bottom panel in Table 4 presents the effect of changes in correlation. The
higher is the correlation between costs and cash flows, the lower is the value of the
project, with or without the option to abandon. This is because a negative correlation
implies that when costs are low, cash flows tend to be high, and vise versa: this leads to a
wider distribution of values. The reverse is true when the correlation is positive. As the
correlation increases the project becomes more marginal, the probability of abandonment
increases and the option to abandon becomes more valuable.
All the values in Table 4 are directly comparable (without simulation error)
because the same random numbers were used in all the simulations.25 They correspond
to those used in the last column of Table 2. Since uncertainty does not affect the net
present value of a project, the net present value of the project without uncertainty for all
the cases in the table is -$7.4 million.
3.3.2 Cost and Cash Flow Parameters
The effects on project values and probabilities of abandonment of changes in expected
costs to completion, maximum investment rate, cash flow rate and terminal cash flow
multiple are presented in Table 5. All of them have predictable effects: values increase
and probabilities of abandonment decrease when expected cost to completion decrease,
when the maximum investment rate increases, when cash flow rate increases, and when
the terminal cash flow multiple increases. The value of the option to abandon, however,
is more valuable the more marginal the project and the higher the probability of
abandoning it.

21

The level of expected investment costs has a large effect on the value of the
project since they are all paid before cash flows start to be generated. The effects are also
asymmetric: a 10% increase in costs decreases the value of the project by $6.24 million,
whereas a 10% decrease in costs increases the value by $8.53 million. The main reason
for this is that when costs increase, the option to abandon is used more often preventing
additional losses.
The value of the project increases with the investment rate because cash flows
will start earlier since investment will be completed faster. Since the patent expires in 20
years, the duration of the cash flows will also be longer.
The value of the project is somewhat less sensitive to the cash flow rate and the
cash flow multiple at the expiration of the patent than to the total investment costs. The
reason for this is that cash flows are to be generated in a distant future. This is especially
true for the terminal cash flow.
3.3.3

Parameters that Affect Compounding and Discounting

There are three parameters in the model that affect the compounding and discounting of
costs and cash flows.

These are the drift of the cash flow process26, the Poisson

probability of failure during investment, and the risk-free rate of interest. Table 6 shows
the effects of changes in these parameters on valuation and probability of abandonment.
The top panel of Table 6 shows the effect of changes in the drift of the cash flow
process. These are substantial, but these results should be interpreted with caution, since
a higher cash flow drift would probably be due to a higher expected inflation, which

25

The same applies to the next two subsections and to Tables 5 and 6.
Actually only the risk adjusted drift affects valuation, so changes in the risk premium have exactly the
same, and opposite, effect on valuation that changes in the true drift of the cash flow process.

26

22

would also affect in similar fashion the risk-free rate (bottom panel in Table 6). These
two effects would, to a large degree, mitigate one another.
As expected, a higher probability of catastrophic failure decreases the value of the
project and increases the probability that it will be abandoned. These results are shown in
the middle panel of Table 6.
3.3.4

Time to Expiration of the Patent

Table 7 reports the sensitivity of the value of the project with respect to changes in the
time to expiration of the patent. This is an important parameter since it depends on
public policy. Changes in the time to expiration of the patent have significant effects on
the value of the project. Extending the duration of the patent by 10% increases the value
of the project by 35%.27
The model can also be used to analyze issues of public policy such as the tradeoff
between the duration of a patent and the allowable competition by generic drugs at the
expiration of the patent. For example, assume that the degree of allowable competition
can be represented by the multiple of cash flows that the patent-holder receives at the
expiration of the patent. Then a 10% reduction of the life of the patent (from 20 to 18
years) would require an increase of this multiple from 5 to 7.6 to approximately maintain
the same value of the R&D project.
3.4 Critical Values
For any given level of the cash flow rate we can increase the cost to completion until the
project is immediately abandoned and its value is zero. This is the critical cost to

27

In comparing the results reported in Table 7 it should be noted that they are subject to simulation error
since, given their different duration, each row uses different random numbers.

23

completion above which it is not optimal to invest in the project. For the base case cash
flow rate of $20 million the critical cost is $125 million.
Alternatively, for any given level of cost we can decrease the cash flow rate until
abandonment is optimal at the initial period. This is the critical cash flow rate below
which it is not optimal to invest. For the base case cost of $100 million the critical cash
flow rate is $13.6 million.
Figure 4 shows the critical cash flows rates (critical costs) for costs between $80
and $100 million (cash flow rates between $9 and $18 million). Above (or to the left of)
the curve, when cash flows are high and/or cost are low it is optimal to invest. Below (or
to the right of) the curve it is optimal to abandon the project.28
3.5 Risk Measures of the R&D Project
To compute the volatility and the beta of the project using Equations (14) and (15), we
need first to compute the derivatives of the project’s value with respect to expected costs
and cash flows.

These derivatives are computed numerically applying the same

simulation procedure, perturbing these variables (by 1%) using the same seed in the
random number generator.
The risk measures for the R&D project are substantially higher than those of the
successful project. The volatility of the project computed using Equation (14) is 1.51,
which is more than 4 times larger than the average volatility (0.35) of the nine
pharmaceutical companies used as a proxy for the successful project. The beta of the
project computed using Equation (15) is 2.01, which is more than 3 times larger than the
average beta (0.60) of the same nine companies.

28

The results reported in Figure 4 were done using 10,000 simulations.

24

This high level of risk is to be expected since at the start of the project
approximately $100 million have to be invested over a period of ten years before starting
to receive the benefits of this investment. Expected returns on the investment, however,
should be commensurate to its risks.29
4. Extensions of the Analysis
The model developed and discussed in the previous sections is a simplified description of
the real world. In this section some important features of the pharmaceutical industry are
presented, and I discuss how the simple model developed can be modified to deal with
these features. There are two stages in pharmaceutical research and development: drug
discovery (the research stage) and drug development. The goal of the research phase is to
find a chemical compound that has the desirable effect in a “screen” that mimics some
aspect of a disease state in man, while the goal of the drug development process is to
ensure that compounds identified through the research process are safe and effective in
humans (Henderson and Cockburn (1996a), page 34).
4.1 Drug Development Process
New drug development is a sequential process. At several points in the process a
pharmaceutical firm will review the status of testing on the drug and make a decision on
whether to continue with its development or abandon the project. The decision will
depend on factors such as potential therapeutic benefits, expected frequency and severity
of adverse reactions, projected additional development, marketing, distribution, and
production costs and estimates of the future revenue stream.30

29

According to Grobowski and Vernon (1990, 1994) realized returns on new drug introductions in the
1970s and early 1980s have not been of an order of magnitude to justify this high level of risk. It should be
taken into account, however, that they include the cost of failed projects in the cost of successful ones.
30
This discussion is based on DiMasi et al. (1991), pages 109 and 110.

25

Once a new compound has been identified and is considered a promising
candidate for further development the firm will file with the FDA an Investigational New
Drug Application. The firm may begin clinical (human) testing of the drug thirty days
after the filing unless the FDA places a hold on the application. Clinical testing normally
occurs over three distinct phases, each of which contributes different amounts and types
of information on safety and efficacy.
In phase I, testing is performed on a small number of usually healthy volunteers.
The main purpose of these trials is to obtain information on toxicity and safe dosing
ranges in humans. In phase II the drug is administered to a larger number of individuals
consisting of patients for whom the drug was intended to benefit. The purpose of these
trials is to provide the first significant evidence of efficacy, and additional safety
information. Phase III involves large-scale trials on patients. The purpose of these trials
is to find definitive evidence of efficacy and any possible adverse reactions.
A New Drug Application is submitted to the FDA for review once the clinical
development phases have been completed and the firm believes it has sufficient evidence
for approval. Marketing for the new drug can only begin upon notification from the FDA.
The FDA review can be considered as a fourth phase in the cycle.
The simulation approach can readily be adapted to deal with different phases of
investment. The expected cost to completion, the maximum rate of investment, the cost
volatility, and the probability of failure would, in general, be different for different
phases. The correlation between costs and estimated cash flows could also be different
for the different phases. Then, for each phase j, the dynamics of the expected cost to
completion (from Equation (1)) would be:

26

1

(16) dK j = − I j dt + σ j ( I j K j ) 2 dz j
Phase j would have to be completed before the start of phase j+1.31 Moreover, the
approach allows for the cost variables (expected cost to completion, maximum
investment rate, volatility of costs and probability of failure) in phase j+1 to depend on
the realized cost variables in phase j. For example, if the realized total investment costs
in a given phase turn out to be lower than expected, it seems likely that the expected costs
in the subsequent phase would also be lower than originally expected. It would be very
unlikely that any other method of solution, other than simulation, would be able to deal
with this complex type of path dependency.
Given that for every new chemical entity that is approved, there are several others
that are abandoned at some point in the development process, most of the literature
dealing with the cost of innovation in the pharmaceutical industry32 include the costs of
failed projects with those of successful projects. In addition, the investments costs are
usually capitalized (at the cost of capital of the pharmaceutical firm) to the point of
marketing approval. This is an ex-post assessment of the costs (and returns) of successful
pharmaceutical products.
The purpose of my analysis is to determine the value of the R&D project (or the
patent) before investment starts. In this context the expected cost to completion represent
an ex-ante assessment of the costs of the project. Some projects are successful, some fail
(probability of failure), and some are abandoned (optimal exercise of the abandonment
option). The value of the project today takes into account that there is some probability
31

This framework would even allow for phase j+1 to start before the completion of phase j, which is
sometimes the case in the drug development process.

27

of failure and abandonment, but the expected costs are not increased to take into account
this possibility. The expected costs to completion in my analysis are related to what the
literature calls “out-of -pocket cost per approved new chemical entity”.
4.2 Patent Term Restoration
As mentioned earlier: “The 1994 Uruguay Round Agreements Act changed the
way in which the term of a U.S. patent has been calculated since 1861. Unlike the former
seventeen-year term, which was measured from the date that the patent issued, a patent
that issues from an application filed on June 8, 1995, and thereafter has a term of twenty
years measured from the date that the earliest U.S. patent application was filed.”33 The
new twenty-year term is subject to patent term extension for a period of time related to
the regulatory period review. To compensate for the regulatory review period by the
FDA, an extension for up to five years can be obtained. Extensions can be granted only
if the remaining term of the patent is less than fourteen years after regulatory approval for
market, and the remaining patent term and the extension combined cannot exceed
fourteen years beyond the date of market approval.
This patent extension feature can also be incorporated in the simulation approach
developed in this article. For every path in the simulation, once the investment is
completed and the drug approved, the regulatory review period is known. Then, if the
remaining time to the expiration of the patent is less that fourteen years, the period where
cash flows are generated can be extended to fourteen years. This modification would
certainly increase somewhat the project values reported in Section 4.

32

See for example Di Masi et al (1991, 1995), DiMasi, Grabowski and Vernon (1995), and Grabowski and
Vernon (1990, 1994).
33
Marks (1996), page 445.

28

The discussion above is a somewhat simplistic description of how patents actually
operate in practice. The reality is that there is much more fuzziness around these patent
issues. For example, litigation over intellectual property is frequent when competitors
have developed similar new drugs, and even if a firm may think it has patent protection
for a particular drug, it is always possible that it may end up having a key patent declared
invalid.34 This type of issue is difficult to incorporate explicitly in the model developed.
The probability of failure during the investment period, however, can implicitly take into
account all those events that could put an end to the project.
4.3 Cash Flows and Product Life Cycle
In the development of the model, I have assumed that the cash flows process follows a
Geometric random walk. In reality pharmaceutical sales and cash flows start very low at
the introduction of a new drug, then grow to a maximum close to the expiration of the
patent, and decrease dramatically once the patent has expired35. One possible way to add
this product life cycle to the analysis would be to superimpose a deterministic life cycle
variable to the stochastic cash flows to be able to more closely mimic actual sales and
cash flows. This modification would somewhat change the timing of the cash flows, but
would not change significantly the nature of the analysis.
4.4 Patent Expiration and Entry
The “1984 law Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act facilitated the
entry of generic drug products after patent expiration while it also restored part of the
patent life lost during the pre-market regulatory process for new introductions.”36 Before

34

For a discussion of these issues see Lanjouw and Schankerman (2001) and Schankerman and Scotchmer
(2001). For some Japanese evidence see Sakakibara and Branstetter (2001).
35
See Grabowski and Vernon (1990, 1994).
36
Grabowski and Vernon (1992), page 331.

29

1984 market entry by generics was limited due to the costly requirements imposed by the
FDA for imitative products (i.e. duplicate many of the pioneer’s tests). The 1984 law
required generic products to demonstrate only bio-equivalence to the pioneer’s brand. As
a consequence, generic entry has increased significantly.
The post-patent competitive process in which entry erodes patent-protected
monopoly rents and eliminates the associated deadweight losses to society, has received
relatively little attention in the literature37. To simplify the analysis of post-patent cash
flows, the model developed in the previous sections assumed that the present value of
these cash flows at the expiration of the patent is equal to a multiple of cash flows at that
point in time. This is similar to assuming that the terminal value of a firm is a multiple of
earnings at a given horizon. Alternative assumptions are possible. For example, the life
of the project could be extended into the post-patent period (i.e. five or ten years longer)
and declining cash flows consistent with recent experience could be modeled.
4.5 Tax Considerations
Clearly, for valuing any project the relevant cash flows are the ones after taxes. For
simplicity, the model developed has completely abstracted form tax considerations and
has implicitly assumed that all relevant cash flows are on an after tax basis. For any
particular project, however, tax distortions can be significant.
The tax situation of a particular project would depend on the fraction of the
investment costs that can be expensed immediately, and the fraction that has to be
capitalized for future depreciation, on whether the firm has other profitable projects for
offsetting losses, etc. However, for a given known situation, the simulation approach is

37

Notable exceptions are Caves et al. (1991) and Grabowski and Vernon (1992).

30

especially suited to deal with the path dependencies of capital expenditures and capital
cost allowances.38
4.6 Input Cost Uncertainty
The dynamics of the expected cost to completion of the R&D project specified in
Equation (1) assumes that all the uncertainty in the costs are of a technical nature, that is,
it can only be resolved by investing. Pindyck (1993) suggests the possibility of including
in the stochastic process for the cost to completion also input cost uncertainty (e.g., prices
of labor and materials) that are external to what the firm does and might be partially
correlated with the overall economic activity.
Adding input cost uncertainty to the cost process, Equation (1) would be written
as:
1
2

(17) dK = − Idt + σ ( IK ) dz + γKdy

where γ is the input cost uncertainty and dy is an increment to a Gauss Wiener process
that may be correlated with the return on the market portfolio and with the cash flow
process.
A cost specification as in (17) could be easily incorporated in the simulation
procedure described in Appendix.39 The difficulty in adding input cost uncertainty would
be that, if it is correlated with the return on the market, it would have a risk premium
associated with it which might be difficult to estimate in practice.
4.7 Options to Delay Investment, Stop Investment, and Restart the Project

38

See Schwartz and Moon (2001) for a discussion of these issues.
A third standard normal variate, correlated with the other two, would have to be generated and Equation
(A1) would have another term in the right hand side to deal with input cost uncertainty. The rest of the
procedure would be the same.

39

31

The model discussed in the previous sections takes into account the option to abandon the
project, but not the option to delay investment or the option to restart a project that has
been previously stopped. This is a reasonable framework for situations in which the
product to be produced in the future is protected by a patent, since delaying investment
shortens the duration of the future cash flows making it very unlikely that a stopped
project would be restarted later on.
For situations in which the duration of the cash flows is independent of the
duration of the investment, these options can become more important. Delaying
investment does not shorten the duration of cash flows, though it still has the effect of
generating cash flows more distant in the future. In this case the value of the investment
opportunity depends on the cost to completion, K, and the value of the asset obtained at
the completion of the project, V(C,t) given by Equation (7), but not on calendar time
since now T-t has a fixed duration independent on when the investment is completed.
This problem generates an elliptical partial differential equation which can be solved by
numerical methods to give the value of the project and the optimal investment strategy.40
This case is simpler since the duration of the cash flows is deterministic.
5

Conclusions

In this article I have developed and implemented a simulation approach to value R&D
projects and patents that is based on the Real Options approach. It takes into account
uncertainty in the cost to completion of the project, uncertainty in the cash flows to be
generated from the project, and the possibility of catastrophic events that could put an
end to the effort before it is completed. It also allows for the possibility of abandoning
the project when costs turn out to be larger than expected or when estimated cash flows

32

turn out to be smaller than anticipated. This abandonment option represents a very
substantial part of the project’s value when the project is marginal or/and when
uncertainty is large.
Even though this article looks at R&D projects from the private point of view, the
analysis has important public policy implications. Regulation can affect not only the life
of the patent, but also the cost of development and/or the prices charged for the product
produced. All of these will affect the profitability of R&D projects and, therefore, the
amount of innovative output. The model developed in this article should be of help to
policy makers for analyzing the trade-off between promoting innovative efforts and
securing competitive market outcomes.41
In the development and analysis of this article, it has been taken for granted that
development costs and the cash flows generated by the project are independent of the
owner of the project. As in many other types of projects this is not necessarily the case.
There is some recent evidence that the R&D cost per new drug approved in the US
decrease with firm size, while the sales per new drug approved increase with firm size.42
New regulatory initiatives in the United States have provided valuable
opportunities for pharmaceutical developers to improve efficiency.43 For example, the
Prescription Drug User Fee Act of 1992, which authorized the collection of user fees by
the FDA, resulted in a sharp decline in new drug approval times, and the FDA
Modernization Act of 1997 established the “Fast Track Process” for speeding the
development and approval of drugs that address unmet medical needs.
40

The model

See Schwartz and Moon (2000).
It should be pointed out that intellectual property is not the only mechanism for rewarding R&D. Prizes
and contract research of various types are also common. For a discussion of these issues see Gallini and
Schotchmer (2002).

41

33

developed in this article is well suited to deal with economic effects of these types of
issues.
There are important factors about the decision to invest in R&D that are not
incorporated in the analysis of this article. For example, recent theoretical work has
stressed strategic interaction among rivals as a primary determinant of investment
decisions. This approach has suggested some powerful insights into the dynamics of
competition in R&D.44
The pharmaceutical industry appears to have suffered a decline in productivity
over the last twenty years. Henderson and Cockburn (1996b) use disaggregated data at
the research program level to explore that decline. They conclude that “the decline is
probably not a function either of a shift to research in more difficult areas or of an
increase in racing behavior in the industry. Rather, our results are consistent with the
hypothesis that rising real costs of research in the industry reflect decreasing returns. The
switch to more science-intensive methods of drug research appears to be a major
contributor to increasing costs, but the most important driver of cost escalation appears to
be the rocketing costs of developing clinical drugs. We speculate that this probably
reflects both a shift to the treatment of conditions that require more complex clinical trials
and increasing regulatory stringency, but we have no data about those issues.”45 As the
investment process in R&D becomes more complex, tools as those suggested in this
article will become more important in the evaluation and decision making processes.

42

See DiMasi, Grabowski and Vernon (1995).
See Kaitin and DiMassi (2000).
44
See Cockburn and Henderson (1994), Reinganum (1989) and Miltersen and Schwartz (2002).
45
See Henderson and Cockburn (1996b), page 184.
43

34

Summary
This article develops and implements a simulation approach to value R&D projects and
patents that is based on the Real Options approach. It takes into account uncertainty in
the cost to completion of the project, uncertainty in the cash flows to be generated from
the project, and the possibility of catastrophic events that could put an end to the effort
before it is completed. It also allows for the possibility of abandoning the project when
costs turn out to be larger than expected or when estimated cash flows turn out to be
smaller than anticipated. This abandonment option represents a very substantial part of
the project’s value when the project is marginal or/and when uncertainty is large.
Even though this article looks at R&D projects from the private point of view, the
analysis has important public policy implications. Regulation can affect not only the life
of the patent, but also the cost of development and/or the prices charged for the product
produced. All of these will affect the profitability of R&D projects and, therefore, the
amount of innovative output. The model developed in this article should be of help to
policy makers for analyzing the trade-off between promoting innovative efforts and
securing competitive market outcomes.

35

Appendix: Solution Procedure
The appendix describes the Monte Carlo simulation procedure used to solve the problem.
The option to abandon the R&D project is computed using a variation of the least-squares
method proposed by Longstaff and Schwartz (2001) for valuing American options. The
decision to abandon the project is evaluated at discrete points in time, instead of
continuously. This would seem to be a more reasonable assumption when analyzing
R&D projects. In the simulations, the following discrete approximations to Equations (1)
and (4) are used:
(A1) K (t + ∆ t ) = K (t ) − I∆ t + σ ( IK ) 1 / 2 ( ∆ t ) 1 / 2 ε 1
2
1/ 2
(A2) C (t + ∆t ) = C (t ) exp((α * −0.5φ )∆t + φ (∆t ) ε 2 )

where ε 1 and ε 2 are standard normal variates with correlation ρ .
If T is the time to the expiration of the patent and ∆t is the step size, NT =

T
is
∆t

the number of periods per path in the simulation. Equations (A1) and (A2) are used to
generate N paths of NT periods each of costs to completion and cash flow rate. Each
path i is then described by two NT vectors K(i) and C(i). After the cost to completion
reaches zero, the K(i) vector is filled in with zeros.
The Longstaff and Schwartz (2001) least-squares Monte Carlo algorithm (LSM)
is used to provide a path-wise approximation to the optimal stopping rule that maximizes
the value of the project. I assume that the option to abandon the project can only be
exercised at the NT discrete times in the simulation and consider the optimal stopping
policy at each exercise date. The option to abandon the project has value only during the
period of investment in R&D, since once the investment is completed the net cash flows

36

are assumed to be positive and abandonment is never optimal. At each possible exercise
date, the value of the project is zero if abandoned. The value of continuation can be
obtained by taking the conditional expectation of the remaining discounted cash flows
with respect to the risk-neutral measure.

The LSM approach uses least squares to

approximate the conditional expectation function at each exercise date. The project is
abandoned if the expected value of the project next period is smaller than the marginal
investment required this period.
Conditional on not having abandoned the project before, at the final expiration
date of the patent (time NT), the value of the project for any path i is given by the
boundary condition:
(A3) W (i, NT ) = M • C (i, NT )
At any date j the value of the project, conditional on not having been abandoned before,
for those paths for which the investment has been completed is computed recursively by:
(A4) W (i, j ) = exp( − r∆t )W (i, j + 1) + C (i, j ) ∆t
For all those paths for which investment is not completed and optimal abandonment is
possible, the conditional expected value of continuation is estimated by regressing the
discounted value of the project, exp( −( r + λ ) ∆t )W (i, j + 1) 46, onto a set of basis functions
of the state variables at time j47. The fitted value of this regression, Wˆ (i, j ) , is the best
linear unbiased estimator of the conditional expectation. For those paths for which this
fitted value is smaller than the additional investment required in period j, abandonment is
optimal and I set:

46

Note that during the period of investment the discount rate is equal to the risk free rate plus the Poisson
probability of failure.
47
In the implementation of the algorithm I use polynomials with nine terms.

37

(A5) W (i, j ) = 0
For those paths for which the fitted value is larger than the additional investment
required, abandonment is not optimal and the expected value of the project at time j is:
(A6) W (i, j ) = Wˆ (i, j ) − I∆t
The recursion proceeds by rolling back in time and repeating the procedure until
the exercise decisions at each possible exercise time along each path have been
determined. The value of the R&D project is then computed by starting at time zero,
moving forward along each path until the expiration of the patent or until the first
stopping time occurs, discounting the resulting cash flows to time zero, and taking the
average over all the paths. When the optimal stopping time is time zero, the value of the
project is zero. Note that the value of the project obtained by this procedure is generally
not equal to the average of the W(i,0)’s, since only the optimal stopping times generated
by the algorithm are used, and not the expected values.
The value of the R&D project without the abandonment option can be easily
computed as a byproduct of the procedure described above. Note that this value will be
in general different from the net present value (Equation (13)) since, even though it does
not take into account the option to abandon, it does take into account the volatilities and
the correlation of costs and cash flows.

38

References
Berk, J.B., R.C. Green, and V. Naik, 2003, Valuation and Return Dynamics of New
Ventures, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Bloom, N., and J. Van Reenen, 2000, Real Options, Patents, Productivity and Market
Value: Evidence from a panel of British firm, IFS working paper.
Brennan, M.J., and E.S. Schwartz, 1985, Evaluating Natural Resource Investments,
Journal of Business 58, pp. 135-157.
Caves R.E., M.D. Whinston and M.A. Hurwitz,1991, Patent Expiration, Entry, and
Competition in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry, Brookings Papers: Microeconomics,
pp. 1-79.
Childs, P.D., and A.J. Triantis, 1999, Dynamic R&D Investment Policies, Management
Science 45:10, pp. 1359-1377.
Cockburn I., and R. Henderson, 1994, Racing to Invest? The Dynamics of Competition in
Ethical Drug Discovery, Journal of Economic and Management Strategy 3:3, pp. 481519.
DiMasi J.A., R.W Hansen, H.G. Grabowsky and L. Lasagna, 1991, Cost of innovation in
the pharmaceutical industry, Journal of Health Economics 10, pp.107-142.
DiMasi J.A., R.W Hansen, H.G. Grabowsky and L. Lasagna, 1995, Research and
Development Costs for New Drugs by Therapeutic Category: A Study of the US
Pharmaceutical Industry, PharmacoEconomics 7:2, pp. 152-169.
DiMasi, J.A., H.G. Grabowski and J. Vernon, 1995, R&D Costs, Innovative Output and
Firm Size in the Pharmaceutical Industry, International Journal of the Economics of
Business 2:2, pp. 201-219.
Dixit, A.K., and R.S. Pindyck, 1994, Investment under Uncertainty, Princeton, NY:
Princeton University Press.
Gallini, N., and S. Scotchmer, 2002, Intellectual Property: When is it the Best Incentive
System? in Innovation Policy and the Economy, Vol. 2, edited by A.B. Jaffe, J. Lerner,
and S. Stern, NBER.
Grabowski H.G., and J.M. Vernon, 1990, A New Look at the Returns and Risks to
Pharmaceutical R&D, Management Science 36:7, pp 804-821.
Grabowski H.G., and J.M. Vernon, 1992, Brand Loyalty, Entry, and Price Competition in
Pharmaceutical after the 1984 Drug Act, Journal of Law and Economics 35, pp. 331-350.

39

Grabowski H.G., and J.M. Vernon, 1994, Returns on R&D on new drug introductions in
the 1980s, Journal of Health Economics 13, pp. 383-406.
Henderson R., and I. Cockburn, 1996a, Scale, scope and spillovers: the determinants of
research productivity in drug discovery, Rand Journal of Economics 27:1, pp. 32-59.
Henderson R., and I. Cockburn, 1996b, The Determinants of Research Productivity in
Ethical Drug Discovery, The American Enterprise Institute Conference Volume:
Competitive Strategies in the Pharmaceutical Industry, Robert B. Helms, (ed.),
Washington, D.C.
Kaitin K.I., and J.A. DiMasi, 2000, Measuring the Pace of New Drug Development in the
User Fee Era, Drug Information Journal 34, pp.673-680.
Lanjouw J.O. and M. Schankerman, 2001, Characteristics of patent litigation: a window
on competition, Rand Journal of Economics 32:1, pp. 129-151.
Longstaff F.A. and E.S. Schwartz, 2001, Valuing American Options by Simulation: A
Simple Least-Square Approach, Review of Financial Studies, 14:1, pp. 113-147.
Marks, M.S.,1996, The Impact of the Patent Term Provisions of the 1994 Uruguay Round
Agreement Act on the Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act, Food
and Drug Law Journal 51, pp. 445-470.
Miltersen, K.R. and E. S. Schwartz, 2002, R&D Investments with Competitive
Interactions, UCLA working paper.
Merton, R.C., 1973, An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model, Econometrica 41, pp.
867-887.
Myers, S.C., and C.D. Howe, 1997, A Life-Cycle Financial Model of Pharmaceutical
R&D, MIT working paper.
Paddock, J.L., D.R. Siegel, and J.L. Smith, 1988, Option Valuation of Claims on Real
Assets: The Case of Offshore Petroleum Leases, Quarterly Journal of Economics 103,
pp. 479-508.
Pakes, A., 1985, On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return, Journal of
Political Economy 93:2, pp. 390-409.
Pakes, A., 1986, Patents as Options: Some Estimates of the Value of Holding European
Patent Stocks, Econometrica 54:4, pp. 755-784.
Parry, J.R., L.C. Rose, and D.G. Smith, 1999, Efficient Funding of Biotechnology Firms
– A Pecking Order Approach, working paper, Massey University, New Zeland.

40

Reinganum, J.F., 1989, The Timing of Innovation: Research, Development and
Diffusion, in Schmalensee, R. and R. Willig (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization,
Volume 1, Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 849-908.
Pindyck, R. S., 1993, Investments of uncertain cost, Journal of Financial Economics 34,
pp. 53-76.
Sakakibara, M. and L. Branstetter, 2001, Do stronger patents induce more innovation?
Evidence from the 1988 Japanese patent law reforms, Rand Journal of Economics 32:1,
pp. 77-100.
Schankerman, M. and S Scotchmer, 2001, Damages and injunctions in protecting
intellectual property, Rand Journal of Economics 32:1, pp. 199-220.
Schwartz E.S. and M. Moon, 2000, Evaluating Research and Development Investments,
in Innovation, Infrastructure and Strategic Options, M. J. Brennan and L. Trigeorgis
(eds), Oxford University Press, (2000), pp. 85-106.
Schwartz, E.S. and M. Moon, 2001, Rational Pricing of Internet Companies Revisited,
The Financial Review 36, pp. 7-26.
Schwartz, E.S. and C. Zozaya, 2001a, Valuing Investments in Information Technology as
Real Options, UCLA Working Paper.
Schwartz, E.S. and C. Zozaya, 2001b, Evaluating Investments in Disruptive
Technologies, in Mathematical Finance - Bachelier 2000, Editors H. Geman, D. Madan,
S. Pliska and T. Vost, Springer-Verlag, pp. 463-486.
Trigeorgis, L., 1996, Real Options: Managerial Flexibility and Strategy in Resource
Allocation, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

41

Parameter
Total Cost to Completion
Maximum Investment Rate
Cost Uncertainty
Cash Flow Rate
Cash Flow Uncertainty
Cash Flow Drift
Terminal Cash Flow Multiple
Annual Probability of Failure
Time to Expiration of the Patent
Correlation between Costs and Cash Flows
Risk Premium Associated with Cash Flows
Risk-free Rate of Interest
Time Step Size in Simulations
Number of Simulations

Value
$100 million
$10 million per year
0.5
$20 million per year
0.35
0.02
5
0.07
20 years
-0.1
0.036
0.05
0.25 year
100,000

Table 1: Parameters used in Simulations for the base case

Value with abandonment option ($ million)
Proportion of paths optimally abandoned (%)
Value without abandonment option ($ million)

13.9
40.8
5.7

12.9
39.9
4.8

13.1
42.5
4.8

14.0
40.4
5.7

Table 2: Values and Proportion Abandoned for Different Seeds

42

13.3
41.3
5.0

Quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

% Abandoned
2.58
5.85
5.18
4.07
3.40
2.56
2.22
1.66
1.42
1.16
1.11
0.82
0.79
0.65
0.66
0.55

Table 3: Percentage of Paths Abandoned in First Four Years

43

Cost Uncertainty
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60

Value with Option % Abandoned Value Without Option Option Value
9.658
43.9
1.263
8.395
11.370
42.4
3.055
8.315
13.291
41.3
4.992
8.299
15.241
40.0
7.035
8.206
17.186
38.5
9.198
7.988

Cash Flow Uncertainty Value with Option % Abandoned Value Without Option Option Value
0.25
10.926
40.2
4.221
6.705
0.30
12.128
40.8
4.607
7.521
0.35
13.291
41.3
4.992
8.299
0.40
14.433
42.1
5.392
9.041
0.45
15.401
43.6
5.830
9.571
Correlation
-0.10
-0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10

Value with Option % Abandoned Value Without Option Option Value
13.291
41.3
4.992
8.299
12.040
42.5
3.611
8.429
10.737
43.9
2.221
8.516
9.515
45.5
0.823
8.692
8.265
47.4
-0.581
8.846

Table 4: Comparative Statics with respect to Volatilities and Correlation

44

Expected Cost
80.00
90.00
100.00
110.00
120.00

Value with Option % Abandoned Value Without Option Option Value
32.812
18.6
30.060
2.752
21.818
28.1
16.691
5.127
13.291
41.3
4.992
8.299
7.047
56.0
-5.252
12.299
3.273
71.4
-14.116
17.389

Investment Rate
8.00
9.00
10.00
11.00
12.00

Value with Option % Abandoned Value Without Option Option Value
5.315
59.3
-5.935
11.250
9.160
49.1
-0.483
9.643
13.291
41.3
4.992
8.299
17.415
34.5
10.298
7.117
21.430
29.1
15.354
6.076

Cash Flow Rate
16.00
18.00
20.00
22.00
24.00

Value with Option % Abandoned Value Without Option Option Value
5.488
60.2
-7.072
12.560
9.036
49.3
-1.040
10.076
13.291
41.3
4.992
8.299
17.955
35.2
11.024
6.931
22.878
30.7
17.057
5.821

Cash Flow Multiple
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00

Value with Option % Abandoned Value Without Option Option Value
9.633
49.1
-0.555
10.188
11.396
45.1
2.218
9.178
13.291
41.3
4.992
8.299
15.271
37.9
7.767
7.504
17.307
34.8
10.540
6.767

Table 5: Comparative Statics with respect to Cost and Cash Flow Parameters

45

Cash Flow Drift
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04

Value with Option % Abandoned Value Without Option Option Value
4.166
66.8
-10.320
14.486
7.734
52.3
-3.273
11.007
13.291
41.3
4.992
8.299
20.699
31.7
14.700
5.999
30.487
24.7
26.121
4.366

Probability of Failure
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09

Value with Option % Abandoned Value Without Option Option Value
18.757
34.8
10.920
7.837
15.888
37.9
7.793
8.095
13.291
41.3
4.992
8.299
11.041
45.0
2.485
8.556
9.057
48.9
0.243
8.814

Risk Free Rate
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07

Value with Option % Abandoned Value Without Option Option Value
27.415
28.9
21.133
6.282
19.489
34.3
12.290
7.199
13.291
41.3
4.992
8.299
8.522
50.0
-1.017
9.539
5.152
60.3
-5.951
11.103

Table 6: Comparative Statics with respect to Compounding and Discounting
Parameters

Expiration of Patent
18.00
19.00
20.00
21.00
22.00

Value with Option % Abandoned Value Without Option Option Value
9.037
49.3
-1.040
10.077
11.077
45.0
1.976
9.101
13.291
41.3
4.992
8.299
15.611
38.1
8.008
7.603
17.955
35.2
11.024
6.931

Table 7: Comparative Statics with respect to Time to Expiration of the Patent

46

Figure 1
Simulated Paths of Cost to Completion and Quarterly Cash Flow
120

9
8

Anticipated Cash Flows

100

Investment is completed
and Cash Flows start

80

7
6
5

60
4
Realized Cash Flows

40

3
2

Cost to Completion

20

1
0

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

Callendar Time (years)

47

Figure 2:
Net Present Value of Project for Cash Flow Rate of $20 Million
210
190
170
150
130
110
90
70
50
30
10
-10
-30
-50
-70
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Total Cost to Completion

48

140

160

180

200

Figure 3
Cost to Completion Distribution
9000
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
2.3% reach
patent expiration

3000
2000
1000
0
35

55

75

95

115

135

Cost to Completion

49

155

175

195

Figure 4:
Critical Values for Investment
18.00
17.00
16.00
Cash Flow Rate

15.00
Invest at Maximum Rate

14.00
13.00
12.00
11.00

Do not Invest
Project Value Equal 0

10.00
9.00
8.00
80.00

85.00

90.00

95.00

100.00

105.00

Cost to Completion

50

110.00

115.00

120.00

