                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            PARETO EFFICIENT INCOME TAXATION
                                WITH STOCHASTIC ABILITIES

                                            Marco Battaglini
                                             Stephen Coate

                                          Working Paper 10119
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10119


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Marco Battaglini and Stephen Coate. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Pareto Efficient Income Taxation with Stochastic Abilities
Marco Battaglini and Stephen Coate
NBER Working Paper No. 10119
November 2003
JEL No. H21

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper studies Pareto efficient income taxation in an economy with infinitely-lived individuals

whose income generating abilities evolve according to a two-state Markov process. The study yields

two main results. First, when individuals are risk neutral, the fraction of individuals who face a

positive marginal income tax rate is always positive but converges to zero. Moreover, the tax rate

these individuals face also goes to zero. Second, Pareto efficient income tax systems can be time-

consistent even when the degree of correlation in ability types is large.

Marco Battaglini
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
mbattagl@princeton.edu

Stephen Coate
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
and NBER
sc163@cornell.edu
1     Introduction

This paper studies Pareto eﬃcient income taxation in a dynamic version of the classic Mirrlees
model (Mirrlees (1971)). It assumes that individuals are infinitely-lived and that their income
generating abilities vary stochastically from period to period. In the tradition of the literature
following Mirrlees (1971), the paper seeks to understand the nature of the distortions implied by
eﬃcient taxation. It develops a tractable model that is rich enough to shed light on the dynamic
evolution of these distortions. The model assumes that, in any period, there are two ability types
- low and high - and that individuals’ abilities follow a Markov process. Thus, an individual’s
current ability is a suﬃcient statistic for predicting his ability in the next period. Individuals’
per period utility functions are additively separable in consumption and leisure and much of the
analysis focuses on the case in which individuals are risk neutral. Under the latter assumption,
the eﬃciency problem is simply one of minimizing distortions in labor supply.
    When individuals’ income generating abilities are constant over time, Pareto eﬃcient income
taxation is basically the same as in the static two-type Mirrlees model. Eﬃcient tax systems are
stationary. Low ability individuals face a positive marginal tax rate and their labor supply is
distorted downwards. High ability individuals face a zero marginal tax rate and their labor supply
is undistorted. However, when ability types are not perfectly correlated over time, the results are
dramatically diﬀerent. Eﬃcient tax systems are non-stationary and the only individuals whose
labor supply is distorted are those who currently are and have always been low ability. All other
individuals face a zero marginal rate of taxation. Moreover, the degree to which these perpetual
low types have their labor supply distorted converges to zero, so that not only is the fraction
of individuals who face a positive marginal tax rate converging to zero, but the tax rate these
individuals are facing goes to zero. Thus, in a very strong sense, the distortions caused by eﬃcient
income tax schemes converge to zero over time.
    When individuals are risk averse, a tax system must not only account for distortions in indi-
viduals’ labor supply but also for distortions in the allocation of consumption across states and
time. We show in a two-period version of the model, that with risk aversion, individuals who are
low ability in the second period face a positive marginal tax rate even if they were previously high
ability. Thus, risk neutrality is a necessary condition for the result described above. However,
we also show that the distortion imposed on those who become low types in the second period is



                                                 1
close to zero when individuals are only slightly risk averse and that the basic pattern of earnings
under an eﬃcient tax system is the same as in the risk neutral case. Thus, the broad features of
eﬃcient tax systems that we identify in our basic model are robust to introducing risk aversion.
   A second interesting feature of Pareto eﬃcient income tax systems in our environment is that
they can be time consistent even when the correlation in individuals’ ability types is large. As
pointed out by Roberts (1984), when ability types are constant over time, Pareto eﬃcient income
tax systems are not time-consistent. Distortionary taxation is necessary to extract individuals’
private information. But after individuals have revealed it, the government will find it optimal
to eliminate such distortions, making the original tax system non credible. However, when ability
types are stochastic, residual uncertainty remains, because an individual may change type. Ac-
cordingly, the government must still screen types in the remaining periods. We establish a lower
bound on the correlation in types such that below it the ex post optimal distortion is the same
as the ex ante optimal distortion and the optimal tax system is time consistent. We also show
that when the correlation of types is above this bound, it is governments with higher spending
commitments and/or more ambitious redistributive objectives who find it harder to commit to
implement eﬃcient income tax systems.
   The paper contributes to a large literature on dynamic optimal taxation. The bulk of this
has studied the optimal taxation of labor income and wealth under the assumption that the
government is constrained to use linear taxes (see Chari and Kehoe (1999) for a review). This
paper follows the mechanism design approach of Mirrlees (1971) and models the informational
asymmetries that preclude the use of non-distortionary taxation. Thus, we make no a priori
restrictions on the type of taxes the government may use. Other papers in this tradition include
Albanesi and Sleet (2003), Brito et al (1991), Diamond and Mirrlees (1978), Golosov, Kocherlakota
and Tsyvinsky (2003), Golosov and Tsyvinski (2003) and Werning (2002). Of these, our paper
is closest to Golosov, Kocherlakota and Tsyvinsky (2003).1                They also consider an infinitely-
lived economy in which individuals’ income generating abilities vary over time. Their model is
much more general than ours, in the sense that it includes capital and multiple consumption
    1 The other papers make diﬀerent assumptions about the dynamic evolution of individuals’ unobservable types.

Brito et al (1991) assume that individuals income generating abilities are constant. Werning (2002) assumes
that individuals’ productive abilities are constant but adds in an observable technology shock which impacts
wages. Diamond and Mirrlees (1978) and Golosov and Tsyvinski (2003) assume a very specific pattern of shocks
- individuals have constant income generating abilities unless they become disabled, which is an absorbing state.
Albanesi and Sleet (2003) assume that individuals diﬀer by their leisure preferences rather than their income
generating abilities. These preferences are uncorrelated across periods.


                                                       2
goods and imposes less structure on the stochastic evolution of abilities. However, they provide
only a partial characterization of Pareto eﬃcient allocations. In particular, they do not obtain
results about distortions in labor supply. Our more restrictive assumptions allow us to actually
provide a full characterization of Pareto eﬃcient allocations. Moreover, they assume, along with
all the literature cited above, that the government has full commitment power, ignoring the time
consistency problem.
    In fully characterizing Pareto eﬃcient allocations and studying their time consistency, our pa-
per draws on the dynamic contracting literature. In particular, we follow the analytical approach
employed by Battaglini (2003a) to study a monopoly pricing problem with long-lived consumers
whose tastes evolve according to a Markov process. We show that his approach can be fruitfully
applied to the problem of optimal income taxation. The taxation problem is somewhat more
involved than the pricing problem, in part because it involves characterizing the entire Pareto
frontier rather than simply finding the profit maximizing solution. Among other things, char-
acterizing the entire frontier helps us understand the role of the government’s initial spending
commitments and redistributive objectives in determining the time consistency of eﬃcient allo-
cations. Our analysis also extends Battaglini’s work by investigating the robustness of optimal
policies to risk aversion.
    The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows. The next section presents the
model. Section 3 explains how we characterize Pareto eﬃcient allocations. Section 4 describes the
properties of Pareto eﬃcient allocations and draws out their implications for the eﬃcient taxation
of labor income. Section 5 studies a two period version of the model in which agents are risk averse
and explains how risk aversion modifies the conclusions. Section 6 analyses the time consistency
of Pareto eﬃcient allocations and section 7 concludes.


2     The model

We study an economy populated by a continuum of infinitely-lived individuals. There are two
goods - consumption and leisure. In each period t, individuals get utility from consumption xt and
work lt according to the utility function xt − ϕ(lt ) where ϕ is increasing, strictly convex, and twice
continuously diﬀerentiable. Individuals are endowed with l units of time in each period. To avoid
having to worry about corner solutions, we assume that ϕ0 (0) = 0 and that liml→l ϕ0 (l) = ∞.
Individuals discount the future at rate δ < 1 and can borrow or lend at the exogenously fixed

                                                  3
                     1
interest rate r =    δ   − 1.
      Individuals diﬀer in their income generating abilities. In period t, an individual with income
generating ability θt earns income yt = θt lt if he works an amount lt . In each period, there are just
two ability levels, low and high, denoted by {θL , θH } where 0 < θL < θH . However, individuals’
abilities may diﬀer across periods. Specifically, each individual’s ability follows a Markov process
with support {θL , θH } and transition matrix:
                                        ⎡                               ⎤
                                                    ⎢ αLL       αLH ⎥
                                                    ⎢               ⎥.
                                                    ⎣               ⎦
                                                      αHL       αHH

We assume that types are correlated (i.e., that αHH ≥ αLH ), but we do not make assumptions
on the degree of correlation. A fraction µ ∈ (0, 1) of individuals are high types in period one.
      The economy also has a government. In each period, this government spends an amount G.
While this spending does not directly impact individuals’ utilities, the government must raise the
revenue necessary to finance it.
      A history for an individual at time t consists of a list of his previous t − 1 abilities; i.e.,
ht = {θ1 , ..., θt−1 }. Let h1 = ∅ denote the history at time 1 and let H denote the set of all
histories. Let the notation ht+j º ht mean that ht+j follows ht (i.e., its first t − 1 components are
equal to ht ).
      An allocation in this economy is described by (x, y) = {(xt (θt ; ht ), yt (θt ; ht ))}∞
                                                                                             t=1 .         Here
(xt (θt ; ht ), yt (θt ; ht )) is the consumption-earnings bundle of those individuals who have ability
θt in period t after history ht ∈ H. To be feasible, an allocation must satisfy the aggregate
resource constraint2
                                ∞
                                X                                    ∞
                                                                     X
                                      δ t−1 E[xt (θt ; ht ) + G] ≤         δ t−1 E[yt (θt ; ht )].
                                t=1                                  t=1

This says that the present value of consumption and government spending equals the present value
of earnings. The expected lifetime utility of an individual with high ability in period one under
such an allocation is
                                         ∞
                                         X
                     V (θH | h1 ) =            δ t−1 E[xt (θt ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θt ; ht )/θt ) | θ1 = θH ],
                                         t=1

  2   Throughout the paper, we will ignore non-negativity constraints on individuals’ consumptions.




                                                               4
while that of an individual with low ability in period one is
                                      ∞
                                      X
                    V (θL | h1 ) =          δ t−1 E[xt (θt ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θt ; ht )/θt ) | θ1 = θL ].
                                      t=1

   An allocation is eﬃcient if, for some u, it solves the problem

                                                    max V (θH | h1 )
                                                    (x,y)


                                             s.t. V (θL | h1 ) ≥ u (UL )

and
                        ∞
                        X                                        ∞
                                                                 X
                               δ t−1 E[xt (θt ; ht ) + G] ≤            δ t−1 E[yt (θt ; ht )]. (R)
                         t=1                                     t=1

Thus, it maximizes the expected utility of those who are high types in period one subject to giving
a fixed level of utility to those who are low types and the aggregate resource constraint.
   It is straightforward to show that an allocation (x, y) is eﬃcient if and only if the earnings
path y maximizes Marshallian aggregate surplus
                                   ∞
                                   X
                                          δ t−1 E[yt (θt ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θt ; ht )/θt )],
                                    t=1

and the consumption path x is such that UL and R hold with equality. The surplus maximizing
earnings path has the property that individuals work up until the point at which their marginal
disutility of work equals their marginal product. More precisely, in any period t after any history
ht , yt (θH ; ht ) must equal y ∗ (θH ) and yt (θL ; ht ) must equal y ∗ (θL ) where

                     y ∗ (θ) = arg max{y − ϕ(y/θ) : y/θ ∈ [0, l]}                     θ ∈ {θL , θH }.

   If the government can observe individuals’ abilities, it can realize any utility allocation on the
Pareto frontier through a very simple stationary tax system. All high ability individuals in any
                                           ∗
period are required to pay a lump sum tax TH and all low ability individuals must pay a tax
TL∗ . These taxes are chosen so that (i) the present value of tax receipts equals the present value
of government expenditures and (ii) those who begin period one as low types have the required
expected utility of u. Given this system, high ability individuals will choose to earn y ∗ (θH ) in any
period and low ability individuals will choose to earn y ∗ (θL ).
   Eﬃcient allocations will be diﬃcult to realize when the government is unable to observe indi-
viduals’ income generating abilities and hence unable to impose ability-specific lump sum taxes.

                                                             5
Accounting for this unobservability, requires ensuring that it is always in individuals’ interests to
claim the bundles intended for them. This requires that the allocation satisfy the following set of
incentive constraints. For all time periods t and histories ht ,

                    xt (θH ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θH ; ht )/θH ) + δEθH V (θt+1 |(ht , θH ) )

               ≥ xt (θL ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θL ; ht )/θH ) + δEθH V (θt+1 |(ht , θL ) ) (ICH (ht ))

and

                   xt (θL ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θL ; ht )/θL ) + δEθL V (θt+1 |(ht , θL ) )

               ≥ xt (θH ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θH ; ht )/θL ) + δEθL V (θt+1 |(ht , θH ) ) (ICL (ht )),

where V (θt | ht ) denotes the expected lifetime utility of an individual who has type θt in period
t after history ht . These constraints ensure that in any period t after any history ht individuals
are always better oﬀ with the bundle intended for them than the bundle intended for any other
individual they could credibly claim to be.
    We say that an allocation is second best eﬃcient if, for some u, it solves the problem

                                              max V (θH | h1 )                                     (P I )
                                              (x,y)


                       s.t. UL , R, and ICH (ht ) & ICL (ht ) f or all t & ht

In the sequel, we refer to this as the general problem. Our interest lies in understanding what
second best eﬃcient allocations look like and how they may be decentralized via tax-transfer
systems. To make the problem interesting, we restrict consideration to cases in which G and u
are suﬃciently high that any eﬃcient allocation in which those who are low types in period one
have expected utility u violates at least one of the high types’ incentive constraints.


3     Solution procedure

To characterize second best eﬃcient allocations, we study the following relaxed problem:

                                              max V (θH | h1 )                                    (P II )
                                              (x,y)


                               s.t. UL , R, and ICH (ht ) f or all t & ht



                                                      6
The relaxed problem imposes the incentive constraints after any history only for those who are
currently high types. We will first characterize the solution to the relaxed problem and then
explain the relationship between the relaxed and general problems.
   Our first observation about the relaxed problem is:

Lemma 1 Let (x, y) solve the relaxed problem. Then both UL and ICH (h1 ) hold with equality.

The reason why the period one incentive constraint is binding is that, if it were not, then by
transferring resources forward in time as necessary, we could assure that none of the incentive
constraints were satisfied. But then the solution to the relaxed problem would be an eﬃcient
allocation and, by assumption, must violate at least one of the high type’s incentive constraints.
   Lemma 1 does not imply that all the incentive constraints are binding because the solution
may involve giving those who are high types in the future suﬃcient consumption that they are
strictly better oﬀ not masquerading as low types. It turns out, however, that this possibility can
be ignored.

Lemma 2 Let (x, y) be an allocation satisfying the constraints of the relaxed problem. Then there
exists x0 such that (x0 , y) satisfies all the constraints and yields the same value of the objective
function as (x, y) but also satisfies ICH (ht ) with equality for all periods t > 1 and all histories ht .

   To understand this result, suppose that under the allocation (x, y) an incentive constraint is
not binding for individuals who are high types at some period t > 1 after some history ht =
(ht−1 , θt−1 ). Then, we can make it bind by reducing the high types’ consumption in that period
and giving the expected present value to those with history ht−1 and ability θt−1 in period t − 1.
If θt−1 = θH then this has no implications for the incentive constraint of the high types in period
t − 1 with history ht−1 . The gain in consumption in period t − 1 is exactly oﬀset by the loss in
expected consumption should they remain high types in period t. If θt−1 = θL then the transfer
does have implications for the incentive constraint of the high types in period t − 1 with history
ht−1 . On the one hand, masquerading as low types in period t − 1 now yields more consumption
in period t − 1. On the other, it yields less consumption in period t if individuals remain high
types. It turns out that because high types are more likely to remain high types than are low
types to become high types, the cost of lower future consumption outweighs the benefit of higher
current consumption so that the incentive constraint still holds. Indeed, the transfer leads the
incentive constraint of the high type in period t − 1 with history ht−1 to be satisfied strictly.
However, we can repeat the process by reducing the consumption of the high type in period t − 1

                                                    7
with history ht−1 = (ht−2 , θt−2 ) and giving the expected present value to those with history ht−2
and ability θt−2 in period t − 2. By repeating this process as many times as necessary, we find a
consumption allocation x0 that satisfies all the incentive constraints with equality except possibly
the first period constraint.
   It follows from Lemma 1 and 2 that there is no loss of generality in assuming that in the
solution to the relaxed problem ICH (ht ) holds with equality for all t and ht . We can use this fact
to write the expected lifetime utility of an individual with high ability after history ht as

                  V (θH | ht ) = V (θL | ht ) + Φ (yt (θL ; ht )) + ∆EV (θt+1 | (ht , θL ))           (1)

where Φ (y) = ϕ(y/θL ) − ϕ(y/θH ) and ∆EV (θt+1 | (ht , θL )) is the diﬀerence in the continuation
values for the two types EθH V (θt+1 | (ht , θL )) − EθL V (θt+1 | (ht , θL )). By successively using this
equation, we can write the diﬀerence in the continuation values as solely a function of the earnings
of an individual who is a low type in period t and remains one thereafter. Denote by H ◦ (ht ) the
set of histories following a history ht in which in all the periods including and after t the individual
has low ability. Let h◦t+j denote an element of H ◦ (ht ). Then we can use (1) to show that:
Lemma 3 Let (x, y) be an allocation satisfying ICH (ht ) with equality for all periods t and all
histories ht . Then, the utility of an individual with history ht who is a high type in period t can
be written as:
                               X∞
                                                   j  ¡                 ¢
                V (θH | ht ) =     δ j [αHH − αLH ] Φ yt+j (θL ; h◦t+j ) + V (θL | ht ) .         (2)
                                 j=0

   This result can in turn be used to establish:
Lemma 4 Let (x, y) solve the relaxed problem. Then the earnings levels y solve the problem:
                                       ∞
                                       X                        ¡                  ¢
                                max          δ j [αHH − αLH ]j Φ y1+j (θL ; h◦1+j ) + u
                                       j=0
                                         ∞
                                         X
               s.t.   G ≤ (1 − δ)              δ t−1 E[yt (θt ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θt ; ht )/θt )]          (3)
                                         t=1
                                               ∞
                                               X                        ¡                  ¢
                                −(1 − δ)[µ           δ j [αHH − αLH ]j Φ y1+j (θL ; h◦1+j ) + u]
                                               j=0

   The problem described in Lemma 4 is straightforward to solve. Letting γ be the multiplier on
the revenue constraint, the associated Lagrangian can be written as
                       ∞
                       X
              L =            δ t−1 E[yt (θt ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θt ; ht )/θt )] − G/(1 − δ)                (4)
                       t=1
                                           X∞
                                    1                            ¡                  ¢
                       −(µ −             ){   δ j [αHH − αLH ]j Φ y1+j (θL ; h◦1+j ) + u}
                                 γ(1 − δ) j=0


                                                           8
The first term is Marshallian aggregate surplus, while the second term represents the loss of
surplus resulting from having to meet the incentive constraints. Letting h∗t = h◦1+(t−1) , the first
order conditions are that for all t and ht 6= h∗t

                                         ϕ0 (yt (θt ; ht )/θt ) = θt                               (5)

and for all t and ht = h∗t
                                                ∙       ¸t−1
                      ϕ0 (yt (θL ; h∗t )/θL )       αHL                                  1
          (1 − µ)[1 −                         ]= 1−          Φ0 (yt (θL ; h∗t )) (µ −          )   (6)
                               θL                   αLL                               γ(1 − δ)
As we show in the proof of Proposition 1, the value of the multiplier γ is such that µ > 1/γ (1 − δ),
so that the right hand side of (6) is positive.
    Before we study the implications of these conditions, we first clarify the relationship between
the relaxed and general problems.
Lemma 5 Let (x, y) be an allocation with the property that the earnings levels solve the problem
described in Lemma 4 and the consumption levels are such as to make UL and ICH (ht ) (for all t
and ht ) hold with equality. Then, (x, y) is a second best eﬃcient allocation. Conversely, if (x, y)
is a second best eﬃcient allocation, then the earnings levels must solve the problem described in
Lemma 4.

It follows from this result that if (x, y) is a second best eﬃcient allocation then the earnings levels
satisfy the first order conditions (5) and (6). In the next section, we use this to derive some results
about the nature of second best eﬃcient allocations. Before doing that, it is worth noting that the
relationship between the relaxed and general problems is somewhat non-standard. In a standard
problem, it is the case that any solution to the relaxed problem solves the general problem. In
our problem, only those solutions that satisfy the constraints with equality necessarily solve the
general problem.


4     Second best eﬃcient allocations

To set the stage for our first main result, we briefly describe the nature of second best eﬃcient
allocations in which ability types are perfectly correlated over time, so that αHH = αLL = 1.
Under this assumption, the model is a replication of the Mirrlees model with two ability types.
The following proposition will therefore come as no surprise.
Proposition 1 Suppose that ability types are perfectly correlated over time. Then, in any second
best eﬃcient allocation, the earnings of individuals are constant over time. The earnings of those
with high ability are undistorted (i.e., they earn y ∗ (θH ) each period), while the earnings of those
with low ability are distorted downward (i.e., they earn less than y ∗ (θL ) each period).

                                                     9
Proof: In any period t, high ability individuals have history ht = (θH , ..., θH ). The first order
condition (5) then implies that yt (θH ; ht ) = y ∗ (θH ). Low ability individuals, on the other hand,
have history ht = (θL , ..., θL ) = h∗t so that (6) implies their earnings satisfy
                                                 ∙       ¸t−1
                       ϕ0 (yt (θL ; h∗t )/θL )       αHL                                  1
           (1 − µ)[1 −                         ]= 1−          Φ0 (yt (θL ; h∗t )) (µ −          ).
                                θL                   αLL                               γ(1 − δ)

Since αHL = 0, the latter implies that:

                                 ϕ0 (yt (θL ; h∗t )/θL )                                 1
                   (1 − µ)[1 −                           ] = Φ0 (yt (θL ; h∗t )) (µ −          ).                  (7)
                                          θL                                          γ(1 − δ)

Assuming that µ > 1/γ(1 − δ), (7) implies that low types earn a constant amount each period
which is less than y ∗ (θL ).
   It only remains to prove that µ > 1/γ(1 − δ). Assume, first that µ = 1/γ(1 − δ). Then (7)
implies that for all t, yt (θL ; h∗t ) = y ∗ (θL ). This means that the earnings levels that solve the
                                      e, are first best eﬃcient. But we know by assumption
problem described in Lemma 4, denoted y
that if (x, y) solves the relaxed problem then y is not first best eﬃcient and hence cannot equal
e . This contradicts Lemma 4.
y
                                         e denote the associated optimal earnings levels. Let
   Next suppose that µ < 1/γ(1 − δ). Let y
e be such as to make ICH (ht ) (for all t and ht ) and UL hold with equality given y
x                                                                                  e . Then, we
will show that (e  e ) cannot solve the relaxed problem - a contradiction. To see this, consider a
                x, y
marginal reduction dy in ye1 (θL ; h1 ) and choose dx so as to keep the period one low type’s utility
constant; i.e., so that

                                           ye1 (θL ; h1 ) − dy                      ye1 (θL ; h1 )
                 e1 (θL ; h1 ) − dx − ϕ(
                 x                                               e1 (θL ; h1 ) − ϕ(
                                                               )=x                                 ).
                                                    θL                                    θL

Clearly,
                                                   ϕ0 (e
                                                       y1 (θL ; h1 ))
                                            dx =                      dy.
                                                          θL
Note that ICH (h1 ) is now still satisfied, because the high type now finds the low type’s bundle
less attractive because it involves less earnings. However, the change in revenues is

                                                               ϕ0 (e
                                                                   y1 (θL ; h1 ))
                     dR = (1 − µ)[dx − dy] = (1 − µ)[                             − 1]dy > 0.
                                                                      θL
                                                                            ϕ0 (e
                                                                                y1 (θL ;h1 )/θL )
This change is positive since µ < 1/γ(1 − δ) implies that 1 −                        θL             < 0. Now take this
                                                                                         e1 (θH ; h1 )
revenue increase and divide it among those who are high types in period one; i.e., raise x



                                                         10
by dR/µ. Clearly, this change makes the high types strictly better oﬀ, which since it violates none
of the constraints, means that (e  e ) cannot solve the relaxed problem. Q.E.D.
                                x, y

    Thus, the labor supply of high ability individuals is undistorted, while the labor supply of
low ability individuals is distorted downwards. This is to counteract the incentives of high ability
types to masquerade as low ability types. Any utility allocation on the (second best) Pareto
                                                                           ∗∗
frontier can be realized through a very simple stationary tax system. Let yL  denote the amount
earned by low ability individuals in the utility allocation in question. Let x∗L be the constant level
of consumption just suﬃcient to give low ability individuals utility level u given that they are
         ∗∗
working yL  /θL in each period; i.e.,

                                              x∗L − ϕ(yL
                                                       ∗∗
                                                          /θL )
                                                                = u.
                                                    1−δ

Let x∗H be the constant level of consumption just suﬃcient to prevent high ability individuals from
claiming to be low ability individuals given that they are working y ∗ (θH )/θH in each period; i.e.,

                           x∗H − ϕ(y ∗ (θH )/θH )      ∗∗
                                                    ϕ(yL             ∗∗
                                                          /θL ) − ϕ(yL  /θH )
                                                  =                           + u.
                                  1−δ                         1−δ

Then if the government requires that in each period individuals pay taxes according to the schedule
                ∗
T (y) where T (yH ) = y ∗ (θH ) − x∗H and T (yLL
                                              ∗       ∗
                                                 ) = yLL − x∗L , it can achieve the utility allocation
in question. This tax schedule has a zero marginal rate in the neighborhood of the income level
y ∗ (θH ) but a positive marginal rate in the neighborhood of yLL
                                                               ∗ 3
                                                                  .
    With this as background, we now present our first main result.

Proposition 2 Suppose that ability types are not perfectly correlated over time. Then, in any
second best eﬃcient allocation, the earnings of individuals who are currently, or have at some
point been, high types are undistorted (i.e., they earn y ∗ (θt ) in period t when they have ability
θt ). The earnings of individuals who are currently and have always been low types are distorted
downwards (i.e., they earn less than y ∗ (θL )). However, the extent of this distortion decreases over
time converging to 0 as t → ∞.

Proof: The first order conditions tell us that for all t and ht 6= h∗t

                                             ϕ0 (yt (θt ; ht )/θt ) = θt                                           (8)

    3 Suppose that the government is employing a smooth tax schedule T (y) with the property that T (y ∗ ) =
                                                                                                                 H
y∗ (θH ) − x∗H and T (yLL
                        ∗ ) = y ∗ − x∗ . The schedule must be such that y ∗
                                LL      L                                  LL maximizes y − T (y) − ϕ(y/θL ) and yH
                                                                                                                     ∗
                                                                             0  ∗                  ∗
maximizes y − T (y) − ϕ(y/θH ). Since T (y) is smooth, this requires that T (yLL ) equal 1 − ϕ(yLL /θL )/θL which is
positive and that T 0 (yH∗ ) equal 1 − ϕ(y ∗ /θ )/θ
                                          H    H   H which is zero. Of course, there is no reason that the government
need use such a smooth schedule. It could, for example, set T (y) equal to infinity for any y other than yLL∗       ∗ .
                                                                                                                or yH
In this case, the notion of a marginal rate of taxation is not well defined.


                                                          11
and for all t and ht = h∗t
                                                ∙       ¸t−1
                      ϕ0 (yt (θL ; h∗t )/θL )       αHL                                  1
          (1 − µ)[1 −                         ]= 1−          Φ0 (yt (θL ; h∗t )) (µ −          )   (9)
                               θL                   αLL                               γ(1 − δ)

If an individual is currently or has at some point been a high type, then ht 6= h∗t and, from (8), it
can be seen that the first order conditions imply that they work up until the point at which their
marginal disutility of work ϕ0 (y/θt ) equals their wage θt . If an individual is currently and has
always been a low type then ht = h∗t and, from (9), it can be seen that the first order conditions
imply that they work less than the amount at which their marginal disutility of work equals their
                                                                                 h        it−1
wage. Since ability types are not perfectly correlated over time, 1 > ααHL
                                                                        LL
                                                                            and   1 − αHL
                                                                                      αLL
                                                                                               is
decreasing in t and converges to zero as t → ∞. The first order condition therefore implies that
yt (θL ; h∗t )/θL is decreasing in t and converges to y ∗ (θL )/θL as t → ∞. Q.E.D.

   The proposition implies that when ability types are not perfectly correlated over time, the
fraction of individuals in any period whose labor supply is distorted in any second best eﬃcient
allocation is decreasing and converges to zero as t → ∞. Moreover, the degree to which these
individuals have their labor supply distorted also converges to zero. Thus, in a very strong sense,
the distortion caused by imperfect observability of individuals’ abilities goes to zero.
   To understand the first part of the proposition, consider a group of individuals at some time
t who share the same history ht . Suppose that at some point in the past these individuals were
high ability so that ht 6= h∗t . By Proposition 2, the earnings of these individuals are undistorted at
time t. This is obviously optimal for those with high ability at time t, so consider those with low
ability. Suppose, to the contrary, that the earnings of these individuals are distorted downwards.
Then, if we were to increase their earnings slightly in period t we would make them better oﬀ. Of
course, such a change would also necessitate an increase in the consumption of those who have high
ability at time t to prevent them from masquerading as low types. This will reduce government
revenues. However, this reduction in expected revenues can be financed by a concordant reduction
in the consumption of these individuals in the period τ < t in which they were first high types.
This reduction gives individuals with high ability in period τ and history hτ ¹ ht no incentive to
masquerade as low types. The reason is that the reduction in current consumption is oﬀset by the
increase in expected future consumption at time t. This marginal change in the allocation would
not cause any of the incentive constraints of low ability individuals to be violated since none of
these are binding.

                                                   12
   To understand the second part of the proposition, it is useful to contrast it with the result in
Proposition 1. As noted, with constant types the earnings of low ability individuals are distorted
downwards and the degree of distortion is constant over time. The size of the distortion is deter-
mined by a simple marginal cost - marginal benefit argument. A lower distortion increases the
Marshallian surplus generated by an individual and therefore obviously increases welfare. How-
ever, it also increases the consumption that needs to be given to individuals with high ability.
This reduces tax revenues for the government and increases the shadow cost of taxation γ. At the
optimum, the marginal increase in surplus is exactly compensated by the marginal reduction in
revenues. With constant abilities the marginal cost/benefit ratio is constant throughout periods.
After any period t, the marginal benefit of a lower distortion is proportional to the fraction of low
types (the constant 1 − µ), because types never change. Similarly, the marginal cost is constant:
it is proportional to the fraction of high types whose consumption must be raised (the constant
µ) and the shadow cost of taxation: µ − 1/γ(1 − δ). When types change over time, the marginal
cost/benefit ratio is not constant, because, depending on the realized history, there is a diﬀerent
composition of the population. The marginal benefit of a lower distortion in the earnings of those
individuals who at time t are and have always been low types is proportional to the fraction of
                                             t−1
such individuals in the population: (1 − µ) αLL  . The marginal cost, evaluated at time 1, also
depends on the time t of the change. At time t the consumption of high ability individuals who
have previously been low types increases by, say, ∆Rt . At time t − 1 the expected utility of those
who are and have always been low types increases because they can become high types at time t
and benefit from the increase in consumption at that time. Part of this extra expected utility can
be taxed away at t − 1, but not all since incentive compatibility must be satisfied at that time as
well. At time t − 1 individuals who have high ability for the first time can not receive less than
what they would receive if they chooses the option designed for those who remain low types. Even
if we completely tax away the expected increase in consumption of those who, at time t − 1, are
and have always been low types with a tax Tt−1 such that αLH ∆Rt − Tt−1 = 0, those individuals
who have high ability at time t − 1 after previously being low types must receive an increase
in consumption equal to ∆Rt−1 = (αHH ∆Rt − Tt−1 ) − (αLH ∆Rt − Tt−1 ) = (αHH − αLH ) ∆Rt .
Repeating the same argument, if we try and tax away these gains at t − 2, we must provide an
increase in consumption at time t − 2 for those individuals who have high ability for the first
                                                                  2
time equal to ∆Rt−2 = (αHH − αLH ) ∆Rt−1 = (αHH − αLH ) ∆Rt . Proceeding backward, we


                                                 13
arrive to an increase in the consumption of those who are high ability at time 1 proportional to
(αHH − αLH )t−1 . Since these individuals make up a fraction µ of the population, the marginal
cost of a lower distortion in the earnings of those individuals who at time t are and have always
                                                        t−1
been low types is proportional to µ (αHH − αLH ) . Accordingly, the marginal cost/benefit ratio
                                     h          it−1
                                  µ    αHH −αLH
at time t is now proportional to 1−µ     αLL         . As the cost/benefit ratio of a lower distortion
vanishes over time,4 the distortion vanishes with it.
      When ability types are not perfectly correlated, it is no longer the case that utility allocations
on the (second best) Pareto frontier can be realized through a stationary tax system. Proposition
2 implies that the marginal tax rates individuals face should depend upon their entire history of
earnings. What might such a non—stationary tax system look like? To provide a feel for this, we
will describe a particular tax system that can realize utility allocations on the Pareto frontier.
It should be stressed that this is not the only possibility. Given that individuals have constant
marginal utility of consumption, the allocation of consumption across time or states is irrelevant
for individuals’ utility and this gives a great deal of flexibility in choosing consumption paths and
hence tax systems.
      Consider a particular utility allocation on the Pareto frontier and let y denote the associated
earnings levels. These must solve the problem described in Lemma 4. Thus, yt (θH ; ht ) = y ∗ (θH )
for all t and ht and yt (θL ; ht ) = y ∗ (θL ) for all t and all ht 6= h∗t . To simplify notation, let
 ∗
yLt = yt (θL ; h∗t ) for all t. Now, choose x as follows. First, let the consumption of high types in
any period be constant, so that xt (θH ; ht ) = x∗H for all t and ht for some x∗H . In addition, let
the consumption of those who are currently low types but have previously been high types be
constant, so that xt (θL ; ht ) = x∗L for all t and ht 6= h∗t . Further, let this consumption be related
to x∗H in the following way:

                              x∗L = x∗H − (ϕ(y ∗ (θH )/θH ) − ϕ(y ∗ (θL )/θH )).

  4                                                                                                   αHH −αLH
   This can be seen from the fact that the term in the square parenthesis is lower than one: indeed     αLL
                                                                                                                 =
      αHL
1−     < 1 because types are positively correlated.
      αLL




                                                       14
Finally, for those who have always been low types let xt (θL ; h∗t ) = x∗Lt where (x∗Lt )∞
                                                                                         t=1 satisfy for

all t

x∗Lt     = x∗L − (ϕ(y ∗ (θL )/θH ) − ϕ(yLt
                                        ∗
                                           /θH )) + δαHL {x∗L − ϕ(y ∗ (θL )/θL ) − (x∗Lt+1 − ϕ(yLt+1
                                                                                                ∗
                                                                                                     /θL ))}
              X∞
           +     δ j αj−1    ∗       ∗               ∗         ∗
                      LL {xL − ϕ(y (θL )/θL ) − (xLt+j − ϕ(yLt+j /θL ))}.
               j=2

It may be verified that x so constructed is such as to make the incentive constraints ICH (ht ) (for
all t and ht ) bind. To ensure UL binds, let x∗H be chosen so that when x∗L and (x∗Lt )∞
                                                                                       t=1 are defined

by the above equations, then V (θL | h1 ) = u.
       Now consider the features of the tax system that would decentralize the allocation (x, y). In
period 1, individuals would face a schedule T1 (y) that requires them to pay a tax T1 (y ∗ (θH )) =
y ∗ (θH ) − x∗H if they earn y ∗ (θH ) and a tax T1 (yL1
                                                      ∗       ∗
                                                         ) = yL1 − x∗L1 if they earn yL1
                                                                                      ∗
                                                                                         . This first period
                                                 ∗
schedule has a positive marginal rate at income yL1 and a zero rate at income y ∗ (θH ).
       In the second period, the schedule individuals face depends upon their first period earnings.
Those who earn y ∗ (θH ) in the first period face a schedule T2 (y; y ∗ (θH )) that requires them to
pay a tax T2 (y ∗ (θH ); y ∗ (θH )) = y ∗ (θH ) − x∗H if they earn y ∗ (θH ) and a tax T2 (y ∗ (θL ); y ∗ (θH )) =
y ∗ (θL ) − x∗L if they earn y ∗ (θL ). This tax schedule has zero marginal rates in the neighborhood of
both the income levels y ∗ (θH ) and y ∗ (θL ). Those who earn yL1
                                                                ∗
                                                                   in the first period, face a schedule
        ∗
T2 (y; yL1 ) that requires them to pay a tax T2 (y ∗ (θH ); yL1
                                                             ∗
                                                                ) = y ∗ (θH ) − x∗H if they earn y ∗ (θH )
               ∗     ∗       ∗
and a tax T2 (yL2 ; yL1 ) = yL2 − x∗L2 if they earn yL2
                                                     ∗
                                                        . This tax schedule has a zero marginal rate
in the neighborhood of y ∗ (θH ) but a positive marginal rate in the neighborhood of yL2
                                                                                      ∗
                                                                                         . Thus,
                         ∗                                                          ∗
the tax schedule T2 (y; yL1 ) has a diﬀerent marginal rate in the neighborhood of [yL2 , y ∗ (θL )] than
T2 (y; y ∗ (θH )). Since yL2
                          ∗     ∗
                             > yL1                            ∗
                                   , the tax schedule T2 (y; yL1 ) has a lower marginal rate in the
                 ∗
neighborhood of yL2 than the first period tax schedule.
       In the third period, those who had earned y ∗ (θH ) in the first period continue to face the
schedule T2 (y; y ∗ (θH )) as do those who earned y ∗ (θH ) in the second period. Those who earned
 ∗       ∗                                                      ∗     ∗
yL1 and yL2 in the first two periods, face the schedule T3 (y; yL1 , yL2 ) that requires them to pay a
tax T3 (y ∗ (θH ); yL1
                    ∗     ∗
                       , yL2 ) = y ∗ (θH )−x∗H if they earn y ∗ (θH ) and a tax T3 (yL3
                                                                                     ∗     ∗
                                                                                        ; yL1    ∗
                                                                                              , yL2      ∗
                                                                                                    ) = yL3 −x∗L3
              ∗           ∗     ∗                             ∗     ∗
if they earn yL3 . Since yL3 > yL2 , the tax schedule T3 (y; yL1 , yL2 ) involves a lower marginal rate
                        ∗
in the neighborhood of yL3 than does the second period tax schedule. As time progresses, more
and more individuals come under the tax schedule T2 (y; y ∗ (θH )). Moreover, the schedule faced by
                                                            ∗         ∗
those with an uninterrupted history of low earnings Tt (y; yL1 , .., yLt−1 ) converges to the schedule

                                                       15
T2 (y; y ∗ (θH )).


5      Implications of risk aversion

The model studied so far has assumed that individuals are risk neutral. This implies that individ-
uals are indiﬀerent as to the allocation of consumption across time and states. This facilitates a
clean focus on the problem of designing taxation to minimize distortions in labor supply. In this
section, we extend the model to incorporate risk aversion and investigate how this impacts the
results.
    To incorporate risk aversion, we assume that:

                                              ut = (xt )β − ϕ(lt )                                   (10)

where β ∈ (0, 1). As β approaches 1 individuals become risk neutral and we have the original
model. For tractability, in this section we focus on a two-period version of the model.
    In the two-period model, an allocation can be fully described by

                (x, y) = {(xL , xH , xLL , xLH , xHL , xHH ); (yL , yH , yLL , yLH , yHL , yHH )}.

Thus, (xL , yL ) is the consumption-earnings bundle intended for those individuals who have low
ability in period one; (xLL , yLL ) is the period two bundle intended for those who have low ability
in both periods; and so on. As before, an allocation is eﬃcient if, for some u, it solves the problem

      max[(xH )β − ϕ(yH /θH )] + δ[αHH ((xHH )β − ϕ(yHH /θH )) + αHL ((xHL )β − ϕ(yHL /θL ))].

s.t. [(xL )β − ϕ(yL /θL )] + δ[αLL ((xLL )β − ϕ(yLL /θL )) + αLH ((xLH )β − ϕ(yLH /θH ))] ≥ u (UL )

and

           [µxH + (1 − µ)xL + G] + δ[µ(αHH xHH + αHL xHL ) + (1 − µ)(αLH xLH + αLL xLL ) + G]

    ≤ [µyH + (1 − µ)yL ] + δ[µ(αHH yHH + αHL yHL ) + (1 − µ)(αLH yLH + αLL yLL )]. (R)

    Eﬃcient allocations now have two properties. First, individuals’ consumption levels are con-
stant across time and states. Thus, for the period one high types xH = xHL = xHH and for
the low types xL = xLH = xLL . Second, there is no distortion in individuals’ labor supply
decisions. This requires that each individual should work up until the point at which their mar-
ginal disutility of work equals the marginal utility of the consumption that work produces. Thus,
θH βxβ−1
     H   = ϕ0 (yH /θH ), θL βxβ−1   0
                              HL = ϕ (yHL /θL ), and so on.


                                                       16
   Again, if the government can observe individuals’ abilities, it can realize eﬃcient allocations
with a simple tax system. Let y ∗ (T, θ) denote the earnings level that would maximize the static
utility of an individual with ability θ if he had to pay a lump sum tax T ; that is,

             y ∗ (T, θ) = arg max{(y − T )β − ϕ(y/θ) : y/θ ∈ [0, l]}     θ ∈ {θL , θH }.

Then, any eﬃcient allocation (x, y) can be decentralized as follows. Individuals who are high
types in the first period pay a lump sum tax TH where y ∗ (TH , θH ) − TH = xH . They also pay this
tax in the second period if they remain high types. If they become low types, their tax burdens
are reduced in such a way as to maintain their consumption at the level it would be were they
high types. More precisely, they pay a tax THL such that y ∗ (THL , θL ) − THL = xH . In eﬀect, the
tax system completely insures them against any consumption loss resulting from a shock in their
income generating ability. The story for those who are low types in the first period is similar. In
the first period, they pay the lump sum tax TL where y ∗ (TL , θL ) − TL = xL . They also pay this
tax in the second period if they remain low types. If they become high types, their tax burden is
increased in such a way as to maintain their consumption at the level it would be were they low
types. More precisely, they would pay a tax TLH such that y ∗ (TLH , θH ) − TLH = xL . Individuals
have no incentive to save under this tax system, as it keeps their marginal utility of consumption
constant across time and states.
   An allocation is second best eﬃcient if it solves the eﬃciency problem with the following
additional set of incentive constraints:

      (xH )β − ϕ(yH /θH ) + δ[αHH ((xHH )β − ϕ(yHH /θH )) + αHL ((xHL )β − ϕ(yHL /θL ))]

  ≥ (xL )β − ϕ(yL /θH ) + δ[αHH ((xLH )β − ϕ(yLH /θH )) + αHL ((xLL )β − ϕ(yLL /θL ))] (IC(H))


      (xL )β − ϕ(yL /θL ) + δ[αLH ((xLH )β − ϕ(yLH /θH )) + αLL ((xLL )β − ϕ(yLL /θL ))]

  ≥ (xH )β − ϕ(yH /θL ) + δ[αLH ((xHH )β − ϕ(yHH /θH )) + αLL ((xHL )β − ϕ(yHL /θL ))] (IC(L))

                   (xHH )β − ϕ(yHH /θH ) ≥ (xHL )β − ϕ(yHL /θH ) (IC(HH))

                    (xHL )β − ϕ(yHL /θL ) ≥ (xHH )β − ϕ(yHH /θL ) (IC(HL))

                    (xLH )β − ϕ(yLH /θH ) ≥ (xLL )β − ϕ(yLL /θH ) (IC(LH))

                     (xLL )β − ϕ(yLL /θL ) ≥ (xLH )β − ϕ(yLH /θL ) (IC(LL))

                                                 17
The first two constraints deal with the first period and the remainder the second period. We
retain the assumption that when β = 1, G and u are suﬃciently high that any eﬃcient allocation
in which those who are low types in period one have expected utility of at least u violates one or
more of the high types’ incentive constraints. Thus, the second best Pareto frontier lies strictly
inside the first best frontier when β = 1.
   To solve for second best eﬃcient allocations we again consider the relaxed problem obtained
by ignoring the incentive constraints for low types. Thus we study the problem:

    max[(xH )β − ϕ(yH /θH )] + δ[αHH ((xHH )β − ϕ(yHH /θH )) + αHL ((xHL )β − ϕ(yHL /θL ))]
    (x,y)


                              s.t. UL , R, IC(H), IC(HH), IC(LH).

While we are no longer able to prove generally that second best eﬃcient allocations must solve
the relaxed problem, we can show that this is the case for β suﬃciently large.

Lemma 6 In the two period model with risk averse individuals, there exist a β < 1 such that if
β ∈ (β, 1), (x, y) is a second best eﬃcient allocation if and only if it solves the relaxed problem.

   By analyzing the first order conditions for the relaxed problem, we are able to establish:

Proposition 3 In the two period model with risk averse individuals, there exist a β < 1 such that
if β ∈ (β, 1), in any second best eﬃcient allocation, the earnings of individuals who are high types
in either period are undistorted. The earnings of individuals who are low types in either period
are distorted downwards. However, the degree of distortion in the earnings of those who become
low types in the second period converges to 0 as β → 1. Moreover, those who are low types in both
periods earn more in the second period.

This proposition shows that once we introduce risk aversion, the result that in any second best
eﬃcient allocation only those who remain low types have their labor supply decisions distorted no
longer holds. Those who start out as high types and become low types in the second period, also
work less than the eﬃcient amount. However, as individuals become less and less risk averse the
degree of this distortion converges to zero. Moreover, the basic pattern of earnings in any second
best eﬃcient allocation is the same as in the risk neutral case. In particular, the earnings of those
who remain low types are increasing.
   With risk aversion, the allocation of consumption across time and states is relevant for indi-
viduals’ utility and this explains why the earnings of individuals with history HL are distorted
downwards. Reducing the earnings level yHL lessens the incentive of those with history HH to



                                                 18
pretend they have history HL. In the risk neutral case, this problem could be handled by in-
creasing the consumption of those with history HH and taking the expected discounted value
from high ability individuals in the first period. But because individuals want to smooth their
consumption this intertemporal reallocation is no longer without cost.
   What can be established about the allocation of consumption across time and states in a second
best eﬃcient allocation? Our next proposition addresses this.
Proposition 4 In the two period model with risk averse individuals, there exist a β < 1 such that
if β ∈ (β, 1), in any second best eﬃcient allocation the consumption of individuals who are high
types in the first period goes up if they remain high types in the second period and down if they
become low types. Similarly, the consumption of individuals who are low types in the first period
goes up if they are high types in the second period and down if they are low types. Moreover, for
both low and high types, the marginal utility of consumption in the first period is less than the
expected marginal utility of consumption in the second period.

   Thus, when compared with eﬃcient allocations there are two distinct distortions in the allo-
cation of consumption. First, the allocation of consumption across states is distorted in the sense
that individuals are not fully insured. If they are low types in the second period, their consump-
tion is lower than if they are high types. This is obviously a necessary condition for incentive
compatibility. Second, the allocation of consumption across time is distorted in the sense that
individuals consume more than is optimal in the first period. This is a particular application of the
result first established by Rogerson (1985) and since generalized and applied to optimal taxation
by Golosov, Kocherlakota, and Tsyvinsky (2003). The intuition is the following. Because of the
incentive compatibility constraint, low types will supply less labor and enjoy lower consumption
in each period. The marginal utility of consumption of low types, therefore, is higher than the
marginal utility of high types in period two. Suppose, to the contrary, that the marginal utility
of consumption in the first period were higher than the expected marginal utility in the second
period for some type. If we reduce the second period consumption of high and low types by some
amount ∆ incentive compatibility is preserved, since the utility of low types is reduced by more
than that of high types. This reduction frees ∆ units of consumption that can be used to increase
consumption in the first period. But then, since the marginal increase in utility at t = 1 is higher
that the expected reduction at t = 2, the change creates a Pareto improvement: and we have a
contradiction.
   What would a tax system that could decentralize second best eﬃcient allocations look like?
Let (x, y) be the allocation we wish to decentralize. The first period tax schedule T1 (y) is such

                                                 19
that T1 (yH ) = yH − xH and T1 (yL ) = yL − xL . The marginal rate of taxation is positive in
the neighborhood of yL and zero in the neighborhood of yH . Those who earn yH in the first
period face a second period tax schedule T2 (y; yH ) such that T2 (yHH ; yH ) = yHH − xHH and
T2 (yHL ; yH ) = yHL − xHL . The marginal rate of taxation is positive in the neighborhood of yHL
and zero in the neighborhood of yHH . Those who earn yL in the first period face a second period
tax schedule T2 (y; yL ) such that T2 (yLH ; yL ) = yLH − xLH and T2 (yLL ; yL ) = yLL − xLL . The
marginal rate of taxation is positive in the neighborhood of yLL and zero in the neighborhood of
yLH .
    It is important to note that under this tax system, individuals have an incentive to save in the
first period. As Proposition 4 demonstrates, x is such that for both types the marginal utility of
consumption in the first period is less than the expected marginal utility of consumption in the
second period. This provides individuals with an incentive to transfer consumption forward. To
prevent this, it would be necessary to supplement the tax on earnings with a tax on capital income
from savings. The tax rate on saving should be suﬃcient to deter individuals from saving given
the consumptions x. Obviously, there are many choices of capital tax rates that would achieve
this goal.


6       Time consistency

Imagine that at the beginning of period one the government announces a tax/transfer system de-
signed to implement a particular utility allocation on the second best Pareto frontier. Individuals’
period one earnings choices would then reveal their period one types. If the government could
use this information to design a new tax/transfer system that was better for all individuals and
raised just as much revenue, one might imagine that it would be tempted to do so. In this case,
the original tax/transfer system would not be time consistent.
    Up to this point, we have ignored this time consistency problem, implicitly assuming that the
government can credibly commit to the ex ante optimal tax/transfer system. The equilibrium
characterized in Section 4, is therefore a Ramsey equilibrium (Ramsey (1927)): the government
determines the optimal policy given individuals’ reaction functions. However, it is well known
that Ramsey optimal policies are often not time-consistent in the sense that even benevolent




                                                 20
governments find it ex post optimal to depart from them.5                   In a model like ours, distortionary
taxation is necessary to extract individuals’ private information; after individuals have revealed it,
the government may find it optimal to eliminate such distortions: but then the original tax system
would not be credible. This type of time-inconsistency in the context of taxation with asymmetric
information was first observed by Roberts (1984).
       In this section we show that when individuals’ types can vary stochastically the time-inconsistency
problem may not arise. To analyze the issue we return to the basic model with quasi-linear utili-
ties and infinite periods.6 We also impose the additional assumption that the disutility of labor
function has a positive third derivative; i.e., ϕ000 (l) ≥ 0.7 This assumption guarantees that Φ00 > 0
which in turn implies that the Lagrangian for the maximization problem in Lemma 4 (4) is strictly
concave and that the eﬃcient earnings levels are unique.
       We begin by providing a more precise definition of time consistency. We will work directly with
allocations rather than the tax-transfer systems that generate them. It is to be understood that a
particular tax/transfer system is time consistent if and only if the allocation it generates is time
consistent. Consider then a particular second best eﬃcient allocation (x∗ , y∗ ) and imagine that
we are at the beginning of some period t ≥ 2. At that point, the government knows the histories
of all the individuals in the economy but not their period t types. Consider a group of individuals
with history ht . We are interested in whether the government can change the future allocation
intended for these individuals in such a way as to make them better oﬀ while still raising the same
revenue from them.
       Let (xht , yht ) denote a future allocation for those individuals who at time t have history ht ;
i.e.,
                     (xht , yht ) = {(xt+j (θt+j ; ht+j ), yt+j (θt+j ; ht+j )) | ∀ ht+j º ht }∞
                                                                                               j=0 .


The future allocation implied by the eﬃcient allocation (x∗ , y∗ ) is denoted (x∗ht , yh∗ t ). Let R∗ (ht )
   5 The classic reference is Kydland and Prescott (1977). See Chari, Kehoe and Prescott (1988) and Stokey (1989)

for general discussion and surveys of the literature.
    6 Our result also holds for a finite economy. This distinguishes it from Chari and Kehoe (1990) who show that

in infinitely-lived economies Ramsey equilibria may be sustained by trigger strategies if the discount factor is high
enough.
   7    This condition is satisfied by most common cost functions such as quadratic, logarithmic or exponential.




                                                           21
be the expected revenues raised from those individuals under (x∗ht , yh∗ t ); that is,
                                      ∞
                                      X
                         R∗ (ht ) =                ∗
                                            δ j E[yt+j (θt+j ; ht+j ) − x∗t+j (θt+j ; ht+j ) | ht ].
                                      j=0

Finally, let V ∗ (θ | ht ) be the expected utility of a type θ after a history ht under (x∗ , y∗ ).
       Now consider the problem:

                                                     max V (θH | ht )                                        (PhIt )
                                                   (xht ,yht )


                                             s.t. V (θL | ht ) ≥ V ∗ (θL | ht )
                         ∞
                         X
                               δ j E[yt+j (θt+j ; ht+j ) − xt+j (θt+j ; ht+j ) |ht ] ≥ R∗ (ht )
                         j=0


                      and ICH (ht+j ) & ICL (ht+j ) f or all ht+j º ht and j = 0, 1, ..

Thus, we seek to maximize the expected utility of those individuals with history ht who are high
types at time t, subject to the constraints that (i) those who are low types in period t with
history ht obtain at least as much utility as they obtain under (x∗ht , yh∗ t ); (ii) the same expected
revenue is raised from these individuals as under (x∗ht , yh∗ t ); and (iii) the incentive compatibility
constraints for these individuals in period t and beyond are satisfied. Clearly, (x∗ht , yh∗ t ) satisfies
all the constraints of this problem. If (x∗ht , yh∗ t ) solves it, then the government cannot change the
future allocation intended for individuals with history ht in such a way as to make them better oﬀ
while still raising the same revenue from them. Therefore, we say that (x∗ , y∗ ) is time consistent
if for all periods t ≥ 2 and all histories ht , (x∗ht , yh∗ t ) is a solution to PhIt .8
       We now have:

Lemma 7 Let (x∗ , y∗ ) be a second best eﬃcient allocation. Then, (x∗ , y∗ ) is time consistent if
and only if
                                                                1
                                                   αLH   µ − γ(1−δ)
                                                       ≥        1                                              (11)
                                                   αHH   1 − γ(1−δ)

where γ is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the maximization problem described in Lemma
4 that is solved by y∗ .

The intuition underlying this result is the following. When ability types are perfectly correlated,
under the Ramsey tax system the government faces no residual uncertainty in period two and
   8   This corresponds to the standard definition in the literature. See, for example, Kydland and Prescott (1977).


                                                                 22
beyond. Because of this, it could impose lump sum taxes from that point on and eliminate all
distortions in individuals’ labor supply. Accordingly, Ramsey optimal taxes can never be time
consistent. When types are stochastic, residual uncertainty remains because an individual may
change type. Thus, the government must still screen types in the remaining periods. Condition
(11) guarantees that the ex post optimal distortion is the same as the ex ante optimal distortion.
When this is the case, two competing forces oﬀset each other. On the one hand, in order to
create a Pareto improvement, the government must introduce a new tax system that involves less
distortions than the original one. This necessitates increasing the earnings of those individuals
whose earnings are distorted who, by Proposition 2, are those who currently are and always
have been low types. On the other hand, increasing the earnings of these individuals requires
compensating increases in consumption for those individuals with the same history who have
become high types. When condition (11) is satisfied, these compensating increases in consumption
are suﬃcient to oﬀset the revenue gains from the higher earnings of those who are still low types
and the net impact on revenue is negative.
   From Lemma 7, we can derive our second main result:
Proposition 5 Let (x∗ , y∗ ) be a second best eﬃcient allocation. Then: (i) if αLH = 0, (x∗ , y∗ )
is not time consistent; (ii) if αLH /αHH ≥ µ, (x∗ , y∗ ) is time consistent; and (iii) if αLH /αHH ∈
(0, µ) there exists a threshold Ω∗ such that (x∗ , y∗ ) is time consistent if and only if G + (1 − δ) u ≤
Ω∗ .

To understand how this result follows from the Lemma, recall that γ always exceeds 1/µ(1 − δ) so
that the right hand side of condition (11) is positive. This yields part (i). On the other hand, note
that the right hand side of this inequality is increasing in γ and converges to µ as γ approaches ∞.
Accordingly, condition (11) is necessarily satisfied when αLH /αHH exceeds µ which implies part
(ii). In the intermediate case, whether the condition is satisfied depends upon the precise value of
the Lagrange multiplier γ associated with y∗ . The smaller it is, the more likely is the condition
to be satisfied. Since γ represents the marginal value of a unit relaxation in the government’s
revenue requirement, the degree to which it exceeds 1/µ(1 − δ) will depend upon the tightness of
the incentive constraints. This in turn will depend on the size of the revenue requirement G and
on the amount of redistribution the government intends to do as measured by u.
   This proposition has two interesting implications. First, no matter how strong the correlation
between types, if it is anything less than perfect, there are conditions under which the Ramsey
optimal policy will be sustainable. This justifies our claim in the introduction that Pareto eﬃcient

                                                   23
income tax systems can be time-consistent even when the degree of correlation in ability types is
large. Second, in the intermediate case in which αLH /αHH ∈ (0, µ), Pareto eﬃcient tax systems
will be time consistent only when the government’s revenue requirement and its redistributive
goals are “not too large”. Thus, ceteris paribus, a government that starts with higher spending
commitments (for example, higher debt to repay) or more ambitious redistributive objectives will
find it harder to implement second best optimal policies.
    This second implication suggests a theoretical reason why the classic equity-eﬃciency trade oﬀ
(see, for example, Okun (1975)) may be steeper than previously thought. A well-known lesson of
public economics is that achieving stronger equity objectives requires more distortionary taxation
which reduces the size of the aggregate pie. Indeed, the Mirrlees model is designed precisely to
illustrate and quantify this trade oﬀ. Proposition 6 suggests that, in dynamic economies, stronger
equity objectives might lead second best optimal policies to be time inconsistent. This will force
governments to achieve their equity objectives with third best policies.9 These will lead to greater
distortions and larger reductions in the aggregate pie than suggested by the Mirrlees model.


7     Conclusion

This paper has investigated Pareto eﬃcient income taxation in an economy with infinitely-lived
individuals whose income generating abilities evolve according to a two-state Markov process.
The investigation has yielded two novel conclusions. First, when individuals are risk neutral, the
fraction of individuals who face a positive marginal income tax rate converges to zero and, in
addition, the tax rate these individuals face also goes to zero. Thus, in the long run, an eﬃcient
income tax system involves no distortions in labor supply and hence no excess burden. Second,
Pareto eﬃcient income tax systems can be time-consistent even when the degree of correlation
in ability types is large. Moreover, time consistency is more likely when governments have less
progressive policy agendas (i.e., lower spending and less redistribution). As we have argued, this
provides a theoretical rationale for believing that the equity-eﬃciency trade oﬀ may be steeper
   9 Understanding what these third best policies look like is a challenging problem because when the government

cannot commit, the revelation principle does not hold. In a two period Principal-Agent model with variable types,
Battaglini (2003b) fully characterizes the optimal renegotiation proof contract extending the revelation principle
to this dynamic environment. He shows that when the second best optimal contract is not time consistent, the
third best optimal contract involves the agent playing a mixed strategy. The optimal contract induces the high
type agent to partially pool with the low type in the first period; and the degree of pooling monotonically increases
with the level of types’ persistence.




                                                         24
than suggested by the static Mirrlees model.
   It is well worth understanding how general these conclusions are. Our analysis of the two
period model shows that risk neutrality is a necessary condition for our result about distortions.
However, we also found that when individuals’ risk aversion is not too high, the basic pattern of
earnings under an eﬃcient tax system is the same as in the risk neutral case. Thus, the broad
features of eﬃcient tax systems that we identify in our basic model are robust to introducing
risk aversion. There are many other directions that the model could usefully be extended. For
example, it would be interesting to allow for more than two ability types. We leave this and other
extensions for future work.




                                               25
References
   Albanesi, Stefania and Christopher Sleet, (2003), “Dynamic Optimal Taxation with Private
   Information,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
   Battaglini, Marco, (2003a), “Long Term Contracting with Markovian Consumers,” mimeo,
   Princeton University.
   Battaglini, Marco, (2003b), “Optimality and Renegotiation in Dynamic Contracting.”
   mimeo, Princeton University.
   Brito, Dagobert, Jonathan Hamilton, Steven Slutsky and Joseph Stiglitz, (1991), “Dynamic
   Optimal Taxation with Commitment,” Journal of Public Economics, 44, 15-35.
   Chari, V.V., Patrick Kehoe and Edward Prescott, (1989), “Time Consistency and Policy,”
   in Modern Business Cycle Theory, eds. Robert Barro, Harvard University Press: Cambridge
   Chari, V.V. and Patrick Kehoe, (1990), “Sustainable Plans,” Journal of Political Economy,
   98-4, 783-802.
   Chari, V.V and Patrick Kehoe, (1999), “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy,” in Handbook
   of Macroeconomics, eds. John Taylor and Michael Woodford, Elsevier: New York.
   Diamond, Peter and James Mirrlees, (1978), “A Model of Social Insurance with Variable
   Retirement,” Journal of Public Economics, 10, 295-336.
   Golosov, Mikhail, Naryana Kocherlakota and Aleh Tsyvinsky, (2003), “Optimal Indirect
   and Capital Taxation,” Review of Economic Studies, 70, 569-588.
   Golosov, Mikhail, and Aleh Tsyvinsky, (2003), “Designing Optimal Disability Insurance,”
   mimeo, University of Minnesota.
   Kocherlakota, Narayana, (2003), “Zero Expected Wealth Taxes: A Mirrlees Approach to
   Dynamic Optimal Taxation,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
   Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott, (1977), “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsis-
   tency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 85-3, 473-491.
   Mirrlees, James, (1971), “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation,”
   Review of Economic Studies, 38, 175-208.
   Okun, Arthur, (1975), Equality and Eﬃciency: The Big Tradeoﬀ, The Brookings Institution:
   Washington DC.
   Ramsey, Frank, (1927), “A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation,” Economic Journal, 37,
   47-61.
   Roberts, Kevin, (1984), “The Theoretical Limits to Redistribution,” Review of Economics
   Studies, LI, 177-195.
   Rogerson, William, (1985), “Repeated Moral Hazard,” Econometrica, 53, 69-76.
   Stokey, Nancy, (1989), “Reputation and Time Consistency,” American Economic Review
   Papers and Proceedings, 79-2, 134-139.
   Werning, Ivan, (2002), Optimal Dynamic Taxation and Social Insurance, Doctoral Disserta-
   tion, University of Chicago.


                                           26
8     Appendix

Proof of Lemma 1: It is obvious that UL holds with equality, so we will just show that ICH (h1 )
is binding. Let (b  b ) solve the relaxed problem and suppose that ICH (h1 ) is not binding. Without
                 x, y
loss of generality, we can assume that for all t > 1 and histories ht , the constraint ICH (ht ) is not
binding. To see this, suppose that for some time period b
                                                        t and some history hbt = {θ1 , ..., θbt−1 },
                                                                                       b ) in which
ICH (hbt ) were binding. Suppose first that θ1 = θH . Then consider the allocation (x, y

                                              bbt (θH ; hbt ) + ε; xbt (θL ; hbt ) = x
                            xbt (θH ; hbt ) = x                                      bbt (θL ; hbt );
                                                                           b
                                       b1 (θH ; h1 ) − δ t−1 ε Pr ((hbt , θH ) |θ1 = θH )
                   and x1 (θH ; h1 ) = x

for ε > 0 and all the remaining consumptions are unchanged. Observe that the expected utility
of a high type in period one under this allocation is exactly the same as under (b  b ) because
                                                                                 x, y
                     X∞                                     ∞
                                                            X
                   E[   δ t−1 xt (θt ; ht ) |θ1 = θH ] = E[   δ t−1 x
                                                                    bt (θt ; ht ) |θ1 = θH ].
                      t=1                                             t=1

                    b ) satisfies ICH (h1 ) and yields the same value of the objective function as
It follows that (x, y
(b  b ). It is also satisfies R and UL .
 x, y
                                                                 b ) in which
    Next suppose that θ1 = θL . Then consider the allocation (x, y

                                              bbt (θH ; hbt ) + ε; xbt (θL ; hbt ) = x
                            xbt (θH ; hbt ) = x                                      bbt (θL ; hbt );
                                                                           b
                                        b1 (θL ; h1 ) − δ t−1 ε Pr ((hbt , θH ) |θ1 = θL )
                    and x1 (θL ; h1 ) = x

for ε > 0 and all the remaining consumptions are unchanged. Observe that the expected utility
of a low type in period one under this allocation is exactly the same as under (b  b ) because
                                                                                x, y
                      X∞                                 ∞
                                                         X
                          t−1
                    E[   δ xt (θt ; ht ) |θ1 = θL ] = E[   δ t−1 x
                                                                 bt (θt ; ht ) |θ1 = θL ].
                      t=1                                             t=1

                    b ) satisfies UL . It also yields the same value of the objective function as (b
It follows that (x, y                                                                                 b)
                                                                                                   x, y
and satisfies R. Moreover, since ICH (h1 ) is not binding under (b  b ) it will not be binding under
                                                                 x, y
    b ) for ε suﬃciently small.
(x, y
    It follows from this that (b  b ) solves the problem
                               x, y

                                                    max                    V (θH | h1 )
                                        {(xt (θt ;ht ),yt (θt ;ht ))}∞
                                                                     t=1


                                                        s.t. UL , R

                                                              27
This implies that (b  b ) is simply an eﬃcient allocation in which V (θL | h1 ) = u. But, by
                   x, y
assumption, u is suﬃciently high that this fails to satisfy at least one of the high types’ incentive
constraints ICH (ht ). Q.E.D.

Proof of Lemma 2: Let (x, y) be an allocation satisfying the constraints of the relaxed problem.
We will show that for all t ≥ 2 we can find xt such that the allocation (xt , y) (i) satisfies all the
constraints and yields the same value of the objective function as (x, y); (ii) satisfies ICH (hτ )
with equality for all periods τ ∈ {2, ..., t} and all histories hτ ; and (iii) is identical to (x, y) for all
periods τ > t and all histories hτ . This implies the result.
   We prove our claim by induction. Consider the claim for t = 2. Suppose that ICH (h2 ) is not
binding after some history h2 . Suppose first that h2 = {θL }, so that the high type was a low type
in period 1. Since ICH (h2 ) is not binding, there must exist some ε > 0 such that:

              V (θH |h2 ) = x2 (θL ; h2 ) − ϕ(y2 (θL ; h2 )/θH ) + δEθH V (θ3 | {h2 , θL }) + ε

Now let x2 satisfy

                    x22 (θH ; h2 ) = x2 (θH ; h2 ) − ε; x22 (θL ; h2 ) = x2 (θL ; h2 )

                     x21 (θL ; h1 ) = x1 (θL ; h1 ) + δαLH ε; x21 (θH ; h1 ) = x1 (θH ; h1 )

and otherwise equals x. Thus, all we have done is to take consumption away from the high type
after history h2 and give the expected discounted value to the low type in period one. Clearly, this
does not eﬀect the value of the objective function. Nor does it eﬀect the (R) or (UL ) constraints.
It satisfies the ICH (h2 ) constraint with equality by construction. We need to check that the
ICH (h1 ) constraint is satisfied; i.e., that:

                 V 2 (θH |h1 ) ≥ x21 (θL ; h1 ) − ϕ(y1 (θL ; h1 )/θH ) + δEθH V 2 (θ2 | {θL })

where V 2 (θt | ht ) is the value function corresponding to the allocation (x2 , y). We have that:

     V 2 (θH |h1 ) = x21 (θH ; h1 ) − ϕ(y1 (θH ; h1 )/θH ) + δEθH V 2 (θ2 |{θH } ).

                     = V (θH | h1 )

                     ≥ x1 (θL ; h1 ) − ϕ(y1 (θL ; h1 )/θH ) + δEθH V (θ2 |{θL } ).

                     = x21 (θL ; h1 ) − δεαLH − ϕ(y1 (θL ; h1 )/θH ) + δEθH V 2 (θ2 |{θL } ) + δεαHH

                     ≥ x21 (θL ; h1 ) − ϕ(y1 (θL ; h1 )/θH ) + δEθH V 2 (θ2 |{θL } )

                                                       28
where the third equality follows from the fact that (x, y) satisfies ICH (h1 ) and the fourth follows
from the fact that αHH ≥ αLH .
   Next suppose that h2 = {θH } so that the high type was also a high type in period 1. Again,
there must exist some ε > 0 such that:

              V (θH |h2 ) = x2 (θL ; h2 ) − ϕ(y2 (θL ; h2 )/θH ) + δEθH V (θ3 |{h2 , θL } ) + ε

Again, we will show that we can find an alternative allocation that yields at least the same value
of the objective function, satisfies all the constraints of the relaxed problem and has the property
that ICH (h2 ) is binding. Now let x2 be defined by:

                    x22 (θH ; h2 ) = x2 (θH ; h2 ) − ε; x22 (θL ; h2 ) = x2 (θL ; h2 )

                    x21 (θH ; h1 ) = x1 (θH ; h1 ) + δαLH ε; x21 (θL ; h1 ) = x1 (θL ; h1 )

and equals x otherwise. Thus, all we have done is to take consumption away from the high type
after history h2 and give the expected discounted value to the high type in period 1. Clearly, this
does not eﬀect the value of the objective function. Nor does it eﬀect the R or UL constraints. It
satisfies the ICH (h2 ) constraint with equality by construction and has no eﬀect on the ICH (h1 )
constraint.
   Now suppose that the claim is true for τ = 2, ..., t − 1 and consider the claim for t. Since
the claim is true for t − 1, we can find xt−1 such that the allocation (xt−1 , y) satisfies all the
constraints and yields the same value of the objective function as (x, y); (ii) satisfies ICH (hτ )
with equality for all periods τ ∈ {2, ..., t − 1} and all histories hτ ; and (iii) is identical to (x, y)
for all periods τ > t − 1 and all histories hτ . If (xt−1 , y) is such that ICH (ht ) is binding for all
histories ht then we can simply let xt = xt−1 .
   If this is not the case, there must exist some history ht such that ICH (ht ) is not binding.
Again, there are two possibilities, ht = {ht−1 , θL } and ht = {ht−1 , θH }. In either case, in the
                                  e such that the allocation (e
same manner as above, we can find x                           x, y) (i) yields the same value of
the objective function as (xt−1 , y) (and hence (x, y)); (ii) satisfies ICH (ht ) with equality; and (iii)
equals (xt−1 , y) (and hence (x, y)) for all periods τ > t and all histories hτ . If ht = {ht−1 , θH }
     e will also satisfy ICH (hτ ) with equality for all periods τ ∈ {2, ..., t − 1} so we can let xt = x
then x                                                                                                  e.
   If ht = {ht−1 , θL } and αHH > αLH , then ICH (ht−1 ) will hold strictly. However, in this case,
                                                  b such that the allocation (b
since the claim is true for τ = t − 1 we can find x                           x, y) (i) satisfies all

                                                      29
the constraints and yields the same value of the objective function as (e
                                                                        x, y); (ii) satisfies ICH (hτ )
with equality for all periods τ ∈ {2, ..., t − 1} and all histories hτ ; and (iii) is identical to (e
                                                                                                    x, y) for
all periods τ > t − 1 and all histories hτ . We can then let xt = x
                                                                  b. Q.E.D.

Proof of Lemma 3: From (1) we have that:

                    V (θH |ht ) = V (θL |ht ) + Φ (yt (θL ; ht )) + ∆EV (θt+1 |{ht , θL } ).

We have that

     ∆EV (θt+1 |{ht , θL } ) = δ (αHH − αLH ) V (θH |{ht , θL } ) + δ (αHL − αLL ) V (θL |{ht , θL } )

where V (θ |{ht , θL } ) is the expected lifetime utility of an individual who has type θ in period t + 1
after history {ht , θL }. But by (1) we have that:

V (θH |{ht , θL } ) = V (θL |{ht , θL } ) + Φ (yt+1 (θL ; {ht , θL })) + ∆EV (θt+2 |{ht , θL , θL } )

                     = V (θL |{ht , θL } ) + Φ (yt+1 (θL ; {ht , θL })) + δ (αHH − αLH ) V (θH |{ht , θL , θL } )

                          +δ (αHL − αLL ) V (θL |{ht , θL , θL } ).

Thus, we have that

           ∆EV (θt+1 |{ht , θL } ) = δ (αHH − αLH ) Φ (yt+1 (θL ; {ht , θL }))
                                                                  2
                                           +δ 2 (αHH − αLH ) V (θH |{ht , θL , θL } )

                                           +δ 2 (αHH − αLH ) (αHL − αLL ) V (θL |{ht , θL , θL } )

But again from (1) we have that

V (θH |{ht , θL , θL } ) = V (θL |{ht , θL , θL } ) + Φ (yt+2 (θL ; {ht , θL , θL }))

                              +δ (αHH − αLH ) V (θH |{ht , θL , θL , θL } ) + δ (αHL − αLL ) V (θL |{ht , θL , θL , θL } ).

So that

        ∆EV (θt+1 |{ht , θL } ) = δ (αHH − αLH ) Φ (yt+1 (θL ; {ht , θL }))
                                                              2
                                        +δ 2 (αHH − αLH ) Φ (yt+2 (θL ; {ht , θL , θL }))

                                        +δ 3 (αHH − αLH )3 V (θH |{ht , θL , θL , θL } )

                                        +δ 3 (αHH − αLH )2 (αHL − αLL ) V (θL |{ht , θL , θL , θL } ).

                                                        30
Repeated application of this argument yields
                                                      ∞
                                                      X                        ¡                  ¢
                   ∆EV (θt+1 |{ht , θL } ) =                δ j [αHH − αLH ]j Φ yt+j (θL ; h◦t+j ) .
                                                      j=1

and we have the claimed expression. Q.E.D.

Proof of Lemma 4: Let (x, y) solve the relaxed problem. Then by Lemmas 1 and 2 we may
assume with no loss of generality that x is such that (x, y) satisfies UL and all the incentive
constraints with equality. Thus, by Lemma 3 we can write the value of the objective function as
                                           ∞
                                           X                        ¡                  ¢
                        V (θH |h1 ) =            δ j [αHH − αLH ]j Φ y1+j (θL ; h◦1+j ) + u                                  (12)
                                           j=0
                                                                             P∞
The resource constraint can be written as G ≤ (1 − δ)                           t=1   δ t−1 E[yt (θt ; ht ) − xt (θt ; ht )]. By
definition, we know that
                                       ∞
                                       X
                      V (θH |h1 ) =          δ t−1 E[xt (θt ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θt ; ht )/θt ) |θ1 = θH ],
                                       t=1

and
                                       ∞
                                       X
                      V (θL |h1 ) =          δ t−1 E[xt (θt ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θt ; ht )/θt ) |θ1 = θL ].
                                       t=1
Thus,
∞
X                                   ∞
                                    X                                                      ∞
                                                                                           X
      δ t−1 E[xt (θt ; ht )] = µ          δ t−1 E[xt (θt ; ht ) |θ1 = θH ] + (1 − µ)              δ t−1 E[xt (θt ; ht ) |θ1 = θL ]
t=1                                 t=1                                                     t=1
                                                       ∞
                                                       X
                             = µ[V (θH |h1 ) +               δ t−1 E[ϕ(yt (θt ; ht )/θt ) |θ1 = θH ]
                                                       t=1
                                                                 ∞
                                                                 X
                                  +(1 − µ)[V (θL |h1 ) +               δ t−1 E[ϕ(yt (θt ; ht )/θt ) |θ1 = θL ]
                                                                 t=1
                                                                                 ∞
                                                                                 X
                             = µV (θH |h1 ) + (1 − µ)V (θL |h1 ) +                     δ t−1 E[ϕ(yt (θt ; ht )/θt )].
                                                                                 t=1

Substituting this into the resource constraint, yields,
                      ∞
                      X
        G ≤ (1 − δ)         δ t−1 E[yt (θt ; ht ) − µV (θH | h1 ) − (1 − µ)V (θL | h1 ) − ϕ(yt (θt ; ht )/θt )].
                      t=1

Using Lemma 3 and UL we can write this as
                                          ∞
                                          X
                    G ≤ (1 − δ)                 δ t−1 E[yt (θt ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θt ; ht )/θt )]                                (13)
                                          t=1
                                                ∞
                                                X                        ¡                  ¢
                                −(1 − δ)[µ            δ j [αHH − αLH ]j Φ y1+j (θL ; h◦1+j ) + u]
                                                j=0



                                                               31
Thus, it follows that the earnings levels y must maximize the objective function (12) subject to
the constraint (13). Q.E.D.

Proof of Lemma 5: We know that (x, y) is a solution to Problem P II . To show that it solves
Problem P I , all we need show is that the low type’s incentive constraint ICL (ht ) is satisfied for
all t and ht . For a given period t and history ht , this requires showing that

                             xt (θL ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θL ; ht )/θL ) + δEθL V (θt+1 |{ht , θL } )

                         ≥ xt (θH ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θH ; ht )/θL ) + δEθL V (θt+1 |{ht , θH } )

or, equivalently, that

          xt (θL ; ht ) − xt (θH ; ht ) ≥ ϕ(yt (θL ; ht )/θL ) − ϕ(yt (θH ; ht )/θL )                        (14)

                                             +δ[EθL V (θt+1 |{ht , θH } ) − δEθL V (θt+1 |{ht , θL } )]

From the fact that ICH (ht ) holds with equality, we have that

          xt (θL ; ht ) − xt (θH ; ht ) = ϕ(yt (θL ; ht )/θH ) − ϕ(yt (θH ; ht )/θH )                        (15)

                                             +δEθH [V (θt+1 |{ht , θH } ) − EθH V (θt+1 |{ht , θL } ])

We can use this to prove the desired inequality. Note first that

[EθH V (θt+1 |{ht , θH } ) − EθH V (θt+1 |{ht , θL } )] ≥ [EθL V (θt+1 |{ht , θH } ) − EθL V (θt+1 |{ht , θL } )].

To see this, note that

       [EθH V (θt+1 |{ht , θH } ) − EθH V (θt+1 |{ht , θL } )] − [EθL V (θt+1 |{ht , θH } ) − EθL V (θt+1 |{ht , θL } )]

  = (αHH − αLH ) [V (θH |{ht , θH } ) − V (θH |{ht , θL } )]

       +(αHL − αLL )[V (θL |{ht , θH } )) − V (θL |{ht , θL } )]

Using Lemma 3, this diﬀerence equals
                  ∞
                  X                      j  ¡                            ¢   ¡                            ¢
  (αHH − αLH )           δ j [αHH − αLH ] (Φ yt+1+j (θL ; {ht , θH }◦+j ) − Φ yt+1+j (θL ; {ht , θL }◦+j ) ).
                   j=0

Observe now that from the first order conditions that for all j

                                    ϕ0 (yt+1+j (θL ; {ht , θH }◦+j )/θL ) = θL ,


                                                         32
while (since γµ (1 − δ) > 1)

                                   ϕ0 (yt+1+j (θL ; {ht , θL }◦+j )/θL ) ≤ θL .

Thus, for all j, yt+1+j (θL ; {ht , θH }◦+j ) ≥ yt+1+j (θL ; {ht , θL }◦+j ). Since Φ0 ≥ 0, it follows that the
above diﬀerence is non-negative.
   It is also the case that

            ϕ(yt (θL ; ht )/θH ) − ϕ(yt (θH ; ht )/θH ) ≥ ϕ(yt (θL ; ht )/θL ) − ϕ(yt (θH ; ht )/θL ).

To see this, note that the first order conditions imply that yt (θL ; ht ) < yt (θH ; ht ). In addition, it
is the case that
                                         ϕ0 (y/θH ) ϕ0 (y/θL )
                                                   −           < 0.
                                             θH         θL
It follows from these two claims and from (14) and (15) that ICL (ht ) is satisfied.
   Conversely, let (x, y) be a solution to Problem P I . We need to show that the earnings y
solve problem (3). Suppose not. Then (x, y) cannot solve the relaxed problem. Let (x0 , y0 ) be a
solution to the relaxed problem with y0 6= y. Then by Lemma 4, we know that y0 solves problem
(3). Moreover, we can assume by Lemmas 1 and 2 without loss of generality that x0 is such that
(x0 , y0 ) satisfies ICH (ht ) with equality for all ht and that UL binds. But then it follows by the
above argument that (x0 , y0 ) satisfies ICL (ht ) for all t and ht . This is a contradiction. Q.E.D.

Proof of Lemma 6: Let (x, y) solve the relaxed problem. It suﬃces to show that there exists a
β < 1 such that if β ∈ (β, 1) then the eliminated constraints ICL , ICL (H) and ICL (L) are satisfied.
To do this, we must first establish some properties of the solution to the relaxed problem.
   The Lagrangian for the relaxed problem is

L = (xH )β − ϕ(yH /θH ) + δ[αHH ((xHH )β − ϕ(yHH /θH )) + αHL ((xHL )β − ϕ(yHL /θL ))] (16)

         +λU {(xL )β − ϕ(yL /θL ) + δ[αLH ((xLH )β − ϕ(yLH /θH )) + αLL ((xLL )β − ϕ(yLL /θL ))]}

         +λH {(xH )β − ϕ(yH /θH ) + δ[αHH ((xHH )β − ϕ(yHH /θH )) + αHL ((xHL )β − ϕ(yHL /θL ))]

         −(xL )β + ϕ(yL /θH ) − δ[αHH ((xLH )β − ϕ(yLH /θH )) + αHL ((xLL )β − ϕ(yLL /θL ))]}

         +λHH {(xHH )β − ϕ(yHH /θH ) − (xHL )β + ϕ(yHL /θH )}

         +λLH {(xLH )β − ϕ(yLH /θH ) − (xLL )β + ϕ(yLL /θH )}

         +λR {µ[(yH − xH ) + δ(αHH (yHH − xHH ) + αHL (yHL − xHL ))]

         +(1 − µ)[(yL − xL ) + δ(αLH (yLH − xLH ) + αLL (yLL − xLL ))]}.

                                                       33
The first order conditions for the high type’s consumptions imply that

                                                            λR µ
                                       β(xH )β−1 =               ,                                (17)
                                                          1 + λH


                                                        λR µ
                              β(xHH )β−1 =                         ,                              (18)
                                                1 + λH + λHH /δαHH

and
                                                         λR µ
                               β(xHL )β−1 =                         .
                                                 1 + λH − λHH /δαHL
Those for the low type’s consumptions imply that:



                                                      λR (1 − µ)
                                     β(xL )β−1 =                 ,                                (19)
                                                      λU − λH


                                                       λR (1 − µ)
                            β(xLL )β−1 =             αHL                ,                         (20)
                                              λU −   αLL λH − λLH /δαLL

and

                                                       λR (1 − µ)
                            β(xLH )β−1 =             αHH                           .              (21)
                                              λU −   αLH λH + λLH /δαLH

With respect to earnings levels, the first order conditions for the high type’s earnings imply:

                                      ϕ0 (yH /θH )     λR µ
                                                   =        ,
                                           θH        1 + λH
                              ϕ0 (yHH /θH )           λR µ
                                            =                    ,
                                   θH         1 + λH + λHH /δαHH
and


                                                           0
                             ϕ0 (yHL /θL )   λR µ − ϕ (yHL
                                                        θH
                                                           /θH ) λHH
                                                                 δαHL
                                           =                          .                           (22)
                                  θL                (1 + λH )

Those for the low type imply that:
                                              ϕ0 (yL /θH )
                             ϕ0 (yL /θL )          θH      λH   + λR (1 − µ)
                                          =                                    ,                  (23)
                                  θL                        λU

                                                   0
                                              λLH ϕ (yLL /θH )
                           ϕ0 (yLL /θL )      δαLL    θH       + λR (1   − µ)
                                         =                 αHL                     ,              (24)
                                θL                   λU − αLL λH


                                                     34
and

                            ϕ0 (yLH /θH )            λR (1 − µ)
                                          =        αHH                  .                           (25)
                                 θH         λU −   αLH λH + λLH /δαLH

   We can use these conditions to establish some facts about the solution to the relaxed problem.

Claim 1: λH > 0 implies λHH > 0 and λLH > 0.

We first show that λHH > 0. Suppose, to the contrary, that λHH = 0. Then it follows from the
first order conditions for the high type’s consumptions that xHL = xH = xHH . But from the
conditions describing the high type’s earnings levels if λHH = 0, then, since λH > 0, we have that:

                                     ϕ0 (yHL /θL )   ϕ0 (yHH /θH )
                                                   =
                                          θL              θH

which implies that yHL /θL < yHH /θH . But then, since xHH = xHL , it is clear that IC(HH)
would be violated.
   We now show that λLH > 0. Again, suppose to the contrary, that λLH = 0. Then it follows
                                                                                    αHH       αHL
from the first order conditions for the low type’s consumptions and the fact that   αLH   ≥   αLL   that

                                     λR (1 − µ)      λR (1 − µ)
                     α(xLL )α−1 =                ≤               = α(xLH )α−1 .
                                    λU − ααHL
                                           LL
                                              λH   λU −  αHH
                                                          αLH
                                                              λH

It follows that xLH ≤ xLL . But from our analysis of earnings levels, if λLH = 0 then

                  ϕ0 (yLL /θL )    λR (1 − µ)    λR (1 − µ)   ϕ0 (yLH /θH )
                                =       αHL   ≤      αHH    =
                       θL         λU − αLL λH   λU − αLH λH        θH

which implies that yLL /θL < yLH /θH . But then it is clear that IC(LH) would be violated. ¥

Claim 2: λH > 0 implies that yHH ≥ yHL and yLH ≥ yLL

We first show that yHH ≥ yHL . From the previous claim, we know that λHH > 0 and hence that

                          (xHH )β − ϕ(yHH /θH ) = (xHL )β − ϕ(yHL /θH ).

But the first order conditions for the high type’s consumptions together with the fact that λHH > 0
imply that xHL < xHH . Thus, yHH must exceed yHL .
   We next show that yLH ≥ yLL . From the previous claim, we know that λLH > 0 and hence
that
                           (xLH )β − ϕ(yLH /θH ) = (xLL )β − ϕ(yLL /θH ).




                                                  35
It follows that if yLH < yLL we must have that xLL > xLH . From the first order conditions for
yLH and xLH we know that
                                                                ϕ0 (yLH /θH )
                                            β(xLH )β−1 =                      .
                                                                     θH
From the first order conditions for yLL , we know that
        ϕ0 (yLL /θL )       αHL      λLH     λLH ϕ0 (yLL /θL ) ϕ0 (yLL /θH )
                      (λU −     λH −      )+      {           −              } = λR (1 − µ).
             θL             αLL      δαLL    δαLL     θL            θH
Thus,
ϕ0 (yLL /θL )            λLH /δαLL          ϕ0 (yLL /θL ) ϕ0 (yLL /θH )                        λR (1 − µ)
              +        αHL                {              −              }         =          αHL                .
     θL         λU −   αLL λH − λLH /δαLL        θL            θH                     λU −   αLL λH − λLH /δαLL

Since
                                                ϕ0 (yLL /θL )   ϕ0 (yLL /θH )
                                                              >               ,
                                                     θL              θH
it follows from the first order condition for xLL that
                                                ϕ0 (yLL /θL )
                                                              < β(xLL )β−1 .
                                                     θL
Thus, if xLL > xLH we have that
                        ϕ0 (yLH /θH )                             ϕ0 (yLL /θL )
                                      = β(xLH )β−1 > β(xLL )β−1 >               .
                             θH                                        θL
But this inequality implies that yLH > yLL - a contradiction. ¥

Claim 3: There exists a ε > 0 and a β1 < 1 such that for all β ∈ (β1 , 1), λH ≥ ε.

Observe first that there must be a κ > 0 and a β0 < 1 such that for any β ∈ (β0 , 1), max{λH , λHH , λLH } >
κ. If this were not to be true, then the solution of the problem would be arbitrarily near to the
eﬃcient solution for some β close to 1. But, by assumption, the second best Pareto frontier is
strictly below the first best frontier at β = 1 and, by the Theorem of the Maximum, the value
function of the maximization of a continuous function with continuous constraint correspondence
(as (16)) is continuous: therefore we would have a contradiction.
   Now suppose, contrary to the claim, that for any ε > 0 and any β1 < 1 there is a β ∈ [β1 , 1)
                                       λR µ
such that λH < ε. Then, since      1−λHH /δαHL           → 1 as β → 1, there must be a sequence β n converging
to one, such that the multiplier λHH corresponding to β n is less than κ. We can therefore assume
that the multiplier λLH corresponding to β n exceeds κ. But then we have:
                                       n               λR (1 − µ)       λR (1 − µ)
                         β n (xLL )β       −1
                                                  =                 >
                                                    λU − λLH /δαLL    λU − κ/δαLL
                                                    µ             ¶
                                                           λU       λR (1 − µ)
                                                  =                            .
                                                      λU − κ/δαLL       λU

                                                              36
                                 λR (1−µ)                                                          1−µ
We know that, as β n → 1,           λU      converges to one and λU converges to                    µ .   Thus, we can find
an n and some ² > 0, such that for n > n,

                                                                n
                                                 β n (xLL )β        −1
                                                                         > 1 + ².

But this contradicts the fact that β n → 1. ¥

Claim 4: There exists a β2 ∈ (β1 , 1) such that for all β ∈ (β2 , 1), yH ≥ yL .

From (23) we can write:
                             µ             ¶             ∙                             ¸
              ϕ0 (yL /θL )            λH            λH       ϕ0 (yL /θL ) ϕ0 (yL /θH )     λR (1 − µ)
                                 1−             +                        −               =
                   θL                 λU            λU            θL           θH              λU

It can be verified from (23) that yL > 0 for any β. By Claim 3 it follows that there exists some
ε > 0 such that
                                            ∙                             ¸
                                                ϕ0 (yL /θL ) ϕ0 (yL /θH )
                                      λH                    −               >ε
                                                     θL           θH
for any β ∈ (β1 , 1). Thus, for any β ∈ (β1 , 1)
                                                    µ      ¶
                                 ϕ0 (yL /θL )           λH      ε   λR (1 − µ)
                                                     1−      +    <
                                      θL                λU     λU       λU

which implies that
                                            ϕ0 (yL /θL )   λR (1 − µ)
                                                         <            −ε
                                                 θL         λU − λH
But we know that
                                λR (1 − µ)                 ϕ0 (yH /θH )
                             lim           = lim βxβ−1
                                                   L   '1=              .
                             β→1 λU − λH     β→1                θH
Therefore, it must be the case that for suﬃciently large β

                                               ϕ0 (yL /θL )   ϕ0 (yH /θH )
                                                            <              ,
                                                    θL             θH

which implies that yH ≥ yL . This implies the result. ¥

Claim 5: There exists some β3 < 1 such that if β ∈ (β3 , 1), then yHL ≥ yLL .

The first order conditions for the high type’s consumptions imply that limβ→1 λHH = 0. From
the first order conditions for xHL and yHL we have that
                                                                           ϕ0 (yHL /θH ) λHH
                            ϕ0 (yHL /θL )       λR µ −     θH                            δαHL
                        lim               = lim                                                 = 1.                   (26)
                        β→1      θL         β→1        (1 + λH )




                                                                37
                              ϕ0 (yLL /θL )
We now prove that limβ→1           θL         < limβ→1 β(xLL )β−1 = 1. From the first order condition
(24) we have:

                  ϕ0 (yLL /θL )         λ            ϕ0 (yLL /θH )     λR (1 − µ)
                                =     ³ LH         ´               +       αHL
                       θL                   αHL
                                  δαLL λU − αLL λH        θH         λU − αLL λH


But from the first order condition (20) we also know that:
                                                 ⎡                      ⎤
                      λR (1 − µ)                             λ
                                  = β (xLL )β−1 ⎣1 −       ³ LH        ´⎦
                     λU − ααHL
                            LL
                               λH                               αHL
                                                      δαLL λU − αLL λH

So:
                                                                 ∙ 0                         ¸
       ϕ0 (yLL /θL )                               λ              ϕ (yLL /θH )
                     − 1 = β (xLL )β−1 − 1 +     ³ LH          ´               − β (xLL )β−1
            θL                               δαLL λU − ααHL λH        θH
                                                         LL
                                                                                                                 (27)

It is easy to verify that λLH must be strictly positive for any β in [0, 1] (otherwise (20) and
(21) can not be satisfied simultaneously); and, as shown above, λU and λH are also strictly
                     ³ 0               ´                                          0
positive. If limβ→1 ϕ (yLL θH
                              /θH )
                                    − 1 < 0, therefore, (27) implies that limβ→1 ϕ (yLL
                                                                                     θL
                                                                                        /θL )
                                                                                              − 1 < 0.
          ³ 0               ´
            ϕ (yLL /θH )
If limβ→1       θH       − 1 ≥ 0, then we have:
                                       ⎛                                     ⎞
         0
                                                                                  ∙                          ¸
       ϕ (limβ→1 yLL /θL )                                    λLH                     ϕ0 (limβ→1 yLL /θH )
                           − 1 = ⎝ lim                   ³                   ´⎠                            −1
              θL                  β→1
                                       δα                    λU −   αHL                       θH
                                                    LL              αLL λH

                                       ϕ0 (limβ→1 yLL /θL )
                                 <                          −1
                                               θL

since, from (20) and (21), limβ→1          ³ λLH        ´       < 1. But this is obviously impossible. We
                                                 α
                                       δαLL λU − αHL λH
                                                      LL
conclude that

                                                  ϕ0 (yLL /θL )
                                              lim               < 1.                                             (28)
                                              β→1      θL

      We now show that there exists a β3 < 1 such that for any β ∈ (β3 , 1) any solution of the
program implies:

                                       ϕ0 (yHL /θL )   ϕ0 (yLL /θL )
                                                     >
                                            θL              θL

Assume not. Then we can construct a sequence hβn i∞
                                                  n=1 converging to one such that for any

element of the sequence we have

                                       ϕ0 (yHL
                                            n
                                               /θL )   ϕ0 (yLL
                                                            n
                                                               /θL )
                                                     ≤
                                            θL              θL

                                                         38
       n       n                                           0              n       0
where yHL and yHL are solutions corresponding to βn . Let yHL = limβn →1 yHL and yLL =
          n
limβn →1 yLL be limits of the solution along this sequence (it is immediate to verify that the limits
                                                                                                ϕ0 (yHL
                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                         /θL )
exist without loss of generality). Then, by the continuity of ϕ0 , it must be that                    θL         ≤
    0     0
ϕ       (yLL /θL )                        0       0
          θL         . This implies that yHL and yLL are not solutions of the program, otherwise we would
violate (28) and (26). But it is impossible that the limit of solutions is not a solution since, by
the Theorem of the Maximum, the solution of the program is an upper-hemicontinuous correspon-
dence. ¥

         Now let β = max{β2 , β3 } < 1. Then we claim that if β ∈ (β, 1) then IC(L), IC(HL) and
IC(LL) are satisfied. The last two follow from the standard static argument given that (by
Claims 1 and 3) IC(HH) and IC(LH) hold with equality and (by Claims 2 and 3) yHH ≥ yHL
and yLH ≥ yLL . For IC(L) to be satisfied we need that

                     (xL )β − ϕ(yL /θL ) + δ[αLH ((xLH )β − ϕ(yLH /θH )) + αLL ((xLL )β − ϕ(yLL /θL ))]

             ≥ (xH )β − ϕ(yH /θL ) + δ[αLH ((xHH )β − ϕ(yHH /θH )) + αLL ((xHL )β − ϕ(yHL /θL ))]

or equivalently that

(xL )β − (xH )β            ≥ ϕ(yL /θL ) − ϕ(yH /θL ) + δ[αLH ((xHH )β − ϕ(yHH /θH )) + αLL ((xHL )β − ϕ(yHL /θL ))]

                               −δ[αLH ((xLH )β − ϕ(yLH /θH )) + αLL ((xLL )β − ϕ(yLL /θL ))]

                           = ϕ(yL /θL ) − ϕ(yH /θL ) + δ[αLH (UHH − ULH ) + αLL (UHL − ULL )]

where UHH = (xHH )β − ϕ(yHH /θH ), etc.
         By Claim 1, we know that IC(H) is satisfied with equality in the solution to the relaxed
problem, so that

(xH )β − ϕ(yH /θH ) + δ[αHH (UHH ) + αHL (UHL )] = (xL )β − ϕ(yL /θH ) + δ[αHH (ULH ) + αHL (ULL )]

implying that

            (xL )β − (xH )β = ϕ(yL /θH ) − ϕ(yH /θH ) + δ[αHH (UHH − ULH ) + αHL (UHL − ULL )].

Thus, all we need to show is that

                                     Φ (yH ) + δ[αHH (UHH − ULH ) + αHL (UHL − ULL )]

                                ≥ Φ (yL ) + δ[αLH (UHH − ULH ) + αLL (UHL − ULL )]

                                                           39
By Claim 4 we know that yL ≤ yH which, since Φ0 (y) > 0, implies that Φ (yH ) ≥ Φ (yL ). Thus it
suﬃces to show that

                     (αHH − αLH )(UHH − ULH ) + (αHL − αLL )(UHL − ULL ) ≥ 0.

But since

               UHH − ULH         = (xHH )β − ϕ(yHH /θH ) − ((xLH )β − ϕ(yLH /θH ))

                                 = (xHL )β − ϕ(yHL /θH ) − ((xLL )β − ϕ(yLL /θH ))

                                 = UHL − ULL + Φ (yHL ) − Φ (yLL )

this requires that

        (αHH − αLH )(UHL + Φ (yHL ) − ULL − Φ (yLL )) + (αHL − αLL )(UHL − ULL ) ≥ 0

or, equivalently that (αHH − αLH )(Φ (yHL ) − Φ (yLL )) ≥ 0. This follows from the fact that, by
Claim 5, yHL ≥ yLL .
   Now suppose that (x, y) is a second best eﬃcient allocation. Suppose that it did not solve the
relaxed problem. Then there would exist another allocation (b  b ) that yields a higher value of
                                                            x, y
the objective function and satisfies UL , R, IC(H), IC(LH) and IC(HH) all with equality. It must
be the case therefore that it does not satisfy one or more of the eliminated constraints IC(L),
IC(HL), and IC(LL). But for β ∈ (β, 1) that cannot be true as we have just shown. Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 3: It follows from the first order conditions for the high types consumptions
and earnings derived in the proof of the previous Lemma and the fact that λHH > 0 that yH and
yHH are set eﬃciently, while yHL is distorted downwards. It is also clear from the first order
conditions that yLH is set eﬃciently. To prove that yL is distorted downwards, we need to show
that
                                 ϕ0 (yL /θH )
                ϕ0 (yL /θL )          θH      λH   + λR (1 − µ)                   λR (1 − µ)
                             =                                    < β(xL )β−1 =
                     θL                       λU                                  λU − λH
From the condition that yL satisfies, we know that

                ϕ0 (yL /θL )                   ϕ0 (yL /θL ) ϕ0 (yL /θH )
                             (λU − λH ) + λH {             −             } = λR (1 − µ)
                     θL                             θL           θH

Thus,
                ϕ0 (yL /θL )      λH        ϕ0 (yL /θL ) ϕ0 (yL /θH )    λR (1 − µ)
                             +            {             −             }=
                     θL        (λU − λH )        θL           θH         (λU − λH )

                                                       40
and we have that
                                        ϕ0 (yL /θL )   ϕ0 (yL /θH )
                                                     >              ,
                                             θL             θH
which yields the result since λU − λH > 0. To prove that yLL is distorted downwards, we need to
show that
                            0
                       λLH ϕ (yLL /θH )
     ϕ0 (yLL /θL )     δαLL    θH       + λR (1   − µ)                               λR (1 − µ)
                   =                αHL                  < β(xLL )β−1 =            αHL
          θL                  λU − αLL λH                                  λU −    αLL λH − λLH /δαLL

From the condition that yLL satisfies, we know that
     ϕ0 (yLL /θL )       αHL      λLH     λLH ϕ0 (yLL /θL ) ϕ0 (yLL /θH )
                   (λU −     λH −      )+      {           −              } = λR (1 − µ)
          θL             αLL      δαLL    δαLL     θL            θH
Thus,
ϕ0 (yLL /θL )            λLH /δαLL          ϕ0 (yLL /θL ) ϕ0 (yLL /θH )                     λR (1 − µ)
              +        αHL                {              −              }      =          αHL
     θL         λU −   αLL λH − λLH /δαLL        θL            θH                  λU −   αLL λH − λLH /δαLL

and we have that
                                      ϕ0 (yLL /θL )   ϕ0 (yLL /θH )
                                                    >               ,
                                           θL              θH
                                      αHL
which yields the result since λU −    αLL λH   − λLH /δαLL > 0.
   We next show that the degree of distortion in the earnings of those who becomes low types in
the second period converges to 0 as β → 1. As noted in the proof of Claim 5 of Lemma 6, the
first order conditions for the high type’s consumptions imply that limβ→1 λHH = 0. From the
first order conditions for xHL and yHL we have that
                                                  ϕ0 (yHL /θH ) λHH
                 ϕ0 (yHL /θL )       λR µ −
             lim               = lim            θH              δαHL
                                                                       = 1 = lim β (xHL )β−1 .
             β→1      θL         β→1        (1 + λH )                        β→1

   Finally, we show that yLL > yL . From the first order conditions for the low type’s earnings,
we know that
                   ϕ0 (yLL /θL )       αHL        λLH ϕ0 (yLL /θH )
                                 (λU −     λH ) −                   = λR (1 − µ)
                        θL             αLL        δαLL     θH
and that
                              ϕ0 (yL /θL )      ϕ0 (yL /θH )
                                           λU −              λH = λR (1 − µ).
                                   θL                θH
It will be shown in the next proposition that xL > xLL . This implies from the first order conditions
for xL and xLL that [αLL − αHL ]λH δ < λLH . Thus,
                                  ϕ0 (yLL /θL )       αHL         λLH ϕ0 (yLL /θH )
               λR (1 − µ) =                     (λU −      λH ) −
                                       θL             αLL         δαLL     θH
                                                            µ          ¶
                                  ϕ0 (yLL /θL )                    αHL
                             <                  (λU − λH ) + 1 −         λH Φ0 (yLL /θH )
                                       θL                          αLL

                                                     41
Since, by (19), as β → 1 we have that (λU − λH ) → λR (1 − µ), we can write:
                                               µ            ¶
                         ϕ0 (yLL /θL )                αHL           λH
                      1−               <           1−                      Φ0 (yLL /θH )
                              θL                      αLL       λR (1 − µ)

Consider now (23), again (19) implies

                          ϕ0 (yL /θL )           λH
                     1−                    '            Φ0 (yLL /θH )
                               θL            λR (1 − µ)
                                             µ          ¶
                                                   αHL        λH
                                           >  1−                      Φ0 (yL /θH )
                                                   αLL λR (1 − µ)

Therefore:
                                         ϕ0 (yLL /θL )   ϕ0 (yL /θL )
                                                       >
                                              θL              θL
and the result follows by the convexity of ϕ. Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 4: For the first statement we need to show that xH ∈ (xHL , xHH ) and
xL ∈ (xLL , xLH ). The first claim follows immediately from the first order conditions for the high
types consumption and the fact that (as shown in the proof of Lemma 6) λHH is positive. For the
second claim, note first that since (as shown in the proof of Lemma 6) yLL < yLH the incentive
constraint IC(LH) implies that xLL < xLH . Thus, if xL ∈
                                                       / (xLL , xLH ), then either it is the case
that xL ≤ xLL < xLH or it is the case that xLL < xLH ≤ xL .
   Suppose the former. Then, from the first order conditions for xL and xLL ,

                             λR (1 − µ)                 λR (1 − µ)
                                        ≥             αHL                .
                             λU − λH      λU −        αLL λH − λLH /δαLL

This implies that [αLL − αHL ]λH δ ≥ λLH . But this means that

                 αHH                  αHH
                     λH − λLH /δαLH ≥     λH − λH [αLL − αHL ]/αLH = λH
                 αLH                  αLH

and hence that
                                      λR (1 − µ)                       λR (1 − µ)
                                    αHH                            ≥              .
                           λU −   ( αLH λH − λLH /δαLH )               λU − λH
From the first order conditions for xL and xLH this implies that β(xLH )β−1 ≥ β(xL )β−1 which
means that xLH ≤ xL - a contradiction.
   Suppose then that xLL < xLH ≤ xL . From the first order conditions for xL and xLH ,

                           λR (1 − µ)            λR (1 − µ)
                                      ≤        αHH                  .
                           λU − λH      λU − ( αLH λH − λLH /δαLH )


                                                      42
This implies that λLH ≤ δ(αHH − αLH )λH . But this means that

                    αHL                  αHL
                        λH + λLH /δαLL ≤     λH + (αHH − αLH )λH /αLL = λH
                    αLL                  αLL

and hence that
                                         λR (1 − µ)                λR (1 − µ)
                                       αHL                     ≤              .
                                λU −   αLL λH − λLH /δαLL          λU − λH
From the first order conditions for xL and xLL this implies that β(xLL )β−1 ≤ β(xL )β−1 which
means that xLL ≥ xL - a contradiction.
   For the second statement, we need to show that for K ∈ {L, H}


                           β(xK )β−1 < αKH β(xKH )β−1 + αKL β(xKL )β−1 .

Define υ (x) = (x)β and υ(xi ) = vi for i = K, KL, KH. Consider a decrease in υK by φ (which
                                                                                      φ
can be positive or negative) and a contextual increase of υKL and υKH by              δ.   After this change
the utility maintenance constraint and the incentive compatibility constraints at t = 1 and 2 are
obviously satisfied, since utilities at t = 2 change by the same amounts and the net present value
of the expected utility of reporting K at t = 1 is unchanged. It must be that this change does
not relax the resources constraint, therefore:
               ∙              µ         µ        ¶            µ        ¶¶¸
             ∂   −1                  −1        φ           −1        φ
                υ (υK − φ) + δ αKH υ     υKL +     + αKH υ     υKH +       =0                             (29)
            ∂φ                                 δ                     δ

where υ−1 (·) is the inverse of υ. By Jensen’s inequality, we have:
        µ                         ¶              µ                             ¶
               αKH         αKH           1                       1                   1
     0=      0
                       +  0
                                    −  0
                                              >          0             0
                                                                                 − 0
            υ (υKH ) υ (υKL )         υ (υK )      αKH υ (υKH ) + αKH υ (υKL )    υ (υK )

which implies β(xK )β−1 < αKH β(xKH )β−1 + αLL β(xKL )β−1 . Q.E.D.

Proof of Lemma 7: Consider a particular period t ≥ 2 and some history ht . We are interested in
knowing when (x∗ht , yh∗ t ) will be a solution to PhIt . This is clearly the case if ht 6= h∗t = {θL , ...θL }
since Proposition 2 tells us that (x∗ht , yh∗ t ) is first best eﬃcient. Therefore we focus attention on
the history h∗t .
   Observe that the program PhI∗t is identical to P I , but for two exceptions. On the one hand, the
reservation value of those with history h∗t who are low types at time t is their expected continuation
value V ∗ (θL | h∗t ) under (x∗ , y∗ ) instead of u. On the other hand, the revenue requirement is not
G/(1 − δ), but the expected revenue generated from individuals with history h∗t by (x∗ , y∗ ). We


                                                      43
will exploit this similarity to solve the program PhI∗t in the same way as we did the program P I .
However, a certain amount of work is necessary to show that the equivalent of Lemma 1 holds for
the relaxed program corresponding to PhI∗t .
   To this end, consider first the following revenue maximization problem:
                                       ∞
                                       X
                         max                 δ j E[yt+j (θt+j ; ht+j ) − xt+j (θt+j ; ht+j ) |h∗t ]
                       (xh∗ ,yh∗ )
                          t    t       j=0


                                              s.t. V (θL | h∗t ) ≥ V ∗ (θL | h∗t )

                       and ICH (ht+j ) & ICL (ht+j ) ∀ ht+j º h∗t ∀ j = 0, 1, ..

Thus, we maximize the expected present value of revenues that can be extracted from individuals
with history h∗t at time t subject to the constraint that those with low ability at time t have at
least as much utility as under (x∗h∗t , yh∗ ∗t ) and the incentive constraints. Let (xR
                                                                                      h∗
                                                                                       t
                                                                                         , yhR∗t ) denote the
solution to the revenue maximizing problem. We can immediately apply Lemmata 1-5 to this
problem and conclude that the earnings path yhR∗t solves the problem
                                                   ∞
                                                   X
                              max(1 − δ)                 δ j E[yt+j (θt+j ; ht+j ) − ϕ(yt+j (θt+j ; ht+j )/θt+j ) |h∗t ]
                              yh∗
                                   t               j=0
                                             ∞
                                             X                        ¡                  ¢
     −(1 − δ)[Pr(θt     = θH |h∗t )                δ j [αHH − αLH ]j Φ yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ) + V ∗ (θL | h∗t )]
                                             j=0

We can now establish:

Lemma 8 If (11) holds, then for any h∗t+j , yt+j
                                             ∗
                                                 (θL ; h∗t+j ) > yt+j
                                                                  R
                                                                      (θL ; h∗t+j ).

Proof: Since Pr(θt = θH |h∗t ) = αLH , for any history h∗t+j , yt+j
                                                                R
                                                                    (θL ; h∗t+j ) satisfies the first order
condition
                                                       ∙       ¸j
                αLL      ϕ0 (yt+j
                              R
                                  (θL ; h∗t+j )/θL )       αHL      ¡ R                ¢
                    [1 −                             ]= 1−        Φ0 yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ) .                                  (30)
                αLH                 θL                     αLL

Under our assumption that ϕ000 ≥ 0 the revenues are a strictly concave function of each yt+j ,
implying that revenues are decreasing in yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ) on the interval [yt+j
                                                                              R
                                                                                  (θL ; h∗t+j ), ∞). From
                  ∗
                      ¡          ¢
(6) we have that yt+j  θL ; h∗t+j solves:
 ∙       ¸1−t                                                      ∙       ¸j
     αHL      γ (1 − δ) (1 − µ)      ϕ0 (yt+j
                                          ∗
                                              (θL ; h∗t+j )/θL )       αHL      ¡ ∗                ¢
  1−                            [1 −                             ]= 1−        Φ0 yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ) .
     αLL       γµ(1 − δ) − 1                    θL                     αLL
                                                                                                                           (31)


                                                                44
Using (11):
                                     ∙       ¸1−t
                                         αHL       γ (1 − δ) (1 − µ)
                                      1−
                                         αLL        γµ(1 − δ) − 1
                                     ∙       ¸−1
                                         αHL      γ (1 − δ) (1 − µ)    αLL
                                   ≥  1−                             >
                                         αLL       γµ(1 − δ) − 1       αLH

So the right hand side of (31) is larger than the right hand side of (30), and concavity of the
                               ∗
revenue function implies that yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ) > yt+j
                                                    R
                                                        (θL ; h∗t+j ). Q.E.D.

    We can now show that the equivalent of Lemma 1 holds for the relaxed program corresponding
to PhI∗t .

Lemma 9 Let (xh∗t , yh∗t ) solve the relaxed problem corresponding to PhI∗t in which the incentive
compatibility constraints for the low types are ignored. Then ICH (h∗t ) holds with equality.

Proof: Assume, by contradiction, that ICH (h∗t ) is not binding. Following the same argument as
in Lemma 1, it follows that (xh∗t , yh∗t ) must be eﬃcient starting from h∗t . Therefore, using Lemma
7 and Proposition 2
                             yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ) > yt+j
                                                   ∗
                                                       (θL ; h∗t+j ) > yt+j
                                                                        R
                                                                            (θL ; h∗t+j )

for any j ≥ 0, while for all histories ht+j 6= h∗t+j

                             yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ) = yt+j
                                                   ∗
                                                       (θL ; h∗t+j ) = yt+j
                                                                        R
                                                                            (θL ; h∗t+j ).

                                                         R
Since revenues are strictly decreasing on the interval [yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ), ∞), it follows that the tax
revenues generated by (xh∗t , yh∗t ) must be strictly lower than the revenues generated by the ex
ante optimal solution (x∗ht , yh∗ t ) starting from h∗t : but this is a contradiction because then the
revenues constraint would be violated. Q.E.D.

    Given this last lemma, we can apply Lemmata 2-5 and conclude that (x∗h∗t , yh∗ ∗t ) will be a
solution to PhI∗t if and only if yh∗ ∗t is a solution to the problem
                             ∞
                             X                     j ¡                  ¢
                      max          δ j [αHH − αLH ] Φ yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ) + V ∗ (θL | h∗t )                           (PhS∗t )
                       yht
                             j=0
                                             ∞
                                             X
        s.t. R∗ (h∗t ) (1 − δ) ≤ (1 − δ)           δ j E[yt+j (θt+j ; ht+j ) − ϕ(yt+j (θt+j ; ht+j )/θt+j ) |h∗t ]
                                             j=0
                                                                                                                       (32)
                                       ∞
                                       X                     j ¡                  ¢
         −(1 − δ)[Pr(θt = θH |h∗t )          δ j [αHH − αLH ] Φ yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ) + V ∗ (θL | h∗t )]
                                       j=0



                                                            45
Accordingly, to prove the result we need to show that yh∗ ∗t is a solution to the problem if and only
if (11) holds.
   Since Pr(θt = θH |h∗t ) = αLH , the Lagrangian of PhS∗t is:
                   ∞
                   X                     j ¡                  ¢
     Lh∗t     =          δ j [αHH − αLH ] Φ yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j )                                                    (33)
                   j=0
                                            X   ∞
                           [γS (1 − δ)]
                   +                            δ j E[yt+j (θt+j ; ht+j ) − ϕ(yt+j (θt+j ; ht+j )/θt+j ) |h∗t ]
                       (1 − γS αLH (1 − δ)) j=0

where we have divided through by 1 − γS αLH (1 − δ) and omitted the constants V ∗ (θL | h∗t ) and
R∗ (h∗t ) . We denote the Lagrange multiplier γS to distinguish it from the analogous multiplier γ
for the program solved by y∗ . Let yhS∗t denote the solution to this program. Under our assumption
that ϕ000 ≥ 0 the Lagrangian is a strictly concave function of each yt+j and the solution is unique.
   We can now prove the Proposition:

Suﬃcient condition: If (11) is satisfied, then yh∗ ∗t is a solution to problem PhS∗t . We proceed in
three steps.

   Step 1. We first show that
                                                 ∙       ¸1−t
                               γS (1 − δ) αLL        αHL      γ (1 − δ) (1 − µ)
                                                ≤ 1−                                                              (34)
                             γS αLH (1 − δ) − 1      αLL       γµ(1 − δ) − 1
                                                                                  S
                                                                                      ¡           ¢
Assume, by contradiction, that this inequality is not true. The optimal solution yt+j  θL ; h∗t+j
satisfies the first order condition:
                                                                   ∙       ¸j
              γS (1 − δ) αLL        ϕ0 (yt+j
                                         S
                                             (θL ; h∗t+j )/θL )        αHL      ¡ S                 ¢
                               [1 −                             ] = 1−        Φ0 yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j )               (35)
            γS αLH (1 − δ) − 1                 θL                      αLL

if ht+j 6= h∗t+j ; and it would be fully eﬃcient otherwise.                   If (34) is not true, then after any
history h∗t+j , concavity of the Lagrangian implies that the solution yt+j
                                                                       S
                                                                           (θL ; h∗t+j ) of (35) is strictly
                                          ∗
larger than the ex ante optimal solution yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ). Moreover, from Lemma 7 we know that
                                   ∗
that the ex ante optimal solution yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ) is larger than the revenue maximizing solution
 R
yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ). Accordingly,

                                 S
                                yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ) > yt+j
                                                      ∗
                                                          (θL ; h∗t+j ) > yt+j
                                                                           R
                                                                               (θL ; h∗t+j )

                                                                                    R
Since, as proven in Lemma 7, tax revenues are strictly decreasing on the interval [yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ), ∞),
this would imply that the revenues corresponding to the earnings path yhS∗t are strictly lower than


                                                            46
under the ex ante optimal solution yh∗ ∗t : it follows that the revenue constraint (32) is not satisfied
- a contradiction.

    Step 2. Next we show that:
                                              ∙       ¸1−t
                            γS (1 − δ) αLL        αHL      γ (1 − δ) (1 − µ)
                                             ≥ 1−                                                             (36)
                          γS αLH (1 − δ) − 1      αLL       γµ(1 − δ) − 1

Assume, by contraction, that (36) is not true. We know by the analogue of Lemma 4 that if yhS∗t
solves problem PhS∗t and the consumption levels xSh∗t are such as to make ICH (ht+j ) for all j and
ht+j º h∗t and the low type’s utility constraint hold with equality given yhS∗t , then (xSh∗t , yhS∗t ) must
solve problem PhI∗t . But if (36) is not true, then after any history h∗t+j the solution yt+j
                                                                                          S
                                                                                              (θL ; h∗t+j )
                                                                               ∗
of (35) is smaller and hence more distorted than the ex ante optimal solution yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ). Since
the solution on any other history would be eﬃcient both under yh∗ ∗t and yhS∗t , we would have that
aggregate surplus is lower under (xSh∗t , yhS∗t ) than under (x∗h∗t , yh∗ ∗t ). But this is a contradiction since
in this case it is impossible that all the constraints of program PhI∗t are satisfied and its value is
strictly larger than V ∗ (θH | h∗t ).

    Step 3. From Steps 1 and 2 it follows that
                                              ∙       ¸1−t
                            γS (1 − δ) αLL        αHL      γ (1 − δ) (1 − µ)
                                             = 1−                            .
                          γS αLH (1 − δ) − 1      αLL       γµ(1 − δ) − 1

From (35) and (31) it follows that yh∗ ∗t solves PhS∗t as claimed.

Necessary condition: If (11) is not satisfied, then yh∗ ∗t is not a solution to problem PhS∗t .

    If (11) does not hold, then (31) and (30) imply that after any history h∗t+j , yt+j
                                                                                    ∗
                                                                                        (θL ; h∗t+j ) is
                                              R
smaller than the revenue maximizing solution yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ). Let yh∗t be an earnings path such that
for any history h∗t+j , yt+j (θL ; h∗t+j ) ∈ (yt+j
                                               ∗
                                                   (θL ; h∗t+j ), min{yt+j
                                                                       R
                                                                           (θL ; h∗t+j ), y ∗ (θL )}) but otherwise
equals yh∗ ∗t . Then this earnings path raises strictly more revenue and yields a strictly higher level of
the objective function than does yh∗ ∗t . Accordingly, yh∗ ∗t is not a solution to problem PhS∗t . Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 6: Let Ω = G + (1 − δ) u. Then, if (x∗ , y∗ ) is a second best eﬃcient




                                                        47
allocation, Lemma 5 tells us that y∗ = y∗ (Ω) where y∗ (Ω) solves the problem
                                         ∞
                                         X                     j ¡                  ¢
                                   max         δ j [αHH − αLH ] Φ y1+j (θL ; h◦1+j ) + u
                                         j=0
                                             ∞
                                             X
                  s.t. Ω ≤ (1 − δ)                  δ t−1 E[yt (θt ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θt ; ht )/θt )]
                                             t=1
                                                    ∞
                                                    X                     j ¡                  ¢
                                   −(1 − δ)[µ             δ j [αHH − αLH ] Φ y1+j (θL ; h◦1+j ) ].
                                                    j=0

Let γ(Ω) denote the associated Lagrange multiplier. Condition (11) of Proposition 5 implies that,
       αLH                                                     1
when   αHH   ∈ (0, µ), there is a threshold γ >             µ(1−δ)    such that (x∗ , y∗ ) is time consistent if and
only if γ(Ω) ≤ γ. Let Ω be the maximum value of Ω such that the above problem has a solution.
Let Ω be the largest value of Ω such that there exists an eﬃcient allocation in which those who are
low types in period one have expected utility u and none of the high types’ incentive constraints
are violated. To prove the Proposition, we will demonstrate that as Ω increases from Ω to Ω, γ(Ω)
                    1
increases from   µ(1−δ)   to ∞.
   Define the functions
                                                                  Φ0 (y)
                                               Λ1 (y) =            ϕ0 (y/θL )
                                                             1−        θL

which is increasing in y; and
                                               ∙        ¸1−t
                                                    αHL        (1 − µ)
                                    Λ2 (t, γ) = 1 −                 1
                                                    αLL      1 − γ(1−δ)

which is decreasing in γ. We know from our characterization of y∗ (Ω) that, for any t:


                                      Λ1 (yt∗ (θL ; h∗t ; Ω)) = Λ2 (t, γ(Ω)) .

For all other histories, yt∗ (θL ; ht ; Ω) is eﬃcient.
   Now consider the pure revenue maximization problem:
                                            ∞
                                            X
                                    max           δ t−1 E[yt (θt ; ht ) − xt (θt ; ht )]
                                    (x,y)
                                            t=1


                                                  s.t. V (θL | h1 ) ≥ u

                                  and ICH (ht ) & ICL (ht ) f or all t & ht .

Let (xR , yR ) denote the solution to this problem. As in the proof of the previous proposition, we
can immediately apply Lemmata 1-5 to this problem and conclude that the revenue maximizing

                                                             48
earnings path earnings path yR solves the problem:
                                           ∞
                                           X
                            max (1 − δ)           δ t−1 E[yt (θt ; ht ) − ϕ(yt (θt ; ht )/θt )]
                             y
                                           t=1
                                          ∞
                                          X                          ¡                  ¢
                            −(1 − δ)[µ            δ j [αHH − αLH ]j Φ y1+j (θL ; h◦1+j ) + u].
                                          j=0

It is easy to see that:
                                    ¡               ¢
                                  Λ1 ytR (θL ; h∗t ) = lim Λ2 (t, λ) = 1 − µ,
                                                            λ→∞

while for all other histories    ytR (θL ; ht )   is eﬃcient. Note also that yR is completely independent of
Ω.
     Now consider two values of Ω, Ω,                      e > Ω0 . We claim that γ(Ω)
                                   e Ω0 ∈ (Ω, Ω) such that Ω                        e > γ(Ω0 ).
                                 e ≤ γ(Ω0 ). Then, we have that along the history h∗t for any
Suppose, to the contrary, that γ(Ω)
time period t,
                 °                                   °   °          ³          ´                  °
                 ° R                               e °   °                 e                      °
                 °yt (θL ; h∗t ) − yt∗ (θL ; h∗t ; Ω)° = °Λ−1
                                                            1 Λ2 t, γ(Ω) − Λ1 (1 − µ)°
                                                                                       −1

                                                         °                                        °
                                                       ≥ °Λ−1               0          −1
                                                            1 Λ2 (t, γ(Ω )) − Λ1 (1 − µ)
                                                                                                  °
                                                         °                                      °
                                                       = °ytR (θL ; h∗t ) − yt∗ (θL ; h∗t ; Ω0 )°

so that the diﬀerence between the revenue maximizing income level ytR (θL ; h∗t ) and the con-
                                        e is not smaller than the diﬀerence between ytR (θL ; h∗t ) and
strained eﬃcient income yt∗ (θL ; h∗t ; Ω)
yt∗ (θL ; h∗t ; Ω0 ). Since these diﬀerences must have the same sign and since revenues are concave in
                         e cannot generate more revenues than y∗ (Ω0 ). This is a contradiction since
yt , it follows that y∗ (Ω)
e > Ω0 .
Ω
                                                      1
     To see that as Ω → Ω, γ(Ω) →                  µ(1−δ)   note that as Ω → Ω the incentive compatibility
constraints for the high types become non-binding, so taxation becomes eﬃcient. This implies
                    1
that γ(Ω) →      µ(1−δ) .   Similarly as Ω converges to Ω, γ(Ω) must converge to infinity, otherwise
some resources would be left to the high type and tax revenues would not be maximized. Q.E.D.




                                                             49
