NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE AND RESERVATION WAGES

Martin

Feldstein

James Poterba

Working Paper No. 1011

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

July 1982

The research is part of the NBER study of the Government Budget and the
Private Economy. .Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1011
July

1982

Unemployment Insurance and Reservation Wages

ABSTRACT

The present paper examines the reservation wages reported by a large
sample of unemployed individuals in the United States in May 1976. The majority
of unemployed
individuals report reservation wages that are at least as high
as the wage they were paid on their last job. Approximately one—fourth of all
job seekers required a wage that is at least 10 percent higher than the wage on
their previous job.
Our econometric evidence shows that the level of unemployment benefits
relative to previous wages has a powerful effect on the individual's reservation
wage. A ten percent increase in the U.I. replacement ratio increases the reservation wage by about
percent for job losers who are not on layoff and by
somewhat less for other unemployed groups. Separate regressions to analyze the
high reservation wage per se show that a ten percent increase in the U.I. replacement
ratio also increases by about four percentage points the probability that
an unemployed individual will require a wage increase of 10 percent or more.
These estimates imply that reducing net unemployment insurance benefits (by lowering gross benefits or by taxing unemployment benefits) could
significantly lower the average duration of unemployment and the relative number
of long duration spells of unemployment. Because of. the norilinear response of
the unemployment duration to the reservation wage, reducing a high unemployment
insurance ratio by ten percentage points is likely to have a greater impact on
unemployment than reducing a low unemployment insurance ratio by ten percentage
points.

Martin Feldsteln
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

James Poterba
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
(617) 868—3930

Unemployment Insurance and Reservation Wages

Martin Feldstein*
James Poterba**

1. Introduction
The principle imperfection in modern labor markets is the downward

rigidity of existing nominal wages. As a result, a decline in the marginal
value product of an employee's labor is likely to cause a temporary or permanent

layoff rather than a downward wage adjustment. Such separations are inefficient
because they waste job specific human capital and cause employees to work at new
jobs in which their productivity is lower than it would be if they remained at
their previous job.1
Although wage reductions on an existing job are rare, an employee who
loses his job is likely to find that the wage on his next job is lower than the

wage on the job that he lost. There are at least five reasons to expect this
wage reduction: First, the original job loss is likely to have occurred because
of a decline in the value of the employee's services. This may reflect a
deterioration of the employee's own skills, a change in available production
methods that makes existing skills less valuable, or a decline in the real price

of the product that the employee produces. Second, even if there has been no

*IIaard University and the National Bureau of Economic Research.
**Oxford University and the National Bureau of Economic Research.
This paper was prepared for the June 1982 Oxford conference on "Micro—Data and
Public Economics", sponsored jointly by the NBER and the Social Science Research
Council of Great Britain. The research is part of the NBER study of the
Government Budget and the Private Economy.
See Hall and Lazear (19 2) for an analysis of the inefficiency ot such
separations and of the second—best character of contracts that entail such
wage rigidities.
(051382)

—2—

decline in the actual value of an employee's services, he may lose his job
because his employer accumulates enough information to decide that the value of

those services is below his wage. Third, as we have already noted, the change
in jobs is likely to involve some loss of job—specific human capital. Fourth, a
prospective

employer who is not able to judge the skill level of a new employee

will pay a lower wage until information accumulates. Finally, employees with

substantial job tenure nay receive wages that exceed the marginal value product
of

their

labor while new

employees are paid less than their marginal value pro-

duct (Medoff and Abraham, 1978, and Lazear, 1931, 1982).

The actual wage on the new job depends on the job—seeker's willingness

to search and to wait. A job loser may have to wait a long time unless
he reduces his reservation wage below the wage that he received on his last job.
The more he reduces his reservation wage relative to his previous wage, the
sooner the job loser can expect to find new work.'
The traditional distinction between voluntary and involuntary
unemployment pushes this notion to the extreme and classifies an individual as
voluntarily or involuntarily unemployed according to whether or not he is

willing to work at a wage that is less than or equal to his previous wage. The
search theory model of unemployment2 implies that this two—way classification is
less meaningful than using the individual's reservation wage as a continuous

1Several empirical studies indicate that a higher relative reservation wage
reduces the probability of leaving unemployment and becoming employed (Baron
and Mellow, 1981, and Warner et al., 1980).
2See Stigler (1962) for the basic idea of the theory. A more formal model is
presented in a number of places, e.g., McCall (1970), and Mortenson (1971).

—3—

measure of the eagerness or reluctance of the job—seeker to accept employment.
Even an individual who is willing to work for less than his previous wage will
be voluntarily unemployed in the sense that he rejects wage offers below his

reservation wage. Nevertheless, a comparison of the reservation wage with the
wage on the last job is useful simply because the probability of finding an
acceptable job is likely to decline rapidly as the reservation wage exceeds the
1

previous wage.

An alternative theory might

replace

the notion of voluntary and in-

voluntary unemployment with a comparison of the individual's reservation wage with

the socially optimal reservation wage for that individual. The socially optimal
reservation wage for an individual reflects a balancing of the gains of additional job search (measured by the increase in the individual's marginal product
in a better job) against the cost of that search (measured by the value of foregone production, net of the value of leisure, during the period of additional

search.) The primary reason for the difference between the privately optimal
reservation wage and the socially optimal reservation wage is that unemployment
insurance benefits decrease the private cost of unemployment but not the social

cost of unemployment.2 Because of unemployment insurance, the privately optimal
reservation wage exceeds the socially optimal reservation wage and job search is
inefficiently prolonged.

1The starting wage is of course not the only attribute of the new job. Other
features of the job itself, expected future wage increases, pension arrange—
merits, etc., all influence the job's attractiveness. We implicitly assume that
these features do not differ between the previous job and the prospective new
job and that they vary nnotonica11y with the wage.
2The private reservation wage also reflects the income tax that reduces both
the opportunity cost of unemployment and the reward for finding a better job.
But if the marginal tax rate is constant, this effect is at most of secondary
importance.

—4 —

It would be good to xxasure the extent to which private reservation
wages exceed the corresponding social optima and to estimate the actual effect

of unemployment insurance on this gap. Unfortunately, although data are
available on individual reservation wages, no direct observation or calculation

of socially optimal reservation wages is possible. In the present study we
therefore compare an individual's reservation wage with the wage he earned

on his previous job. The wage on the previous job is of interest in itself in
this context and can also be interpreted as an indication of the socially optimal reservation wage.

The previous wage is likely to exceed the socially optimal reservation

wage for individuals who lost their previous job. By definition, a job loser
was willing to continue working for his previous employer at his previous wage.
Thus the previous wage was at least equal to the individual's previous private

reservation wage. Since unemployment insurance makes the private reservation
wage greater than the social reservation wage, the previous wage was greater

than the previous socially optimal reservation wage. Since the unemployment
itself reflects or causes a fall in the distribution of potential wade

offers,1

the new socially optimal reservation wage is also lower than the pre-

vious socially optimal reservation wage. Thus the previous actual wage exceeds
the new socially optimal reservation wage.
The present paper examines the reservation wages reported by a large

sample of unemployed individuals in the United States in May 1976. At that

1The five reasons given above for a lower post—unemployment wage can be
interpreted as reasons for a downward shift of the distribution of potential
wage offers.

—5—

time,

the econoniy was still recovering from the recession that ended in

March

1975. The overall unemployment

substantial

rate

of 6.7 percent indicated that

slack still remained in the labor market. We report information

separately for those individuals who are classified as job—losers and those who

report that
given

they voluntarily quit their previous job. Specific attention is

to the relative level of unemployment insurance benefits as a determinant

of the reservation wage.

A most striking finding in our analysis is that the majority of
unemployed individuals report reservation wages

that

are at least as high as the

wage they were paid on their last job. But the median reservation wage
ratio1 is less important than the substantial fraction of job seekers who

require wages that are significantly higher than their last wage. The evidence
presented in section 3 shows that approximately one—fourth of all job seekers
require a wage that is at least 10 percent higher than the wage on their last

job. Not surprisingly, individuals who voluntarily left their previous job
generally report even higher reservation wage ratios. Fully 31 percent of job
leavers are seeking new jobs that pay at least 10 percent more than their present wage.

Several previous studies (e.g., Baron and Mellow, 19b1, and Warner,
Poindexter and Fean, 1980 ) have noted that the nan of the reservation wage

ratio or of some closely related nasure2 is less than one and concluded that

1We use the term "reservation wage ratio" for the ratio of the reservation
wage to the wage on the individual's last job.

2The usual nasure is the ratio of the reservation wage to the wage predicted
for the individual. Section 2 discusses this ratio and the reason why it is
likely to be lower than the reservation wage ratio that we analyzed.

—6—

this is consistent with the theoretical expectation that unemployed

individuals

set low reservation wages. By looking only at the average reservation wage,
these studies fail to see the large

percentage

of individuals who have set

significantly high reservation wage ratios. Only Clark and Summers (1919) note
that a significant fraction of reservation wages exceed the individuals' previous wages.

The official procedure of the U.S. Department of Labor classifies an
individual as unemployed if he is not currently working and has done something in

the past four weeks to find employment. No reference is made in this criterion
of uneinploy-ment to the individual's reservation wage. Even someone whose reser-

vation wage is so high that essentialy all feasible wage offers would be

rejected is thus officially classified as unemployed. In section 2 of the present paper we use information on the individual reservation wages to adjust the

official unemployment statistics. We define an adjusted unemployment rate by
excluding everyone whose reservation wage is above the wage on their last job.
A more conservative procedure defines an adjusted unemployment rate by excluding
those with reservation wages above 1.1 times their last wage.

The primary focus of the present research is the effect of
unemployment insurance on reservation wages. Section 5 of the paper summarizes
previous research on this subject and discusses the specification of the reservation wage equations that we use to estimate the effect of unemployment

insurance. Section 6 presents parameter estimates for these equations and section 7 discusses the implications for the expected duration of unemployment and

for the probability of long spells of unemployment. There is a brief concluding
section.

2. Data and Definitions
Our analysis is based on a special study of the job search methods of
the unemployed that was conducted by the U.S. Department of Labor in May 1976.1

A total of 4,668 persons in the Current Population Survey in May 1976 were
classified as unemployed and asked to fill out a special supplementary questionnaire concerning previous work experience and earnings, current job—seeking

methods and aspirations, and related questions. In many households, the form
was left to be filled in later or was mailed to the unemployed person after a

telephone interview. The nonresponse rate was 31 percent and resulted in a
total sample of 3,238 completed questionnaires. Although there is no reason to
expect

a systematic bias in the sample of respondents with respect to the

questions of interest in this paper, a 31 percent nonresponse rate is clearly a
reason

for caution in interpreting any precise numbers.

Since our interest is in the ratio of the individual's reservation
wage to his or her previous wage, we have eliminated from the Department of
Labor sample all those individuals who are classified as new entrants (who have
no previous wage) or reentrants (whose previous wage may refer to a much earlier

period). Some individuals who answered the questionnaire did not provide information about their reservation wage or their previous wage. A small group of
respondents provided such extreme answers (reservation wages that were nre
than three times their previous wage or less than one—third of their previous

wage) that we thought it best to disregard those answers as indicating that the
respondents did not understand the question or were unwilling to provide an

1See Rosenfeld (1977) for a description of the survey and a copy of the
questionnaire.

—8—

answer.

Our final sample contains 2,228 nen and women for whom all the required

data are available.

Our neasure of the reservation wage was based on the following pair of
(1) "What kind of work were you looking for (in the period for April

questions:

18 through May 15)?" and (2) "What is the lowest wage or salary you would accept

(before deductions) for this type of work?" Individuals who indicated that they
were looking for more than one kind of work were asked to specify their reservation wage for the type of job that they preferred.

In our basic analysis, we compare this reservation wage to the wage
that the individual describes as "the usual earnings ...

before deductions" on

the "last job at which you worked for two consecutive weeks or more."
Individuals were also asked whether they had had a higher paying job since

January 1, 1971. Approximately one—fourth of the individuals in our sample
responded that they had had such a job and they were asked to specify their

usual earnings on that job. We also present some analysis based on the ratio of
the reservation wage to this previous highest earnings.1
Survey respondents were also asked whether they received any
unemployment insurance benefits during their current spell of unemployment.

Those who had received benefits were asked what their weekly benefit was. In
our analysis of the effect of unemployment insurance on reservation wages, we
use the ratio of this reported U.I. benefit to the highest previous wage, i.e.,
the highest wage on any other job since January 19114 including the last job.

1lndividuals may indicate their usual earnings as a rate per hour, per week,
per month or per year. As long as the unit is the same for the reservation
wage and the previous wage, the specific choice of unit is irrelevant. When
the units are not the same, we convert by assuming 140 hours per week and
14.3 weeks per month.

—9—

It is important to note that our unemployment insurance variable

refers to the amount of U.I. benefits actually received during the

unemployment

spell and not to the benefits to which the individual was entitled under the
law.

This difference makes it very difficult to interpret the distinction bet-

ween those who receive UI. benefits and those who do not. An individual may not
receive U.I. benefits because Ci) he is not eligible for benefits (having
exhausted benefits or had insufficient previous work experience) or because (2)
he has not yet applied for benefits or because (3) he has applied but has not
yet received benefits because of administrative delays in the payment of U.I.
benefits.

This last point deserves further explanation. In most states there is
a one week "waiting period" in the first unemployment spell per benefit year

before the individual becomes eligible for unemployment insurance. But even
after the individual is eligible for benefits and is actually accruing benefits,
he may not be receiving those benefits because of administrative delays in pro-

cessing payment. A significant fraction of individuals during the first few
weeks of unemployment may be accruing benefits even though they have not yet

received their first U.I. benefit checks. Such individuals should behave as if
the net cost of unemployment is reduced by the accruing U.I. benefits even though

they are recorded in our statistics as not receiving benefits. Since about half
of the unemployed job losers in May 1976 were in the first

weeks 01' their

unemployment spell, this is a potentially serious problem in interpreting the

receipt

or non—receipt of

U.I. benefits.

The problem of interpreting the absence of U.I. benefits does not of
course apply to interpreting the ratio of U.I. benefits to wages among those who

—10—

do receive U.I. benefits. Our analysis of the effect of U.I. therefore concentrates
on the effect of variations in the U.I. replacement rate (i.e., the ratio of U.I.
benefits to previous

wages) among the U.I. recipients. Some evidence for the

entire sample confirms that

there are problems

of

interpreting the nonreceipt of

benefits.

3.

Distribution of Reservation Wage Ratios

As we noted in the introduction, several previous studies have coin—

mented that on average reservation wages are slightly less than some measure of

potential wage. These studies have failed, however, to note that significant
variation of the reservation wage ratio around its average implies that a
substantial fraction of employees have reservation wages that exceed their

potential wage. The present study examines the full distribution of reservation
wages and shows that about one—third of the unemployed state that their minimum
wage requirement exceeds their last wage while less than one—third of the
unemployed are willing to accept a wage reduction of 10 percent or more.
The Labor Department's own analysis of the questionnaire emphasizes
the willingness of some of the unemployed to accept low wages but says nothing

about the high relative reservation wage required by a substantial group. Thus

the

Labor Department study notes

willing

to

that

"about 1

out of 5 (unemployed) were

accept less than $2.30 an hour (the minimum wage level in May 1976)"

and that "in contrast, only 1 out of 10 of the employed who were paid on an

hourly basis reported such low earnings" (Rosenfeld, 1977, p. 39). In the same
vein, that study reports that "only 6 percent of the unemployed were asking $7

an

hour or more, the earnings reported by

(Rosenfeld, 1977,

pp. 39—t0).

11 percent

of employed workers"

—11—

In addition to ignoring the high side of the distribution of reservation wages, the Labor Department's comparisons ignore the differences between
the potential wages of the unemployed and the actual wages of the employed.
Indeed, the Labor Department's report itself cautions that the employed and
unemployed have vastly different demographic characteristics and work experience
that riake their own comparisons potentially- very misleading.

Other

researchers have sought to reduce this problem of noncom—

parability by relating each individual's reservation wage to the wage predicted
for an employed

force

individual

experience.1

with the same demographic characteristics and

There is, however, strong reason to believe that the

unemployed differ from the employed in systematic ways that

the

labor

are not recorded in

survey questionnaire but that influence both the probability of unemployment

and the potential wage. Workers of higher "quality" (in a sense that can be
observed by employers or prospective employers but that is

survey)

are nore likely to be employed and, if' employ-ed,

not recorded in the

to earn a higher wage.

Comparing the reservation wage of' an unemployed worker to the wage predicted

from

a regression equation estimated with a sample of employed workers is thus

likely to understate the ratio of the reservation wage to the true potential
wage.
We avoid the "unobserved quality" bias by comparing each individual's

reported wage to his own past wage. Even this is subject to problems. For job
losers, our reservation wage ratio is likely to understate the ratio of the
reservation wage to the true potential wage for the reasons discussed in

1See, for example, the studies by Baron and Mellow (1978, 1981) and
Warner, Poindexter, and Fearn (1980).

—12—

section 1.

For example, an individual who was overpaid on his previous job,

i.e., whose wage exceeded his marginal product, is more likely to have become

unemployed. Similarly, individuals are likely to become unemployed when a
reduction in the demand for a product causes a fall in the individual's marginal

revenue product. In contrast, for individuals who quit their last job, the pre—
vious wage may understate the wage that the individual might reasonably hope to

receive. An

individual

may

quit

because he believes that he is in a job that

does not pay him the value of his marginal product or that does not permit him

to be as productive as he might be in some other occupation or firi. Our analysis therefore presents separate information for job losers and job leavers.
Although our primary concern is with the distribution of reservation
wages and the relative frequency with which reservation wages exceed previous
wages, we begin in Table 1 by examining the mean reservation wage ratios for
different groups of unemployed workers.

The first line of Table 1 presents the reservation wage ratio for all
unemployed individuals in our sample grouped by the number of weeks that they

had already been unemployed at the time of the survey. For the sample as a
whole, the mean ratio of the reservation wage to the wage on the last job was
1.01, implying that on average the unemployed are seeking a wage that is higher

than the wage that they received on their last job. The reservation wage ratio
declines with the duration of the unemployment spell but the differences are
not large.1 Even among individuals who have been unemployed for six ntrnths

'Several earlier studies found that the reservation wages of individual
employees declined with the time that they remained unemployed, e.g.,
Kasper (1967), Keifer and Neumann (1979), and Holt (1970).

— 13-

Save for 'Jhble 1

—14-.

or

longer, the mean reservation wage ratio is not significantly different from

one. 1,2

Eliminating individuals who voluntarily left their previous job and

focusing on job losers shows very similar results (line 2 of Table 1). The
overall mean reservation wage ratio for this group is 1.03 and declines slightly
from 1.06 among those unemployed less than five weeks to 1.0 at 20 weeks and

0.97 after a year. Lines 3 and 4 divide the job losers into those who are on
layoff expecting to return to their original job and those who have no expectation of returning. The group on layoff reports a mean reservation 'wage ratio
of

approximately 1.0 at all durations while the

vation wages

"other job losers"

report reser-

that on average decline from 1.1 times their past wage during the

first four weeks of unemployment to about equal to their last wage after six

months and about 10 percent below their last wage after a year. Although the
decline of 17 percent in the reservation wage is quite significant, it is even
more striking that these job losers began with reservation wages that on average
were 10 percent above their last wage and only reached their last wage after six

months without work. As expected, the job leavers (line 5) have even higher
aspirations which decline only slowly with the length of the spell of unemployment.

1The standard errors of the mean ratios are approximately 0.03 for most of
the ratios in Table 1. Some of the means refer to relatively small numbers
of individuals (e.g., the mean corresponding to 15 to 19 weeks) and are
subject to standard errors that are approximately twice as great.
2These figures underestimate slightly the extent of the decline in the
reservation wage when inflation is raising all wages. In 197() wages were
rising at the rate of about 0.6 percent per month. An individual who is
unemployed for five months might ceteris paribus expect a wage that is three
percent higher than his last wage. This is offset to the extent that individual skills decay with extended unemployment and that individuals who
experience longer periods of unemployment uay on average be of lower
"quality" relative to their previous wage than individuals who have had only
a short spell of unemployment. Adjusting the figures in Table 1 for inflation
would imply a stronger negative relation between the reservation wage and
unemployment.

—15—

The last three relate the reservation wage to the highest wage that

the individual earned on any job after January l9T4. For some individuals, the
last job was a temporary job with a relatively low wage which provides a poor

standard of comparison. For such individuals, the highest wage since January
197I is a better measure of the potential wage and may even, because of the

passage of time, represent an underestimate of the potential wage in 1916. For
others, however, the highest earnings in the past two years may represent a temporary job with abnormally high wages that reflect the temporary character of
the position.

The mean reservation wage ratios based on the highest previous wage
are only a few percent below the reservation wage ratios based on the last job.

For all unemployed persons in the sample, the mean is 1.00 in comparison to the

1.07 based on the last wage. For job losers the mean is 0.98, or five percent
below the 1.03 for this group based on the last wage. In short, even when the
reservation wage is related to the highest past wage the mean reflects no
willingness to reduce wages and implies that there is a significant group that
is seeking a higher wage than they have had before.

Table 2 shows the nature of this distribution of relative reservation

wages explictly. Among all of the unemployed individuals in our sample (line
i), only 2I percent indicated that they would accept a wage less than 90 percent

of their last wage. An additional 11 percent were willing to accept between 90
percent and 100 percent of their previous wage. This is shown as the cuuiula—
tive 35

percent

corresponding to a reservation wage of less than 1.0. Thus

only about one-third of the unemployed were willing to accept any wage reduction
at all.

A further 27 percent indicated that they would accept any wage equal
to or greater than their last wage but nothing less, thereby bringing the curnula—

—16—

Save for Table 2

—17--

tive percentage of the reservation wage ratio less than or equal to 1 to 62 per-

cent. Thus, 38 percent of the unemployed had a reservation wage greater than
their previous earnings. Only about one—fourth of those who required a wage
increase said they would accept an increase of less than 10 percent. The cumu—

lative proportion below a reservation wage ratio of LI was thus 0.72. Fully 28
percent of the unemployed said they would only return to work if they received a
wage that was 10 percent higher than their previous wage.
The large percentage of the unemployed who require wage increases to
accept new employment is characteristic of both job losers and job leavers.
Line 2 shows that only 41 percent of job losers would accept a reduction from
their last wage and that 24 percent say they would not accept a job unless it

paid at least 10 percent more than their last job. The percentage requiring a
wage increase is even higher for job leavers (line 5).
Lines 6 through 8 repeat the analysis with the reservation wage rela-

tive to the highest previous wage. Even among the job losers, only 48 percent
say they will accept any reduction in pay at all while 20 percent say they
require a wage that is at least 10 percent higher than their highest previous
wage.
The

ages of 25

final three lines restrict the sample to individuals between the

and 55.

two groups that nay

This excludes the young people and those near retirement,
have

weaker labor force attachment and therefore relatively

higher reservation wages. But even in

this

age group, the mean

replacement wage

ratio is virtually one (0.99 for all unemployed and 0.98 for job losers) and
less than half of the unemployed indicate a willingness to accept any wage
reduction.

—18—

An important reason for the high reservation wage ratios and the high
fraction of individuals who require a wage increase as a condition of'

reemployment is the system of unemployment insurance benefits. Before presenting the evidence for this conclusion in sections 5 and 6, we turn in the
next section to consider the implications of the high reservation wage ratios
for the general problem of measuring unemployment.

..

The Measurement of Unemployment

The

to be

Department of Labor does not consider everyone who is

not

working

unemployed. An individual is officially classified as unemployed only if

he is available for work and has n.de specific efforts to find a job within the

past four weeks. The purpose of this standard is to count as unemployed only
those who really want to work but are unable to find a "suitable" job.

But as we noted in the introduction to this paper, no limit is placed
on the individual's reservation wage in defining his willingness to work and

therefore his unemployment status. No nEtter hov high or infeasible the
individual's reservation wage i.y be, he is classified as unemployed if within

four weeks he did athing to find employment, including asking friends or relatives about jobs, checking with a private or public agency or answering
newspaper ads.

It is interesting to consider what happens to the measured

individuals with "unreasonably" high reservation
overall unemployment rate was 6.7 percent. Individuals

unemployment rate if we exclude

wages. In

May 1976, the

classified as job losers and job leavers accounted for L.2 percentage points or
a little less than

lyzed in

two—thirds of total unemployment. In

the sample that we ana—

the previous section, only 35 percent of job losers and leavers mdi—

—19--

cated a willingness to work for less than their last pay. If we defined an
individual as unemployed only if he is willing to accept a wage that is lower
than his last wage, 59 percent of those who are currently classified as
unemployed job losers and 68 percent of job leavers would be reclassified and no

longer counted as unemployed. The .2 percent of the labor force that is
classified as unemployed job losers and leavers would be reduced to 1.6 percent
and the overall unemployment rate would fall from 6. percent to 14.1 percent.
This sharp reduction in the defined rate of unemployment occurs without any
reexamination of the reservation wages of those who are classified as new
entrants or reentrants.

A weaker standard of reclassification continues to regard as
unemployed anyone whose reservation wage does not actually exceed his past wage

even though he is not willing to reduce his wage at all. Among job losers, 31
percent would be reclassified by this standard because their reservation wage
ratio exceeded their last wage; among job leavers, 1.2 percent would be

reclassified. The result would be a 1.14 percentage point reduction in the

unemployment rate to 5.3 percent. Again, this 20 percent reduction in the
unemployment rate occurs without any reclassification of the new entrants and
reentrants.

An even weaker standard accepts as unemployed anyone whose reservation

wage does not exceed 110 percent of his last wage. Even this very weak standard
eliminates more than one—fourth of job losers and leavers and therefore reduces
the unemployment rate to 5.6 percent.

Table 3 presents the official May 1976 unemployment rates for the
population as a whole and for several desographic groups and compares these

official rates with two alternative "adjusted" unemployment rates. The
"adjusted

rate 1" figures exclude

from the unemployed that share

of the

—20--

Save for Table 3

—21—

losers and leavers who reported reservation wages 1.10 or more times their last
wage.

The "adjusted rate 2" figures exclude that share of the losers and

leavers whose reservation wage ratio

exceeds 1.0.

No figures are presented for

the more stringent criterion that classifies an individual as unemployed only if
he is willing to accept less than his previous wage.

The adjusted rate 2 figures indicate, as we noted in the previous
paragraph, that reclassifying anyone who wants a wage increase in his previous

wage reduces measured unemployment by more than one—fifth. The nist striking
difference among the subgroups is the small effect of reclassification on teen-

agers. Since teenage unemployment includes many more new entrants and
reentrants, reclassification on the basis of previous wages is quite limited.

5. The Reservation Wage Equation: Specification and Previous Research
We turn now to examine the extent to which the level of unemployment
insurance benefits raises the level of reservation wages and the probability

that the individual's reservation wage ratio will exceed one. In the theory of
search unemployment, the individual's reservation wage is a decreasing function
of the cost of remaining unemployed and therefore an increasing function of the

ratio of unemployment benefits to previous wages.1
Although unemployment benefit rules differ among states, the typical
benefit fornula provides that an unemployed worker gets basic weekly benefits
equal to about half of his previous gross weekly earnings, subject to a maximum

'The importance of unemployment insurance as a cause of higher reservation
wages and a longer duration of search is discussed in Feldstein (1913a,b) and
developed in formal nde1s by Baily (1977, 1978), Mortenson (1977) and IIirdett
('979).

—22—

weekly amount that is a binding constraint for a minority of beneficiaries. In
addition, about one—third of the labor force lives in states that provide addi-

tional

benefits for dependents. Unemployment benefits are subject to federal

income tax only when family income exceeds $25,000 for a couple filing a joint

return or $20,000 for a single person filing an individual return; even in these
households, half of' unemployment benefits are excluded in calculating taxable
income.1

Unemployment benefits are also not subject to payroll tax or to state

income tax.2 Unemployment benefits therefore typically replace about two—thirds

of

recipients' lost net income.3
Earlier studies, although not dealing directly with the reservation

wage ratio, indicate that higher levels of unemployment insurance benefits do
increase reservation wages. Warner, Poindexter and Fearn (1980) use the 1910
Census Employment Survey and relate the job—seekers reported reservation wage to
the itrket wage predicted for someone with those demographic characteristics and
to a dummy variable that indicates whether the individual receives unemployment

insurance benefits. The receipt of unemployment benefits raises the reservation
wage by 8.6

percent

(with a standard error of' 1.o

percent.)

There is no inf or—

mation on the amount of benefits or on the ratio of the reservation wage to the
individual's previous wage.

Fishe (1982) studies a group of job seekers in Florida for whom data
are available on individual attributes and on the nErket wage of' the job that

No federal tax was levied on unemployment insurance in 191
2Soine states levy a tax on the federal income tax base or a tax that is
proportional to the federal tax payments. In either of these cases, unemployment benefits are subject to partial taxation at the state level.
3See Feldsteiri (l971) for a detailed analysis of unemployment insurance
replacement

rates.

—23—

the individual takes at the end of the unemployment spell. Although there is no
reported information on reservation wages, Fishe uses a censored regression
model to obtain maximum likelihood estimates of a reservation wage equation.
He concludes that unemployment insurance raises the reservation wage and that
the reservation wage varies inversely with the remaining length of the period
for which benefits will still be paid.

The final study of unemployment insurance and reservation wages of

which

we are aware is the research by Pucher and Harrison (1915) who report

regression equations based on the 1970 Census Employment Survey. They focus on
inner city workers and relate the observed reservation wage to a predicted

potential wage (based on the job seeker's demographic characteristics) and
dumjr variables indicating whether the individual received a small or large

amount of unemployment insurance benefits in the previous year. Since these
unemployment

to

insurance variables reflect the duration of unemployment but refer

a different period, it is difficult to know how their positive coefficients

should be interpreted.

In short, while the previous studies suggest that unemployment
insurance raises reservation wages, none of these studies actually uses data on
either the ratio of unemployment benefits to wages or on the ratio of the reser-

vation wage to the individual's previous wage. The present study therefore aims
at a more explicit evaluation of the effect of unemployment insurance by
relating the reservation wage ratio to the unemployment insurance replacement

rate. We also give particular attention to the effect of unemployment insurance
on the probability that an individual's reservation wage will exceed the wage
(or 1.1 times the wage) that he earned on his last job.

214

Our unemployment insurance variable is the ratio of the weekly benefits received by the individual during the current spell of unemployment to the

net wage that he earned on his last job. It would in principle be desirable to
calculate the marginal income tax rate for each person in our sample and to use
that tax rate to calculate the ratio of U.I. benefits to previous net earnings.
Because the data required to calculate each individual's marginal tax rate are not
available for our sample, we have assumed a common marginal tax rate of 30 percent.

Because we do not recognize differences in marginal tax rates, our
measure of the U.I. replacement ratio understates the replacement ratio for individuals with high marginal tax rates and overstates the replacement ratio for

individuals with low marginal tax rates. Since individuals with high marginal
tax rates are likely to be individuals with high wage rates and therefore lower
than average U.I. replacement ratios,' our procedure generally understates the low
replacement rates and overstates the high replacement rates.

An example will illustrate the nature of this bias. Consider a low
wage individual who earns $200 a week, receives benefits of $100 a week and

pays a marginal tax rate of 25 percent. We measure his replacement rate as $100
divided by 70 percent of $200 or 0.71; in reality his replacement rate is $100

divided by 75 percent of $200 or 0.67. A high wage individual earns $1400 a
week, receives benefits of $150 a week and pays a nRrginal tax rate of 35 per-

cent. We nasure his replacement rate as $150 divided by $2d0 or 0.514 when the
correct measure is 0.58. Thus our replacement rates stand in the ratio of 0.71
to 0.514 or 1.31 while the "true" replacement rates stand in the ratio of 0.67

1Recall that benefits
weekly benefit.

are generally proportional to wages

up to some maximum

—25—

to 0.58 or 1.16.

The result of exaggerating the variation in the measured U.I. replacement
rate while keeping the mean unchanged is to bias its estimated coefficient in a

regression equation toward zero.1 In addition, any purely random errors in the
U.I. replacement rate introduced by our procedure will cause a further downward bias

of the usual errors in variables type. For both reasons, therefore, our procedure is likely to underestimate the effect of any changes in unemployment benefits.

We have already described the measurement of the dependent variable of

our analysis, the reservation wage ratio. We use the ratio of the individual's
stated reservation wage to the wage that he earned on his last job. The other
variables in our reservation wage equation are of two kinds:

(1) measures of

other income during unemployment that might raise the reservation wage and
(2) demographic variables that might

influence

the reservation wage directly and

that are included in the equation as a precaution.

The survey provides information on total nonwage income during the
previous month, an amount that includes not only a small amount of interest and
dividends but also the value of unemployment benefits, welfare, disability

payments, food stamps, etc. We subtract from this an estimate of the
unemployment benefits received during that month and divide the differences by

the wage on the last job. We refer to this as the Nonwage Income Fatio and
expect that it will increase the individual's reservation wage ratio.

1This is seen most easily in a bivariate regression of any dependent variable
on the U.I. replacement rate. The regression coefficient is the ratio of the
covariance between the variables to the variance of the U.I. replacement rate.
Increasing the variance of the replacement rate by a factor of A increases

the covariance bynd therefore reduces the regression coefficient to
1/ A times its true value.

—26-.

Since data are not available on the amount of supplementary
unemployment benefits, welfare, and other forms of nonwage incoiie, it is not

possible to measure their specific effects on reservation wages. information is
available, however, on whether or not the individual received welfare payments

or supplementary unemployment benefits. We include binary variables for these
two income sources (which take the value of 1 if that type of income is received
and zero otherwise) and regard their coefficients as a weak indication of
whether each type of income affects the reservation wage ratio in a different

way from other forms of nonwage income. In virtually every equation, the coefficients of these variables are negligible, suggesting that the distinction among

these income sources does not matter. We would emphasize, however, that this is
a very weak test of whether different types of income have different effects on
reservation wage ratios.

The survey also provides information on whether another worker is pre-

sent in the household. The presence of such a worker provides additional income
which makes finding a job less urgent than it would otherwise be. Such income
is, however, very different from unemployment insurance or other employment—
conditioned transfers; an additional worker in the household has an income
effect but does not change the cost of unemployment and therefore has no substi-

tution effect. We would expect the effect of this variable to be positive but
•

small and that is generally what we find.

1

Closely related to the possibility of additional family income is the

extent of the individual's family responsibility. We add a binary variable that
is equal to one if the individual is a married man. Since 'we are controlling
f or the presence of an additional worker, the coefficient of the married nan

1The presence of another worker during an unemployment spell may not be
exogenous but a response to the unemployment.

—21—
variable represents a negative income effect and should be expected to reduce
the reservation wage if it has any noticeable effect at all.
Four other demographic variables are included in the equation without
any clear a priori expectation about the likely direction of their effect on the

reservation wage ratio. They are included because of the possibility that they
might have an effect and might be correlated with the unemployment insurance

replacement ratio. These variables are the individual's age in years, the race
of the individual (a binary variable equal to one if the individual is white),
the sex of the individual (a binary variable equal to one for males) and the
number of years of schooling that the individual has had.'

6. Estimated Effects of Unemployment Insurance on the Reservation Wage Ratio
Table 1 presents estimated coefficients for the specification

discussed in the last section. Separate equations are estimated for individuals
classified as "job losers on layofft', "other job losers," and "job leavers."

Only individuals who received unemployment insurance are included in the sample
because of the difficulties and ambiguities associated with the non—receipt of
benefits. 2

The coefficient of the unemployment compensation variable is positive
and significantly different from zero in all three equations, implying that a

higher unemployment insurance replacennt rate raises the reservation wage

1We have also included the level of the individual's previous wage. The coefficient of this variable is generally insignificant and its presence does not
alter the estimated effect of the U.I. replacement rate.

hen the sample is expanded to include nonrecipients of unemployment
compensation, the coefficient of the unemployment insurance variable
is generally not significantly different from zero. See section 2 for a
discussion of the difficulties of interpreting the absence of benefits. The
exclusion of nonrecipients is the primary reason why the regression sample is
61&2 instead of the 2228 observations in the tables.

—28.-

Save for Table

—29--

ratio. The coefficient of 0.129 for job losers on layoff implies that
increasing the unemployment insurance replacement rate from Q•14 to 0.7 raises

the reservation wage ratio by

percentage points for someone in this group.

The effect is substantially larger for job losers who are not on layoff; an
increase in the U.I. replacement rate from o.1 to 0.7 raises their reservation

wage by nore than 12 percentage points. Before discussing the implication of
these figures for the duration of unemployment or the effect of unemployment
insurance on the probability that the reservation wage ratio exceeds 1.0 or 1.1,
we comment briefly on the other coefficients in Table 4.

A greater amount of nonwage income relative to the individual's last
wage raises the reservation wage ratio for both groups of job losers but not for

job leavers. Since only some of this nonwage income is conditional on continued
unemployment, the effect is substantially smaller than that of the unemployment
insurance benefits.
The coefficients of the duninr variables for the receipt of welfare and

of supplementary unemployment insurance are generally insignificant, indicating

that these forms of nonwage income did not affect reservation wages differently

than other forms of nonwage income (except unemployment insurance). The exception is for the group of job losers who are not on layoff. In this group, the
receipt of welfare and supplementary benefits appears to raise reservation wages
more than other forms of nonwage income.

The presence of a second worker in the household has only an income
effect and therefore is expected to have a weaker impact on the reservation wage

ratio than unemployment insurance. Although the coefficient is positive in two
of the three equations, it is never statistically significant. This and the
evidence on nonwage income both indicate that unemployment insurance is impor—

—30—

tant because it affects the cost of continued unemployment (a substitution
effect) and not just because it increases the individual!s financial resources.

The duinny variable for married men reinforces this conclusion. The
negative coefficient reflects the adverse "income effect" of additional spending
responsibilities but the small size and lack of statistical significance
reflects the unimportance of income effects relative to substitution effects.

None of the four demographic variables had a statistically significant

coefficient. Equations were also estimated with more detailed demographic specification (e.g., a set of binary variables for age) but these specifications
did not add significantly to the explanatory power of the equation or change
the coefficient of the unemployment insurance variable to any appreciable extent.
In the next section we show that the duration of unemployment is
likely to increase in a very nonlinear way with the reservation wage ratio.

Increasing the reservation wage ratio from 0.8 to 0.9 has a much smaller effect
on the duration of unemployment than increasing the reservation wage ratio from

1.0 to 1.1. Since the median reservation wage ratio is 1.0, the estimated
effect of unemployment insurance presented in Table )4 implies that the changes

in the reservation wage caused by unemployment insurance can have a very
substantial effect on the probability that the reservation wage exceeds 1.0 or
1.1 and therefore on the likely duration of unemployment.
The specification of the equation in Table 1 assumes a linear rela—

tionship between the unemployment insurance ratio and the reservation wage

ratio. We have also included a quadratic term in the U.I. ratio but found that
its coefficient is not significantly different from zero. The coefficient of
the quadratic term is however generally positive, suggesting that high U.I.

—31—

ratios have a disproportionately large effect on the reservation wage ratio.
As

likelihood

a further check on the effect of

of

unemployment insurance on the

high reservation wage ratios, we have used the specification of

Table 4 to study directly the probability that an individual's reservation wage

ratio

exceeds 1.0 or 1.1.

regressions is one if

zero

The dependent variables in the "greater than 1.0"

the individual's reservation wage

otherwise. Table

5 summarizes

ratio exceeds 1.0 and

the effect of the unemployment insurance

ratio on these reservation wage probabilities for the three unemployment groups.
Only the coefficient of the U.I. ratio variable is presented although each coef-

ficient

is taken from a full specification like those of Table 14•

The other

coefficients are qualitatively very similar to those of Table 4, indicating weak

income effects and virtually no differences among demographic groups. The mean
of the dependent variable and the R2 value for the equation as a whole are also
presented.

In each case, the coefficient of the unemployment insurance variable

is large and statistically significant, indicating a substantial effect of
unemployment insurance on the probability that the unemployed individual will

have a high reservation wage. Consider, for example, the group of job losers on
layoff. The average ratio of unemployment insurance benefits to the previous
net wage for this group is 0.66 and 31 percent of the group have reservation

wages above the wage on their last job. Reducing all unemployment insurance
ratios in this group by 0.21 would reduce the 31 percent with high reservation

wages to 23 percent. Completely eliminating the unemployment insurance reduces
the mean probability of a reservation wage greater than 1 by 0.10 (0.66) = 0.264
to o.ob6.

1This reduction is approximately equivalent to taxing unemployment benefits.

—32—

Save

for Thble 5.

—33—

7.

Unemployment Insurance, Reservation Wages and the Duration of Unemployment
By raising the reservation wage, high unemployment insurance benefits

increase the expected duration of' unemployment. Because the relationship between the reservation wage and the expected duration of unemployment is very
nonlinear, the effect of unemployment insurance is particularly important when
it raises the reservation wage above the wage that the individual earned on his
previous job.1
Although we lack sufficient information to do a complete analysis of

the

effect of unemployment insurance on expected durations of unemployment, it is

useful to examine the implications of

linear character

a

simple model that illustrates the non-

of the effect of unemployment insurance and of reservation 'wage

ratios.

Assume that each individual who becomes unemployed adopts a reservation wage (R) that reflects his unemployment benefits, his previous wage
(w0) and other factors that influence his expectations about the distribution

of potential wage offers [f(w)]. Assume further
receives

of

wage offers (w) that represent

potential wage offers and accepts

vation wage. The

that the

individual then

random drawings from this distribution

the first offer that exceeds his reser-

model simplifies reality by assuming that the individual does

'We are aware that several past investigations (e.g., Baron and Mellow, 1981)
have failed to find a significant relationship between reported reservation
wages and subsequent labor market experience. The theoretical relationship is
unambiguous and several explanations may be proposed for the lack of an
observed relationship. For example, other job attributes may induce workers to
for wages below their stated reservation wage. Alternatively, workers
may revise their reservation wages in response to information obtained 'while
unemployed.

settle

—34—

not revise his reservation wage over time1 and that wage offers arrive in random
order.

2

In such a nxdel, the probability (P) that the individual accepts each
wage offer is equal to the probability that the offer exceeds his reservation
wage:

P = J

Ci)

f(w)

dw.

R

If wage offers are received every t days, the expected duration of unemployment
CE) is E =

t/P.

For the normal distribution, or for any distribution in which

the "tails" have less density per unit of w than the center of the distribution,

P will vary with R in a very nonlinear way. The higher the value of R, the
greater the proportional change in P per unit change in R.3 Since the expected
duration of unemployment is inversely proportional to the acceptance probability, the sensitivity of the expected duration of unemployment to the value of R
is an increasing function of R.
This idea can be illustrated by assuming that the distribution of

potential wage offers is normal. The further assumption that the mean of the
potential wage offers for an unemployed individual is the wage on his last job
is a conservative one since the true mean is probably lower (for the reasons
discussed in section 1) and the assumption of a higher mean increases the pro—

individual who is unsure about the parameters of f(w) will use his wage
offers to revise his subjective estimates of these parameters and will alter his
reservation wage as his estimates of these parameters change.

2Th1s precludes a search strater in which the individual ranks firms by the
expected prevailing wage and applies for employment in decreasing order of this
potential wage.
3This property holds for a much wider class of distributions. Even if the
probability P varies linearly with R (as it would for a uniform distribution),
the expected deviation varies inversely with P and is therefore a nonlinear
function of R.

—35—

bability

of acceptance for every reservation wage level and thus reduces the

sensitivity of the expected duration to unemployment insurance. Since the standard deviation of the potential wage offer distribution is not known, we will
present estimates conditional on a variety of plausible values.

Before looking at these estimates, it is useful to examine oneexample
in detail. Consider an individual who is an unemployed job loser who is not on
layoff, who receives U.I. benefits that replace 70 percent of his previous net
wage, and whose reservation wage

is

1.1 times the wage on his last job. Assume

that the mean of his potential wage offer distribution is the wage on his last
job and the standard deviation of that distribution is 10 percent of the mean.

Thus the individual's probability of receiving a wage offer as high as his
reservation wage is equal to the probability of exceeding the mean of the offer
distribution by one standard deviation and is thus 1 —

F(l.0)

o.i6 when F()

is the cumulative normal distribution rith mean zero and standard deviation 1.

The reservation wage ratio equation for "other job losers" presented
in Table 1 implies that each additional 10 percentage points of the U.I. replacement ratio raises the reservation wage ratio by 14.2 percentage points. Thus
lowering the individual's U.I. replacement ratio from 0.7 to 0.5 would reduce his

reservation wage ratio from 1.10 to 1.02. The probability of receiving an
acceptable wage would rise to 1 —

F(0.2) =

0.142.

The expected duration would

fall from t/o,i6 to t/0.142 or to 38 percent of its previous value. This figure
is

shown in Table 6

ratio of 1.1
deviation
0.7

(the

in

the row corresponding

to an

initial reservation wage

second row) and in the column corresponding to the standard

equal to 10 percent

of the mean and the reduction in the U.I. ratio from

to 0.5 (column 7).

More generally, Table 6 shows the effect of reducing the U. I. replace-

ment ratio on the probability of receiving an acceptable wage offer and on the

—36—

Save

for Thble 6

—37—

expected duration of unemployment. The figures refer to "job losers not on
layoff" and use the U.I. ratio coefficient of 0.1i6 presented in Table )4

for

this

group. Although similar calculations could be done for workers on layoff and
for job leavers, the principal effect of iLl. on job search relates to job
losers who are not on layoff.

The first column shows the initial reservation wage ratio. The next
three columns show the acceptance probabilities corresponding to those reservation wage ratios if the standard deviation of wage offers is 5 percent of the

The

mean value (column 2), 10 percent (column 3) and 15 percent (column ).

next group of columns correspond to the effect of reducing the unemployment

insurance ratio from 0.7 to 0.5. The first of these columns shows the new
reservation wage ratio predicted to result from the reduced unemployment

insurance ratio. For each alternative standard deviation, the next 3 columns
then show the new relative duration of unemployment, i.e., the ratio of the

expected

duration with a U.I. replacement ratio of 0.5 to the expected duration

with a U.I. ratio of 0.7. The final four columns then repeat the analysis for a
reduction in the U.I. ratio from 0.7 to 03.
figures in columns 6,

The
0.7 to 0.5 has
unemployment

a very substantial

7 and 8 show

that reducing the U.I.

ratio from

effect on the expected duration of

for those individuals whose reservation wage would otherwise equal

or exceed their previous wage. Even someone whose reservation wage ratio is

reduced from 1.0 to 0.92 will experience a 37
unemployment time if

percent

decrease in expected

the standard deviation is equal to ten percent of the zran

wage offer.
Doubling

the decrease in the U.I. ratio (i.e., decreasing it from 0.7 to

0.3 instead of from 0.7 to 0.5) has a less than proportional effect on the

expected duration. For example, with a starting reservation wage ratio of 1.1

—38—
and a standard deviation of 0.15, the probability of an acceptable wage offer is

0.25 and therefore the expected duration of unemployment is .0 times the interval between wage offers. Reducing the U.I. replacement rate from 0.7 to 0.5
lowers the reservation wage ratio to 1.02 and increases the probability of an

acceptable wage offer to 0.L5. This reduces the expected duration of
unemployment to 2.2 times the wage offer interval, or 56 percent of its previous

value. A further reduction in the U.I. ratio to 0.3 lowers the reservation wage
ratio to 0.93 and thus increases the probability of an acceptable wage offer to

0.68. The expected duration of unemployment falls to 1.5 times the wage offer
interval or 37 percent of its initial value. Thus the first 20 percentage point
reduction in the U.I. replacement ratio implied a 4 percent reduction in the
expected duration while the additional 20 percentage point reduction in the U.I.
ratio reduced expected duration by only 19 percent of its original value.

1

In addition to this analysis of the expected duration of unemployment,

particularly interesting to examine the effect of unemployment insurance

it is

on the probability of long durations of unemployment.
who,

with a U.I. replacement

times

ratio of 0.7,

Consider an individual

has a reservation wage that is 1.1

his previous wage. Table 6 shows that if the standard deviation of wage

offers is 10 percent of his previous wage, the probability that each wage offer

is acceptable is 0.1587. Although the expected duration of unemployment is 6.3
times the interval between wage offers, the probability that the individual will

1The nonlinearity of this relation reflects the linearity of the specification
in Table 1. If the sensitivity of the reservation wage to the unemployment
insurance ratio were a rapidly decreasing function of the U.I. ratio, the reductions in low U.I. rates could have a nre powerful effect. Estimates of the
nonlinear generalization of the equations in Table b indicate that nonlinear
specifications are not statistically better and that the direction of nonlinearity actually reinforces the conclusion in the text by showing that the sensitivity of the reservation wage is greater at higher levels of the U.I. ratio.

—4 1—

itself 1.0, even small changes in the reservation wage can have a substantial
impact on unemployment.

The analysis of section 6 shows that the level of unemployment benefits relative to previous wages has a powerful effect on the individual's reser-

vation wage. A 10 percent increase in the U.I. replacement ratio increases the
reservation wage by about

percent for job losers who are not on layoff and by

somewhat less for other unemployed groups. Separate regressions to analyze
the high reservation wage per se show that a 10 percent increase in the U.I.
replacement ratio also increases by about four percentage points the probability

that an unemployed individual will require a wage increase of 10 percent or
more.

The estimates that we have presented imply that reducing unemployment
insurance benefits could significantly lower the average duration of
unemployment

Because

and the relative number of

long—duration spells of unemployment.

of the nonlinear response of the unemployment duration to the reser-

vation wage, reducing a high unemployment insurance ratio by 10 percentage

points is likely to have a greater impact on unemployment than reducing a low
unemployment insurance ratio by 10 percentage

points.

Taxing unemployment benefits in the same way that earnings are taxed

would

reduce net unemployment insurance by about 30 percent although the reduc-

tion would be much smaller for individuals with low overall annual income.

The

typical U.I. ratio would decline from about 0.7 to 0.5. Since such a reduction
in the U.I. ratio implies a reduction in the reservation wage ratio of more than
10 percentage points, the implied impact on total unemployment and on relatively
long durations of unemployment would be very substantial.
The May 1976 survey is currently a unique source of data on reservation wages and unemployment insurance. It would obviously be valuable to have

—12—

a replication of that survey
replication, it would

be

under different

economic conditions. In such a

useful to collect sore information on the individuals

who do not receive unemployment insurance and the reasons why they do not. With
the existing data, a possible next step would be an analysis that explicitly
links the observed durations of unemployment to the reservation wage in the
framework of a model with time—varying reservation wages.

The
a

optimal level of unemployment benefits for job seekers

depends on

balance between protection and distortion: protection against the discomfort

of reduced consumption during unemployment and distortion of the duration of
unemployment. The

research

presented in this paper suggests that a constant

level of unemployment benefits for an individual may

benefits

not

be optimal. Instead,

might be varied over time to offset the effect of excessive reservation

wages. In particular, it is possible to learn something about the individual's

unobserved reservation wage y the anunt of time that he has remained
unemployed. A long—spell of unemployment reflects combinations of a high reservation wage and/or a string of unlucky wage offers. More forniaU,y, the likelihood function of the individual's reservation wage can be inferred from the
observed duration of unemployment if the distribution of wage offers is known.
This suggests that the optimal U.I. benefit might, ceteris paribus, be a

decreasing function of the duration of the unemployment spell. The formal solution to this problem remains to be investigated.1

1The optimal relationship between U.I. benefits and the duration of
unemployment should also reflect the fact that longer spells impose a

greater

financial hardship. A "deductible" in the form of a waiting period or a con-

tinuously

varying replacement ratio nay therefore

be optimal.

—13—

Bibliography

Baily, M. (1971) "Unemployment Insurance as Insurance for Workers"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 495—504.
Baily,

M. (1978) "Some Aspects of Optimal Unemployment Insurance" Journal

of Public Economics 10, 379—402.

Baron J. and Mellow, W. (1981) "Changes in Labor Force Status Among the
Unemployed" The Journal of Human Resources XVI, 3, 427—4l.

Feldstein,

M. (1973a) Lowering the Permanent Rate of Unemployment, A study

Prepared for the use of the Joint Economic Committee, Congress of the
United States, Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.

_____________ (1973b) "The Economics of the New Unemployment" The Public
Interest 33, 3—42.

_____________ (1974) "Unemployment Compensation: Adverse Incentives and
Distributional Anomalies" National Tax Journal 27, 2, 23l—4.

_____________ (1975) "The Importance of Temporary Layoffs: An Empirical
Analysis" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 3, 725—u.

_____________ (1976) "Temporary Layoffs in the Theory of Unemployment" Journal

of

Political Econosr 84,

5, 937—57.

_____________ (1978) "The Effect of Unemployment Insurance on Temporary Layoff
Unemployment" American Economic Review, 191—222.

Fishe, R. (1982) "Unemployment Insurance and the Reservation Wage of the
Unemployed" The Review of Economics and Statistics LXIV, 1, 12—17.

Hall, B. and E. Lazear (1982) "The Excess Sensitivity of Layoffs and Quits to
Demand" NBER Working Paper No. 864, Cambridge, MA.

_144 —

Holt,

C.C.

(1970) "Money Wage tynamics and Labor Market Equilibrium" in E.

Phelps (ed.) Microecoromic Foundations of Employment and Inflation
Theory, New York: Norton.

Kasper, H. (1967) "The Asking Prince of Labor and the Duration of Unemployment"
The Review of Economics and Statistics L9 165—72.

Kiefer, N.M. and G. Neumann (1979) "An Empirical Job Search Model, with a
Test of the Constant—Reservation—Wage Fiypothesis" Journal of Political
Economy 87, 89—107.
Lazear, E. P.

(1981) "Severance Pay, Pensions and Efficient Mobility"

National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.

Cambridge,

MA.

Lazear, E. P. (1982) "Pensions as Severance Pay" in Z. Bodie and J. Shoven,
(eds.), Financial Aspects of the U.S. Pension System, an NBER project
report, University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

McCall, J.J. (1970) "Economics of Information and Job Search" Quarterly Journal
of Economics 81k, 113—126.

Medoff, J.L. and K.G. Abraham (1978) "Experience, Performance, and 1rnings"
NBER Working Paper No. 278, Cambridge, MA.

Mortenson, D. (1977) "Unemployment Insurance and Job Decisions" Industrial
and Labor Relations Review XXX, 505—517,
Pucher, J. and Bennett Harrison (1975) "Reservation Wages, Unemployment, and

Earnings Expectations in Urban Labor Markets", New York: Research Center for
Economic Planning.

Rosenfeld, C. (1977) "Job Search of the Unemployed, May 1976" Monthly Labor

Review, U.S. Department of Labor, Special Labor Force Report 210, 39—3.

_1 5-.

Stigler, G. (1962) "Inforxnation in the labor Market" Journal of Political
Economics LXX, 914_105.
Warner

J.T, C. Poindexter, Jr., and R. M. Fearn (1980) "Employer—Employee

Interactions arid the Duration of Unemployment" The Quarterly Journal
of Economics XCIV, 2, 211—233.

Job Losers

Job Losers

3.

Source:

6.

Leavers
Highest
Wage

Wage

1.04

0.98

1.05

0.99

1.01

1.12

1.10

1.00

1.06

1.11

5 weeks

Less
than

Authors' calculations based on May 1976 Job Search Questionnaires.

Job

Highest

1.00

Job Losers

Wage

7.

Hiqiest

Al

6.

Job Losers
and Leavers

1.09

Last Wage

Job Leavers

5,

I

1.04

Last Wage

1.01

1.03

1.07

Durations

Other Job
Losers

I

4.

Al

Last Wage

Last Wage

Last Wage

Wage

to

Layoff

on

Job Losers

and Leavers

All

Group

Uneiployment

2,

1,

Li ne

Ratio of
Reservation

1

9

1,11

0.98

1.01

1.18

1.04

1.01

1.03

1.04

10—14
weeks

15—19

0.95

1.01

1.00

1.00

1.10

0,99

1.06

1.06

weeks

1.09

0.96

1.00

1.18

1.03

0.95

1.00

1.04

weeks

20—24

15—49

1.04

0.96

0,98

1.06

0.98

1.01

0.99

1.02

weeks

See text for description and definitions.

1,04

0.99

1.00

1.09

1.06

1.04

1.05

1.09

weeks

5 —

Duration of Unemployment Spell

Mean Reservation Ratio by Duration of Unemployment

Table

50+

1.01

0•94

095

1.01

0.91

1,06

0.97

0.99

weeks

Table 2

CumulatIve Distribution of Reservation Wage Ratios

Line

Unemployment

Group

Ratio of
Reservation

Mean

than

Wage to
I.

All Unemployed
(job losers and

Less

Proportion with Ratio
Less
Less than
Less
than
than or equal to

0.9

1.0

1.0

1.1

Last Wage

1.07

0.24

0.35

0.62

0.72

Last Wage

1.03

0.29

0.41

0.69

0.76

on layoff

Last Wage

1.01

0.25

0.38

0.71

0.80

Other Job
Losers

Last Wage

1.04

0.31

0.43

0.68

0.74

5.

Job Leavers

Last Wage

1.09

0.22

0.32

0.58

0.69

6.

Al I UneTiployed

Highest Wage

1.00

0.34

0.46

0.71

0.79

7.

Job Losers

Highest Wage

0.98

0.36

0.48

0.73

0.80

8.

Job Leavers

Highest Wage

1.04

0.28

0.39

0.65

0.76

9.

All Unemployed

Last Wage

0.99

0.34

0.47

0.75

0.81

Last Wage

0.98

0.35

0.47

0.74

0.82

Last Wage

1.02

0.31

0.44

0.73

0.81

I eavers)

2.

3.

4.

Job Losers
Job Losers

age 25—55
10.

Job Losers

age 25—55
11.

Job Leavers

age 25—55

Source: Authors' calculations based on May 1976 Job Search Questionnaire. See text for
description and definitions.

Table 3
Unemployment Rates Adjusted for High Reservation Rates

Exclude

Share of Unemployment f ) 1.1 Wo
Reported May 1976
Unemployment Rate

Group

Accounted for By
Losers and Leavers

Adjusted
Rate 1*

Exclude

Wo
Adjusted
Rate 2*

Total

6.7

62.7

5.6

5.3

Males, age 20+

5.3

79.2

4.3

4.0

Females, age 20+

6.4

62.5

5.4

5.0

16.8

31.0

15.7

15.2

6.1

63.9

5.1

4.8

11.4

55•3

8.7

8.2

16—19 year olds

Whites
Nonwhites

*

Adjusted Rate I Is computed by excluding from the unemployment rate calculations
that share of the losers and leavers who reported reservation wages of 1.10 or
more times their last wage.

**

Adjusted Rate 2 Is computed by excluding fran the unemployment rate calculation
that share of losers and leavers who reported reservation wages above their
I ast wage.

Source: Unemployment data from Employment and Earnings, June 1976, Table A—12.
Adjusiments based on author's calailations using Job Search Questionnaire
Data.

Table 4

Effects of Unenployment Insurance and other Variables
on Reservation Wage Ratios
Variable

Unemployment Group

Job Losers

on Layoff

U.I.

Other Job
Losers

Job Leavers

Replacement
Ratio

0.129

0.417

0.294

(0.057)

(0.070)

(0.184)

Nonwage income
RatIo

0.044

0.073

(0.022)

(0.024)

—0.004
(0.044)

—0.014
(0.042)

0.104

0.076

(0.044)

(0.107)

Welfare
Supplementary

Unemployment

—0.022

0.111

0.222

BenefIts

(0.058)

(0.059)

(0.135)

Other Worker
Present

0.041

—0.009

0.02 1

(0.031)

(0.038)

(0.082)

Married Man

—0.042

—0.042

—0.054

(0.038)

(0.044)

(0.139)

—0.001

0.000
(0.001)

-0.005
(0.003)

—0.055

0.045

(0.046)

(0.047)

0.107
(0.104)

0.051

0.020

0.073

(0.040)

(0.047)

(0.119)

—0.001

—0.002

—0.004

(0.005)

(0.006)

(0.015)

0.964

(0.108)

0.617
(0.127)

(0.312)

0.084

0.203

0.121

Age

(0.001)
White

Male

Education

Constant

N

246

306

0.866

90

Mean of

Dependent Variable

The dependent variable In each

1.025

1014

1.100

equation is the ratio of the reservation wage to
the wage on the last Job. Standard errors are shown In parenthesis.

Table 5
Effect of Unrpioyment Insurance on the Probability

of a Hl Reservation Wage

Coefficient

of Uneirqloyment Insurance Variable
to Reservation Wage Ratio Greater than

1.0

1.1

0.400

0.315

(0.120)

(0.108)

R2

0.101

0.070

Mean Proportion

0.31

0.22

0.382

0.421

(0.108)

(0.101)

0.099

0.105

0.30

0.24

0.499

0.648

(0.245)

(0.2 14)

R2

0.155

0.171

Mean Proportion

0.33

0.26

Job Losers

on Layoff

Coefficient

Standard Error

Other Job Losers
Coefficient

Standard Error

R

2

Mean Proportion

Job Leavers

Coefficient
Standard Error

Each

coefficient is based on equations with the same specification as the
in Table 4.

equations

9.13
25.25
50.00
74.75
90.87

1.2

1.1

1.0

0.9

0.8
97.72

84.13

50.00

15.87

2.28

(3)

0.10

(4)

100.00

97.72

50.00

2.28

0.00

0.05

0.72

0.82

0.92

1.02

1.12

(5)

0.94

0.84

0.71

0.56

0.43

(6)

0.15

0.98

0.87

0.63

0.38

0.20

(7)

0.10

1.00

0.98

0.53

0.07

0.00

(8)

0.05

Effect of Reducing UI Replacement
Rate from 0.7 to 0.5
ReservatIon
Relative Duration
Ratio
If
Standard Deviation
Wage

0.63

0.73

0.83

0.93

1.03

(9)

Wage Ratio

0.91

0.77

0.57

0.37

0.22

(10)

0.15

0.98

0.84

0.52

0.21

0.06

(II)

0.10

1.00

0.98

0.50

0.02

0.00

(12)

0.05

If Standard Deviation

Effect of Reducing UI Replacement
Rate from 0.7 to 0.3
Reservation
Relative Duration

Al

I

figures refer to job losers who are not on teeporary layoff. The unemployment Insurance ratio is the ratio of
uneeployment insurance benefits
to wages net of margInal tax liability. The relative duration of
unemployment Is the ratio of the predicted duration to the duration
corresponding to the initial reservation wage ratio. The "standard devIation" refers to the standard deviation of potential
wage offers as a proportion of the mean of that distribution.

(2)

0.15

Acceptance Percentage
If Standard Deviation

(1)

Reservation
Wage Ratio

Initial

on Expected Duration of Unemployment

Effects of Alternative Unemployment Insurance Ratios

Table 6

