                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE LM CURVE: A NOT-SO-FOND FAREWELL

                                          Benjamin M. Friedman

                                           Working Paper 10123
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w10123


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      November 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Benajmin M. Friedman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The LM Curve: A Not-So-Fond Farewell
Benjamin M. Friedman
NBER Working Paper No. 10123
November 2003
JEL No. E52

                                            ABSTRACT

        One of the most significant changes in monetary economics in recent years has been the
virtual disappearance of what was once a dominant focus on money, and in parallel the
disappearance of the LM curve as part of the analytical framework that economists use to think
about issues of monetary policy. Today’s standard workhorse model consists of an aggregate
demand (or IS) curve and an aggregate supply (or price setting) curve, with the system closed when
appropriate by an equation that represents monetary policy by relating the nominal interest rate to
variables like output and inflation, but typically not either the quantity or the growth rate of money.


        This change in the standard analytics is an understandable reflection of how most central
banks now make monetary policy: by setting a short-term nominal interest rate, with little if any
explicit role for “money.” But the disappearance of the LM curve has also left two lacunae in how
economists think about monetary policy. Without the LM curve it is more difficult to take into
account how the functioning of the banking system, and with it the credit markets more generally,
matter for monetary policy. Abandoning the role of money and the analytics of the LM curve also
leaves open the underlying question of how the central bank manages to fix the chosen interest rate
in the first place.




Benjamin M. Friedman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 127
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bfriedman@harvard.edu
                                                                      Revised: July, 2003




                     THE LM CURVE: A NOT-SO-FOND FAREWELL

                            Remarks in Honor of Charles Freedman


                                      Benjamin M. Friedman1
                                        Harvard University



        Celebrating the distinguished career and prolific contributions of a researcher and

policymaker like Chuck Freedman gives us occasion to take stock. Chuck’s experience at the

center of Canadian monetary policy has spanned more than three decades. His professional

interest in the field, dating to the beginning of his post-graduate studies at Oxford, spans four.

Along the way, he has participated in just about every aspect of the evolution that has taken

place in monetary economics and monetary policymaking. He has more than earned his place in

the front rank of those whose views one would want to seek out on any issue in the field. And

both his own country’s government and the economics profession at large have made a habit of

doing just that.

        Monetary policymaking is different today than it was four or even three decades ago, and

so is monetary economics. More specifically, the focus of attention has shifted in important

ways. During the five years that Chuck Freedman attended MIT, the Journal of Political

Economy published 29 articles on the demand for money: not quite one per issue. During the


        1
        Remarks presented at the Bank of Canada conference in honor of Charles Freedman,
Ottawa, June 19, 2003.

                                                 -1-
most recent five years, the total number of articles on money demand in the JPE has been three.

The leading graduate textbook in the field when Chuck was in graduate school was Money,

Interest and Prices, by Don Patinkin. The book’s title immediately suggested what was to come.

Patinkin introduced the concept of money demand in the book’s second chapter (it didn’t fit in

Chapter I, “The Theory of a Barter Economy”), and the word “money” appeared in the title of

each of the next six chapters. The construction and manipulation of what Patinkin called the LL

curve -- his analog to the Hicksian LM curve in his neoclassical setting in which what varied was

not output but prices -- was a central focus of the entire second half of the book, designated

“Macroeconomics.” By contrast, the text in use in many graduate courses today is David

Romer’s Macroeconomic Theory. Not only does the book’s title contain no mention of either

“money” or “monetary,” the Romer text has no chapter title with those words either. The

demand for money makes only two substantive appearances, both fleeting. The LM curve

occupies less than a page.

       More importantly, in parallel to what the allocation of journal and textbook pages

suggests, a shift has visibly taken place in the analytical framework that economists concerned

with monetary policy (to continue to call it that) use to address fundamental research questions

as well as everyday issues of practical policymaking. A widely read and widely assigned article

in the Journal of Economic Literature several years ago — “The Science of Monetary Policy” by

Richard Clarida, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler — presented in canonical form what has become

the standard workhorse of the field: a two-equation model consisting of an aggregate demand (or

IS) curve, relating today’s output level to expected future output and the expected real interest




                                                -2-
rate;2 and an aggregate supply (or short-run Phillips) curve relating today’s inflation rate both to

today’s level of output, relative to some capacity benchmark, and to expected future inflation.

       What is striking about this two-equation workhorse model is not so much what’s in it —

forward-looking behavior by both price setters and demanders of goods and services, rational

expectations, and so on — but what’s missing. There is no LM curve. And there is no variable

labeled “money” either. To close the model with an equation representing the behavior of

monetary policy, Clarida, Gali and Gertler added a “Taylor rule” relating the nominal interest

rate to output and inflation (but, again, neither the quantity nor the growth rate of money).

       A traditional question about any scientific discipline is the balance of influence, between

internal intellectual dynamics and the external environment, in shaping the evolution of ideas in

the field: Does creative thinking evolve primarily in an axiomatic way -- that is, because so-and-

so’s hypothesis opened the path for somebody else to think such-and-such? Or does new

thinking arise mostly in response to tension between the implications of existing thinking and

what everyone can readily observe in the world around them?

       Monetary economics, or macroeconomics, has always displayed a large element of

influence due to the external environment. The subject emerged as a recognizable field within

economics in response to the upheavals caused by the depression of the 1930s. The concepts of

aggregate demand, unused resources, price stickiness and market disequilibrium that grew out of

that experience -- all with a focus on a short-term horizon in which familiar dynamics did not

fully play themselves out -- became the central supports of the discipline for the next four


       2
         Clarida, Gali and Gertler were careful to note that the form of the aggregate demand
relationship they present does not exactly correspond to an IS curve, but the difference is not
essential.

                                                 -3-
decades. Then the inflation of the 1970s, importantly including the disinflation of the 1980s,

reshaped the field in yet new ways. Aggregate supply, inflation expectations and money growth

became (or, in some cases, became again) essential concepts, and the time horizon within which

various dynamics did work themselves through returned into view. And, of course, the force of

ongoing economic events affected not just what conceptual constructs were central to the field

but what people thought about the key substantive questions in it: Does monetary policy affect

output and other aspects of real economic activity? How costly is disinflation? Can monetary

and fiscal policies operate fully independently?

       The LM curve, representing the equilibrium of money demand and money supply — or

equivalently, for many purposes, the solved-out money market-goods market system expressed

in the form of a relation between aggregate demand and the money stock — was a staple of

macroeconomic analysis of both the 1930s vintage and the 1970s vintage. It was the starting

point for thinking about how a central bank, by changing the supply of (outside) money, could

influence prices or output or both. In the case in which the central bank instead fixed an interest

rate, by supplying money perfectly elastically, the LM curve per se became trivially horizontal,

but the underlying supply-demand apparatus still importantly indicated how much money

households and firms in the economy would choose to hold at the designated interest rate.

       This remains the way much of macroeconomics is taught to undergraduates. The latest

(2003) edition of Greg Mankiw’s Macroeconomics includes a full presentation of the LM curve

as one of the two building blocks of the determination of aggregate demand, and in particular the

point of entry for thinking about monetary policy. But the model laid out by Clarida, Gali and

Gertler, with only the aggregate demand/IS curve to go along with the aggregate supply/price


                                                -4-
setting curve, has now become the starting point for much of the familiar research in the field.

Moreover, it is, in summary form, increasingly what policy-oriented discussions within central

banks look like. A generation ago, even as the rational expectations revolution spawned a

burgeoning line of academic research based on intertemporal optimizing models with explicit

microfoundations, the everyday conversation within central banks continued to be based,

sometimes explicitly but much more often in substance, on the logic of an IS curve intersecting

an LM curve. Today the IS curve has survived, but the LM is gone.

       What makes the disappearance of the LM curve (and, in parallel, the disappearance of

interest in the demand for money) so unusual in the evolution of macroeconomic thinking is that,

unlike the sea changes that occurred after the 1930s and the 1970s, this intellectual shift has been

a product not of events in the economy but of changes in policymaking practice. If central banks

still made monetary policy by fixing the level or growth rate of some measure of outside money

— bank reserves, the monetary base, or some equivalent — it is hard to imagine that researchers

and students in the field would have dropped the LM curve from their analysis. But in recent

years few if any central banks have either formulated or implemented their policy in that way.

       Even now that central banks make policy by fixing an interest rate, if they did so with the

near-term objective of steering some measure of (inside) money growth along a designated target

path — as many used to do a couple of decades ago — the LM curve and the representation of

money demand standing behind it would still be central to policy analysis. But nowadays most

central banks don’t do that either. As a result, neither the LM curve nor even the concept of

money demand any longer has much bearing on what we continue to call monetary policy.

Perhaps in time the generic name for this form of economic policy will change as well. (In the


                                                -5-
vocabulary used within the Federal Reserve Bank of New York when I worked there as a student

intern, at the same time Chuck Freedman was studying at MIT, the purpose of the Federal Open

Market Committee was to take decisions on “credit policy.”)

       It is difficult today to see how the LM curve will re-establish itself in the economics of

monetary policymaking — unless, of course, central banks go back to making policy in terms of

target rates for money growth. This is not a loss to be lamented. Even so, the disappearance of

the LM curve leaves two other lacunae that in time may prove more a matter of concern. First,

the disappearance of the LM curve has made it more difficult to take into account the functioning

of the banking system within standard macroeconomic analysis of monetary policy. The LM

curve immediately brought one side of the banks’ balance sheet into the picture: their liabilities.

From there, it was straight forward that (except for changes in bank capital, which are usually

small in the short run) whatever happened to total liabilities also had to track the fluctuation in

total assets. And this link opened the way to bring into the analysis the full range of theoretical

work on the supply and demand for credit, as well as the flow of information from lending

institutions that most central banks normally monitor. With no LM curve, and no explicit role

for the demand for money, integrating the credit markets into both the theoretical and the

practical analysis of monetary policy is going to be harder. In short, no deposits, no credit.

       Second, dropping the LM curve, in recognition that most central banks make monetary

policy not by fixing outside money or targeting inside money but instead by fixing some interest

rate, leaves open the underlying question of how the central bank manages to fix the chosen

interest rate in the first place. This is a subject that Chuck and I, along with Charles Goodhart

and Mike Woodford, have debated before, and this occasion is not the right time to revisit that


                                                 -6-
argument. For present purposes, what is interesting is that one of the key phenomena under

discussion in that debate is the fact that in recent years central banks — including those that fix

the relevant short-term interest rate by some kind of “channel” system, as well as others, like the

Federal Reserve, that do not — are able to move market interest rates by means of transactions

that are negligibly small in magnitude, and often without engaging in any transactions at all.

Whatever the explanation may be, it seems very far away from the traditional story in which an

open market operation either increases or decreases the quantity of outside money, thereby

shifting the LM curve while the demand for money remains functionally stable.

        What should we think, with the benefit of hindsight, about the role that the LM curve

played in thinking about monetary policy over so many decades? Was it just a distraction? Or a

valuable construct whose usefulness was overtaken by changes in how policymakers go about

their business? And does anyone now regret those changes in policymaking? Or seek to reverse

them?

        With or without the LM curve, confidence in the efficacy of monetary policy has rarely

been higher.3 The chronic inflation of three decades ago now seems a distant memory. The

power of that historical episode to motivate useful new research in the field is dissipating, just as

the hold exerted by the depression gradually waned in the face of the mostly full-employment

post-war economy. Some countries conquered their inflation in part by changing their monetary

policymaking institutions. Importantly, however, others succeeded against inflation with no

institutional change, or changed their mode of policymaking only after inflation had already



        3
       The exception that proves the rule is Japan. The Japanese case serves as a reminder that
wrong-headed monetary policy can also influence real economic outcomes, and seriously so.

                                                 -7-
abated. It is no longer a commonplace to think that monetary policy, when made by central

banks not subject to some kind of external straightjacket, is subject to unavoidable inflationary

biases.

          Just as important, no central banker makes policy today as if his or her actions had no

effect on real economic outcomes. Moreover, today no central banker feels the need to be

apologetic about believing that monetary policy does affect real outcomes. Bob Lucas’ famous

“critique” of macroeconomic policymaking appeared shortly after Chuck first joined the Bank of

Canada, and the playing out of that line of thought has been a major part of the evolution within

the field ever since. More than a quarter-century later, there is active research questioning all

three of the basic underpinnings of the “new classical” demonstration of the neutrality of

systematic monetary policy: flexible wages and prices (the assumption on which economists who

rejected monetary neutrality focused attention almost immediately), the “natural rate” model of

aggregate supply, and, most recently, even the rationality of expectations. As Chris Sims

tellingly wrote in the latest issue of the Brookings Papers, in a study of the use of traditional

macroeconometric models within central banks, “The FRBUS model is seldom used in its

‘model-consistent expectations’ mode. Most uses of the model are for monetary policy, and with

a horizon of up to two years or so. In this time frame it is not reasonable to suppose that the

public would quickly perceive and act on a shift in policy behavior.”4 Today, most economists

would probably agree with Chris’ statement. But this is exactly what was at issue in the original

claim that monetary policy could not affect real outcomes because changes in expectations

would undo the behavior that such models implied.


          4
           BPEA, No. 2, 2002, p. 33.

                                                  -8-
       The difficult challenge, in the new world of monetary policy with no LM curve and no

substantial role for money demand, will be to understand the relationships between what

individual households and firms and banks and asset management firms do — rearranging their

portfolios, making and taking loans, buying and selling equities and perhaps foreign currencies,

investing in physical assets, buying and selling real goods and services, hiring and selling labor,

and setting prices and wages, all in ways that somehow depend in part on the interest rates that

central banks set — and the observable influence of monetary policy on such features of the

aggregate economy as output and employment and inflation. In many respects, this task is

simply a part of the broader integration of microeconomics and macroeconomics that has been

on the profession’s agenda for decades.

       Economists often aspire to make our discipline more like physics. (Joel Cohen once

accused social scientists more generally of “physics-envy.”) Just as there are today two

“economicses” — micro and macro, referring to the behavior of individual agents and aggregate

economies, respectively — there are also two “physicses”: quantum theory, which describes the

behavior of the tiniest particles of matter, and Newtonian mechanics (as amended by the theory

of relativity), which applies to far larger bodies. One of the challenges that physicists face is to

integrate the two. As the distinguished mathematician Roger Penrose has pointed out, however,

the way to do so is clearly not simply to take the principles of quantum theory and apply them

wholesale to larger bodies. Doing so leads, in Penrose’s classic example, to concluding that a

basketball can be in two places at once. An important part of what we have learned about

monetary policy during the years spanned by Chuck Freedman’s professional career is that

simply applying to aggregate economies what we know about the behavior of rational, profit- or


                                                 -9-
utility-maximizing individual agents similarly leads to patent contradictions of the behavior of

the economic world in which we live.

       The field of monetary economics has made impressive progress over the years that Chuck

Freedman has been a part of it, and the fact that we have not yet fully met this daunting

challenge in no way diminishes the progress we have made. One of history’s great moralists

(Chuck will immediately recognize the words of the second-century sage R. Tarphon) explained,

“You are not required to finish the task; but neither are you free to neglect it altogether.”5 None

of us has finished the task taken up by monetary economics. Chuck Freedman has certainly

never neglected it.




       5
        Avot 2:16.

                                                -10-
