                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        INTERNATIONAL LENDING OF LAST RESORT
                                 AND MORAL HAZARD:
                          A MODEL OF IMF’S CATALYTIC FINANCE

                                           Giancarlo Corsetti
                                          Bernardo Guimaraes
                                            Nouriel Roubini

                                         Working Paper 10125
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10125


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2003




We thank for comments Casper De Vries, Olivier Jeanne, Stephen Morris, Adrian Penalver, and seminar
participants at the Bank of Italy, ESSIM 2003, the International Monetary Fund, the “34th Konstanz Seminar
on Monetary Theory and Monetary Policy”, 2003 LACEA conference, New York University and the Federal
Reserve Board. Corsetti’s work on this paper is part of the Research Network on ‘The Analysis of
International Capital Markets: Understanding Europe’s Role in the Global Economy’, funded by the European
Commission under the Research Training Network Programme (Contract No. HPRN-CT-1999-00067).
Corsetti gratefully acknowledges the European Central Bank for hospitality when working on this project.
Correspondence: giancarlo.corsetti@iue.it; bernardo.guimaraes@yale.edu; nroubini@stern.nyu.edu. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Giancarlo Corsetti, Bernardo Guimaraes, and Nouriel Roubini. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
International Lending of Last Resort and Moral Hazard: A Model of IMF’s Catalytic Finance
Giancarlo Corsetti, Bernardo Guimaraes, and Nouriel Roubini
NBER Working Paper No. 10125
December 2003
JEL No. F33, F34, N20

                                            ABSTRACT

It is often argued that the provision of liquidity by the international institutions such as the IMF to
countries experiencing balance of payment problems can have catalytic effects on the behavior of
international financial markets, i.e., it can reduce the scale of liquidity runs by inducing investors
to roll over their financial claims to the country. Critics point out that official lending also causes
moral hazard distortions: expecting to be bailed out by the IMF, debtor countries have weak
incentives to implement good but costly policies, thus raising the probability of a crisis. This paper
presents an analytical framework to study the trade-off between official liquidity provision and
debtor moral hazard. In our model international financial crises are caused by the interaction of bad
fundamentals, self-fulfilling runs and policies by three classes of optimizing agents: international
investors, the local government and the IMF. We show how an international financial institution
helps prevent liquidity runs via coordination of agents' expectations, by raising the number of
investors willing to lend to the country for any given level of the fundamental. We show that the
influence of such an institution is increasing in the size of its interventions and the precision of its
information: more liquidity support and better information make agents more willing to roll over
their debt and reduces the probability of a crisis. Different from the conventional view stressing
debtor moral hazard, we show that official lending may actually strengthen a government incentive
to implement desirable but costly policies. By worsening the expected return on these policies,
destructive liquidity runs may well discourage governments from undertaking them, unless they can
count on contingent liquidity assistance.

Giancarlo Corsetti                                      Nouriel Roubini
European University Institute                           Department of Economics, KMC 7-83
corsetti@iue.it                                         Stern School of Business
                                                        New York University
Bernardo Guimaraes                                      44 West 4th Street
Yale University                                         New York, NY 10012
bernardo.guimaraes@yale.edu                             nroubini@stern.nyu.edu
1       Introduction

In the last decade many emerging market economies have experienced currency, debt, financial
and banking crises: Mexico, Thailand, Indonesia, Korea, Russia, Brazil, Ecuador, Turkey,
Argentina and Uruguay, to name the main ones. At different times, each of these countries
faced massive reversal of capital flows, and experienced a large drop in asset prices and economic
activity. Even if current account deficits were sharply reduced via domestic policy adjustment
and painful economic contraction, external financing gaps remained large because of strong
capital outflows and the unwillingness of investors to rollover short-term claims on the country
(including its government, its banks and its residents).
     Crisis resolution has thus involved, in addition to domestic policy adjustment, some com-
bination of official financing (or ‘bailouts’) by International Financial Institutions and other
official creditors, and private financing in the form of ‘bailins’ of private investors (the latter is
also referred to as private sector involvement (or PSI) in crisis resolution).1 Indeed, the issue
of ‘bailouts’ versus ‘bailins’ – or private sector involvement in crisis resolution – is the most
controversial question in the debate on the reform of the international financial architecture.2
     In this debate, an important view holds that international currency and financial crises are
primarily driven by liquidity runs and panics, and could therefore be avoided via the provision
of sufficient international liquidity to countries threatened by a crisis. According to this view,
the global financial architecture should be reformed by creating an international lender of last
resort. Not only would such an institution increase efficiency ex-post by eliminating liquidation
costs and default in the event of a run: by severing the link between illiquidity and insolvency,
it would also prevent crises from occurring in the first place (see Sachs (1995) and Fischer
(2001)). The opposing view doubts that international illiquidity is the main factor driving
crises. When crises can also be attributed to fundamental shocks and policy mismanagement,
    1 Bail-ins   can take various forms in a spectrum going from very coercive to very soft forms of PSI: at one extreme are
defaults on external (and domestic) claims (as in the case of Ecuador, Argentina, Russia); somewhere between extremes
are debt suspension and standstills, semi-coercive bonded debt exchange offers, semi-coercive rollover agreements (as in
the case of Ukraine, Pakistan, Uruguay Korea, Indonesia, Thailand); on the softer corner of the PSI spectrum are semi-
voluntary rollover agreements and other mild forms of PSI (Brazil in 1999, Turkey in 2001) or outright bailouts with little
PSI (Mexico in 1995, Turkey in 2002-2003).
  2 See Roubini (2001, 2002a, b, 2003) and Roubini and Setser (2003) for a detailed discussion of the PSI and ”bail-in

versus bail-out” debate.




                                                               1
liquidity support may turn into a subsidy to insolvent countries, thus generating debtor and
creditors moral hazard (see the Meltzer Commission Report (2001)). Accordingly, IMF inter-
ventions should be limited in frequency and size so as to reduce moral hazard distortions, even
if limited support would not prevent liquidity runs.
    The official IMF/G7 position is somewhere between the two extreme views described above:
provided a crisis is closer to illiquidity than to insolvency, a partial bailout granted conditional
on policy adjustment by the debtor country can restore investors’ confidence and voluntary
lending and therefore stop destructive runs — i.e., can have a “catalytic effect”. If the “cat-
alytic” approach is successful, official resources do not need to be unlimited (i.e., so large as
to fill in any potential financing gap), since some official liquidity provision and policy adjust-
ment will convince private investors to rollover their positions (rather than run) while restoring
market access by the debtor country.3 But can partial “catalytic” bailouts be successful or, as
argued by many, can only ‘corner solutions’ of large full bailouts or full bailins prevent destruc-
tive runs? And if bailouts are not desirable because of moral hazard distortions, shouldn’t the
IMF promote alternative mechanisms that can coordinate investors’ behavior in the event of a
crisis, such as debt suspension/standstill or temporary capital controls?4
    This paper contributes to the current debate on these issues by providing a theoretical
model of financial crises and the main policy trade-offs in the design of liquidity provision by an
international financial institution. In our model, a crisis can be generated both by fundamental
shocks and by self-fulfilling panics, whereas liquidity provision affects the optimal behavior of
the government in the debtor country (possibly generating moral hazard distortions). Our
study draws on the theoretical model by Corsetti, Dasgupta, Morris and Shin (2002) and the
   3 See   Cottarelli and Giannini (2002) and Mody and Saravia (2003) for an analysis of the IMF’s catalytic approach and
an assessment of its success.
   4 On these controversial questions, there is a wide range of opinions, but little analytical and formal work. The G7

doctrine and framework for PSI policy has evolved over time as a reform of the international financial architecture was
started after the Asian and global crisis of 1997-98. The current tentative but fragile G7/IMF consensus approach can be
summarized as follows. Based on a case-by-case discretional assessment of each crisis, the IMF should finance troubled
countries with large, possibly catalytic, packages when the crisis is closer to illiquidity and country policy adjustment
can ensure solvency. The IMF should limit its financial support, and proceed with debt restructuring/reduction when
a country is close to insolvency and unable to adopt adjustment policies. A combination of limited official financing,
appropriate bailins (such as debt reprofiling, restretching or restructuring) and policy adjustment is appropriate in cases
between the two extremes — whenever problems are more severe than illiquidity but not as severe as in insolvency. Clearly,
many difficult issues are left open in this framework such as those related to when large catalytic finance is appropriate.



                                                             2
policy analysis by Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (2002), on the role of large speculative traders
in a currency crisis. Consistent with these contributions, we model the official creditor (the IMF
or ILOLR) as a large player in the world economy, with a well-defined objective function and
financial resources. In our model, the strategies of the official creditor, international speculators
and domestic governments are all endogenously determined in equilibrium.
    There are two major areas in which our model contributes to the debate on the reform of
the international financial architecture: the effectiveness of catalytic finance and the trade-off
between liquidity support and moral hazard distortions. As regards the first area, our analysis
lends support to the hypothesis that catalytic liquidity provision by an official institution can
work to prevent a destructive run — although in our model the success of partial bailouts
is realistically limited to cases in which macroeconomic fundamentals are not too weak. In
reality, the IMF does not have infinite resources and cannot close by itself the possibly very
large external financing gaps generated by speculative runs, i.e., the IMF cannot rule out debt
defaults due to illiquidity runs. According to our results, however, even when relatively small,
contingent liquidity support lowers the likelihood of a crisis by enlarging the range of economic
fundamentals at which international investors find it optimal to rollover their credit to the
country. This ‘catalytic effect’ is stronger, the larger the size of IMF funds, and the more
accurate the IMF information. But our results also make clear that catalytic finance cannot
and will not be effective when the fundamental turns out to be very weak ex post: as more
and more agents receive bad signals about the state of the economy, massive withdrawals will
cause a crisis regardless of whether the IMF intervenes.
    Our result runs counter to the hypothesis, first suggested by Krugman and King and then
formalized by Zettelmeyer (1999) and Wyplosz and Jeanne (2000), that IMF bailouts can be
effective only when there are enough resources to fill financing gaps of any possible size. These
authors base their view on models with multiple equilibria, in which partial bailouts cannot
rule out the possibility of self-fulfilling runs, i.e., partial IMF interventions are not an effective
coordination mechanism of private investors. In such a framework, liquidity support is effective
only insofar as it is large enough to prevent a run and eliminate all liquidation costs in the
presence of a run.5
   5 Models   drawing on the traditional bank run literature prescribe that the IMF should have very deep pockets. Usually,
in the analysis underlying such a view, the cost of a crisis is independent of the size of the financial gap, i.e. the difference



                                                               3
    Building on the main insights from the literature on global games,6 our paper contributes
to our understanding of how and why catalytic finance can work. Liquidity support is effective
both directly and indirectly. Directly, it reduces liquidation costs against speculative with-
drawal of credit as liquidity provision reduces the amount of illiquid investments that need to
be liquidated. Indirectly, it reduces the number of speculators willing to attack a country for
each realization of the economic fundamentals. In other words, the presence of the IMF means
that, over some crucial range of fundamentals, private investors are more likely to rollover their
positions than roll them off — this is the essence of ‘catalytic finance.’
    Second, contrary to the widespread view linking provision of liquidity to moral hazard
distortions, we show that under some circumstances liquidity assistance can actually make a
government willing to implement efficiency-enhancing but costly reforms. More specifically, the
conventional view on debtor moral hazard is that, by insulating the macroeconomic outcome
from ruinous speculative runs, liquidity assistance gives the government an incentive to avoid
the costs of implementing good policies. But this is not the only possible effect of an ILOLR. It
is also plausible that some governments may be discouraged from implementing good but costly
policies because speculative runs may jeopardize their success. In this scenario, by reducing
liquidation costs in the event of a run, liquidity support actually enables a government to
implement socially desirable policies, i.e., official support motivates a country to follow good
policies. Our model can generate both scenarios — one with debtor moral hazard distortions in
case of large liquidity support, the other one with complementarity between liquidity assistance
and good policy behavior.
    Our analysis is related to a vast and fast-growing literature on the merits of bailouts vs.
bailins as a crisis resolution strategy and the arguments in favor of an ILOLR (surveyed in
between short term obligations and the liquid financial resources available to the country. In other words, by falling either
one cent or one billion dollars short of obligations, the country pays the same large cost. More general and realistic models
- such as that in our paper - would allow for partial liquidation of long term investment (selling one bit of it may provide
the required resources without incurring a macroeconomic crisis). See appendix A of this paper for further discussion.
   6 Specifically, our framework draws on the literature on global games as developed by Carlsson and van Damme (1993)

and Morris and Shin (2000). As is well known, in global games the state of the economy and speculative activity is not
common knowledge among agents. With asymmetric information, there will be some heterogeneity in speculative positions
even if everybody follows the same optimal strategy in equilibrium. Moreover, the precision of information need not be the
same across individuals. Arguably, global games provide a particularly attractive framework to analyze the coordination
problem in financial markets.




                                                             4
section 2 below). Our paper contributes to this literature in a number of dimensions.
   First, most papers analyze an ILOLR in models after Diamond and Dybvig (1983) —
D&D henceforth — interpreting crises as a switch across instantaneous (rational-expectations)
equilibria, but ignoring or downplaying macroeconomic shocks or any other risk of fundamental
insolvency. In contrast, we develop a model where a crisis may be anywhere in the spectrum
going from pure illiquidity to insolvency. Thus, we present a more realistic specification of an
open economy where fundamentals, in additions to speculation, can cause debt crises.7
   Second, contributions drawing on D&D cannot properly address issues in moral hazard by
liquidity provisions. The reason is that, in models of multiple equilibria, the results of com-
parative static analysis depend on which equilibrium is selected, but there is no endogenous
mechanism that leads agents to select one equilibrium over the other(s). In contrast, in our
global games model the coordination mechanism is endogenous, and the equilibrium is unique.
We can therefore perform comparative statics analysis, tracing the effect on government be-
havior of various assumptions about the size of the IMF, the precision of its information and
other parameters of the model. As already mentioned, the conventional wisdom is that official
finance exacerbates the moral hazard problem: the novel result from our analysis is that, in
some circumstances, the existence of official liquidity assistance can give a debtor country the
right incentive to implement policy adjustment.
   Third, in the context of global games and the literature on the ILOLR building on them
(see Morris and Shin (2002) but also the closed-economy model by Goldstein and Pauzner
(2002) and Rochet and Vives (2002)) we model the role of official financial institutions as large
players whose behavior is endogenously derived in equilibrium. Much of our new analytical
insight stems exactly from this original feature of our model. In specifying the preferences of
its shareholders or principals, we model a ‘conservative’ IMF, in the sense that it seeks to lend
to illiquid countries, but not to insolvent countries. Consistently, in our equilibrium the IMF is
more likely to provide liquidity support when the crisis is caused by a liquidity run, as opposed
to crises that are closer to the case of insolvency.
   Fourth, in our framework domestic expected GNP is a natural measure for national welfare
— which may differ from the objective function of the domestic government because of the
(political) costs of implementing reforms and adjustment policies. We can therefore analyze
  7 Thus,   our model is closer to fundamental banking crisis models a’ la Allen and Gale (2000) rather than D&D models.



                                                            5
the impact on the welfare of domestic citizens and the government of alternative intervention
strategies by the IMF.
    Fifth, the framework of global games allows us to assess the role of IMF information precision
in strengthening the IMF’s influence on private investors’ strategies and government behav-
ior. In general, a better-informed IMF reduces the aggressiveness of private speculators, and
therefore lowers the likelihood of a crisis. The role of information precision in catalytic finance,
however, becomes much more important when the IMF can strategically signal its position to
the market, e.g. it can choose to move before private investors. Some results on signalling
by CDMS and Dasgupta (1999) indeed suggest that in our economy there is an equilibrium
in which the IMF has a much stronger impact on market behavior by moving before private
investors. As in Dasgupta (1999), an IMF with sufficiently precise information can induce
‘strong herding behavior’ — i.e., private funds’ managers disregard their private information
and make their portfolio conditional on the IMF move, rolling over their debt if the IMF makes
liquidity available to the country, withdrawing otherwise.
    The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 below briefly surveys the literature
on liquidity provision, catalytic finance and moral hazard. Section 3 introduces the model.
Sections 4, 5 and 6 present our main results, regarding the effect of IMF lending on the
likelihood and severity of crises and the trade-off between IMF assistance and moral hazard
distortions. Section 7 discusses two extensions of the model, namely, seniority of IMF loans
and different timing of IMF interventions. Section 8 concludes.


2      The international lender of last resort and “catalytic” fi-
       nance: an overview of issues in theory and policy

In this section, we briefly discuss the debate on the creation of an international lender of last
resort (ILOLR), and the role of IMF lending as a “catalyst” for private lending at the onset
and during a crisis. This literature presents views and approaches which stress different market
failures underlying financial crises, and therefore emphasize different policy trade-offs faced by
governments and international institutions.
    Sachs (1984) among others8 has emphasized the possibility of panic-driven runs of creditors
    8 Many   open economy models of bank or debt runs (such as Chang and Velasco (1999) and Cole and Kehoe (1998)) are


                                                           6
when the country’s liquid assets fall short of the country’s short-term liabilities (including
short-term debt, long-term debt coming to maturity, and interest payments). Models with
multiple instantaneous equilibria suggest that, provided that fundamentals are not too strong,
these runs may occur in either bad or good states of the world, and independently of the policies
implemented by the debtor country.
    The literature has typically provided examples in which liquidity runs cause default because
of the implied liquidation costs. In these examples, if creditors could be convinced to rollover
debt, wasteful costs and default could be avoided altogether. But it is important to stress that
liquidity runs are costly also in bad states of the world, whereas the country would be bankrupt
independently of a run. In this case coordination failures among creditors creates additional,
avoidable costs on top of the costs due to bad shocks to fundamentals.
    The possibility of coordination problems among creditors is the main argument in favor of an
international lender of last resort (ILOLR).9 To assess the strength of this argument it is useful
to understand in detail the conditions under which, facing a liquidity run, a country is unable
to obtain new loans. As there is no shortage of liquidity in international markets, it must be
that either (a) there is no private lender that is large enough to solve by itself the coordination
problem and finance a potentially solvent debtor, or (b) uncertainty and incomplete information
about the fundamentals of the country generate doubts about its solvency.
    The latter point is key in any discussion of the ILOLR, as full ILOLR support is warranted
only in the presence of pure liquidity problems. The important point here is that there is
almost no historical example of pure liquidity-driven crises. Countries in financial difficulties
usually have weak fundamentals and serious policy shortcomings prior to the run.10 This
evidence casts doubts on policy implications derived from models where crises are generated
international variants of the Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and Bryant (1980) models of bank runs.
   9 See Sachs (1995) for an argument in favor of an ILOLR along such lines and see Fischer (2001) for reasons underlying

the creation of an ILOLR. In models after Diamond-Dybvig, self-fulfilling bank runs can be ruled out by the existence of
a lender of last resort providing unlimited liquidity support, or even a (government) guarantee on deposits, i.e. deposit
insurance. Jeanne (2000) argues that global welfare is increased through ILOLR intervention. Moral hazard issues are
finessed in the ILOLR model of Jeanne and Wyplosz (2001) as well as in many other analytical contributions to the
ILOLR debate.
  10 Empirically, illiquidity problems characterize countries also experiencing some fundamental or policy weaknesses. In

cases like Mexico, Korea, Brazil, Thailand, Indonesia and Uruguay, one can argue that the immediate cause of the crisis
was indeed a liquidity problem. Yet some serious macro, structural or policy shortcomings certainly played a role in
triggering the crisis. And in some cases (e.g. Argentina in 2001) illiquidity interacted with deeper solvency issues.



                                                             7
exclusively by speculative runs (usually a variant of the Diamond and Dybvig model), since
these analyses justify an ILOLR by construction. It is preferable to build models where the
country is exposed to fundamental risk, which may cause default independently of a run, and
study the coordination problems of investors who face strategic uncertainty about both the
fundamentals and each other’s behavior.11 This is the approach we take in our paper.12
    Moreover, even in cases that are close to a pure speculative run, it could be argued that the
amount of official support need not be unlimited, i.e., need not be equal the external financing
gap: the combination of an official package and strong domestic policy to signal commitment to
service the country debt should restore investor’s confidence and therefore the country’s access
to international financial markets. The external financing gap will therefore be closed by both
official loans and new (voluntary) private capital flows.
    The model of catalytic finance shapes the traditional, official view of liquidity provision by
the IMF. Yet, until very recently, there was no theoretical analysis of why and how catalytic
finance could work. The literature mostly focused on the corner solutions of full bailins or full
bailouts. This paper and Morris and Shin (2002) are, to our knowledge, the first contributions
to fill such gap in the literature (see also the closed-economy model by Rochet and Vives
(2002)).
    The core policy tradeoff in creating an ILOLR is between liquidity provision and moral
hazard distortions. For instance, in analyzing the IMF role in the new international financial
architecture, many authors have stressed the need to complement provision of liquidity with
punishment mechanisms that reduce the incentive to default strategically (as in Dooley and
  11 In   the bank run literature, there are several models of bank runs and crises driven by fundamentals. An incomplete
list includes Allen and Gale (2000), Jacklin and Bhattacharya (1988) and Gorton (1987).
   12 Note that the argument in favor of a “full bailout” by an ILOLR could also be used in support of a “full bail-in”, i.e.

some combination of broad debt standstills/suspension, capital controls and other measures to lock in all investors who are
rushing to the door. Diamond and Dybvig (1983) for instance suggest that a temporary debt suspension (bank holiday)
is the optimal policy to prevent multiple equilibria runs. The two solutions are not equivalent, however, except under
special circumstances. They have different merits, depending on several features of the economy including the importance
of fundamental problems potentially jeopardizing solvency, the degree of uncertainty and precision of private information
about the fundamentals and the policy response to the crisis, and creditors’ risk-aversion — see for instance the discussion
in Frankel and Roubini (2001), and Roubini (2000, 2002b) arguing in favor of “bailouts” rather than debt-suspension
solution to liqudity crises and Wallace (1988) stressing optimal debt suspension policy. Debt standstill/suspensions as
alternative policies to catalytic official finance as crisis resolution tools have not yet been analyzed in much formal detail
in the literature. A partial exception is Bank of England (2002).




                                                              8
Verma (2000)) or tune down policy efforts to ensure solvency (as in Kumar, Masson and Miller
(2000)). Specifically, Dooley and Verma (2000) strongly argued against reducing the costs
of renegotiating debt. To the extent that this leads an opportunistic sovereign to use debt
suspensions/standstill/defaults too often, the flow of capital to emerging markets would drop
to socially inefficient levels in equilibrium (see also Gai, Hayes and Shin (2001) for a refinement
of the argument).
    In a closed economy setup, moral hazard distortions can be reduced via incentive-compatible
deposit insurance, capital adequacy regulation and overall supervision and regulation of the
banking sector. In case financial distress occurs, the central bank and/or the authorities in
charge of regulation and supervision have the power to seize the banks, change their man-
agement, restructure and merge them with other banks or even liquidate them. But in an
international context, there is no international authority with comparable powers: debtors
with sovereign immunity cannot be seized, merged or closed down. Moral hazard distortions
deriving from the existence of an ILOLR are thus potentially exacerbated.13
    Some recent literature has contributed to our understanding of the policy trade-offs be-
tween liquidity and moral hazard. Bank of England (2002) present a model that allows for
fundamentals-driven runs, and assess the arguments in favor debt standstills, relative to offi-
cial finance, as crisis resolution mechanisms. These authors discuss the implications of moral
hazard but do not develop a model of the tradeoff between these objectives and the optimal
  13 A   number of recent contributions have discussed several dimensions of this issue. Kumar, Masson and Miller (2000)
focus on the maturity structure of external debt: short-term debt imposes discipline on the debtor, but only at the
cost of raising the probability of self-fulfilling runs. In this model, moral hazard distortions imply that full insurance by
international institutions is never optimal. Rather, liquidity lending should be made conditional on policy/effort changes
that can be effectively monitored by the IMF.
  The accuracy of the IMF information is an important issue in assessing whether liquidity provision is appropriate or
not and whether it exacerbates moral hazard distortions. Gai, Hayes and Shin (2001) model the IMF role in reducing the
costs of disorderly adjustment following debt servicing difficulties in the presence of debtor moral hazard. International
liquidity support is more likely to be beneficial if the IMF can make an accurate assessment of the country’s policy efforts.
If the IMF is not very effective in distinguishing between a crisis due to bad luck and a crisis due to opportunistic default,
lowering the ex-post cost of a crisis will raise the incentive to default strategically. In equilibrium a larger role for the
IMF can reduce social welfare because it leads to a sizeable drop in the amount of international lending. As argued by
Ghosal and Miller (2002), if official creditors cannot detect the nature of the crisis (insolvency versus opportunistic/moral
hazard-driven default), there is a case for ”constructive ambiguity”, i.e. there should be some uncertainty about the
provision of official liquidity support as a way to reduce moral hazard distortions. In our model, we formally analyze the
role of the relative informational advantage of an official creditor relative to the private ones.



                                                              9
intervention policy. Gale and Vives (2002) study the role of dollarization in overcoming moral
hazard distortions deriving from domestic (but not international) bailout mechanisms (such
as central bank injection of liquidity in a banking system subject to a run). Allen and Gale
(2000a) introduce moral hazard distortions in a model of fundamental bank runs, but do not
consider analytically the role of an international lender of last resort. Vives and Rochet (2002)
study domestic lending of last resort as a solution to bank runs in a global game model.14 They
find that liquidity and solvency regulation can solve the creditor coordination problem that
leads to runs but that their cost is too high in terms of foregone returns. Thus, emergency
liquidity support is optimal in addition to such regulations. However, they do not model the
lender of last resort as a player — as we do in our paper. Therefore, they do not analyze the
tradeoff between bailouts and moral hazard, and the role of a large official creditor (IMF) that
is central to our study. The closest analysis to our model is that of Morris and Shin (2002)
who, in a parallel contribution, also consider formally catalytic IMF finance — although they
do not model the IMF as a ‘large player’.15


3      The model

Consider a small open economy with a three-period horizon — periods are denoted 0, 1 (or
interim) and 2. The economy is populated by a continuum of agents of mass 1, each endowed
with E units of resources. These agents can borrow up to D from a continuum of international
fund managers also of mass 1, willing to lend to the country only short term. Moreover, there
exists one international financial institution, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which
may provide the country with international liquidity up to L. For simplicity, all international
lending and borrowing by domestic agents takes place at the same international interest rate
r∗ , which is normalized to zero.
    Domestic agents invest in domestic projects which yield a stochastic rate of return equal to
R in period 2, or to R/ (1 + κ) if projects are discontinued and liquidated early in the interim
  14 See   also Goldstein and Pauzner (2002).
  15 Several   recent studies (Cottarelli and Giannini (2001), Mody and Saravia (2003) and Roubini and Setser (2003)) have
provided useful empirical evidence on catalytic finance. According to these studies, and consistent with the main results
of our analysis, catalytic finance is more likely to be sucessful when fundamentals are not bad and/or the amount of policy
adjustment required to achieve debt sustainability is feasible and credible.




                                                             10
period. The expected return from these projects in period 2 is well above the international
interest rate, i.e., E0 R > 1 + r∗ = 1. Yet, investment is illiquid, in the sense that projects can
be discontinued in period 1 at the cost κ > 0 per unit of investment.16
    The sequence of decisions can be summarized as follows. In period 0, agents in the economy
invest their own endowment and the borrowed resources E +D in the domestic risky technology
I and in an international liquid asset M .
    In the interim period, fund managers decide whether to rollover their loans or withdraw.
Denoting with x the fraction of managers who decide to withdraw, xD measures the short-
term liquidity need of the country. To meet short-term obligations, domestic agents can use
their stock of liquid resources, and can liquidate some fraction z of the long term investment
I, getting zRI/ (1 + κ). In addition, if the IMF decides to intervenes, the country can obtain
funds up to L.
    Let Λ denote total international liquidity available to the country, including both the prede-
termined component M and the contingent component L. Clearly, the country will incur some
liquidation costs when xD > Λ (i.e., z will be such that xD − Λ = zRI/(1 + κ)); it will default
when xD > Λ + RI/ (1 + κ) (i.e., domestic agents will not be able to meet their short-term
obligations despite complete liquidation of long-term investment). When the country defaults,
we assume that all lenders will be paid pro-rata, up to exhausting the resources available to
the country.
    In the last period, the country total resources consist of R (1 − z) I (corresponding to GDP ),
plus any money left over from the previous period, i.e., max{Λ − xD, 0}. Its liabilities consists
of private debt (1 − x) D plus any outstanding IMF loan L. As for the case of default in the
interim period, we assume that lenders are treated symmetrically and paid pro-rata also when
the country defaults in period 2 (the case in which IMF loans have priority over private loans
is discussed in one of the extensions of the model presented in Section 7).
  16 While   our model analyzes speculative portfolio positions given prices, a more general model should also derive risk
premia in equilibrium. The well know difficulty in this step is that market prices reveal information, and therefore reduce
the importance of agents’ private signal. Interestingly, however, the empirical evidence on the IMF catalytic effect on
asset prices is consistent with many of our results. For instance, Mody and Saravia (2003) find the IMF programs improve
market access and the frequency of bond issuance, and lower spreads. IMF programs seem to contain the negative effect
on spread of high export variability. Finally, the IMF influence is larger for intermediate level of the fundamentals, while
the catalytic role of the IMF increases with the size of its programs. The link between these empirical findings and our
theoretical conclusions are apparent (see Mody and Saravia (2003) for a review of the empirical literature).


                                                            11
   Note that the difference (if any) between total resources and debt obligations is the country
GN P , available to domestic consumption:
                                ©                                         ª
                       Y   = max R(1 − z)I + (Λ − xD)+ − (1 − x)D − L+ , 0                                       (1)
                                ½ ·            ¸           ¾
                                           zκ
                           = max RI 1 −          + M − D, 0
                                         1+κ

whereas we make use of the notation convention (Λ − xD)+ = max {Λ − xD, 0}.17 Note that
GN P and domestic consumption are zero in the event of default. In what follows, we take
GN P as a measure of national welfare.


3.1      Payoffs and information

In this subsection we describe the payoffs and information set of fund managers and the IMF.
The objective function of the government will be introduced later on, in the subsection on
moral-hazard distortions.
   As in Rochet and Vives (2002), fund managers face a structure of payoffs that depend on
taking the “right decision”. When the country does not default, rolling over loans in period 1
is the right thing to do, and yields a benefit that is higher than withdrawing — the difference
in utility between rolling over debt and withdrawing is equal to a positive constant b. When
the country defaults, managers who do not withdraw in the interim period make a mistake and
therefore pay a cost. The difference in utility between rolling over loans and withdrawing is
negative, and set equal to −c.
   Different from previous literature, we model an international institution providing liquidity,
the International Monetary Fund ( IMF) as an additional player that is large in the world
economy. In specifying the IMF objective function, we want to capture the idea that the IMF
is concerned with the inefficiency costs associated with early liquidation, but cannot provide
subsidized loans or grants to a country with bad fundamentals. The payoff of the managing
 17 To   derive the expression in the second line (1) note that the term (Λ − xD)+ is zero when liquidation costs are
positive. Adding and subtracting xD we get

                                             Y = R (1 − z) + xD − D − L+

whereas accounting for liquidation costs we have
                                                                     RIκ
                                           xD − D − L+ = M − D +         .
                                                                     1+κ




                                                          12
board of the IMF is isomorphic to that of private fund managers: if the country ends up not
defaulting, lending L is the right thing to do. By providing liquidity rather than denying it,
the IMF gets a benefit B. If the country defaults, instead, the IMF loses money when lending.
Relative to doing nothing, the benefit from providing liquidity is negative and equal to −C.
   Note that, in the above specification of payoffs, the utility for funds’ managers and the IMF
is independent of the extent of default. Our analysis thus abstracts from distributional issues
between the country and the creditors, as well as between private creditors and the IMF, that
arise in debt crises.
   As regards the stochastic process driving the fundamental, we assume that the rate of return
R is distributed normally with mean Rj and variance 1/ρ. The mean Rj — with j = A, N
— depends on the “effort” of the government, as analyzed later on in the paper. In period 0,
the distribution of R (but the value of its mean) is common knowledge in the economy; R is
realized in the interim period.
   In the interim period, international fund managers do not know the true R but each of them
receives a private signal sei such that
                                                  sei = R + εi                                  (2)

whereas individual noise is normally distributed with precision α and its cumulative distribution
function is denoted by G(.).
   By the same token, the management of the IMF also ignore the true R, but receive a signal
Se such that
                                                  Se = R + η                                    (3)

where η is also normally distributed, with precision β and its cumulative distribution function
is denoted by H(.).
   Now, note that the posteriors of both funds managers and the IMF will depend on public
information (the prior distribution of R), private signals and on probability assigned to the
event ‘government took action A’ (call it pA ). The posterior s for a fund manager that gets
signal sei is equal to:
                                   µ                   ¶                 µ                  ¶
                                       RA ρ + sei .α                         RN ρ + sei α
                          s = pA                           + (1 − pA )                          (4)
                                         ρ+α                                   ρ+α




                                                           13
Analogously, the posterior of the IMF is:
                               Ã            !             Ã           !
                                        e
                                 RA ρ + S.β                        e
                                                            RN ρ + Sα
                      S = pA                  + (1 − pA )                                                                (5)
                                   ρ+β                        ρ+β

     The interaction between private and public signals in coordination games is the focus of re-
cent literature including Hellwig (2002) and Morris and Shin (2002b). Encompassing the main
results of these papers in the context of our model would complicate the analysis considerably,
without necessarily adding essential insights. To keep our work focused, we abstract from the
above issue altogether. In Sections 4 and 5 below, we will proceed as in Corsetti, Dasgupta,
Morris and Shin (2003) by assuming a very uninformative public signal (ρ → 0). In section
6, instead, we will focus on government behavior, affecting the mean of the distribution of R.
Hence, we will set ρ equal to a finite value, and consider the limiting case in which private
information is arbitrarily precise, although precision is not necessarily identical for funds’ man-
agers and the IMF. In either cases — ρ → 0 (for α and β finite) or α, β → ∞ (for ρ finite)
—,

                                                        ρ
                                                         lim si = sei                                                    (6)
                                                        α
                                                            →0


                                                        ρ
                                                         lim S = Se                                                      (7)
                                                        β
                                                            →∞

so that we can disregard public information in building our equilibrium.18


3.2        Solvency and liquidity

To illustrate the logic of the model, suppose that no early withdrawal of funds could ever occur
(debt is effectively long-term), so that x = 0. In this case, the country is solvent if the cash
flow from investment is at least equal to its net debt19

                                                      RI ≥ D − M.                                                        (8)

Thus, the minimum rate of return at which the country is solvent conditional on no liquidity
drain in the interim period (the break-even rate) is
                                                                 D−M
                                                      Rs =           .                                                   (9)
                                                                  I
  18 See   Hellwig (2002) (Theorem 1) among others.
  19 Note   that the following is true whether or not the IMF lends to the country — if it does so, the country will increase
its gross stock of international safe assets in period 1, and use the additional reserves to pay back the IMF in period 2.


                                                                 14
    In the presence of liquidity runs, a return on investment as high as Rs may no longer be
sufficient for the country to avoid default. Specifically, if the IMF has not lent to the country
in the interim period, the country will be solvent in period 2 if and only if:

                              R(1 − z)I = RI − (1 + κ) [xD − M ]+ ≥ (1 − x) D.                                         (10)

Denoting by R̄ the minimum rate of return at which the country is solvent conditional on no
IMF intervention, we can write:
                                                           [xD − M ]+
                                            R̄ = Rs + κ               ≥ Rs .                                           (11)
                                                               I

With early liquidation of investment (i.e., when xD − M > 0), the break-even rate must
increase above Rs , as the failure of international investors to roll over their debt results in
wasteful liquidation costs and hence ex-post efficiency losses.
    Conversely, if the IMF intervenes in the first period, ex-post efficiency losses will be con-
tained, and the solvency threshold for the rate of return conditional on a given x will be lower.
Namely, the country will be solvent if

                         R(1 − z)I = RI − (1 + κ) [xD − M − L]+ ≥ (1 − x) D + L.                                       (12)

Denoting by R̄L the relevant threshold for default, we have
                                                          [xD − M − L]+
                                        R̄L = Rs + κ                    ≥ Rs .                                         (13)
                                                                I

IMF interventions increase the country GNP to the extent that they reduce early liquidation.
It is worth noting that there are two ways in which the IMF can reduce early liquidation:
directly, as the IMF provides liquidity against fund withdrawals, and indirectly, as the presence
of the IMF may reduce the fund managers’ willingness to withdraw for any given fundamental
(lowering x for any given realization of R). This latter effect is at the heart of our analysis in
the following sections.20
  20 Default   in the interim period is also possible. For this to happen, it must be the case that the speculative attack in
the interim period exceeds all liquidity resources plus the liquidation value of domestic investment
                                                           RI
                                                   xD ≥       + M + L+
                                                          1+k




                                                              15
4     Speculative runs and liquidity provision in equilibrium

We now turn to the characterization of the equilibrium in our three-period economy for given
government policies (i.e., for a given distribution of the fundamental R). According to our
specification, in the interim period the IMF and the fund managers take their decisions inde-
pendently and simultaneously. In effect, we envision a world in which the contingent fund L
initially committed by the IMF may not be available ex post, and this is understood by fund
managers, who correctly compute the likelihood of IMF interventions. As mentioned above,
the idea here is that the IMF will refuse to lend if, according to its information, there is no
prospect to recover its loans L fully — so that contingent financial assistance would turn into
a subsidy. A different timing of decisions — with the IMF moving prior to private lenders —
is discussed in section 7.
    At the heart of our model lies the coordination problem faced by fund managers in the
interim period. Fund managers are uncertain about the information reaching all other managers
and the IMF, and therefore face strategic uncertainty about their actions. But the expected
payoff of each fund manager from rolling over a loan to the country depends positively on the
fraction (1 − x) of managers not withdrawing in the interim period, as well as on the IMF
willingness to provide liquidity. The IMF expected payoff from providing liquidity, in turn,
depends positively on the fraction of agents who roll over their debt. Clearly, the decision by
the fund managers and the IMF are strategic complements.
    As in Corsetti, Dasgupta, Morris and Shin [2003] — hereafter CDMS — in our model
there is a unique equilibrium21 in which agents employ trigger strategies: a fund manager
will withdraw in period 1 if and only if her private signal on the rate of return of the risky
investment is below some critical value se∗ , identical for all managers. Analogously, the IMF
will intervene in support of a country in distress if and only if its own private signal is above
The minimum rate of return at which early liquidation x leads to early default is
                                                                          
                                                        [xD − M ]+     L+
                                  R̄ED = (1 + κ)                     −
                                                              I         I
                                                                                 
                                                            [xD − M ]+       L+
                                          = (1 + κ) Rs                  −
                                                              D−M          D−M
where ED stands for early (period 1) default.
 21 The equilibrium is familiar to readers of the global-game literature. It is a Bayes Nash equilibrium in which, conditional

on a player signal, the action prescribed by this player’s strategy maximize his conditional expected payoff when all other
players follow their equilibrium strategy.



                                                             16
some critical value Se∗ . Using the argument in CDMS , it can be shown that a focus on trigger
strategies is without loss of generality, as there is no other equilibrium in other strategies. The
proof is omitted, since it can be derived from the appendix A of the CDMS paper.
   The equilibrium is characterized by four critical thresholds. The first two thresholds are
critical values for the fundamental R, below which the country always defaults — one condi-
tional on no IMF intervention, R̄, the other conditional on IMF intervention, R̄L . The other
two are the thresholds se∗ and Se∗ for the private signal reaching the funds managers and the
IMF, discussed above. In this and the next section we will assume that the public signal is
arbitrarily uninformative — i.e., ρ → 0, so that posteriors will coincide with private signals
(see (6) and (7)). We will therefore express signals and thresholds of individual managers and
the IMF in terms of these agents’ posterior, denoted without tilde (i.e., si , S, s∗ and S ∗ ).
   Let us first derive the equations determining R̄ and R̄L . If funds managers follow a trigger
strategy with threshold s∗ , the proportion of fund managers who receive a signal such that
their posterior is below s∗ and hence withdraw in the first period crucially depends on the
realization R:
                               x = prob (si ≤ s∗ | R) ≡ G(s∗ − R).                                (14)

Using our definition of the threshold for failure R̄, if the IMF does not intervene, there will be
a crisis for any R such that R ≤ R̄. Then, at R = R̄ the mass of international managers that
withdraw is just enough for causing the country to fail. This mass is x = G(s∗ − R̄). Using
(11), the first equilibrium condition — defining R̄ — is therefore:
                                     "     £                    ¤#
                                            G(s∗ − R̄) · D − M
                             R̄ = Rs 1 + κ                          .                             (15)
                                                   D−M

   If the IMF intervenes, there will be a crisis for any R such that R ≤ R̄L . As above, at
R̄L the critical mass of speculator to cause debt liquidity-related problems is x = G(s∗ − R̄L ).
From (13), the threshold for failure conditional on IMF intervention R̄L is:
                                  "      £                         ¤#
                                           G(s∗ − R̄L ) · D − M − L
                        R̄L = Rs 1 + κ                                .                           (16)
                                                   D−M

This is the second equilibrium condition — defining R̄L . At the thresholds R̄ and R̄L , xD must
be greater than M conditional on no IMF intervention, and greater than M + L otherwise. So,



                                                17
in equilibrium
                   £                  ¤                                  £                        ¤
                    G(s∗ − R̄) · D − M > 0                 and            G(s∗ − R̄L ) · D − M − L > 0.

It is easy to show the two equilibrium conditions above imply R̄L < R̄.                           22

    We now turn to the equations determining the triggers s∗ and S ∗ , starting from the latter.
                          e the IMF assigns probability H(R̄L −S) to the failure of the country
Upon receiving the signal S,
despite its intervention. The IMF expected payoff (denoted WIM F ) is therefore
                                           ¡              ¢
                                WIM F = B · 1 − H(R̄L − S) − C · H(R̄L − S)

which is decreasing in S. The optimal strategy consists of lending to the country if and only if
this expected payoff is non-negative, that is, if and only if S ≥ S ∗ where S ∗ is defined by
                                                    µ        ¶
                                   ∗             −1     B
                                 S = R̄L − H                   .                              (17)
                                                      B+C
    The investor’s problem is more complex, as discussed in CDMS. Whether or not the IMF
intervenes, the country will default for R < R̄L . So, a fund manager receiving signal se will
assign probability G(R̄L − s) to the event ‘default regardless of the IMF’s action’. However, for
R comprised between R̄L and R̄, the country will default only if the IMF fails to intervene. So,
the managers’ expected payoff (denoted WF M ) from rolling over their fund in period 1 includes
a term accounting for the conditional probability that the IMF fails to provide liquidity to the
country, H(S ∗ − R):
                                        "       Ã                    Z                                   !#
                                                                          R̄
                    WF M      = b 1−                G(R̄L − s) +               g(R − s) · H(S ∗ − R)dR          (18)
                                                                         R̄L
                                            Ã                   Z                                  !
                                                                    R̄
                                     −c G(R̄L − s) +                     g(R − s) · H(S ∗ − R)dR
                                                                 R̄L

  22 From   (15) and (16) we have:
                                                                            
                                                            R̄      D−M     M
                                       s∗   =   R̄ + G−1       −1         +      =
                                                           Rs         κD     D
                                                                                
                                                             R̄L      D−M     M +L
                                            =   R̄L + G−1        −1         +        .
                                                             Rs        κD        D
Taking differences:
                                                                                  
                                            R̄L     D−M   M +L            R̄     D−M   M
                      R̄ − R̄L = G−1            −1      +        − G−1       −1      +     .
                                            Rs       κD    D              Rs      κD   D
Suppose R̄ ≤ R̄L . Then the LHS of the above equation would be less or equal to zero, while the RHS is positive. So it
must be the case that R̄ > R̄L .


                                                                    18
where g is the probability density function. The optimal trigger s∗ for funds’ managers is
implicitly defined by the zero-profit condition (in expected terms) below:
                                                        Z   R̄
                             b
                                = G(R̄L − s∗ ) +                 g(R − s∗ ) · H(S ∗ − R)dR.                          (19)
                            b+c                           R̄L

The appendix A2 shows that there is a unique value s∗ that solves this equation.
    The four equations (15), (16), (17) and (19) in four endogenous variables (R̄, R̄L , S ∗ and s∗ )
completely characterize the equilibrium. Note that in our equilibrium the country will always
default when the realization of the fundamentals is worse than R̄L , it will never default when
R is above R̄ (when R ≥ R̄, whether or not the IMF intervenes, the fundamentals are good
enough for the country to withstand any speculative run in the interim period). But for R
comprised between R̄ and R̄L , default may or may not occur, depending on the IMF. Analytical
solutions for the general case are not available, but after identifying the relevant questions we
want to address, we can resort to numerical simulations and derive some analytical results.


5     The effect of IMF lending on the likelihood and severity of
      debt crises

A distinctive feature of our global-game model is that crises have both a fundamental com-
ponent and a speculative component. Not only must the rate of return be low enough for a
speculative withdrawal to cause a solvency crises: withdrawals are more likely when the fun-
damentals are weak. The presence of an institutional lender of liquidity – even if with limited
resources – affects the strategy of the fund managers. By changing the likelihood of specula-
tive withdrawals, its presence can therefore influence the macroeconomic performance of the
country.
    In this section, we analyze the effects of IMF lending on the likelihood and severity of
debt crises. More specifically, we can articulate our analysis addressing the following four
questions:23

    1. Does a larger availability of resources to the IMF increase the ‘confidence’ of the fund
  23 CDMS   analyze questions related to the first three in our list in the context of a study focused on the role of large
speculative players in currency crises.




                                                            19
      managers in the country — as captured by their willingness to roll over their loans for a
      relatively worse signal on the state of fundamentals?

  2. To what extent does IMF lending affect the likelihood of a crisis?

  3. Does the precision of the information of the IMF relative to the market matter? In other
      words, is the impact of IMF lending stronger as its information becomes more accurate?

  4. To what extent IMF lending creates moral hazard, in the sense that because of liquidity
      support governments and/or corporations do not take (costly) steps to reduce vulnerabil-
      ity to crises?

   We discuss the first three questions in this section. The last question on moral hazard —
where our work yields the most novel result — will be analyzed in detail in the next section.
Throughout our analysis, we will constrain L such that L < D − M . Obviously, when L
becomes large enough to cover all possible withdrawals, liquidity is no more a concern — the
break even rate is Rs .


5.1    Size of interventions

As regards question 1 and 2 above, we summarize our comparative static exercise by means of
the following proposition:

Proposition 1 All thresholds (R̄L , R̄, s∗ and S ∗ ) are decreasing in L.

   Proof: see appendix.
   To see how this proposition answers to question 1, note that if a larger L lower s∗ , funds
managers are now willing to rollover their loans for weaker private signals about fundamentals
— hence they are less aggressive in their trading. A larger IMF raises the proportion of
investors who are willing to roll over their debt at any level of the fundamental. Moreover,
since the rate of return is normally distributed, if R̄, R̄L and S ∗ are all decreasing in L, the
ex-ante probability of a crisis also falls with L. Then, the answer to question 2 is that bigger
IMF interventions indeed lower the likelihood of a crisis. Observe that a lower S ∗ increases
the probability of the IMF intervention for each level of the fundamentals. Expected GNP
correspondingly increases.

                                               20
   These results lend theoretical support to the notion that an international lender of last resort
increases the country’s expected GNP not only through the direct effects of liquidity provision
(interventions obviously reduce costly liquidation of existing capital). There is also an indirect
effect on the coordination problem faced by fund managers: the possibility of interventions
of size L lowers the threshold at which private managers refuse to roll over their debt, to an
extent that increases with the size of contingent interventions. It follows that an international
lender can avoid some early liquidation even if it does not act ex post.
   To enhance the comparison between our analysis and the literature (especially contributions
stressing multiple equilibria and self-fulfilling runs), it is useful to look at the equilibrium in our
model when the precision of signals becomes arbitrarily large. When the errors εi go to zero,
all private signals are arbitrarily close to the true fundamental R. Yet, signals are not common
knowledge and agents still face strategic uncertainty about each other actions (i.e., they do not
‘know’ each other action in equilibrium). But with α, β → ∞, except in a measure-0 set in
which the fundamental happens to be arbitrarily close to the threshold R̄L , either everybody
withdraws early and the IMF does not intervene or nobody withdraws early. In this limiting
case, there is no heterogeneity in managers’ action, and there will be (almost) no provision
of liquidity in equilibrium. Thus, the prediction of our model is observationally equivalent to
the model with common knowledge after Diamond and Dybvig [1983] — for a comparison,
Appendix A.1 develops a D&D version of our model.
   With α, β → ∞, all the benefit of a lender of last resort come through the coordination
effect (as the IMF almost never intervenes saving liquidation costs). To coordinate markets,
however, the IMF need not have ‘deep pockets’. A marginal increase in the size of condi-
tional interventions L lowers the threshold s∗ chosen by all agents in equilibrium (at which x
endogenously drops from 1 to 0).


5.2    The precision of IMF information

Above we have characterized the equilibrium when private signals become arbitrarily precise.
Question 3 raises the interesting issue regarding the role, if any, of the relative precision of the
information of the IMF. This is a central issue in the analysis of the influence of large players in
currency crises by CDMS, as these players are usually believed to act on superior information.



                                                  21
In our context, the main interest is in the equilibrium effect of improving the quality of IMF
information.
    What happens when the IMF private information becomes more accurate? The following
proposition synthesize our result.

Proposition 2 An increase in the IMF information precision decreases all thresholds.

    Proof: see appendix24

    Ceteris paribus, a higher precision of information by the IMF increases the willingness by
fund managers to roll-over their loans to the country, and reduces the probability of default.
Intuitively, if the IMF has the ability to estimate the state of the country fundamentals arbi-
trarily well, funds’ managers need not worry about idiosyncratic noise in the IMF intervention
decisions. Provided that the IMF’s objective function is common knowledge, private investors
understand its strategy (lending to possibly illiquid but not to insolvent countries). At the
margin, increasing the accuracy of IMF information makes them more willing to lend, because
they will be confident that the IMF assessment of the fundamentals will not be far away from
their own assessment — they can therefore expect the IMF to intervene when they believe that
the state of the economy grant intervention.


5.3     A remark on portfolio managers’ incentives

In our model, the strategies of all agents are endogenous in equilibrium. The parameters
describing investors’ payoffs affect more than the fund managers’ own investment thresholds:
because of their influence on the market coordination problem, these parameters also affect the
equilibrium strategy by the IMF.
    In our analysis, we focus on IMF’s incentives and strategy. Yet our framework can also shed
light on the general equilibrium effect of corporate governance and managers’ behavior. By way
of example, the next proposition establishes a link between the structure of incentives faced
by the funds’ managers, and the likelihood of IMF interventions. Recall that in our model b
is the net gain in utility when a manager rolls over debt and the country is solvent, relative
  24 CDMS   show an analogous result for the limiting case when all players have arbitrarily accurate information. Our
proposition generalize their result.




                                                         22
to withdrawing in the first period. The same net utility is negative and equal to −c when the
country defaults. Formally:

Proposition 3 All thresholds (R̄L , R̄, s∗ and S ∗ ) are decreasing in b and increasing in c.

    Proof: see appendix.
    Intuitively, a weaker reward to successful long-term investment makes fund managers more
wary about rolling over their credit. This in turn leads the IMF to be more cautious in providing
liquidity. The likelihood of debt default correspondingly increases in equilibrium.
    This proposition touches upon a topic extensively discussed by the literature, regarding the
reason why rewards to long-term investment strategies may be perceived as weak by managers.
For instance, funds’ performance may be assessed against industry-wide benchmarks, so that
individual managers may be reluctant to take positions at odds with those benchmarks, even if
these position may have good risk-adjusted payoffs in the long term. Although our example is
admittedly stylized, it shows the potential importance of general equilibrium analysis of these
issues.


6     Liquidity and moral hazard

In the previous section we have shown that the ex-ante GNP of the country — our measure
of national welfare — is increasing in the size of the IMF for any given distribution of the
fundamental. Yet, moral-hazard considerations may invalidate such conclusion, since liquidity
assistance by the IMF could reduce the incentive for the government to implement costly
policies that enhance the likelihood of good macroeconomic outcomes.
    We now develop our framework and assume that the government can take a costly action
improving the expected value of R without affecting the variance of the distribution. The
government decides its level of effort in period 0, when international investors lend D to the
country and the IMF states the size of its contingent intervention L. The action by the
government is not observed at any point (and the IMF cannot make the provision of liquidity
conditional on it).
    For simplicity, we will initially assume that the government can take one single action A (say,
a policy reform and fiscal adjustment) that raises E0 R from RN to RA (let ∆R = RA − RN ).


                                                23
The welfare cost of undertaking action A is Ψ. This cost falls on the government only, and is
motivated by exogenous considerations, say, electoral costs of reforms and fiscal adjustment.
The government welfare function is

                                     W = U − Ψ = E0 Y − Ψ                                   (20)

where U is the utility of the domestic representative agent. Note that W does not coincide
with social welfare U, that is measured by expected GNP only. At this end of this section, we
will show that our main results carry over to a more general setup.


6.1   Liquidity provision and government behavior

It is convenient to focus our analysis on the limiting case when private signals become arbi-
trarily precise. An important reason is that, as the government affects the mean of the prior
distribution, we need to relax the assumption of an uninformative public signal and conduct
our analysis by setting a strictly positive ρ. With arbitrarily precise private information, we
can do so without unnecessarily complicating the analysis. A second reason is that, as we have
shown in the previous section, the case of arbitrarily precise private information brings the re-
sults of our model more closely into line with the predictions of models after Diamond-Dybvig,
and therefore makes it easier to stress core differences between the two. Namely, with α → ∞,
all agents will take the same action in equilibrium for almost all realizations of R (except when
R happens to be arbitrarily close to R̄L ), so that in equilibrium there will be no heterogeneity
(but the equilibrium is unique) and no partial liquidation (except in a measure-zero set). Thus,
the utility of the government conditional on its action simplifies to:
                                   Z ∞
                    lim W (A) =          [R · I + M − D] f (R | RA ) dR − Ψ                 (21)
                   α→∞               R̄L
                                   Z ∞
                   lim W (N ) =          [R · I + M − D] f (R | RN ) dR
                  α→∞                  R̄L

Notably, the integrand in the above expressions does not depend on the liquidation cost κ —
the set of realizations of R at which funds’ withdrawals in period 1 lead to partial liquidation
has measure zero. But the above expression is not independent of κ: in fact the lower extreme
of integration (i.e., the threshold R̄L ) crucially depends on this cost.




                                                24
   Taking the difference in government welfare with and without the costly action we obtain:
                                                ¡     ¡        ¢¢
          lim W (A) − W (N ) ≡ ∆W = I · ∆R · 1 − F R̄L | RN                                  (22)
         α→∞
                                 Z R̄L +∆R
                               +           [R · I + M − D] · f (R | RA ) dR − Ψ
                                                 R̄L

   In deciding whether to undertake the action A, the government compares the utility costs
of a reform Ψ with the gains in expected GNP that come both in terms of higher average
realization of R (first term on the RHS), and in terms of lower expected liquidation costs
(second term on the RHS) because of the drop in the probability of a run on debt.
   As the size of the IMF impacts the limits of integration, depending on parameter values
there may be some critical L at which the government switches policy. The question is therefore
how the net gain from the action A, ∆W, vary with the size of the IMF, L. The answer is
stated by the following proposition.

                                                                             RA +RN
Proposition 4 ∆W is decreasing in L if and only if R̄L <                        2   .

   Proof: using our proposition (1), we know that for a given distribution of the fundamental,
R̄L is decreasing in L. We can therefore study the response of ∆W to changes in R̄L , rather
than in L. We have:
                        d (∆W)                  £ ¡        ¢   ¡         ¢¤
                               = (R̄L I + M − D) f R̄L | RN − f R̄L | RA                     (23)
                          dR̄L
The first term in brackets is non-negative (because (R̄L I +M −D) = (R̄L −Rs )I and R̄L ≥ Rs )
but the second term can have either sign. As RA > RN , we have that
                               ¡        ¢   ¡        ¢        RA + RN
                              f R̄L | RN > f R̄L | RA ⇔ R̄L <                                (24)
                                                                 2
                                              d(∆W)
which is the condition for a positive          dR̄L
                                                    .   ¤


   Suppose that R̄L is lower than both RN and RA — implying that the probability of a crisis
is less than 50 percent irrespective of government behavior. In this case, the difference on the
RHS is positive: a decrease in R̄L , corresponding to a more abundant liquidity provision L,
reduces the extra-utility a government gets for taking the costly action A.
   This case is illustrated by Figure 1-a.25 In equilibrium, the position of R̄L in this figure is
 25 Parameters   employed: RA = 1.25, RN = 1.20, σR = 0.08 and R̄L = 1.15.


                                                         25
such that the density at R̄L is higher conditional on RN than conditional on RA . A decrease
in R̄L will therefore reduce the gain in expected GNP from ‘good’ government behavior.

                                                                  (a)
                                                                                                  Action
                    4                                                                             No action
              pdf




                    2

                                                 RL=1.15
                    0
                        1   1.05   1.1        1.15     1.2     1.25     1.3     1.35        1.4       1.45        1.5
                                                                (b)                    R

                                                                                                      Action
                    4                                                                                 No action
              pdf




                    2

                                                              RL=1.30
                    0
                        1   1.05   1.1        1.15     1.2     1.25     1.3     1.35        1.4       1.45        1.5
                                                                (c)                    R
               0.4
               0.2
d DW / d RL




                    0
              −0.2
              −0.4

                        1   1.05   1.1        1.15     1.2     1.25     1.3     1.35        1.4       1.45        1.5
                                                                                       RL



                                         Figure 1: Government’s decision: ∆W and R̄L


              The equilibrium in Figure 1-a is consistent with the commonly held view of moral hazard
distortions from liquidity provision. The argument underlying the traditional view is that the
cost Ψ is high while the chances of a favorable macroeconomic outcome are good despite no
government effort. In this case, additional liquidity provision is more likely to be helpful if
the government does not take the costly action, so it further reduces the incentive for good
behavior. However, our proposition make it clear that what is drawn in figure 1-a is not the
only possible scenario.


                                                             26
6.2    Liquidity provision as an incentive for the government to ‘do the right
       thing’

We are now ready to state a key result of our analysis. Suppose that the country fundamentals
are relatively weak, in the sense that the ex-ante probability of a crisis is more than 50 percent
even if the government chooses the costly action A. Then, according to proposition 4, ∆W will
be increasing in L.
   Intuitively, if — at some given L — the probability of a failure is relatively high, the
government has little incentive to bear the costs of improving the macro outcome: the chance
that a good outcome will materialize is low whether or not it exerts any effort. In this case,
additional liquidity provision is more likely to be helpful if the government takes the costly
action, so it increases the incentives for good behavior. By reducing the likelihood of runs and
their costs in terms of forgone output, larger support by an international lender of last resort
improves the trade off between the cost of government effort and the related improvement in
the country’s GNP. Whether the government chooses the action A in equilibrium will then
depend on whether the net utility gain from action A exceeds its cost. To illustrate this case,
in Figure 1-b the equilibrium R̄L is drawn to the right of RA . Clearly, a decrease in R̄L raises
the gains in expected GN P from the government action A.
   Figure 1-c, instead, shows how the derivative of ∆W with respect to R̄L varies with the
level R̄L .26 In looking at this figure, recall that R̄L is monotonically decreasing in the size
of IMF intervention L — so what the graph shows is the marginal effect of L on government
incentives at different level of liquidity assistance. If R̄L is small (i.e., L is large), the difference
£ ¡          ¢     ¡          ¢¤
 f R̄L | RN − f R̄L | RA is positive and so is d(∆W)     dR̄L
                                                               . For intermediate values of R̄L (and
                                                                                           ¡          ¢
L ), the ex-ante probability of a crisis gets higher. When R̄L is large enough, f R̄L | RN <
  ¡        ¢
f R̄L | RA and d(∆W)dR̄
                          is negative. In this case, by lowering R̄L , additional liquidity provision
                          L

(larger L) actually strengthens the incentive for the government to take the costly action.
   Relative to the traditional view, global-game models point to a different and intriguing
possibility, one of strategic complementarity between the actions by the IMF and the domestic
government (see the discussion of a similar result in Morris and Shin (2002)). When the ex-
ante probability of a crisis is high, the payoff to the government from action A is increasing
 26 Parameters   employed: RA = 1.25, RN = 1.20, σR = 0.08, I = 1, M = 0.2, D = 1.2.




                                                         27
in L. Note that also the payoffs of the IMF is increasing in the action A undertaken by the
government.
   In closing this section, we note that our conclusion remains unchanged when government
welfare depends on GDP, rather than GNP — this is equivalent to assume that the amount
paid to foreigners is independent of the realization of R, perhaps because there are other
resources in the economy in addition to the payoffs of domestic investment I. By discussing
this case, we stress that our results are not driven by the assumption of “limited liability”
for the economy as a whole. Even if the government cares about GDP, a marginal increase
in the size of the IMF would still reduce R̄L , producing marginal saving on liquidation costs.
Its effect on the incentives to take the costly action A depends on the likelihood that it will
benefit the government in either situation (conditional on choosing RA or RN ). The intuition
is exactly the same as when government cares about GNP — we present some calculation in
the appendix A.7 to shed further light on this issue.


6.3   Policy tradeoffs and the optimal size of L: numerical examples

The properties of our model can be illustrated by means of four numerical examples, all depicted
in Figure 2. To draw this figure, we adopt the parameter values shown in table 1, and set
D = 1.2 and I = 1. For each example, we plot W (A), W (N ) and W (A) + Ψ against different
values of L.
   As shown above, the government chooses the costly action whenever W (A) > W (N ). The
country’s GNP is therefore W (N ) if the action is not taken, and W (A) + Ψ if the action is
taken. Thus, the various graphs in figure 2 show for which values of L the government takes
the costly action A, as well as the country expected GNP, as a function of L.


   Figures 2-a and 2-b illustrate the case in which a large ILOLR unambiguously creates
moral hazard distortions. Comparing W (A) with W (N ): the former exceeds the latter — i.e.,
governments prefer to take the costly action — only for relatively low values of L, between 0
and (approximately) 0.20. Liquidity provision in excess of this value creates a clear incentive
for the government not to act. To trace the behavior of expected GNP for different levels of L,
compare W (A) + Ψ with W (N ). Increasing the size of the IMF contingent interventions above
0 at first raises expected GN P monotonically along W (A)+Ψ. At L around 0.20, however, the

                                              28
                           Table 1: Value of the parameters in figure 2
                                figure   2-a    2-b    2-c    2-d
                                  κ       .3    .25    .25     .25
                                 M       .25    .20    .20     .20
                                  Ψ      .06    .05    .045    .05
                                  b       2      1      1      1
                                  c      10     10     10      10
                                  B       2      2      2      2
                                  C      10     10     10      10
                                 RA      1.18   1.25   1.18   1.12
                                 RN      1.16   1.22   1.15   1.065
                                 σR      .03    .05    .05     .05


moral hazard distortion kicks in, determining a discrete drop in expected GNP and national
welfare to W (N ). Conditional on RN , providing more liquidity assistance has again a positive
effect on expected GNP.
   Thus, in a global sense, there could be different trade-offs between liquidity provision and
moral hazard. In Figure 2-b, the country GN P is at a maximum when liquidity provision is
just below the level at which the government would give up the costly action A. Globally,
moral hazard distortions are more important than the costs of liquidity crises. Conversely, in
Figure 2-a, the country GN P is highest for high values of L despite moral hazard distortions.
Liquidity costs in this case are more important than the output costs due to moral hazard.
   Figure 2-c illustrates the possibility of strategic complementarity between IMF lending and
government policies towards solvency. In this figure the tradeoff between liquidity and moral
hazard vary with L. For sufficiently low values of L, W (A) < W (N ) and the government does
not undertake any action because it is discouraged by bleak prospects of success. For interme-
diate level of liquidity support, however, the government welfare becomes higher conditional
on undertaking the action A. Liquidity provision eventually becomes excessive. For levels of
L in excess of 0.4, once again W (A) < W (N ): the government does not exert any effort,
and the country’s expected GNP falls. Note that, relative to Figure 2-b, the only parameter
change consists of decreasing both RA and RN by a few percentage points — enough to worsen



                                                29
                                         (a)                                                                       (b)
                                                                                          0.26

                                                                                          0.24
             0.2
                                                                                          0.22
  Welfare




                                                                                Welfare
                                                                                           0.2
            0.15
                                                                                          0.18
                                               WA                                                                        WA
                                                                                          0.16
             0.1                               WN                                                                        WN
                                               WA+cost                                    0.14                           WA+cost

                                                                                          0.12
                   0   0.1         0.2         0.3   0.4         0.5                             0   0.1     0.2         0.3     0.4     0.5
                                         L                                                                         L

                                         (c)                                                                       (d)
             0.2

                                                                                           0.1
            0.15
  Welfare




                                                                            Welfare


                                                                                          0.05
             0.1

                                                WA                                          0                                  WA
            0.05                                WN                                                                             WN
                                                WA+cost                                                                        WA+cost
                                                                                      −0.05
              0
                   0         0.2               0.4         0.6                                   0     0.2         0.4         0.6       0.8
                                         L                                                                          L



                                                     Figure 2: Policy tradeoffs


the macroeconomic outcome in such a way that, within some range of the fundamental, the
government would not undertake any costly policy without liquidity assistance by the IMF.
     Relative to Figure 2-c, in Figure 2-d we further reduce both RA and RN , while allowing
for a larger difference ∆R. In figure 2-d, government welfare conditional on the costly action
is actually higher than W(N ) if the IMF provides sufficiently large contingent funds. The
country GN P is always higher conditional on A: globally, there is no trade off between liquidity
provision and moral hazard.
     These considerations may be useful as building blocks towards a normative study of the
optimal size of IMF interventions. As apparent from figure 2, local governments like the
highest possible level of liquidity assistance by the IMF. Once moral hazard considerations are

                                                                       30
taken into account, however, the level of liquidity assistance preferred by policymakers may
not be the one that maximizes expected GNP and national welfare. Since the welfare cost Ψ
does not fall on the country’s citizens, these may prefer a low level to a large level of L. This
is the case in the economy depicted by Figure 2-b.
   The level of L preferred by the IMF need not coincide with either the level of L preferred
by national governments, or the level preferred by the country’s citizens. In our specification,
the structure of IMF preferences penalizes any loss of funds in case of national default, yet as a
simplification the penalty from lending liquidity to crisis countries is exogenously given. Thus,
for any given disutility from loosing its loans to the country — the main concern of the IMF is
whether or not to limit L below its feasible level, as a way to mitigate moral-hazard distortions
that could raise discretely the likelihood of a crisis.


6.4   Moral hazard with a continuous set of actions for the government

We conclude this section by reconsidering our analysis of moral hazard in a more general
framework. Let ∆R denote policy effort, raising linearly the expected value of the fundamental,
i.e., E0 R = R0 + ∆R. Policy effort entails a utility cost Ψ (∆R)ν /ν, affecting the government
only. Thus, assuming that the noise in private signal is arbitrarily small (α → ∞), the policy
problem is to maximize:
                            Z   ∞
                                                                       Ψ (∆R)ν
       lim W (∆R) =                 [R · I + M − D] f (R | R0 + ∆R) dR −                     (25)
       α→∞                 R̄L                                            ν
                          Z ∞
                                                                            Ψ (∆R)ν
                        =          [(R + ∆R) · I + M − D] f (R | R0 ) dR −
                           R̄L −∆R                                             ν
Taking the derivative with respect to ∆R, we get:
                                                    Z ∞
 dW (∆R)                          ¡              ¢
            = (R̄L I + M − D)f R̄L − ∆R | R0 +               I · f (R | R0 ) dR − Ψ (∆R)ν−1
                                                                                         (26)
   d∆R                                               R̄L −∆R
                              ¡             ¢     ¡                      ¢
            = (R̄L − Rs )If R̄L − ∆R | R0 + I 1 − F (R̄L − ∆R | R0 ) − Ψ (∆R)ν−1

   It is easy to show that, for ν > 1 and reasonable values of Ψ, our results for the binary-
action case still apply. Namely, when ex-ante odds of a crisis are high enough, the government
chooses little or no policy effort. By reducing the ex-ante probability of a crisis, a larger L
would then raise the government incentive to choose a higher effort ∆R. Conversely, when the
ex-ante probability of a run is small, additional liquidity provision induces the government to
reduce ∆R.

                                                 31
                                 (a) nu = 2                                                                   (b) nu = 1.2
       0.06                                                                         0.06               Psi=3.7
                     Psi=40
                     Psi=50                                                                            Psi=3.85
       0.05          Psi=70                                                         0.05               Psi=4

       0.04                                                                         0.04
  DR




                                                                   DR
       0.03                                                                         0.03

       0.02                                                                         0.02

       0.01                                                                         0.01

          0                                                                                   0
              1            1.1                1.2       1.3                                        1        1.1           1.2      1.3
                                     RL                                                                            RL
                                 (c) nu = 3                                                               (d) Pr(crisis) if DR=0
       0.06                                                                                   1

       0.05                                                                                  0.8

                                                                        ex−ante Pr(crisis)
       0.04
                                                                                             0.6
  DR




       0.03
                                                                                             0.4
       0.02          Psi=800
                     Psi=1000
       0.01          Psi=1500                                                                0.2

          0                                                                                   0
              1            1.1                1.2       1.3                                        1        1.1           1.2      1.3
                                                                                                                   RL
                                    RL



                              Figure 3: Continuous set of actions for the government


   These results are illustrated by Figures 3-a,b,c, which plot the optimal effort level ∆R as a
function of R̄L , for ν equal to 2, 1.2 and 3, respectively. Figure 3-d, instead, shows the ex-ante
odds of a crisis as a function of R̄L conditional on ∆R = 0.27 The first three graphs appear
quite similar: effort (∆R) is increasing in R̄L up to a point (around 1.18 or 1.20, depending
on parameters’ values), after which it is decreasing in R̄L . Note that the elasticity of ∆R falls
with ν.
 27 Parameters    used in the figures: Rs = 1, R0 = 1.15, σR = 0.05, I = 1.




                                                              32
7     Extensions of the model

7.1    Seniority of IMF loans

The IMF may require a ‘preferred creditor status’ as a precondition to provide liquidity. A
realistic variant of our model could then allow IMF loans to have priority over private loans.
In this case, the solvency threshold for the return on the risky investment that is relevant for
the IMF decision is

                         R(1 − z)I = RI − (1 + κ) [xD − M − L]+ ≥ L                           (27)

Provided that [xD − M − L] > 0 we can write

                                           [xD − M ]     L
                        R̄IM F   = (1 + κ)           −κ =                                     (28)
                                      ·        I         I      ¸
                                               [xD − M ]     L
                                   Rs (1 + κ)            −κ
                                                 D−M        D−M

The international liquidity provider keeps lending up the point in which the country has just
enough resources to repay L.
    There are two effects to consider. On the one hand, as the IMF gets a larger share of the
country’s resources in case of default, it is more willing to intervene. This effect makes a crisis
less likely. On the other hand, conditional on a crisis, private investors are juniors relative to
the IMF, so that the return on their investment is lower. They should therefore be less willing
to roll over debt. This effect makes a crisis more likely.
    What are the overall implications of allowing for IMF seniority? We will show below that our
framework fully captures the first effect, while providing a framework for a heuristic discussion
of the second. Assuming, as in section 4, that ρ → 0, the following equations characterize the
equilibrium when the IMF loans have seniority) — all variables in this case are denoted with
a prime ( 0 ):                       "      £    0∗ − R̄0 ) · D − M
                                                                    ¤#
                                             G(s
                             R̄0 = Rs 1 + κ                                                   (29)
                                                     D−M
                                   "      £                            ¤#
                                           G(s0∗ − R̄0 ) · D − M − L
                           0                           L
                         R̄L  = Rs 1 + κ                                                      (30)
                                                     D−M
                                                       µ         ¶
                                   0∗   0           −1       B
                                  S = R̄ IM F − H                                             (31)
                                                         B+C


                                                33
                                  "           £                        ¤        #
                    0                          G(s0∗ − R̄IM
                                                         0
                                                            F) · D − M       L
                  R̄IM F   = Rs       (1 + κ)                            −κ                   (32)
                                                       D−M                  D−M

                                                 Z   R̄0
                      b        0
                         = G(R̄L − s0∗ ) +                 g(R − s0∗ ) · H(S 0∗ − R)dR        (33)
                     b+c                          R̄   0
                                                       L

There are now 5 equations and 5 variables, instead of 4 equations in 4 variables. Note that the
derivatives of the above expressions with respect to L are all negative, and, as in the version
                                      0 < R̄0 . We can show that:
of our model without IMF seniority, R̄L

                                                 0        0
                                               R̄IM F < R̄L                                   (34)

We hereafter state our result:

Proposition 5 When the IMF has seniority, there is a positive coordination effect that reduces
all thresholds making the crisis less likely (ex-ante): s∗0 < s∗ , R̄0 < R̄, R̄L
                                                                               0 < R̄ .
                                                                                     L


   Proof: see appendix.
   This proposition confirms our previous result, that more liquidity provision (induced by
IMF seniority) tends to increase the willingness of fund managers to roll over their debt, and
decrease the likelihood of crises. But note that the proposition holds agents’ payoffs constant
— i.e., the penalty for lending to a defaulting country does not change even if the private
return conditional on default are now lower. Realistically this penalty should become higher
when the IMF debt has seniority. From proposition 2 we know that an increase in the penalty
parameter c will tend to raise all thresholds — i.e., move them in the opposite direction relative
to what predicted by proposition (5). An important extension of the model thus consists of
specifying a tighter link between managers’ payoffs and portfolio returns, as to disentangle the
role of other factors, such as risk aversion, in determining optimal intervention policies.


7.2   Sequential moves

An important question in our study concerns the consequences of letting the IMF move before
the withdrawal decision by funds managers. In this section we briefly discuss the case in which
funds managers take their portfolio decision being informed about the IMF intervention. A
similar question is addressed by CDMS and especially by Amil Dasgupta in a series of papers
— to which we refer for the analytical aspects of the issue.

                                                       34
   Consider the following amendment of our setup: private signals reach the IMF and funds’
managers simultaneously, but the interim period is split into two subperiods: early and late.
The payoff structure is the same as before: in particular, payoffs do not depend on moving
early or late in the interim period.
   CDMS start their analysis with an observation about timing incentives in the new game
— an observation that also applies here. Under the assumption that payoffs are independent
of the timing of the move, individual funds managers with no market power will always have
an incentive to move late rather than early. They know that they will have no benefit from
signalling: as they are too small to influence the actions by other players, there is no point
in taking an early position in the market. On the other hand, they can learn something by
waiting: they can learn whether the IMF has committed liquidity funds L, which also conveys
information about the IMF private signal.
   The same argument implies that the IMF will always have a weak incentive to move first.
As funds managers always wait, the IMF will never learn anything by waiting — no private
decision will be taken early in the interim period. On the other hand, by moving early, the
IMF can influence the behavior of the market. There is a clear benefit from moving first. As
in CDMS, the IMF is assumed to move early.
   CDMS and related work by Dasgupta show that this game admits an equilibrium in trigger
strategies similar to the one analyzed in Section 4, except that now funds managers have
two triggers for their signal: one conditional on IMF intervention, the conditional on no IMF
intervention. Notably, as before, the IMF intervenes if and only if its signal is good enough
relative to an optimally selected thresholds for its signal. But this means that, by observing the
IMF move, funds managers will learn whether the signal reaching the IMF is above or below
such a threshold. If the precision of IMF information is high enough, the IMF move will be
quite informative about the state of the fundamentals. One can build examples in which funds
managers will disregards their private signal, and just conform to the IMF move: they will
rollover debt if the IMF opens contingent credit lines to the country, and withdraw otherwise.
This is dubbed “strong herding behavior” in Dasgupta (1999). If however the IMF precision of
information is not high, funds managers will form their posterior without ignoring their private
information. An IMF intervention will of course discourage some of the withdrawals, without



                                               35
necessarily eliminating the possibility of a speculative crisis.28


8     Conclusions

As the main results of the model have been stated in the introduction, we devote our conclusion
to some policy-related consideration, and a brief discussion of perspectives for future research.
    The debate on reforming the international financial architecture has long suffered from the
lack of analytical studies comparing liquidity support (bailouts) with different forms of private
sector involvement. The merit of policy analyses embracing the extreme paradigm of multiple
instantaneous equilibria and self-fulfilling crises consists in stressing that disruptive speculative
runs need not be inconsistent with rational individual behavior — i.e., rational expectations
are not sufficient to rule out speculative threats to macroeconomic and financial stability.
Self-fulfilling runs, however, are not the exclusive cause of crises, so that excessive emphasis on
liquidity may severely bias policy design. Moreover, these analyses have severe limits in dealing
with a number of important policy issues, especially regarding the trade-off between liquidity
provision and moral hazard, but also as regards transparency and information accuracy.
    As opposed to the main prescription from these models, the possibility of self-fulfilling runs
does not necessarily justify a full bailout solution to financial crisis. First, ‘catalytic finance’ is
more likely to work in the case of pure speculative crises: a partial bailout may well be sufficient
to restore confidence. Second, and most important, crises are usually caused by a combination
of weak fundamentals, poor policies and speculative runs. Official finance may create wrong
policy/effort incentives deriving from expectations of a bailout.
    The model presented in this paper contributes to take the policy debate a step further. Our
model sheds light on possible channels through which the IMF ‘catalytic finance’ may work,
i.e., channels through which the presence of contingent liquidity provision raises the number of
international investors willing to rollover their loans to a country for any given fundamental.
But this makes clear that catalytic finance cannot be effective when the macroeconomic out-
look turns out to be very weak — as private signals become correspondingly worse, massive
withdrawal would cause a crisis whether or not the IMF intervenes.
 28 The   equilibrium sketched above (and fully characterized by Dasgupta (1999) and CDMS), however, is not necessarily
unique.




                                                          36
   Second, our model emphasizes the possibility that liquidity assistance do not produce moral
hazard distortions. Rather, under some circumstances, it may turn out to be key for well-
intentioned governments to undertake appropriate policies, as the IMF could at least in part
shield the country from self-fulfilling speculative runs. In other words, by insuring against
liquidation costs caused by self-fulfilling speculation, the IMF could raise the expected gains
from reforms, therefore making them more attractive relative to their costs. Other papers based
on global games has provided examples of this principle, notably Morris and Shin (2002).
   While pointing to this possibility, this literature makes clear that moral hazard distortions
are likely to be the dominant concern in setting up facilities providing international liquidity
support. As is well known, there are moral hazard distortions at different levels (i.e., at the level
of the debtor country — its private and public sector — as well as of international investors).
The reform of the international financial architecture cannot but address the issue of their
involvement in bearing the cost of a crisis — vis-a-vis the provision of liquidity as an insurance
against speculation risk.
   This paper and Morris and Shin (2002) show that the literature on global games is particu-
larly effective to shed light on these issues. Morris and Shin reach conclusions similar to ours in
a stylized one-period model, we articulate them in a bank-run framework. Moreover, we model
explicitly the payoffs of the IMF and domestic policy makers, showing how the equilibrium al-
location depends on the incentive structure faced by the main players (private and public). We
show how our approach can account for a number of realistic features of the international finan-
cial architecture — in some cases requiring the specification of a more articulated framework.
It is reasonable to expect that this literature will soon have further important developments
as regards both theory and policy analysis.
   In the text of our paper, we have already pointed out important directions for future research
building on the framework of our model. These include a study of the optimal size of liquidity
support, the implications of a preferred creditor status for the IMF, and the optimal timing and
conditionality of IMF interventions. We have argued that the analysis of these issues crucially
depends on the specification of payoffs for both the IMF and the international investors —
which is a natural important development of our model.
   But there are many other dimensions that future research could explore. For instance,
the true type of government (conservative, reformist, radical and so on) is likely to be only

                                                 37
imperfectly observed. We have seen that, depending on the parameters of the model, liquidity
may either complement reforms and good policies, or induce moral hazard distortions. As the
preferences of the government may well be relevant in determining which scenario is faced by
the IMF, allowing for imperfectly credible policymakers will crucially influence the optimal
timing, size and conditionality of IMF interventions and the success of catalytic approach —
that could be reconsidered in the context of model with pooling/separating equilibria. In
this respect, empirical studies (reviewed by Cottarelli and Giannini (2002)) suggest that the
catalytic approach tends to fail when adjustment policies are imperfectly credible.
   The structure of our economy is highly stylized — in the tradition of bank run studies and
many recent contributions on international illiquidity and vulnerability to crises. There could
be important lessons to be learned from model in which the public and the private sectors are
treated separately, specifying both a banking and a nonfinancial corporate sector. By the same
token, we focused on a real model, abstracting from the link between financial and currency
crises. Extending the model as to analyze this link could contribute to our understanding of
dollarization.
   By the same token, we mostly focused on bailouts. The literature suggests that, when
large bailout funds are not available, coercive bailins in the form of debt standstill and sus-
pensions may work at times. Under which conditions, bailins and debt suspensions dominate
catalytic solutions? Moreover, most of the recent debate on architecture reform has centered
on comparing alternative debt restructuring mechanisms. This is the policy debate contrasting
a “statutory approach” (SDRM) to a “contractual approach” (collective action clauses) to debt
restructuring. Our analytical apparatus can be modified to address such issues — Haldane et
al. (2002) provide an example of work in this direction.
   There is great need for comprehensive empirical studies of catalytic finance, to which our
paper can provide a suitable theoretical framework. Looking at the policy experience in the last
decade, the catalytic approach was initially adopted by the IMF in each of the main emerging
market economies that experienced a crisis (Mexico, Thailand, Indonesia, Korea, Russia, Brazil,
Turkey, Argentina to name the most important ones — see Cottarelli and Giannini (2002)).
The approach succeeded in some cases (Mexico, Brazil); it did not succeed in others (Russia,
Argentina, Indonesia). The 1997/98 crisis in Korea is an example of partial success. Catalytic
finance cum policy adjustment was not enough to ensure voluntary market debt rollover; the

                                              38
collective action problem of creditors was however solved by a semi-coercive bailin (with the
coercive restructuring of short-term cross-border interbank lines). Empirical studies of why and
to what extent catalytic finance may work has great importance to guide the current policy
debate on the reform of international financial architecture, whereas exceptional IMF finance
is perhaps the hottest issue at stake.


A     Appendix

A.1    Multiple equilibrium benchmark

The coordination effect that is captured by global-game models cannot be accounted for by
models of international lender of last resort after Diamond and Dybvig [1983]. This framework
assumes common knowledge of the signal, and in equilibrium each agent conditions his choice
on the speculative position taken by all other agents in the economy. Because of this strong
assumption, multiple equilibria are possible for intermediate range of fundamentals, whereas a
country defaults if a speculative run occurs, is solvent otherwise. In this range, a debt crisis
occurs when each fund manager believes (i.e., knows) that all other fund managers will also
refuse to roll over their debt. There is no heterogeneity in managers’ action: either everybody
attacks (i.e., x = 1), or nobody attacks (i.e., x = 0). In this appendix we study a version of
our model without private information — in the tradition of the bank-run literature stressing
multiple equilibria and self-fulfilling runs. Without private information, IMF interventions
of limited size can lower, at the margin, the break-even rate of return conditional on the
whole market denying credit (i.e., x = 1), but not the break-even rate conditional on nobody
withdrawing their funds (x = 0). Most important, they are irrelevant in determining whether
the market rollover or withdraw loans (i.e., whether x = 0 or x = 1) — see the analysis in
Corsetti Pesenti and Roubini (2002) — unless the IMF has enough resources to bailout the
country completely.
    Assume that in our model all investors and the IMF have complete information about R.
We are interested in understanding the main features of this economy, and identify the values
of the fundamental R corresponding to which the equilibrium is not unique. The equilibrium is
characterized by the following partition of R. Suppose that L is small relative to the external



                                              39
financing gap of the country. If R < Rs , the country is insolvent and there is a unique
                                                £                      ¤
equilibrium with x = 1 and a crisis. If R > M ax Rs , Rs (1 + κ) − κ LI the country has enough
liquidity to pay everybody and there is a unique equilibrium with x = 0 and no crisis. If
Rs < R < Rs (1 + κ) − κ LI , there are 2 equilibria, depending on whether investors attack the
country or keep lending to it. Note that, when the IMF has sufficiently large resources relative
to the next stock of short-term liability of the country, the equilibrium is unique: a crisis occurs
if and only if R < Rs .
   To see this, consider first an equilibrium with a crisis. In equilibrium, rational investors
will all withdraw in the first period (x = 1) and the IMF does not intervene. It is easy to
see that, in equilibrium, no investor will have an incentive to deviate and lend to the country.
In our specification, a single investor of infinitesimal size makes no difference in the amount
of resources that the country will have in period 2. So, an individual agent have an incentive
to deviate if and only if R is sufficiently high that the country will be left with non-negative
resources in the second period, independently of the run. But if the R is large enough, a crisis
cannot be an equilibrium outcome, and nobody attacks.
   Things are slightly different for the IMF, as this agent is not infinitesimal, i.e., its interven-
tion makes a difference as regards the end-point resources of the country. Namely, the IMF has
an incentive to deviate if the country has non-negative resources in the second period condi-
tional on its intervention. If all agents withdraw (x = 1) and the IMF intervenes, equation (12)
tells us that the country will have non-negative resources in the second period if R > R̄x=1 ,
where R̄x=1 is given by:
                               R̄x=1 I − (1 + κ)[D − M − L]+ = L

Now there are two cases to consider, depending on the size of the IMF. If L < D − M , which
means that the IMF endowment of liquidity in not large enough to fill the whole external
financing gap, we have:
                                                              L
                                     R̄x=1 = Rs (1 + κ) − κ
                                                              I
Conversely, if L > D − M , the IMF can solve the liquidity problem by itself, and we have

                                            R̄x=1 = Rs

Note that R̄x=1 depends on L. If L is limited, the IMF can contain the costs of a speculative


                                                 40
run over some range of fundamentals. If L is not limited, instead, liquidity is not an issue, and
a crisis only occurs if the country is insolvent.
     Consider now a scenario without a crisis: rational agents do not withdraw (x = 0) and the
IMF intervenes. An equilibrium without crisis is consistent with rational expectations if the
return on investment plus the money from the IMF is enough to pay all creditors and the IMF
in the second period — in other words, there are no liquidation costs. Nobody has an incentive
to deviate if R > R̄x=0 , which is given by:

                                    I R̄x=0 + L = D − M + L

which yields:
                                            R̄x=0 = Rs

As there are no early withdrawals, the IMF is not saving any liquidation cost, so the equilibrium
with no crisis exists if and only if the country is solvent. Note that R̄x=0 does not depend on
L.
     So, according to the multiple-equilibria framework, the IMF can solve the liquidity problem
if and only if it has deep pockets. Otherwise, it has a limited impact on the range of funda-
mentals for which multiple equilibria are possible. Observe that, in equilibrium, either (a) all
investors withdraw, the IMF does not intervene and there is a crisis, or (b) all investors roll
over their debts, the IMF intervenes and there is no crisis.
     In this model, there is no endogenous mechanism of equilibrium selection. Which equilib-
rium will investors choose? The solution usually adopted by the literature consists in attributing
arbitrary probabilities ξ to a sunspot event selecting between equilibria. Note that this solu-
tion has many well-known conceptual problems: why would everybody pick the same action?
what is the sunspot? But even abstracting from these particular issues, consider the goal of
analyzing catalytic finance and moral hazard distortion within the framework sketched above.
The sunspot probabilities ξ must be known ex-ante. The equilibrium would depend crucially
on ξ, but not on preference parameters b, c, B, C. Conditional on ξ, the IMF will have an
effect only on the threshold R̄x=1 , but not on the other thresholds. It will play no role in the
equilibrium selection (unless this role is posited by assumption). All the above problems are
avoided in our formulation.



                                                41
A.2       Uniqueness and existence of equilibrium

We have seen in the main text that the equilibrium value of s∗ is determined by the following
equation:
                                                     Z   R̄
                       b
                          = G(R̄L − s∗ ) +                    g(R − s∗ ) · H(s∗ − R)dR
                      b+c                              R̄L
We want to show that there is a unique value that solves this equation. Define w = R − s∗ ,
w̄ = R̄ − s∗ , and w̄L = R̄L − s∗ (where clearly w̄ > w̄L ). Changing variables in equation (19)
and using (17) we get:
                           Z   w̄           µ               µ             ¶¶
                                                         −1          B                 b
               G(w̄L ) +            g(w) · H w̄L − w − H                       dw −       =0   (35)
                           w̄L                                      B+C               b+c
Key to our proof is that the RHS of this equation is monotonically increasing in w̄ and w̄L ,
and both w̄ and w̄L in turn are monotonically increasing in s∗ . To see why, note that increasing
w̄L is equivalent .... As regards w̄L , substituting (16) in the definition of this variable we can
write
                                         κRS · D
                               −w̄L −            G (w̄L ) − s∗ + constant = 0
                                         D−M
Differentiating
                                        ∂ w̄L           1
                                              =                      >0
                                        ∂s∗          κRS · D
                                                  1+         g(w̄L )
                                                     D−M
By the same token
                                         ∂ w̄    1
                                              =             >0
                                         ∂s∗ κRS · D
                                         1+           g(w̄)
                                             D−M
just as in CDMS. Thus, for sufficiently large s∗ the LHS of (35) is positive, while it is negative

for sufficiently small s∗ . Since the LHS is continuous in s∗ , there is a unique solution to (35).
Once s∗ is uniquely determined, S ∗ follows from (17).


A.3       Proof of proposition 1

This appendix proves proposition 1. Differentiating equations (15) and (16) and rearranging,
we get:                                      µ             ¶
                                     ds∗    1 − M/D            dR̄
                                         =    1+    ∗
                                                             ·                                 (36)
                                     dL Rs · κ · g(s − R̄)     dL
                       ∗
                          µ                         ¶
                     ds            1 − M/D              dR̄L         1
                         = 1+             ∗
                                                      ·      +     ∗
                                                                                               (37)
                     dL       Rs · κ · g(s − R̄L )       dL    g(s − R̄L )

                                                         42
To ease notation, define ζ1 and ζ2 as follows
                                    µ                           ¶−1
                                                1 − M/D
                               ζ1 = 1 +
                                           Rs · κ · g(s∗ − R̄)
                                    µ                            ¶−1
                                                1 − M/D
                              ζ2 = 1 +
                                           Rs · κ · g(s∗ − R̄L )
Note that ζ1 , ζ2 ∈ (0, 1).
   Now, define w = R − s∗ , w̄ = R̄ − s∗ , and w̄L = R̄L − s∗ . Using (36) and (37) we have:

                                               dw̄              ds∗
                                                   = −(1 − ζ1 )                                   (38)
                                               dL               dL
                                       dw̄L              ds∗     ζ2
                                            = −(1 − ζ2 )     −                                    (39)
                                        dL               dL    g(w̄L )
   Changing variables in equation (19) and using (17) we get:
                                 Z w̄       µ                 µ     ¶¶
                 b                                               B
                     = G(w̄L ) +      g(w).H w̄L − w − H −1            dw                         (40)
               b+c                w̄L                           B+C

Differentiating 40 and rearranging terms:

                                           dw̄      dw̄L
                                               ζ3 +      ζ4 = 0
                                           dL        dL

where:                                    µ                µ             ¶¶
                                                        −1         B
                              ζ3 = g(w̄) H w̄L − w̄ − H                       >0
                                                                  B+C
                         µ         ¶       Z   w̄         µ               µ         ¶¶
                              B                                        −1      B
          ζ4 = g(w̄L )                 +            g(w) h w̄L − w − H                   dw > 0
                             B+C           w̄L                                B+C
This yields:
                              ds∗                     ζ2 ζ4
                                  =−                                        < 0
                              dL     g(w̄L ) [(1 − ζ1 ) ζ3 + (1 − ζ2 ) ζ4 ]
   Using (36), (37) and (17) we get that:

                                       dR̄     dR̄L         dS ∗
                                           <0,      < 0 and      <0
                                       dL       dL          dL

which completes the proof.




                                                         43
A.4       Proof of Proposition 2

Let Φ be the standard normal distribution. Then, equation (17) can be written as:
                                             ³p                      ´      B
                                         Φ         β + ρ (S ∗ − R̄L ) =
                                                                           B+C

Differentiating with respect to the precision of IMF information (β), we get:

                     ³p                ´ ·p     µ ∗
                                                 dS   dR̄L
                                                           ¶
                                                              S ∗ − R̄L
                                                                        ¸
                               ∗
                   φ   β + ρ (S − R̄L ) .   β+ρ     −        + √
                                                 dβ    dβ     2 β+ρ
      Defining wS∗ = S ∗ − s∗ , using w̄L as defined above and rearranging, we obtain:

                                 p    dwS∗  p    dw̄L (wS∗ − w̄L )
                                  β+ρ      = β+ρ     − √                                                (41)
                                       dβ         dβ   2 β+ρ
Moreover, as above:
                                                        dR̄      ds∗
                                                            = ζ1
                                                        dβ       dβ
                                                       dR̄L      ds∗
                                                            = ζ2
                                                        dβ       dβ
So:
                                                    dw̄              ds∗
                                                        = −(1 − ζ1 )                                    (42)
                                                    dβ               dβ
                                                   dw̄L              ds∗
                                                        = −(1 − ζ2 )                                    (43)
                                                    dβ               dβ
      Differentiating (19), using (41), (42), (43) and rearranging, we get:
                                   R w̄          ∗
                            ds∗     w̄L g(w) h (wS − w) (w̄L − w) dw
                                = √                                       < 0
                            dβ     2 β + ρ [(1 − ζ1 ) ζ3 + (1 − ζ2 ) ζ5 ]
where
                       µ         ¶       Z               µ               µ         ¶¶
                            B                 w̄
                                                                      −1      B         p
        ζ5 = g(w̄L )                 +             g(w) h w̄L − w − H                    β + ρ dw > 0
                           B+C               w̄L                             B+C

      Finally, using (41), (42), (43), we obtain:

                                                   dR̄L dR̄ dS ∗
                                                       ,   ,     < 0
                                                    dβ dβ dβ

which concludes our proof.




                                                            44
A.5    Proof of Proposition 3

Here, we show that s∗, S∗, R̄ and R̄L depend negatively on b and positively on c. As above,
we get that:
                                             dR̄      ds∗
                                                 = ζ1                                   (44)
                                             db       db
                                            dR̄L       ds∗
                                                 = ζ2                                   (45)
                                             db        db
Changing variables in the same way, we get that:

                           ds∗        c                1
                               =−        2
                                                                      < 0
                           db     (b + c) ζ3 (1 − ζ1 ) + ζ4 (1 − ζ2 )

Using (44), (45) and (17) we get that:

                                  dR̄     dR̄L         dS ∗
                                      <0,      < 0 and      <0
                                  db       db           db

which completes the proof.


   Analogously,
                            ds∗       b                 1
                                =                                      > 0
                            dc    (b + c)2 ζ3 (1 − ζ1 ) + ζ4 (1 − ζ2 )
and also:
                                  dR̄     dR̄L         dS ∗
                                      >0,      > 0 and      >0
                                  dc       dc           dc

A.6    Proof of Proposition 5

Equations (15) and (16) are identical to equations (29) and (30). A bit of algebra shows that
(check the proof for the derivatives with respect to L):

                  s0∗ ≥ s∗ ⇒ (R̄L
                                0
                                  − s0∗ ) ≤ (R̄L − s∗ ) and (R̄0 − s0∗ ) ≤ (R̄ − s∗ )   (46)

Moreover,


                                 s0∗ < s∗ ⇔ R̄0 < R̄ ⇔ R̄L
                                                         0
                                                           < R̄L

Now, suppose that s0∗ ≥ s∗ .
   From equations (33) and (19), we have that:



                                                  45
                                   Z    R̄                                        µ         ¶
                         ∗                              ∗                    −1        B
               G(R̄L − s ) +                 g(R − s ) · H(R̄L − H                              − R)dR =
                                       R̄L                                            B+C
                                   Z   R̄0                                             µ         ¶
                  0     0∗                              0∗                        −1    B
              G(R̄L   −s )+                  g(R − s ) ·      H(R̄0   IM F   −H                      − R)dR
                                     0
                                   R̄L                                                 B+C
   Using relations (34) and (46), we get a contradiction that proves our claim.


A.7     Liquidity provision with no ‘limited liability’

Assume that the government cares about GDP — and that there are additional resources in
the economy to pay international investors. We have:
                                   Z R̄L ·               ¸
                                           R·I
                 lim W (A) =                     + M − D f (R | RA ) dR
                α→∞                 0      1+κ
                                   Z ∞
                              +         [R · I + M − D] f (R | RA ) dR − Ψ
                                                R̄L
                                               Z  R̄L   ·              ¸
                                                            R·I
                  lim W (N ) =                                  + M − D f (R | RN ) dR
                 α→∞                                        1+κ
                                               Z0 ∞
                                        +             [R · I + M − D] f (R | RN ) dR
                                                R̄L

   The difference in government’s welfare is:
                        Z R̄L ·               ¸
                                R·I
              ∆W =                    + M − D [f (R | RA ) − f (R | RN )] dR
                                1+κ
                        Z0 ∞
                    +        [R · I + M − D] [f (R | RA ) − f (R | RN )] dR − Ψ
                             R̄L

   The marginal effect of a change in R̄L is:

                       d (∆W)           κ £ ¡        ¢   ¡         ¢¤
                              = R̄L I.     f R̄L | RN − f R̄L | RA
                         dR̄L          1+κ

   Therefore, the sign of the marginal effect of L in this case is the same as in equation (23).


References

 [1] Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale (2000), “Financial Contagion,” The Journal of Political
      Economy 108, No. 1, February, pp. 1-33.



                                                               46
 [2] Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale (2000) “Optimal Currency Crises”, unpublished mimeo,
    NYU, April.

 [3] Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale (2001), “Comparative Financial Systems”, MIT Press.

 [4] Bryant, John (1980) “A Model of Reserves, Bank Runs, and Deposit Insurance”, Journal
    of Banking and Finance, 4, pp.335-44.

 [5] Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff (1989) “Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?”
    American Economic Review, Vol. 79, No.1, March.

 [6] Carlsson, H. and E. van Damme (1993) “Global Games and Equilibrium Selection,” Econo-
    metrica 61, 989-1018.

 [7] Chang R. and A. Velasco (1999), “Liquidity Crises in Emerging Markets: Theory and
    Policy”, NBER Macroeconomic Annual, 11-58, MIT Press.

 [8] Cole, Harold and Patrick Kehoe (1998) “Models of Sovereign Debt: Partial Versus General
    Reputations”, International Economic Review 39, No. 1, February, pp. 55-70.

 [9] Corsetti Giancarlo, Amil Dasgupta, Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin (2003), “Does
    One Soros make a difference? A theory of currency crises with Large and Small traders”,
    Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming

[10] Corsetti Giancarlo, Pesenti Paolo and Roubini Nouriel (2002), “The role of large traders in
    currency crises”, in “Preventing currency crises in emerging markets” edited by Edwards
    and Frankel, University of Chicago Press.

[11] Cottarelli and Giannini (2002), “Bedfellows, Hostages, or Perfect Strangers? Global Cap-
    ital Markets and the Catalytic Effect of IMF Crisis Lending”, IMF

[12] Dasgupta A. (1999) “Social Learning with Payoff Complementarities”, mimeo Yale Uni-
    versity

[13] Diamond, D. and P. Dybvig (1983) “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity”, Jour-
    nal of Political Economy 91, 401-419.

[14] Dooley, Michael and Sujata Verma (2001) “Rescue Packages and Output Losses Following
    Crises,” NBER Working Paper 8315, June.

                                              47
[15] Eichengreen, Barry (1999) “Toward a New International Financial Architecture Institute
    for International Economics”, Washington, D.C. 1999.

[16] Fischer, Stanley (1999) “On the Need for an International Lender of Last Resort”, unpub-
    lished, IMF (http://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/1999/010399.HTM)

[17] Frankel, Jeffrey and Nouriel Roubini (2001), “The Role of Industrial Country Policies
    in Emerging Market Crises,” NBER Working Paper 8634; forthcoming in M. Feldstein
    (ed.) Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging Market Economies, volume published
    by NBER and Chicago University Press, 2002.

[18] Gai, Prasanna, Simon Hayes and Hyun Song Shin (2001) “Crisis costs and debtor disci-
    pline: the efficacy of public policy in sovereign debt crises,” Bank of England Working
    Paper 136. http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/workingpapers/wp136.pdf.

[19] Gale, Douglas and Xavier Vives (2001) “Dollarization, Bailouts and the Stability of the
    Banking System”, unpublished, New York University, July.

[20] Ghosal, Sayantan and Marcus Miller (2002) “Co-ordination Failure, Moral Hazard and
    Sovereign Bankruptcy Procedures,” Bank Of England Conference on: The Role Of The
    Official And Private Sectors In Resolving International Financial Crises, Bank Of England,
    July.

[21] Goldstein Itay and Ady Pauzner (2002), “Demand Deposit Contracts and The Probability
    of Bank Runs”, mimeo

[22] Gorton, Gary (1988) “Banking Panics and Business Cycles”, Oxford Economic Papers.
    40, pp.751-781.

[23] Haldane, Andrew Simon Hayes, Adrian Penalver, Victoria Saporta and Hyun Song
    Shin (2002), “Binding-in the Private Sector”, unpublished, Bank of England, August.
    (http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/conferences/conf0207/bindinginps.pdf)

[24] Hellwig, Christian (2002) “Public information, provate information and the multiplicity of
    equilibria in coordination games” Journal of Economic Theory 107, pp.191-222.




                                              48
[25] Jacklin,   Charles and Sudipto Bhattacharya (1988) “Distinguishing Panics and
    Information-based Bank Runs: Welfare and Policy Implications,” The Journal of Political
    Economy 96, No. 3, June, pp. 568-592.

[26] Jeanne, Olivier (2000) “Foreign Currency Debt and the Global Financial Architecture,”
    European Economic Review 44, pp. 719-727.

[27] Jeanne, Olivier (1999) “Sovereign Debt Crises and the Global Financial Architecture.”
    Unpublished manuscript, International Monetary Fund, November.

[28] Jeanne, Olivier and Charles Wyplosz (2001) “The International Lender of Last Resort:
    How Large is Large Enough?” NBER Working Paper 8381, National Bureau of Economic
    Research.

[29] Jeanne, Olivier and Jeromin Zettelmeyer (2001) “International Bailouts, Moral Hazard,
    and Conditionality,” Economic Policy 16, issue No 33, October.

[30] Krueger,    Anne   (2001a)   “International   Financial   Architecture   for   2002:      A
    New Approach to Sovereign Debt Restructuring,”              IMF November 26,            2001.
    (http://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2001/112601.htm)

[31] Krueger, Anne (2001b) “A New Approach to Sovereign Debt Restructuring,” IMF, De-
    cember 20, 2001. (http://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2001/122001.htm)

[32] Krueger, Anne (2002) “New Approaches to Sovereign Debt Restructuring: An Up-
    date on Our Thinking,” Conference on ”Sovereign Debt Workouts:                  Hopes and
    Hazards” Institute for International Economics, Washington DC, April 1, 2002
    (http://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2002/040102.htm)

[33] Kumar, Manmohan, Paul Masson, and Marcus Miller (2000) “Global Financial Crises:
    Institutions and Incentives,” IMF Working Paper 00/105, International Monetary Fund.

[34] Meltzer Commission (2000) Report of the International Financial Institutions Advisory
    Commission (”Meltzer Commission”), Washington D.C.

[35] Mody and Saravia (2003)



                                             49
[36] Morris, S. and H. S. Shin (2000) “Global Games:                          Theory and Applications”, in-
    vited paper for the Eighth World Congress of the Econometric Society, Seattle, 2000,
    http://www.econ.yale.edu/˜smorris/seattle.pdf.

[37] Morris Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (2002), “Catalytic Finance”, mimeo

[38] Morris Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (2002b), “Social value of public information”, Amer-
    ican Economic Review 92.

[39] Rogoff,       Ken     and     Jeromin       Zettelmeyer        (2002)     “Early      Ideas    on    Sovereign
    Bankruptcy Reorganization:                   A Survey,”        IMF Working Paper 02/57,                     March.
    (http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2002/wp0257.pdf)

[40] Roubini, Nouriel (2000) “Bailin, Burden-Sharing, Private Sector Involvement (PSI)
    in Crisis Resolution and Constructive Engagement of the Private Sector. A
    Primer:       Evolving Definitions, Doctrine, Practice and Case Law,” September 2000.
    (http://www.stern.nyu.edu/globalmacro/psipaper.pdf)

[41] Roubini,       Nouriel      (2001a)       “Why     should      the     foreign     creditors   of    Argentina
    take     a     greater      hit/haircut      than      the     domestic     ones:       On      the    economic
    logic,       efficiency,     fairness      and    legality     of     ”discriminating”     between          domes-
    tic    and     foreign      debt     in    sovereign    debt    restructurings”        December       14,     2001
    (http://www.stern.nyu.edu/˜nroubini/asia/discriminationforeigndebt.doc)

[42] Roubini,      Nouriel (2001b) “Should Argentina Dollarize or Float?                                  The Pros
    and Cons of Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes and their Implications for
    Domestic         and       Foreign        Debt   Restructuring/Reduction”             December        2,      2001
    (http://www.stern.nyu.edu/˜nroubini/asia/argentinadollarization.doc)

[43] Roubini, Nouriel (2002a) “Private Sector Involvement in Crisis Resolution and Orderly
    Sovereign Debt Restructurings: The G-7/IMF Framework and the Open Unresolved Is-
    sues,” March 2002, New York University.

[44] Roubini, Nouriel (2002b) “Do we need a new international bankruptcy regime? Comments
    on Bulow, Sachs and White,” April 2002, New York University; forthcoming in the Brook-
    ings Panel on Economic Activity (http://www.stern.nyu.edu/globalmacro/bankreg.doc)

                                                           50
[45] Roubini, Nouriel (2002c) “Do we need a new international bankruptcy regime? Alternative
    regimes for orderly sovereign debt restructurings”, June 2002, New York University.

[46] Rochet JC and X Vives, (2002) “Coordination Failure and the lender of last resort: Was
    Bagehot right after all” mimeo.

[47] Sachs, Jeffrey (1984) “Theoretical Issues in International Borrowing,” Princeton Studies
    in International Finance 54, Princeton University Press.

[48] Sachs, Jeffrey (1995), “Do We Need an International Lender of Last Resort,”
    Frank D. Graham Lecture at Princeton University 8, April 20, 1995 (unpublished
    manuscript.(http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/cid/ciddirector/publicat.html#Working).

[49] Taylor, John B. (2001) “Strengthening the Global Economy after September 11 the Bush
    Administration’s Agenda”, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, November
    29, 2001.(http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/po831.htm)

[50] Taylor, John B. (2002a) “Grants and Sovereign Debt Restructuring: Two Key Elements
    of a Reform Agenda for the International Financial Institutions,” Testimony of John B.
    Taylor Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs before the Joint Economic
    Committee, February 14, 2002(http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/po1016.htm)

[51] Taylor,   John    (2002b)     “Sovereign   Debt   Restructuring:      A   U.S.    Perspective”
    remarks    at     Conference    on   “Sovereign    Debt    Workouts:       Hopes    and   Haz-
    ards” Institute for International Economics,              Washington DC, April 1,         2002.
    (http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/po2056.htm)

[52] Tirole, Jean (2002) “Financial Crises, Liquidity and the International Monetary System”,
    Princeton University Press.

[53] Wallace, Neil (1988) “Another Attempt to Explain an Illiquid Banking System: The Di-
    amond and Dybvig Model with Sequential Servicing Taken Seriously”, Federal Reserve
    Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 12, No. 4, pp. 3-16.

[54] Zettelmeyer, Jeronim (1999) “On the Short-Run Effectiveness of Official Crisis Lending”,
    unpublished manuscript, International Monetary Fund, December.


                                                51
