                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           WHY IS MANHATTAN SO EXPENSIVE?
                        REGULATION AND THE RISE IN HOUSE PRICES

                                             Edward L. Glaeser
                                              Joseph Gyourko
                                                Raven Saks

                                           Working Paper 10124
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w10124


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      November 2003




We are grateful to The Manhattan Institute for supporting this research. Gyourko also thanks the Research
Sponsors Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton for funding. This paper has benefited from
comments provided by Matt Kahn, Albert Saiz, Jesse Shapiro, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, the 2003 NBER Summer Institute, and the Wharton School of the University of
Pennsylvania. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Benajmin M. Friedman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why is Manhattan So Expensive? Regulation and the Rise in House Prices
Edward L. Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, and Raven Saks
NBER Working Paper No. 10124
November 2003
JEL No. R0

                                           ABSTRACT

In Manhattan and elsewhere, housing prices have soared over the 1990s. Rising incomes, lower
interest rates, and other factors can explain the demand side of this increase, but some sluggishness
on the supply of apartment buildings also is needed to account for the high and rising prices. In a
market dominated by high rises, the marginal cost of supplying more space is reflected in the cost
of adding an extra floor to any new building. Home building is a highly competitive industry with
almost no natural barriers to entry, yet prices in Manhattan currently appear to be more than twice
their supply costs. We argue that land use restrictions are the natural explanation of this gap. We
also present evidence consistent with our hypothesis that regulation is constraining the supply of
housing so that increased demand leads to much higher prices, not many more units, in a number
of other high price housing markets across the country.

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
egakleser@harvard.edu

Joseph Gyourko
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367

Raven Saks
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
        I.       Introduction


In some of America’s great cities, residential real estate prices have soared over the past
twenty years. In Boston and San Francisco, the median home price rose by 153 and 81
percent, respectively, in constant dollars between 1980 and 2000. According to the U.S.
Census, the median value of an owner-occupied housing unit in Manhattan rose from
$245,633 in 1980 to $377,246 in 2000 (both figures in 2002 dollars), implying an average
annual compounded real appreciation rate of 2.2 percent, which is double the national
average real appreciation rate on the widely-used Freddie Mac Repeat Sales Price Index.
Rising incomes and declining interest rates almost certainly have increased the
willingness to pay for proximity to productivity and amenities. The buoyant financial
sector, which thrives on the information flows facilitated by New York’s high density,
has pushed New York’s real per capita income from $26,730 to $46,349 between 1979
and 1999 (again both figures in 2002 dollars).1


New York’s high wages and attractive amenities make the demand for its space
understandable, but increases in the demand for housing need not always create such
large price increases. In many places, the supply of housing seems almost perfectly
elastic. For example, the population of Las Vegas almost tripled between 1980 and 2000,
but the real median housing price did not change. In fact, real median housing prices fell
in more than one-third of the larger American cities that added housing units at the
national rate or faster since 1980. In the sprawling cities of the American heartland, land
remains cheap, real construction costs are falling, and expanding supply keeps housing
prices down.


Even in New York City, housing supply used to help keep prices down. As New York
grew in earlier decades, existing blocks of apartments and homes were demolished to
make way for denser residences. Figure 1, which plots data back to the 1950s, shows that



1
 In 2002, 40 percent of the wage payroll in Manhattan was generated by the financial sector, broadly
defined.


                                                                                                       2
such rapid price growth has not always been the norm.2 During this earlier period, tens of
thousands of new units were built in Manhattan, and prices stayed flat. There were
13,000 new units permitted in Manhattan in 1960 alone, versus only 21,000 new units
permitted in Manhattan throughout the 1990s. Since 1980 and in spite of skyrocketing
prices, the housing stock of each of the three cities noted above has grown by less than 10
percent.


In this paper, we try to make the case that the limited supply response is not the result of
technological constraints, or imperfect competition in the construction industry, but rather
the consequence of an increasingly restrictive regulatory environment. In Manhattan and
in other parts of the country, local homeowners have become more and more competent
in blocking new development which they presumably oppose because the new
development would reduce the value of their property either because of increased supply
or because of congestion-related externalities. For reasons discussed just below our focus
is on New York City and Manhattan in particular, but we also present evidence for 21
major metropolitan areas across the country.


The prevailing methodology for assessing the impact of government regulation on
housing price is to compare housing prices in places with some observable form of
regulation with prices in places without that form of regulation. Katz and Rosen (1987)
provided one of the very first and best known such estimates, concluding that house
prices were from 20-40 percent higher in San Francisco area communities that had
enacted growth moratoria or imposed growth management control plans in the 1980s.3
This work is compelling, but more widespread analysis of this type is very difficult to
undertake because much regulation of the housing market is extremely challenging to
quantify. The opponents of development have a strikingly diverse array of weapons,


2
  The price data plotted in Figure 1 are for the metropolitan area as a whole. See the notes to the figure for
the details.
3
  Speyer (1989) and Pollakowski and Wachter (1990) followed with confirmation of significant
capitalization in two other metropolitan areas. There is also an extensive literature on zoning that is related
to our research, as one way to restrict development is via zoning. The interested reader should see Fischel
(1985) for an excellent review of that area and Hamilton (1978) for an early empirical study linking zoning
restrictions to high house prices.


                                                                                                              3
ranging from environmental law suits to public demonstrations which extend far from the
official rules that are supposed to influence the amount of construction.


Consequently, we adopt a different approach that depends much more on basic
economics. One of the strongest implications of free markets is that in an open,
competitive, unregulated market, the price of a commodity will not be greater than the
marginal cost of producing that good. Construction is an enormously competitive
industry, with more than 130,000 establishments nationwide and more than 1,000
establishments in multifamily construction in New York State alone. Free competition
among these suppliers should ensure that prices are pushed down to marginal cost, so the
presence of a large gap between market values and marginal production costs indicates
the presence of supply-side restrictions.4 If we are confident that we are not missing any
technological barriers to construction, then the gap between market value and the cost of
supply must reflect the impact of government regulation.


This approach has two obvious problems. First, our evidence is indirect, and we cannot
measure the price impact of any specific policy. Different types of zoning restrictions or
growth controls certainly could have different effects in the market. Second, unless we
are confident that our cost numbers fully capture the marginal cost of housing and that
the construction industry is perfectly competitive, our estimates will overestimate the
impact of regulation either because of omitted costs or because we are mistaking
monopoly power for government-created barriers to entry. We will address these
concerns by providing auxiliary information on the impact of zoning and other supply-
side restrictions and by interpreting only very large gaps between prices and production
costs as evidence for government regulation.


This suggests that the key task in our approach is to estimate the marginal cost of
producing a house. In the case of single-family homes, this combines the cost of building
the structure and the cost of buying and preparing the land. In the case of multifamily




                                                                                            4
apartments, the marginal cost of a unit is the cost of expanding a new project upwards.
Land shortages well may limit certain types of development in Manhattan, but builders
always can add an extra floor if that would be profitable. Thus, to understand the
marginal physical cost of building a new apartment we do not need to consider land
purchase or preparation costs, as these are fixed costs which do not influence the
marginal cost of building up. This is the primary reason why we focus on Manhattan, as
we are much more confident of the quality of the cost data in such a market.


Different data sources provide a range of estimates, from $120-$220 per square foot, for
the physical costs of different types of residential building construction in Manhattan.
These figures are meant to capture the purely physical costs of construction and do not
include the potentially very large costs associated with assembling a site for construction.
Still, we believe that a figure from the upper end of this range is a reasonable estimate for
providing more space if the builder were legally allowed to build up.


The data clearly show that market prices in Manhattan have been at least double this
marginal cost of production for many years. In the most recent years, Manhattan
condominiums have been selling for $600 per square foot, which is triple the marginal
cost of building up. This gap is so large that it is hard to believe that measurement error
in building costs could be responsible for the difference in any meaningful way.5 If it
costs $200 per square foot to build an apartment that sells for $600 per square foot, then
this would seem to offer an irresistible arbitrage opportunity for developers. The best
explanation for why they do not take advantage of this opportunity is the reason they tell
us themselves: New York’s maze of building regulations effectively cap their building
heights.


To support our contention that the price/cost is the result of regulation, not some other
force, we present other evidence on the New York housing market. First, we present a

4
  There are exceptions to this, of course, including the mark-ups that can occur when monopoly power is
present. We discuss this issue more fully below where we show it is not relevant to the home building
industry.




                                                                                                          5
brief synopsis of “The Battle of Carnegie Hill,” a classic case where local homeowners
used the regulatory process to halve the height of a new building. Second, we present
data on permitting activity, which also supports our contention that changes in the
regulatory environment help us to understand why Manhattan prices have skyrocketed.


We then ask whether other markets exhibit similarly large gaps between the price of
housing and the marginal cost of producing that housing. Given the rise of the so-called
Smart Growth movement in particular and environmental sensitivities more generally,
providing a broader geographic perspective is a useful exercise.6 We report results for
the 21 metropolitan areas tracked in the 1998-99 special Metropolitan files of the
American Housing Survey (AHS).7 In twelve out of the twenty-one markets that we
examine, the typical home costs no more than 110 percent of the combined costs of the
physical structure and the land. However, in the Boston, New York City, Newport News,
Salt Lake City and Washington, D.C. metropolitan areas, the gap between construction
costs and home prices is between ten and thirty-three percent. In the Los Angeles,
Oakland, San Francisco, and San Jose areas, the gap is from one-third to one-half of
typical house value. Given that California is well-known as the epicenter of the
restrictions on new construction, we found it gratifying that our measures suggested that
California had the highest “regulatory tax.”


Because the underlying data are for single family homes, we must estimate the price of
land as part of the marginal cost of the housing unit. As we discuss later in the paper,
there are a number of potential biases arising from the fact that there is insufficient data
on existing land sales with which to estimate the cost of a standard unit of land in a
straightforward manner. While the precise extent of bias is not known, we have made
every attempt to be conservative in estimating the gap between house values and
marginal production costs. While these results are inherently less robust than those we
report for Manhattan because of the difficulties in estimating land price, the evidence still

5
  The unit prices are from actual sales so there is not even the normal worry about biases from self-
reporting by owners for those data.
6
  The term Smart Growth typically refers to a variety of policies intended to deal with sprawl and other
emerging points of debate and contention relating to the modern urban landscape.



                                                                                                           6
strongly suggests that prices exceed construction costs in many coastal housing markets,
and by a fairly wide amount (if not by the precise numbers we report below in Table 6).
To further investigate whether these measures reflect regulation or some other factor, we
then correlate our regulatory tax estimates with other measures of zoning toughness. We
find a significant positive correlation, indicating that places with larger gaps between
market prices and production costs have more onerous zoning rules.


Finally, we ask whether the existing restrictions on new construction could be socially
optimal. After all, since the value of owner-occupied housing used as primary residences
is $9.4 trillion according to the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances, the social welfare
losses due to inefficient regulation may be considerable. While welfare analyses of
building restrictions are notoriously difficult to implement, the exercise is more
straightforward in Manhattan because changes in density are unlikely to create large
changes in the nature of the community. Our examination does not find any negative
externality (or combination of externalities) even remotely large enough to warrant a
development tax that leaves market prices as least double construction costs.


If we are right, and the building restrictions in New York have created this housing price
boom, it is worth asking what the social losses are from these high prices. After all, the
new residents are presumably being compensated for these high prices with higher wages
and amenities. Old residents are benefiting from being able to sell their homes at
extraordinary profits. If government regulation is excessive, the social losses are in the
underpopulation of high productivity, high amenity places. In short, if our estimates are
to be believed, then Manhattan is underpopulated. Likewise, high zoning taxes mean that
many of the attractive areas in California have too few people relative to the social
optimum. The social costs of binding development restrictions lie in the misallocation of
consumers, and having them live in less productive, less attractive places.


The plan of the paper is as follows. The next section discusses the gap between housing
prices and construction costs in Manhattan. Section III then presents other evidence on

7
    This work closely follows Glaeser and Gyourko (2002).


                                                                                             7
regulation in the Manhattan market. This is followed in Section IV with the 21
metropolitan area analysis using the American Housing Survey. Section V describes our
welfare analysis, and the paper concludes with a brief summary.


         II.      The Gap Between Prices and Production Costs in New York

Our primary empirical strategy is to measure the gap between real estate prices and
housing production costs, and use that differential to measure the distortions in the
housing market.8 We will use the term “Regulatory Tax” to reflect the increase in costs
imposed by regulatory restrictions which themselves could include quantity controls,
myriad zoning rules, or taxes and fees. As such, we will define the tax as:


    (1) Regulatory Tax = Market Price of a Housing Unit –
                  Marginal Cost of that Unit (absent government barriers)

This definition suggests two potential problems for accurate measurement. First, the
marginal cost of a unit absent government barriers may be hard to measure. Second,
even if we do measure this marginal cost correctly, there may be other reasons for a gap
between price and marginal cost other than regulation (e.g., monopoly power of
suppliers). A separate issue is if new construction generates negative externalities, then
the optimal Regulatory Tax is positive. We will return to this point at the end of the
paper, but at this point, we are trying to measure the regulatory tax, not inferring anything
about its optimality.


The issues surrounding cost measurement are very different for single-family dwellings
and large apartment buildings. In both cases, one component of cost is the physical cost
of construction, and we can fairly accurately assess the physical costs of construction
using sources such as the R.S. Means Company data. Their data include material costs




8
 Of course, as Glaeser and Gyourko (2003) emphasize, there is no reason why housing prices cannot fall
below construction costs in declining areas. In those places, there will be no new building in the market.


                                                                                                             8
and labor costs, but not costs associated with land.9 For apartment buildings in which the
marginal cost of a new housing unit is entirely reflected in the cost of building up (absent
government intervention), we can readily estimate the marginal cost of the unit with
construction cost data. In the case of single-family dwellings, we must also estimate the
cost of land, also absent government intervention. Data on existing land sales with which
to estimate land costs is very sparse, so we must use housing price hedonics to estimate
the how much current homeowners “value” their own land. While we will turn to this
approach for single-family homes in Section IV, the usual questions about hedonic
estimates lead us to focus initially on multi-family dwellings which are free from this
problem.


The second potential problem with our regulatory tax definition is that a gap between
prices and costs can arise for reasons other than government regulation, particularly if
some firms have market power that they can exploit. However, all available evidence
suggests that the housing production industry is highly competitive, with no natural
barriers to entry. The 1997 Economic Census reports that there were 138,850
establishments in the business of constructing single-family homes. While there are a
huge number of small, ‘mom and pop’-type operations, there also are more than 1,700
establishments with revenues in excess of $10 million. The multifamily housing industry
is only slightly less concentrated. In 1997, there were 7,544 establishments in this
industry and more than 1,000 in New York state alone. In the absence of some type of
land use controls, it is hard to doubt that residential construction would come as close as
possible to the economic ideal of a perfectly competitive industry.


Given that Manhattan is an island, one is naturally tempted to wonder if a fundamental
scarcity of buildable space has developed over time that, when coupled with strong recent
demand, is responsible for today’s high prices. However, even if vacant land is rare, new
units could be supplied by ‘building up’. Given the difficulties of accurately estimating
the value of land, this makes Manhattan, a market dominated by multi-story residential

9
 Two publications are particularly relevant for greater detail on the underlying data: Residential Cost
Data, 19th annual edition, (2000) and Square Foot Costs, 21st annual edition (2000), both published by the



                                                                                                             9
buildings, a natural application for our analysis. Because additional land is not required
on the margin, the production costs of an extra housing unit in this market can be well
approximated by the physical costs of adding an extra floor of space. As the appendix
shows, much of the new construction in Manhattan in recent times has occurred at
moderate building heights that could have easily been extended. Land shortages may
limit certain types of development in Manhattan, but builders always can add one extra
story if new housing units are needed.


Another potential source of distortions in the New York City housing market is rent
control.10 In some cases, rent control may limit the ability to tear down existing renter-
occupied buildings. Nonetheless, this should still reflect a fixed cost that does not change
the marginal cost of constructing an extra apartment in a new development.


Just How Expensive is Manhattan Real Estate?

Our primary data on prices comes from condominium sales records in Manhattan from
the First American Real Estate Corporation. These originate from deeds records and
represent actual transactions prices over the period 1984 to 2002. All sales prices
reported in this section are converted into 2002 dollars using the Consumer Price Index.
And, as our construction cost data are generally on a per square foot basis, we will also
convert our price data into per square foot measures.


We have a large sample of 23,060 condominiums spread throughout Manhattan. While
there is considerable variation in the data, the basic numbers suggest that Manhattan

R.S. Means Company.
10
   Rent control is the most widely-studied housing regulation. The rent control literature is a lengthy one
that has built on Friedman and Stigler’s (1946) classic analysis (reprinted in Bloch and Olsen (1981)). De
Salvo (1971) and Olsen (1972) produced the first modern, econometric analyses of New York City’s
control regime, with Rydell, et. al. studying Los Angeles’ foray into controls. Linneman (1987) and
Gyourko and Linneman (1989, 1990) followed with investigations of various equity and efficiency aspects
of control regimes. This work continues with Moon and Stotsky (1993) using longitudinal data to estimate
the impact of rent control on housing quality. Related work on how controls influence maintenance effort
and long-term impacts of controls include Olsen (1988), Ault and Saba (1990), and Pollakowski (1999).
Olsen and Early (1998, 2003) examine the relationship of rent controls with homelessness. More recently,
Glaeser and Luttmer (2003) provide a new look at resource misallocation under controls. While most of




                                                                                                        10
condo units have been selling for around $460 per square foot over the past two decades.
Prices are generally high, and the small difference between the median value of $455 per
square foot and the mean value of $468 per square foot indicates relatively little skewness
in the distribution (see the top row of Table 1). While there is a considerable upper tail
reflecting apartments that cost much more than $500 per square foot, the high mean value
is not being driven by a few outliers.


The variation in prices reflects both differences in the physical infrastructure of the
apartments and the difference in neighborhood amenities. As our goal is to compare
condominium prices with construction costs, we obviously are concerned about our
inability to measure all aspects of physical apartment quality. However, unless
neighborhood attributes specifically impact construction costs, the variation in prices that
is related to neighborhood amenities will not bias our results. Indeed, in a truly free
market, these amenities would not create a gap between construction costs and prices.
More attractive neighborhoods would simply end up having taller buildings.


In the second and third rows of Table 1, we report data from the New York City Housing
and Vacancy Survey (NYCHVS) for comparison purposes. Our NYCHVS sample
combines all independent observations in Manhattan from the years 1991-1999. This
widely-used data set has two failings relative to our condominium sales data. First, it is
much smaller. We have only 156 observations of condominiums in Manhattan and 165
for the outer boroughs. Second, the price data relies on self-reported market values, not
actual sales data. Even given these issues, the Manhattan data from the NYCHVS look
remarkably similar to the condominium sales data. The mean price per square foot is
$500, which is only slightly higher than what actual transactions show (and which
corresponds well with our priors and the literature on the upward bias of self-reported
values). The median price per square foot is $461, which is extremely close to the $455
value that we observe in the condominium sales data.




this research deals with the trade-off between equity and efficiency, Arnott (1995) has argued that rent
control can be efficient in the presence of landlords with some type of monopoly power.


                                                                                                           11
However, the data on condominiums in the outer boroughs suggest that the housing
market outside of Manhattan is extremely different (row 3, Table 1). The mean price per
square foot in the outer boroughs is $149/ft2, with the median value even lower at $120.
These results do not call into question the Manhattan data, but they do remind us that
New York’s hot housing market is a very localized phenomenon. The outer boroughs are
still full of much less expensive housing.


In the remaining panels of Table 1, we examine prices by apartment size, building height,
number of units in the building, and over time. Interestingly, there is little relationship
between apartment size and value per square foot except among the largest apartments,
which are more expensive. All else equal, larger apartments should be somewhat cheaper
to build on a square foot basis because they have a fixed amount of some forms of
infrastructure. Of course, all else is not equal and we believe these differences reflect
omitted quality factors. The largest apartments almost certainly are nicer along other
dimensions, so that it is likely that higher prices also reflect higher quality.


Not surprisingly, there is a tendency of prices to rise in value with building height. The
average price per square foot for condos in buildings with between 10 and 20 stories is
$400, while the average price per square foot in buildings with more than 40 stories is
$573. These price differences presumably reflect two factors. First, apartments in taller
buildings have better views. Second, taller buildings will tend to be more modern and
perhaps be of higher quality.


We also see a pattern whereby prices are higher in larger buildings. The price per square
foot is around $400 in the smaller buildings (i.e., those with <20 units), but rises to over
$500 for units in large buildings (i.e., those with >200 units). Again, it is unclear if this
price differential reflects better views or other characteristics that might be related to
building size.


Finally, examining the data over time finds large increases in the price per square foot
during the last few years. Prices were high in the 1980s and fell a bit during the recession



                                                                                              12
in the 1990s. They then recovered, rising steadily in the second half of the 1990s and
ending up at a level more than $100/ft2 above the previous high in the 1980s.


In Table 2, we look at the distribution of condominium prices by geographic location
within Manhattan. Eighty-three percent of our sales occur in four neighborhoods that are
closest to the midtown business district: the Upper East Side, the Upper West Side, Turtle
Bay/Stuyvesant and Midtown. Approximately 10 percent of our sales also occur in the
Greenwich Village/Financial District neighborhood. Less than five percent of the sales
occur in the Lower East Side, Harlem, Morningside Heights and Washington Heights.


The most expensive area in the data set is the Midtown area where prices per square foot
averaged $515, with the median unit selling for $490/ft2. The Upper East Side was the
next most expensive area with a mean price of $509/ft2. The Upper West Side was only
slightly less costly with a mean value per square foot of $494. Stuyvesant/Turtle Bay had
the biggest representation in our sample, with over 6,000 units. The mean price in that
neighborhood was $436 per square foot. Units in the financial district and Greenwich
Village were somewhat cheaper with an average cost per square foot of $416. The Lower
East Side apartments were cheaper still, valued at an average of $373 dollars per square
foot, which is still expensive but almost one-third cheaper than the top price
neighborhoods.


The remaining three neighborhoods, Morningside Heights, Washington Heights and
Harlem, appear to be quite different. In these neighborhoods, prices were generally
below $250/ft2, and often well below $200/ft2. Indeed, values in these neighborhoods
look more like the outer boroughs than the rest of Manhattan.


This neighborhood level evidence suggests that there is variation in prices across
Manhattan, with the uptown areas being considerably cheaper. Nonetheless, there is a
fair amount of uniformity across large parts of the borough. Prices are regularly above
$400 per square foot and, in many neighborhoods, almost one-half of the apartments cost
more than $500/ft2.



                                                                                          13
Within the owner-occupied sector, we have focused on condominiums rather than
cooperative units because we are concerned that sales prices of cooperatives may not
reflect the true cost of ownership due to their more complex ownership structures and
allegedly high maintenance fees. Nevertheless, they do represent a significant fraction of
the borough’s housing stock so they clearly warrant study despite concerns about data
quality.


Information on the distribution of self-reported market value per square foot using
Manhattan coops in the NYCHVS is reported in Table 3. The mean value is $382/ft2 ,
with the median sale price being $310/ft2. Holding unit and building quality constant, we
would expect the absence of a straightforward, fee simple ownership status to result in
lower values for cooperatives because property rights are valuable. Furthermore, the
average reported monthly fee associated with these coops is $600/month, which is about
$200 more than the average reported for condominiums in our sample, and at least
partially reflects the fact that coop buildings have independent debt.11 Even with our
concerns that reported values for cooperatives do not fully reflect the cost of owning the
unit, these results clearly indicate that high prices are pervasive throughout the owner-
occupied sector of the Manhattan real estate sales market, and are not confined solely to
condominiums.


The Costs of Production


We now turn to our data on the costs of production. Our primary source for construction
cost data is the R. S. Means Company, which surveys developers throughout the United
States. Given that no data source is perfect, we supplement the information from Means
with three other sources. One is Marshall & Swift, a rival construction cost service.
Second, we use estimates from the New York University (NYU) Center for Real Estate
and Urban Policy. The ultimate source of their data is Zaxon, a third construction cost




                                                                                            14
service. Finally, we use data on condominium costs outside of New York City using the
American Housing Survey. It should be emphasized that in this section of the paper, the
construction cost data pertain to condominium or cooperative-type product in multiple
unit buildings (i.e., these are different from the single-family cost data discussed in
Section IV).


The top panel of Table 4 reports construction costs for residential buildings by height that
are specifically adjusted for the geographic area of Manhattan by the R.S. Means
Company. Consistent cost data are available for structures of less than 25 stories.
Physical construction costs range from $140-$160 per square foot for structures up to 24
stories tall. Taller buildings are modestly more expensive to build, although the Means
data indicate that marginal costs are constant within a wide range of heights above seven
stories.12 If we interpret the Means data as applying to buildings shorter than 30 stories,
these estimates apply to 88 percent of the buildings in our condominium sample. The
NYCHVS topcodes building height at 20 stories, with 80 percent of the observations in
multifamily structures within Manhattan having fewer stories. Thus, the vast majority of
Manhattan residences are in a building type that is comparable with the Means cost
estimates, and it appears that the marginal cost of increasing the height of a typical
residential structure is about $160/ft2.13


As an initial check on the reliability of these data, we turn to a separate set of estimates
provided by the Marshall & Swift Company (see the next panel in Table 4). These costs

11
   Thus, the fee differentials are not due entirely to different maintenance levels or requirements. See
Schill, Voicu, and Miller (2003) for a recent analysis of the factors behind the pricing differences between
condominium and cooperative units in Manhattan.
12
   It is not clear from these data whether costs per square foot are higher or lower for taller buildings. The
Means Company notes that larger buildings tend to have lower costs per square foot, primarily due to
economies of scale and the decreasing contribution of the exterior walls. However, it is possible that
buildings much taller than 24 stories could have higher costs since they may require stronger structural
reinforcements and higher quality materials.
13
   One can obtain a slightly higher marginal cost by making different assumptions regarding the underlying
cost function. For example, if we were to begin by assuming the average costs reported by Means pertain
to the 2nd, 5th, and 15th floors (i.e., to the midpoints of the three height categories), and then presumed that
the average cost function is quadratic and goes through those midpoints (i.e., $142,2; $144,5; $160,15),
the total and marginal cost functions can be derived. In this particular example, marginal costs rise from
around $140/ft2 on the lower floors to about $180/ft2 for floors 10-15. To be conservative in our
calculations below, we will use a value of $200/ft2 for construction costs in the analysis below.


                                                                                                             15
also are specific to Manhattan, but this firm provides a bit more detail with respect to the
different qualities of residential buildings. Overall, these estimates span the results from
the R.S. Means Company. Costs for an average or good quality apartment building are
about $50 per square foot less than the costs reported by Means; costs for what is termed
an average quality, luxury apartment are about the same as Means reports; and costs for
a high quality, luxury apartment are about $50 per square foot higher than Means
calculates. Using this data, the maximum construction cost per square foot is about $220
per square foot for a very high-end residential building in Manhattan.


Yet another source of construction costs comes from a report prepared by Salama, Schill
and Stark for the NYU Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy in 1999. They report
evidence from Zaxon Inc., another construction cost estimator. These estimates, adjusted
to 2002 dollars, indicate a construction cost of about $193 dollars per square foot for a
15-story apartment building, and $134 per square foot for a six-story building. These
data are very much in line with the Means numbers, although the marginal cost for an
extra floor appears to be somewhat higher in these data. In addition, the NYU numbers
are slightly below the cost of a high quality unit according to Marshall & Swift.14


Our final piece of evidence on construction costs relies on condominium prices from the
American Housing Survey for areas outside of New York City. As long as the property
market has not been trending downward (which is the case for most of the 1990s), sales
prices should represent an upper bound on construction costs because developers also
need to turn a profit.15 The AHS data for Chicago indicate that the average price per
square foot of condominiums is $144/ft2. In buildings with more than 10 stories, the
price per square foot is $148. In the rest of the United States, the price per square foot of



14
   As a point of reference, physical construction costs above $150/ft2 are at least as high as those pertaining
to the highest quality single-family residences. In its single family construction cost files, the Means
Company estimates that a large 2,200 square foot, custom quality home with an unfinished basement would
have cost about $132/ft2 to build in the New York metropolitan area. The analogous figure for a luxury
quality home, which is the highest quality category in the Means data, is $159/ft2. [No land costs are
included in these figures.]
15
   There are too few observations on units in newly constructed buildings to create statistically meaningful
samples.


                                                                                                            16
condominiums equals $129. This estimate rises to $176/ft2 if we look only at buildings
with more than 10 stories.


Although part of the price differential across locations may be attributable to differences
in construction costs, the R.S. Means data suggest that the difference in construction costs
across metropolitan areas is relatively small. For example, Means estimates that
construction costs are 19 percent higher in the New York area than in Chicago. As such,
1.19 times sales prices in Chicago represents yet another estimate of construction costs in
New York. Of course, to the extent that there might be a “regulatory tax” in other areas
as well, this method will overstate construction costs. Taken together, these data strongly
suggest that something near $200/ft2 is a reliable upper bound on the marginal cost of
‘building up’ for the vast majority of Manhattan apartments.16


The Regulatory Tax in Manhattan


In computing the regulatory tax as the difference between marginal production costs and
market price, we will use $200 per square foot as our estimate of the former. We
recognize that there will be a small number of apartments that actually cost more than
this amount to build, but in most cases this value will overstate, not understate, the true
cost. When combined with the fact that reported asset values of older units are not
adjusted for depreciation, these assumptions make it highly likely that our estimate of the
regulatory tax will be a lower bound.17

16
   As another source, we also turned to data from the New York City permit office. This office reports an
estimate of the total value of structures put in place by builders along with the total number of units.
Dividing the value per unit by the average square footage per unit from our condominium data yielded an
average cost of $89/ft2. While this price is not totally implausible, especially if many of the units were
somehow controlled or stabilized, it seems quite low. One explanation for this low value is that builders
must pay taxes based on the value of construction they report. Therefore, they have an incentive to
underestimate true construction costs. In any event, we take the permit data as further confirmation of our
view that $200 per square foot is a reasonably generous estimate of the marginal cost of building higher for
high quality apartment buildings in Manhattan.
17
   Stated differently, none of the prices reported in Tables 1-3 reflect values ‘as if new’. Ideally, these
prices should be adjusted (upward) to account for the depreciation that occurs on older units before any
comparison with replacement costs. Unfortunately, the condo sales data from the First American Real
Estate Corporation do not include any information on the age of the buildings in which the units are
situated. The NYCHVS does report age in discrete form, including the following five categories: (a) built
in the 1990s; (b) built in the 1980s; (c) built between 1960-1979; (d) built between 1930-1959; and (e)


                                                                                                         17
Figure 2 begins the comparison by plotting the distribution of price-to-marginal cost
ratios for condominiums in Manhattan. Note that very few units have ratios below one.
In fact, price is above marginal production costs for 93 percent of the sample, with nearly
two-thirds (63 percent) being worth more than twice marginal costs. For an
overwhelming majority of Manhattan condominium owners, this suggests that some
form(s) of regulatory constraint has meant that their cost of housing is more than double
what it would be under a free development policy. Figure 3 charts the same information
for our smaller sample of cooperative units. Nearly three-quarters of these units have
price-to-marginal cost ratios above one, and one-third of this group is valued at more than
double marginal construction costs. Thus, it is clear that the regulatory tax is
meaningfully positive for this segment of the housing stock in Manhattan as well.18


For the median Manhattan condominium in our sample, the regulatory tax amounts to
well over half of the total price of the unit.19 Even for a condo from the 25th percentile of
the price distribution, the tax makes up just over 40 percent of the $339/ft2 total cost. For
cooperative units, the measured tax is smaller on average, but still is economically
significant. It is $182/ft2 at the mean, which amounts to 48 percent of average coop value



built prior to 1930. To try to estimate the impact of depreciation on older structures, we regressed reported
condo value in the NYCHVS on a set of age dummies to determine the average impact of age on value.
Adjusting the reported prices to reflect the regression estimates of depreciation yielded a mean of $625/ft2
and a median of $601/ft2 for the 156 Manhattan condominiums in the NYCHVS, which is 20-25 percent
higher than the reported values. However, the R2 from the regression was only 0.04, not all the coefficients
were statistically significant, and it was not the case that average values were monotonically lower the older
the structure. Similar analyses with the cooperative unit observations for Manhattan from the NYCHVS
yielded slightly higher upward adjustments (in percentage terms). However, these regression results also
were somewhat imprecise. Given these uncertainties, we decided not to work with adjusted (i.e., higher)
prices. While ‘as if new’ prices must be higher than the values we use, this decision is a conservative one
in the sense that it guards against any upward bias in our estimates of the impact of regulatory constraints in
the housing market.
18
   Our longer working paper version includes plots for the distribution of price-to-construction costs for
rental units. While those results are less reliable because we must impute asset values for rental units
(which is why do not report them here), it is noteworthy that for free-market apartments, 78 percent of the
units are valued above construction costs. Despite the fact that rent stabilized apartments are much
cheaper, it still is the case that 40 percent of them have implied asset values in excess of construction costs.
This result is particularly striking given that our estimate of construction costs is almost surely an
overestimate for older, lower quality buildings.
19
   From the top row of Table 1, we know that the median condominium price is $455/ft2. Assuming
$200/ft2 in construction costs, the implied tax is $255/ft2. The ratio of 255/455 equals 56 percent.


                                                                                                            18
in Manhattan. Thus, some type of regulatory constraints in the housing market appears to
be responsible for at least 50 percent of overall unit value for the mean owned apartment.


Translating these figures into annual cost terms can help illuminate the economic
relevance of these results. For simplicity, we presume the annualized cost can be
approximated by the multiple of the real cost of capital (or the real interest rate) and the
component of housing prices that we estimate to be the result of regulation.20 While real
rates of interest currently appear to be quite high by some calculations21, we use a more
conservative estimate of 3 percent for the real cost of capital to current borrowers. The
top panel of Table 5 reports the distribution of the annual regulatory costs for owners in
our condominium sample. For half of the sample, this estimate of the annual flow cost of
regulation exceeds $5,500 per year, or about 9 percent of mean annual wages in
Manhattan. A quarter of the sample is paying at least $9,668 per year, with the mean
flow value of the tax being $7,382. At a more detailed level, the value of the tax appears
to lie between $5,000 and $10,000 per year for 31 percent of our sample. For another 12
percent, the burden lies between $10,000 and $15,000 per year. Yet another 8 percent of
the sample pays between $15,000 and $25,000 per year. Finally, 3 percent of the sample
has a tax amount that is greater than $25,000 per year.22


         III.     Other Evidence on the Regulatory Causes of New York’s High Prices


20
   A more sophisticated analysis might compute the user cost of owning (e.g., see Poterba (1984) for
example). This term includes factors such as local property taxes and maintenance expenses (along with a
liquidity premium possibly) that also are thought to influence the cost of owning. For simplicity alone, we
assume these costs are orthogonal to the regulatory tax and exclude them from our analysis. To the extent
they are positively correlated, our annual estimates are lower bounds.
21
   As we write, the current interest rate on 30-year, fixed rate mortgages is approximately 5.6 percent
(depending upon factors such as points paid and the like) while inflation over calendar year 2002 was only
1.4 percent according to the annual average personal consumption expenditures chain-price index published
by the Bureau of the Economic Analysis. The simple difference between these two figures is 4.2 percent.
22
   These particular results are sensitive to the values of the real cost of capital and true construction costs
used in the calculation. However, absent much higher construction costs (e.g., $100 per square foot higher)
or much lower real interest rates (e.g., Japanese levels of near zero), the annual cost to condominium
owners is substantial. In addition, housing prices in part reflect expectations about future prices. If future
prices are expected to rise dramatically, then this might explain some of the high prices in New York and
would suggest that our simple calculation of multiplying the gap between housing prices and construction
costs with the cost of capital overstates the true impact of regulatory constraints. Of course, if by chance,




                                                                                                           19
Section II has documented that housing prices in Manhattan are far above construction
costs. While we have trouble thinking of a plausible alternative explanation other than
restrictions on construction for this fact, we recognize that we are in some respects just
naming a residual. As such, in this section, we offer two alternative pieces of evidence
which we believe support our contention that the gap between prices and costs is caused
by barriers to construction.

The Battle of Carnegie Hill

New York City has many examples of battles between developers and local residents, but
the ‘Battle of Carnegie Hill’, as it was referred to by the local press, is among the most
famous of these cases.23 This case from the Upper East Side of Manhattan became
locally famous because it involved the actors Woody Allen, Kevin Kline, and Paul
Newman, as well as some of New York City’s financial elite, including Citigroup CEO
Sanford Weill and the family of the prominent investment banker and former Clinton
Administration Deputy Secretrary of the Treasury, Roger Altman.


The case itself appeared mundane at first, with Citigroup selling a corner site at 91st and
Madison Avenue on which it had built a one-story branch bank facility to a local
developer. That firm, Tamarkin Architecture and Development, proposed a 17-story
apartment building. Even though the builder had previously acquired the air rights
necessary for such a tall structure on the site and there are other buildings at least 17
stories high within eyesight of 91st and Madison24, the development was potentially




New York City apartment prices were expected to fall (a not totally implausible possibility) then our
calculation understates the true effect.
23
   We are grateful to Matt Kahn for bringing this particular case to our attention. It was reported by the
New York Times as it was playing out. For more recent descriptions and overviews of the entire battle
between the developer and its opponents from various perspectives, the interested reader can see reports
and commentary from the following three sources: (a) New York Magazine, available at
http://www.newyorkmetro.com/nymetro/realestate/neighborhoods/features/4521/; (b) The City Review,
available at http://www.thecityreview.com/carmad.htm; and (c) the article “Carnegie Hill: By the Content
of Its Character” which was posted on the ‘upper east side’ section of an electronic guide to what is
happening in Manhattan; more specifically, see the Upper East Side, Manhattan section of ‘about.com’ at
the URL http://uppereastside.about.com/library/weekly/aa031200a.htm.
24
   See photographs in The City Review article cited in footnote 23 for these details.


                                                                                                       20
constrained by other facets of the local regulatory environment, most prominently those
associated with landmarks preservation.25


In the first half of 2000, the local Landmarks Preservation Commission denied the
developer’s request to build a 17-story building after hearing from numerous individuals
and groups that the structure would unjustly change the character of their neighborhood.
For his part, Mr. Allen even produced a short video about Carnegie Hill, and New York
Magazine reports that Mr. Kline quoted Richard II to the Landmarks Preservation
Commission on the matter—“How sour sweet music is, when time is broke, and no
proportion kept!”.


Even before the Landmarks Preservation Commission stepped in, Mr. Weill faced social
pressure from at least some of his friends to stop the proposed development. New York
Magazine reports that Mr. Altman’s wife, Jurate Kazickas, personally approached Mr.
Weill and asked him to buy back the site from the local developer--to which Mr. Weill
allegedly responded by asking why Ms. Kazickas did not buy it back herself.26
Presumably, a group including famous entertainers and investment bankers was not
financially constrained from taking up Mr. Weill’s suggestion and forming their own
personal ‘preservation trust’, but found it cheaper to achieve much the same end by
entangling the development in New York City’s regulatory maze.


Approximately three years later, construction finally was begun on a scaled down, 9-story
building that had been approved by the Landmarks Preservation Commission. The point
of this example certainly is not to conduct research by anecdote, however entertaining it
might be. That the regulatory process constrains the ability to ‘build up’ beyond this
example is supported by cases notes in the news reports cited above, as well as by data

25
   Any development that is not what is termed ‘as of right’ must go through the Uniform Land Use Review
Process (or ULURP) in New York City. The building code and broader regulatory environment that helps
determine what is and is not ‘as of right’ is very voluminous. For more on that, see the report by Salaama,
Schill, and Stark (1999) on the myriad of factors affecting the cost of housing construction in New York
City. Their Section 4 on the land use review process, building codes, permit approval, and taxes and fees is
the most relevant to our work.
26
   For the direct quotes and the entire interchange, see the first page of the article by Ralph Gardner, Jr. on
the New York Magazine web site listed in footnote 23.


                                                                                                            21
we obtained on the distribution of the height of new condominium buildings constructed
in Manhattan in the 1980s.27 For example, our sample contains eight structures that were
erected between 1980 and 1989 in the Midtown section of Manhattan, with their heights
ranging from 4 to 70 stories. In the Upper East Side (Carnegie Hill’s neighborhood),
there were seven condominium buildings put up during the same time period, and they
ranged in height from 1 to 32 stories. The Appendix reports analogous data for other
Manhattan neighborhoods. While we do not claim that all this heterogeneity is due to
regulation, the data are abundantly clear that much new residential building has occurred
at fairly low densities.


The Battle for Carnegie Hill also helps illustrate another very important lesson for our
research—namely, that it is extremely difficult to accurately measure the degree of
regulatory constraint facing housing development. It was not simply the presence of a
complex local code and one public commission that influenced a developer’s decision to
bring new housing units to the market, but also the ability of well-funded opponents to
use the regulatory process to substantially delay and change proposals. The inability to
measure all this precisely suggests that traditional difference-in-difference methods may
radically underestimate the true impact of regulation on housing prices (assuming the
measurement error is classical in nature, of course).

Permitting and Prices


We now provide another source of data—on house price changes and housing permits—
that is consistent with our hypothesis on the connection between government regulation
and high prices in Manhattan. In a free market, one would expect increases in housing
prices to lead to more new construction, but this need not be the case in a regulated
market where regulatory constraints of various types can choke off new supply. Figure 1
already suggests that there has been a marked drop off in permitting in Manhattan over
the past two decades, a period over which real house prices rose in excess of 2 percent
per annum. In order to look at the relationship between prices and quantities a bit more

27
     The data are from the First American Real Estate Corporation, the source of the price data used in



                                                                                                          22
closely, we regressed the number of permits issued in Manhattan in a given year on the
change in prices during the previous year.28 Figure 4 then plots the data and the
regression line for four different time periods dating back to 1955.


The 1955-1969 period was a time of relatively modest real price changes, but any
meaningfully positive appreciation typically was associated with a high level of
permitting activity the following year. A similar, but less strongly positive correlation is
observed for the 1970s in the adjacent plot. The variability in real price changes was
greater from 1970-1979, but the association of larger price appreciation with higher
future permitting activity is still clearly evident.29 Were this pattern to hold during the
1980s and 1990s, it clearly would be at odds with our conclusions that this is a market in
which regulation is constraining builders from bringing new units to market. However,
the bottom two graphs in Figure 4 document that changes in prices are not correlated with
future permitting activity in the 1980s and 1990s.30


Although these simple regression plots obviously do not concretely identify a supply-
demand framework (something that is well outside the scope of this study), they do
strongly suggest that the supply side of the housing market was able to respond much
more flexibly to higher demand in earlier decades. We know from above that real
income per capita skyrocketed in Manhattan during the 1980s and 1990s. Thus, an
examination of changes in prices and quantities is consistent with rising housing demand
that was not met by changes in supply. These conditions could easily have led to the
present situation in Manhattan in which the market price of the typical unit is at least
double its production cost.




Section II.
28
   We use lagged prices on the right-hand side on the assumption that it takes some time for developers to
be able to respond to price changes, even in an unregulated market. The house price series is for the New
York metropolitan area. See the notes to Figure 4 for the details. There is not an analogous price series for
Manhattan proper (i.e., for New York County).
29
   Both of the regression-line slopes are significantly different from zero at the 95 percent confidence level.
However, the estimation error is large enough that we cannot confidently conclude the slope is greater for
the 1955-69 period. All regression results are available upon request.
30
   While both slopes are slightly negative, we cannot reject the null that each is zero.


                                                                                                            23
         IV.      Is There Evidence of a Regulatory Tax in Other Housing Markets?


The housing price data used in this section come from the 21 metropolitan areas tracked
in the 1998-99 special Metropolitan files of the AHS. We use observations on single unit
residences that are owner occupied.31 Thus, the typical house in these samples is a single
family, suburban unit. The AHS data include self-reported home values, lot size, and a
number of other physical attributes of the housing unit including living area square
footage. Because the AHS contains no information on building costs, we turn to the R.S.
Means Company for data on that variable.


The Means data for single family homes contain information on four unit qualities—
economy, average, custom, and luxury.32 The data are broken down further by the size of
living area (ranging from 600ft2 to 3,200ft2), the number of stories in the unit, and a few


31
   Condominiums and cooperatives in buildings with multiple units are excluded from this particular
analysis.
32
   Means does not produce true constant quality cost series, as the company relies on building code
requirements to guide its cost estimation process. Since we will be working with data from two
consecutive years in this section, economically significant code changes are unlikely. Nevertheless, these
data have been criticized by Somerville (1999) for not reflecting actual builder experience or fully
controlling for quality changes. While his attempt to develop a constant quality construction cost series via
hedonic techniques certainly could be quite valuable for analysis over long time spans, we do not believe
the results of that analysis warrant not using the Means data or making adjustments to it. Somerville’s
results are based on data from a single home builder operating in three markets (Baltimore, Cincinnati, and
Houston) over a thirteen year period from 1979-1991, so it is not surprising that a single firm’s experience
does not match a market-wide average. Moreover, the sample size in Somerville (1999) works out to an
average of just under 60 observations per market area per year. Given the very small number of
subdivisions that must be involved, this only increases the chances of idiosyncratic factors driving the
differences between his hedonic series and the Means data for his three markets. In addition, there is no
indication that a standard confidence interval around his hedonic cost estimate would not encompass the
Means series. [There is no direct evidence that it would, either. We cannot replicate his results without
access to the confidential data supplied by his builder and the first-stage results. References to large
standard errors on key year controls in his first-stage regression hint that the confidence interval could be
relatively wide.]
          Other factors also increase our confidence in the Means data. One is that it has passed a market
test in the sense the firm has successfully sold its construction cost estimates for over 60 years. While we
recognize the conceptual superiority of a true constant quality cost series, none has been developed yet that
has passed such a test. Another is that the Means data have performed well in other contexts. Glaeser and
Gyourko (2003) and Gyourko and Saiz (2003) have used the Means cost data in the construction of
variables that work well (i.e., as the relevant theory would predicts) in regression analysis. While there is
no doubt that Means measures construction costs with some error, we know of no reason to suspect a
systematic bias. And, if the data largely reflected noise, then it is unlikely it would perform so well in the
papers just cited. Finally, the cost estimates that Means produces for the Manhattan market are close to
those we were able to gather from other independent sources for that market. We do not have independent
sources for any of the other markets we study.


                                                                                                           24
other differentiators. In our comparisons with house prices from the metropolitan files of
the AHS, we presume that construction costs are those associated with the mean of
economy and average quality homes. Holding constant the size and other physical traits
of the unit, construction costs for an average quality home are about 40 percent higher
than those for an economy quality home according to the Means data. Thus, our
estimates of construction cost reflect modest quality, but not the lowest possible quality
that meets building code requirements.33


While there are various adjustments that need to be made to the data before comparing
house prices to construction costs, the biggest difficulty with this procedure is in inferring
the free market cost of land.34 As discussed above, we use the AHS data to estimate the
marginal value of land via a standard housing hedonic that expresses the value of a house
as a function of its various characteristics, including the amount of land on which it sits.
The estimated coefficient on land area will reflect the degree to which the market
valuation of a house increases with lot size. Of course, this estimate of the market
valuation of land area may be biased, particularly if the amount of land is correlated with
omitted housing characteristics. If houses on bigger lots tend to be of higher quality (in
ways that we cannot explicitly control for), the resulting specification error will bias the




33
   This assumption of modest, but not really low, quality is also reflected in our assumptions that the costs
are for a one-story house with an unfinished basement and the average costs associated with four possible
types of siding and building frame. In addition, we develop cost estimates for small (<1,500ft2), medium
(1,550-1,850ft2), and large (>1,850ft2) homes in terms of living area.
34
   Two adjustments are made to the AHS data before comparing house prices to construction costs. These
are to account for the depreciation that occurs on older homes and to account for the fact that research
shows owners tend to overestimate the value of their homes. To account for the latter factor, we follow
Goodman and Ittner (1992) and presume that owners typically overvalue their homes by 6 percent.
Empirically, the more important adjustment takes into account the fact that the vast majority of homes are
not new and have experienced real depreciation. Depreciation factors are estimated using the AHS as
follows. First, house value per square foot (scaled down by the Goodman & Ittner correction) in the
relevant year is regressed on a series of age controls and metropolitan area dummies. The age data are in
interval form so that we can tell if a house is from 0-5 years old, from 6-10 years old, from 11-25 years old,
from 25-36 years old, and more than 45 years old. As expected, the coefficients on the age controls are
each negative and represent the extent to which houses of different ages have depreciated in value on a per
square foot basis. We then adjust the reported values to account for the estimated depreciation so as to
compare the value of a unit as if it were new with its replacement cost. On average, this adjustment results
in about a 40 percent higher asset value for comparison with new construction costs. See our 2002 working
paper for more detail on this procedure.


                                                                                                           25
coefficient upwards. Conversely, omitted characteristics will bias the coefficient
downwards if houses on bigger lots are built where land is cheap.35


Hedonic estimates of the value of land per square foot (in 2000 dollars) for the 21
metropolitan areas surveyed in the two most recent waves of the metropolitan files of the
AHS are reported in Table 6 (see column 3).36 The metropolitan area files provide a
relatively large number of observations, thereby allowing us to estimate attribute prices
fairly precisely, while covering a fairly wide cross section of places in the most recent
survey years.37


The results from column three of Table 6 indicate a wide range of prices across
metropolitan areas, ranging from 13-15 cents per square foot in Birmingham and Houston
to about $4 per square foot in the Bay Area communities of San Francisco and San Jose.


35
   While these are the most likely sources of bias, there probably are other factors making it difficult to pin
down the value of a standard unit of land (e.g., differential option value across locations, etc.). Our strategy
is to make every effort possible to guard against our Regulatory Tax estimates from being biased upward
for the single family house markets in which we must estimate land value as part of the marginal cost of
production. Toward that end, we restrict the underlying samples from the AHS to homes with no more than
two acres of land (i.e., with less than 87,120 square feet of lot). Including observations with larger amounts
of land reduces estimated land prices below those reported below in Table 6, suggesting that there is some
downward bias of the hedonic estimates associated with large lot residences being developed in parts of the
metropolitan area with cheap land. In addition, as suggested above, the hedonic estimate of land price will
overestimate the free market value in markets with binding regulatory constraints.
36
   Four different hedonic specifications were estimated. Generally, the specifications are of the following
form: House Price = p*Land Area + z*Other Controls, where the model is estimated separately for each
metropolitan area. The other controls include the number of bedrooms, the number of bathrooms, the
number of other rooms, an indicator variable that takes on a value of one if the home has a fireplace, an
indicator variable that takes on a value of one if the home has a garage, an indicator variable that takes on a
value of one if the home is in the central city of the metropolitan area, an indicator variable that takes on a
value of one if the home has a basement, an indicator variable that takes on a value of one if the home has
central air-conditioning, and the age of the home. Two of the specifications use the logged value of house
price, while two are purely linear in nature. In addition, two of the models (one logged, the other not) use
the data on interior square footage to capture the size of the home, while the other two use the detail on the
number of bedrooms, bathrooms, and other rooms. In general, the results were quite consistent, although
there is some variability in estimated land prices across the different hedonic models. The land prices in
Table 6 are the mean of the values from the two specifications yielding the second and third highest prices
(i.e., we rank the specifications from lowest to highest implicit land prices estimated and report the average
of the prices from the second and third specifications). The key conclusions regarding the zoning tax are
not sensitive to this choice. All the underlying results are available upon request.
37
   Our 2002 paper performed a similar analysis using the 1999 national file of the American Housing
Survey. The results are similar quantitatively, with the coastal metropolitan areas having much higher
marginal prices of land. However, the estimates here tend to be smaller and much more precisely
estimated. Given the far fewer number of observations at the metropolitan area level in the national file,
we are much more confident of the reliability of the results reported here.


                                                                                                             26
While there clearly are some high price places, these data suggest that consumers in most
areas place a relatively low value on land on the margin. In 16 of the 21 metropolitan
areas, the estimated price is below $1 per square foot. In the two lowest price areas of
Birmingham and Houston, the hedonic land values imply that a typical homeowner
would be willing to pay no more than $1,400-$1,600 for an extra quarter acre of land.38
Even in the Baltimore and Salt Lake City metropolitan areas, in which we estimate the
price of land to be from $0.83-$0.88 per square foot, a quarter acre of land is valued at no
more than $9,040. On the other hand, the hedonic price of land is much higher on the
West Coast. Using the $4 per square foot average of the prices in the two Bay Area
metropolitan areas surveyed implies that a quarter acre is valued at well over $40,000.


While these calculations obviously take some liberty with the meaning of a small change
in the quantity of land, they do illustrate that the value of land as measured by these
hedonic prices is not likely to constitute the bulk of the total value of the typical home in
most of these metropolitan areas. This is evident by comparing the quarter acre land
values discussed above with the mean home prices (in 2000 dollars) reported in column
four of Table 6.


The final column in Table 6 reports our estimate of the Regulatory Tax as a percentage of
average house value in the metropolitan area. Note that the tax is zero or negligible
(defined as less than 10 percent) in over half the markets.39 However, the tax exceeds 10
percent of average home price in nine market areas (Boston, Los Angeles, New York,
Newport News, Oakland, Salt Lake City, San Francisco, San Jose, and Washington, DC).
While the 12 percent figure for the New York metropolitan area is interesting for
comparison purposes with the results we reported above for Manhattan condominiums,
the impact of regulation on land values is much higher in other markets, especially those

38
   There are 43,560 square feet in an acre of land, so $0.13*10,890=$1,416 and $0.15*10,890=$1,634.
39
  We assigned a value of zero for the Regulatory Tax if physical construction costs exceeded the average
house price in the metropolitan area. We would not expect to see new construction in areas with
production costs above market prices. In all areas but Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, a positive Regulatory
Tax results if we assume construction costs associated with the lowest quality units (i.e., economy homes)
tracked in the Means Company data. Effective house quality may, in fact, be lower than we presume in
these areas, but we think it preferable to employ assumptions that lead our estimates to be conservative
rather than aggressive.


                                                                                                        27
on the west coast. In Los Angeles, Oakland, San Francisco, and San Jose, the gap
between prices on the extensive and intensive margins amounts to from one-third to one-
half of home value at the mean. In Boston, Newport News, and Washington, DC, the gap
constitutes about one-fifth of total property value.


Thus, the evidence for single-family housing markets across a diverse set of metropolitan
areas recently tracked by the American Housing Survey suggests a big role for regulatory
restrictions in accounting for high house prices in a select set of primarily coastal
markets. While we have taken every possible precaution to guard against our Regulatory
Tax estimates from being biased upward, we fully recognize that the inability to fully
control for heterogeneity in the quality of land makes these estimates less robust than
those reported above for Manhattan.


Faith in the reliability of these regulatory tax estimates would be increased by showing
that they are related to zoning or other land use restrictions. Unfortunately, such data are
difficult to obtain. Perhaps the most prominent source of such information comes from
the Wharton Land Use Control Survey. This survey took place in 1989 and covered 60
metropolitan areas. While this is a decade prior to our AHS-based results, if there is
persistence in the strictness of land use controls over time40, then we still should see a
meaningfully positive correlation between our Regulatory Tax measure and the severity
of land use restrictions.


Among other variables in the Wharton Land Use Control Survey is a measure of the
average length of time between an application for subdivision approval and the issuance
building permits for a modest size, single family subdivision of less than 50 units, which
we term SUBDIVTIME. This measure can take on values ranging from one to five with
a value of one indicating the permit issuance lag is less than three months, a value of two
indicating the time frame is between three and six months, a value of three indicating a 7-



40
 Housing industry professionals certainly claim there is, but there is no consistent time series evidence of
which we are aware on this matter. This clearly is a matter that future research should address.


                                                                                                          28
12 month lag, a value of four meaning the lag is between one and two years, and a five
signaling a very long lag of over two years.


We are able to match data for this variable with 20 of the 21 metropolitan areas reported
in Table 6.41 The simple correlation between our regulatory tax measure and
SUBDIVTIME is 0.74. Regressing our regulatory tax estimate on SUBDIVTIME finds
that a unit increase in the categorical zoning lag variable is associated with a 15
percentage point increase in the amount of the regulatory tax.42 While this sample size is
quite small and no causality can be inferred, it still is comforting that the places we
estimate to have high regulatory tax levels are in fact those with more onerous zoning.43


     V.      Can Manhattan’s Regulatory Tax Be Justified?


While our findings suggest that regulation has restricted supply in Manhattan and a few
other coastal housing markets, the existence of such a gap between price and marginal
cost is not necessarily inefficient. Indeed, much of the literature on zoning (see Fischel,
1985) has argued that land use controls are absolutely necessary to get developers to
internalize the social costs of their actions. In this section, we ask whether there is likely
to be any negative externality large enough to warrant a Regulatory Tax of the size we
estimate exists for Manhattan.



41
   The Wharton Land Use Control Survey did not include the Norfolk-Newport News area.
42
   The R2=0.55 and the t-statistic on the zoning constraint variable is 3.2 from this regression with 20
observations.
43
   Other measures in the data base include the analogue to this zoning delay question, except that the permit
length time applies to a request for rezoning for residential building purposes in a small subdivision.
Examination of this and other related variables found correlation patterns similar to those just reported. In
our longer working paper version we also investigated the correlation between our regulatory tax variable
and the time to permit issuance following zoning requests using data from the 1989 national file of the
AHS. Two benefits of using that data are that the year is identical to that of the zoning survey and a few
more metropolitan areas can be matched across the two data sources. The biggest drawback is that there
are far fewer observations per metropolitan area, so that the underlying hedonic trait price estimation used
to compute the price of land and, therefore, the regulatory tax amount, is much noisier. The correlation
between the regulatory tax estimates and the zoning measure was smaller, but still significantly positive at
0.39. And, the analogous regression still yields a significantly positive coefficient implying about a 7
percentage point increase in the regulatory tax amount for a unit increase in the categorical zoning
regressor. See Table 6 to our 2002 working paper for those details.



                                                                                                          29
In Manhattan, an optimal zoning tax should incorporate at least three elements in order to
reflect the marginal social cost of a new resident to the community. First, and most
obviously, the zoning tax should reflect the fact that a new apartment may eliminate
views of existing apartments. Indeed, most current height restrictions exist for exactly
that reason. Second, the new development should be taxed to the extent there are
negative externalities created by extra crowding. Pure wage effects (i.e., the fact that
more workers can depress wages) are pecuniary, not real, externalities and the usual
economic logic suggests that these effects should not be part of the development tax.
Third, any tax should reflect the fiscal burden of the new resident. The fiscal burden
should be defined as the difference between government expenditures on the new resident
and the taxes that the resident will face. After addressing each component in turn, we
conclude that the present degree of regulatory constraint on new housing construction is
inefficiently higher—and most probably by a wide margin.


While welfare analyses of zoning are inherently difficult to perform, Manhattan provides
perhaps the best possible laboratory. Adding even a large number of housing units and
people will not change the basic nature of the place, a factor that makes the evaluation
much more straightforward. That said, our results are most properly viewed as educated
guesses, not precise estimates.


Estimating the Value of Views Destroyed by New Construction


The view-related externality is perhaps the most straightforward to estimate. For each
new apartment, the view-related externality equals the number of views blocked by a new
apartment times the welfare cost of blocking a view. The number of views blocked
should reflect the marginal impact of a single new apartment given the existing structure
of apartments in New York.


In a world with homogeneous consumers, the welfare value of a view should equal the
current market price of a view, which can be estimated by comparing apartments with or




                                                                                           30
without views.44 Benson, et. al. (1998) have recently reviewed the existing literature on
hedonic estimates of the price of a view. Estimates vary, but a typical result suggests that
a good view raises the value of the property by about 10 percent. However, most of this
literature uses cross sectional data on single family homes and often estimates the value
of a view associated with some type of natural resource such as the ocean or a mountain
range. Hence, the relevance for our problem of the value of an urban view is somewhat
limited.


Consequently, we decided to compare the prices of condominiums in the upper and lower
floors of the same building using our sample of Manhattan condos, which covers 20,426
units in 518 apartment buildings. We regressed price (in log form) on the square footage
of the unit (also in log form) and a series of dummy variables controlling for the floor of
the unit and a measure of unit size. Specifically, we included a dummy variable ( I11-20 )

that takes on a value of one if the unit is on floors 11-20, another dummy variable ( I 21-30 )

that equals one if the unit is on the 21st-30th floors, and yet another ( I 31+ ) for units on or

above the 31st floor of their buildings. The regression results were as follows


      Log(Price) = .08 • I11-20 + .16 • I 21-30 + .23 • I 30+ + 1.00 • Log(Square Footage)
(2)                                                                                           .
                   (.006)       (.009)          (.01)       (.008)


The regression also includes building-specific fixed effects and year-of-sale fixed effects
that are not reported here. Standard errors are in parentheses and the R2=0.59.


We are most interested in the coefficient on the I 31+ indicator variable that effectively
captures the difference in the prices of condos on the bottom ten floors of the building
relative to those above the 30th floor. Fully recognizing that this coefficient of 0.23 is



44
  In principle, this will be true with heterogeneous consumers as well as long as there are enough
apartments of differing types. If a new apartment blocks the view of someone who values his view more
than the market does, this person can just move apartments and acquire a new (identical) apartment with a
view paying the market cost of a view. Of course, we recognize that urban housing markets are rarely that
fluid.


                                                                                                       31
likely to overstate the value of a view45, the results suggest that the difference in value
between being really high up in a building and being on the first ten floors is about 25
percent of unit price, which we use as our estimate of the value of a view.46


How many apartments’ views does a new apartment block? No economic literature on
this topic exists. One should be an upper bound on this number. After all, the worst
outcome possible is that no apartments have any views, and this would mean that on
average each apartment blocks one other apartment’s view. Of course, it is easy to
contemplate lower numbers. For example, it is possible to imagine tall buildings spaced
far enough from one another (perhaps in the Corbusier Radiant City) so that no views are
blocked. We take 0.5 as a reasonable middle ground and we will use this value as our
estimate.


Given the assumptions, each new apartment destroys one-half of a view of some other
apartment. Since the loss of one complete view would reduce the value of the apartment
by 25 percent, each extra dollar of tall building will lead to about 12.5 cents of lost view.
This finding suggests that lost views are not likely to amount for more than 10-15 percent
of the total value of new housing. As such, views alone suggest that apartments should
face a construction related regulatory tax equal to approximately 12.5 percent of their
value.


Congestion Externalities

A second possible source of externalities that could justify a large regulatory tax on
development is crowding. If people find living in a crowded place distasteful or more
costly, then it is sensible to tax new residents for the costs they impose on current

45
  Unit quality is not fully captured by controlling for unit size (and we do not have other variables in our
data set). If interior quality is superior on higher floors, as we suspect is the case, our estimate of view is
biased upward. We are largely unconcerned by this because our goal is not to provide a precise measure,
but to determine whether views and other externalities could reasonably justify the gap between values and
costs that we currently see in Manhattan. An overly generous estimate of the value of a view serves that
purpose well.




                                                                                                            32
residents. This is a difficult issue to analyze for a number of reasons. First, there is
research in urban and transportation economics which suggests that tall buildings actually
help internalize congestion because trips can be shortened or the number reduced.47 If
that effect is dominant, then building up should be subsidized, not taxed. A related
question is whether the appropriate tax should be based on gross or net congestion. Gross
congestion can be thought of as the social costs imposed on New Yorkers created by one
more apartment in New York. Net congestion is the social costs imposed on New
Yorkers by having one more apartment minus the social costs alleviated by having the
apartment located somewhere else. Perhaps in an ideal system, all localities would
charge fully for the gross congestion cost to that locality. However, if some localities are
not charging (as Table 6 suggests is the case), then it seems like the appropriate tax
should be based on net congestion costs.


Indeed, the net congestion cost imposed by an extra apartment in New York might be
positive. Given New York’s specialization in high density, we suspect that congestion
externalities could be lower in Manhattan than anywhere else in the country. First, the
island does not have a bucolic, rural character that would be spoiled by new residents.
Second, residents of Manhattan overwhelmingly take public transportation or walk. Only
11 percent of Manhattan residents in the 2000 census reported driving alone or
carpooling to work. Congestion does matter on the sidewalks or the subways, but it is far
less important than when driving, mostly because people without cars take up so much
less room than people with automobiles. Congestion also could be reduced if the number
of overall trips is reduced by building to greater densities, per the discussion just above.
If one accepts these arguments, then it seems quite likely that the relative congestion
effect of moving to New York (versus whatever alternative locale) is likely to be
negative. By turning a car driver into a subway rider, congestion on net is reduced rather
than increased. Moreover, urban residents of Manhattan move there in part to be around
other people. This reflects a congestion amenity, not a disamenity.


46
   Because the indicator variable is not continuous, the derivative relating price to floor is not well defined.
Using the adjustment suggested by Halvorsen and Palmquist (1980) for such cases yields the 25 percent
figure.
47
   See Fujita (1989) and Kanemoto (1980) for reviews and the theory behind this contention.


                                                                                                              33
While we suspect the net congestion externality may be positive, we do not try to
estimate it, especially since it would be determined by the relevant alternative locale.
Instead, we will attempt to estimate the size of gross congestion externalities, which
should be thought of as the cash value of the total loss of utility on everyone in
Manhattan created by a new resident. The natural means of estimating this value is to see
whether rents, holding income constant, rise or fall with city population. If people
demand a compensating wage differential for living in a more densely populated city,
then a natural measure of urban amenities is the real income in the metropolitan area. In
this case, income will be low in cities where amenities are high and high where amenities
are low. As such, if the distaste for crowding is large, then we should expect to see a
strong relationship between real income and city size.


Using the 193 cities in 1990 with population levels greater than 100,000, we estimate the
following regression: 48


(3) Log(Median Rent)=-3.4+ 1.04*Log(Per Capita Income)-.05*Log(City Population)
                     (.64) (.06)                      (.016)

Standard errors are in parentheses, and the R2=0.58.49 The –0.05 coefficient on log
population indicates that rents fall only modestly with increases in population, income
held constant. The fact that a one percent increase in population causes a .05 percent
decrease in rents suggests that people are paying less (holding income constant) in more
populated places. This supports the idea that there is a small gross congestion
externality.50


48
     This sort of specification will generate the elasticity that we are interested in if, for example,
U = W / P + A across cities, where U is reservation utility, W is wages, P is the price level (which will
be proxied for with rents) and A equals the amenity level.
49
   The regression also included a control for the percent of residents over the age of 25 with less than 9
years of schooling.
50
   That said, other specifications indicated a smaller negative or even positive effect of population. For
example, controlling for land area turns the population coefficient positive, although not statistically
significantly so. [The coefficient on land area is significantly negative, as expected.] We also tried
controlling for density directly and found denser areas had higher prices. At face value, this suggests that
crowding is good. However, this probably reflects omitted variables having to do with supply constraints


                                                                                                           34
While there certainly are reasons to question these estimates (e.g. the endogeneity of the
variables discussed just above in footnote 50), they strike us as reasonable benchmarks
for the value of the gross congestion externality in New York. Using this estimate, a one
percent increase in city population reduces the utility level (measured as a share of
housing costs) by one-twentieth of one percent. Another way to interpret this value is
that with an extra percent of population in New York, the value of all homes will drop by
one-twentieth of one percent due to congestion externalities. This argues for an
additional five percent zoning tax on new apartments due to these congestion
externalities. Thus, there appears no way that congestion externalities themselves could
justify anything close to the size of the Regulatory Tax that we presently see in
Manhattan.


Wage effects are even more problematic to estimate and interpret. As already noted,
there are reasons to think that this impact should be ignored. If it is driven through
standard labor market effects, then these are pecuniary rather than real externalities. And,
in many cases, new apartments will lead to a redistribution of population from the
suburbs to the central city and will not change the total size of New York’s labor force.


The very direction of the impact of additional workers on wages in Manhattan is not at all
clear. Although standard estimates in the labor economics literature find the slope of the
demand curve to be steeply downward-sloping51, those results do not pertain to our
analysis because they hold output and capital constant. In our case, it is not reasonable to
assume that more workers simply would be dumped into Manhattan with no reallocation
of capital or additional local output.52 Effectively, adding more people to the area will
cause the demand for labor to shift out. Furthermore, urban agglomeration theory


or local amenities. In addition, attempts to instrument for population and density in the crowding
regressions yielded slightly positive coefficients on population. In any event, all the analyses we have done
indicates that –5 percent is an upper bound on this particular externality.
51
   In a comprehensive survey of the literature, Hamermesh (1993) concludes that the elasticity of
employment with respect to wages lies in the range of -0.15 to -0.75. These values imply an elastic
response of wages with respect to employment.
52
   One would have to make an extreme assumption about the share of tradeable goods across areas to get no
local output effects.


                                                                                                          35
suggests that productivity also may increase, with firms passing on some of the gains to
workers. Thus, the diminishing marginal productivity of labor notwithstanding, wages
might well rise with city population.


In fact, empirical work by Ciccone and Hall (1996) and Glaeser and Mare (2001) finds
that increasing population levels are associated with increasing – not decreasing – wage
rates when one looks at the relationship across cities. If agglomeration economies were
dominant as these results indicate, then zoning restrictions would impose an additional
cost in terms of limiting city size. Our experimentation with a number of models
sometimes yielded a negative impact on wages, but it never was large (in absolute value)
or statistically significant.53 In any event, even if this reflects a real, not a pecuniary,
externality, its magnitude is far too small to rationalize development constraints that
leave prices at least double production costs.


Fiscal Externalities from New Construction


The final category of social costs due to new construction that we examine comes
through government taxation and expenditure. If new residents require far more in local
government expenditures than they pay in taxes, then this would be yet another reason for
potentially taxing new construction. Of course, one could argue that a sensible response
to these fiscal externalities is just to charge new residents directly for the services that
they use, instead of relying on some type of development tax. Still, it is worthwhile
asking whether new residents in Manhattan condominiums even create a net fiscal drain
on New York City.


While compelling statistics do not exist, there are a number of good reasons to believe
that new residents in Manhattan condominiums would represent a considerable fiscal

53
  Empirical work in this area is fraught with various potential specification biases, so accurately pinning
down an impact is very difficult. For example, regression estimates of the population-wages relationship
using cross-sectional variation may be upwardly biased because more productive places (with higher
incomes) end up attracting more people and, therefore, have larger populations. Regressions using changes
in population and income may also be biased if increases in urban population are driven by increases to the
productivity of the metropolitan area.


                                                                                                        36
transfer to, not from, the city. First, these residents tend to be rich. People living in
apartments that cost more than $500,000 will tend to be far richer than the average New
Yorker. As such, they are likely to increase the average income in the city. Second,
these residents tend to have small numbers of children. On average, 23 percent of the
residents of Manhattan are enrolled in school, as opposed to 27 percent for the city as a
whole. The residents of expensive condominiums are also disproportionately likely to
have smaller families and to enroll their children in private schools. These individuals
are paying taxes for the use of schools and not using them, to the benefit of the
government’s budget. Finally, a number of government expenditures entail large fixed
costs. For these expenditures, new population is an unqualified improvement since it
allows those expenditures to be spread over a larger base. Altogether, we are quite
confident that the residents of new condominiums in Manhattan, even if those apartments
were priced at $200/ft2 rather than $500/ft2, are likely to be a fiscal boon, not a fiscal
drain on the city.


While the analysis in this section does not allow us to pin down the level of the optimal
tax (or subsidy) on new development, it does show that there is no negative externality
(or combination of externalities) remotely large enough to justify the current gap between
prices and production costs of condominiums in Manhattan. Moreover, it is possible that
a thorough analysis of the impact on transportation might even justify subsidizing denser
construction in Manhattan. And, when one recalls that we have been very conservative in
not adjusting market values for depreciation, thereby minimizing the measured gap
between condominium values and their physical construction costs, it is hard to escape
the conclusion that regulatory constraints on building in Manhattan are far too restrictive.


       VI. Conclusion


Home building is an enormously competitive industry with virtually no natural barriers to
entry. Price markups over construction costs, therefore, are a strong indication of
artificial barriers to new construction. In the bulk of the United States, the costs of
producing housing are hard to estimate because of the lack of reliable data on the cost of



                                                                                             37
land. Nevertheless, the data that are available indicate that in expensive coastal areas
especially, there often is a substantial gap between the price of housing and construction
costs. This gap suggests the power of land use controls in limiting new construction.


There is similar evidence of an important regulatory impact for Manhattan. Not only is
this market interesting in its own right, but since the cost of building an apartment is
always the cost of building up, construction costs for apartments are much easier to
estimate. Because building up does not involve using more land, we can use the physical
costs of construction to determine the costs of building an extra apartment without
knowing the underlying cost of land. After examining several sources, we find that $200
per square foot is about the maximum conceivable value of those construction costs in
Manhattan. This level is high, but it is far below most condominium prices in Manhattan,
which are now routinely two times that amount. As such, perhaps one half or more of the
price of most condominiums in Manhattan can be thought of as the result of some type of
regulatory constraint preventing the construction of new housing. Other evidence also
supports the importance of regulation. For example, over the past 40 years in Manhattan,
we have seen a substantial contraction in the number of residential building permits.


In principle, regulations limiting building need not be economically inefficient.
However, we can find no externality associated with new housing units in Manhattan that
is remotely large enough to warrant a development tax that is equal to construction costs
themselves.


Why is the construction environment so restrictive and why has it become so much more
restrictive over time? Our view is that there has been a re-allocation of property rights
over the past 30 years. In the 1960s, land-owners were generally free to develop their
property in the manner that they desired. However, starting in that decade and
increasingly over the 1970s, 80s and 90s, neighbors have become increasingly effective
in opposing new construction. As illustrated by the battle for Carnegie Hill, increasingly
media-savvy local residents have become adept at using every means possible to restrict




                                                                                            38
new construction. The result of this has been a reassignment of property rights from
developers to local homeowners.


Of course, the Coase theorem tells us that this reassignment need not be inefficient.
However, the reassignment of property rights appears to have resulted in rights that are
both diffuse and poorly defined. The large amount of real estate litigation suggests that
ownership is hard to clearly establish. Moreover, politics is frequently involved in
property rights may be more closely linked to the ability to generate votes than any pre-
ordained legal right. These poorly defined, widely diffused property rights help us to
understand why sensible mechanisms have not come about where developers efficiently
compensate existing homeowners for any losses due to new construction. Furthermore,
existing residents will always try to behave like monopolists, and will try to reduce
supply to boost their own home values.54 Hopefully, future work will help us to
understand why the impediments to new construction in Manhattan and certain other
market have grown so much, and appear to be so high.




54
  Of course, this begs the question of why we do not see big gaps between price and marginal cost in all
markets. Clearly, something else is influencing the propensity to act like monopolists. That is a subject for
future research.


                                                                                                          39
                                        References


Ault, R. and R. Saba, “The Economic Effects of Long-Term Rent Control: The Case of
   New York City”, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, Vol. 3 (1990): 25-
   41.

Arnott, Richard. “Time for Revisionism on Rent Control?” Journal of Economic
   Perspectives, Vol. 9, no. 1 (1995): 99-120.

Benson, Earl, Julia Hansen, Arthur Schwartz, Jr., and Greg Smersh. “Pricing Residential
   Amenities: The Value of a View”, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics,
   Vol. 16, no. 1 (1998): 55-73.

Ciccone, Antonio and Robert Hall. “Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity”,
   American Economic Review, Vol. 6, no. 1 (1996): 54-70.

De Salvo, J.S. “Reforming Rent Controls in New York City: Analysis of Housing
   Expenditures and Market Rents”, Regional Science Association Papers (1971): 195-
   227.

Fischel, William. The Economics of Zoning Laws. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
    Press, 1985.

Friedman, Milton and George Stigler. “Roofs or Ceilings? The Current Housing
    Problem” (1946), reprinted in Rent Control, Myths and Realities: International
    Evidence on the Effects of Rent Control in Six Countries (W. Bloch and E. Olsen,
    eds.), Vancouver, BC: Simon Fraser Institute, 1981.

Fujita, Masa. Urban Economic Theory. Cambridge (UK): Cambridge University Press,
    1989.

Glaeser, Edward and Joseph Gyourko. “The Impact of Zoning on Housing
   Affordability”, NBER Working Paper No. 8835, March 2002.

---------------------------------------------. “Urban Decline and Durable Housing”, NBER
     Working Paper No. 8598 (revised version, 2003).

Glaeser, Edward, Joseph Gyourko, and Raven Saks, “Why Is Manhattan So Expensive?”,
   working paper, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, May 2003.

Glaeser, Edward and David Mare. “Cities and Skills”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol.
   19, no. 2 (2001): 316-342.




                                                                                           40
Gyourko, Joseph and Peter Linneman. “Equity and Efficiency Aspects of Rent Control:
   An Empirical Study of New York City”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 26
   (1989): 54-79.

______________________________. “Rent Controls and Rental Housing Quality: A
   Note on the Effects of New York City’s Old Controls”, Journal of Urban Economics,
   Vol. 27 (1990): 398-409.

Goodman, John C. and John B. Ittner. “The Accuracy of Home Owners’ Estimates of
   House Value”, Journal of Housing Economics, Vol. 2, no. 4 (1992): 339-357.

Hamilton, Bruce. “Zoning and the Exercise of Monopoly Power”, Journal of Urban
  Economics, Vol. 5 (1978): 116-130.

Halvorsen, Robert and Raymond Palmquist. “The Interpretation of Dummy Variables in
   Semilogarithmic Equations”, American Economic Review, Vol. 70 (June 1980): 474-
   75.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. Labor Demand. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993.

Kanemoto, Yoshitsugu. Theories of Urban Externalities. Amsterdam: North-Holland
   Press, 1980.

Katz, Lawrence and Kenneth Rosen. “The Interjurisdictional Effects of Growth Controls
   on Housing Prices”, Journal of Law & Economics, Vol. 30, no. 1 (1987): 149-160.

Linneman, Peter. “The Effect of Rent Control on the Distribution of Income Among
   New York City Renters”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 22 (1987): 14-34.

Marshall & Swift Valuation Service. Commercial Cost Explorer CD, January 2003.

Moon, C. and Janet Stotsky. “The Effect of Rent Control on Housing Quality Change: A
  Longitudinal Analysis”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 101, no. 6 (1993): 1114-
  1148.

Olsen, Edgar. “An Econometric Analysis of Rent Control”, Journal of Political
   Economy, Vol. 80 (1972): 1081-1100.

__________. “What Do Economists Know About the Effects of Rent Control on
   Housing Maintenance?”, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, Vol. 1
   (1988): 295-307.

Olsen, Edgar and Dirk Early. “Rent Control and Homelessness”, Regional Science and
   Urban Economics, Vol. 28 (1998): 797-816.




                                                                                   41
_______________________. “Subsidized Housing, Emergency Shelters, and
   Homelessness: An Empirical Investigation Using Data from the 1990 Census”,
   Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy, forthcoming 2003.

Pollakowski, Henry. “Rent Regulation and Housing Maintenance in New York City”,
    MIT Center for Real Estate Working Paper #79, 1999.

Pollakowski, Henry and Susan Wachter. “The Effects of Land-Use Constraints on
    Housing Prices”, Land Economics, Vol 66, no. 3 (1990): 315-324.

Poterba, James. “Tax Subsidies to Owner-Occupied Housing: An Asset Value
   Approach”, Quarterly Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 99, no. 4 (1984): 729-752.

R. S. Means. Residential Cost Data, 19th Annual Edition, R.S. Means Company, 2000.


--------------. Square Foot Costs, 21st Annual Edition, R.S. Means Company, 2000.


Salama, Jerry, Michael Schill and Martha Stark. “Reducing the Cost of New Housing
   Construction in New York City”. Working paper, The New York University School
   of Law, Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy, 1999.

Schill, Michael, Ioan Voicu, and Jonathan Miller. “The Condominium vs. Cooperative
   Puzzle: An Empirical Analysis of Housing in New York City”, Working paper, The
   New York University School of Law, Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy, 2003.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. American Housing Survey, various National and
   Metropolitan Area Files, 1998-1999.

Wharton Land Use Control Survey. Prepared by Anita A. Summers and Peter Linneman.
  Philadelphia, PA: The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, 1989.




                                                                                     42
                                   Appendix

List of New Buildings by Height in Neighborhoods of Manhattan, 1980s

 Greenwich     Chelsea /         Stuyvesant       Upper West      Upper East
 Village /     Clinton /         Town/            Side            Side
 Financial     Midtown           Turtle Bay
 District
        6             4                 5                4             1
      16             21                13                5             4
      18             30                21                9             5
      44             35                24               11            12
                     42                27               31            14
                     53                29               35            15
                     56                30                             15
                     70                35                             18
                                       44                             19
                                                                      31
                                                                      32
      Source: Data from First American Real Estate Corporation.




                                                                               43
               Table 1: Distribution of Price Per Square Foot for Condominiums

                                                            25th                     75th
                                  # Obs.      Mean       Percentile    Median     Percentile
                  1
       Manhattan                 23,060       468           339         455          572
       Manhattan2                    156      500           271         461          664
       Other Boroughs2               165      149            89         120          177
       By Unit Size1
        ≤600 sq.ft.               5,460        434          311          432         534
        600≤sq.ft. ≤800           6,722        445          339          439         542
        800≤sq.ft. ≤1200          6,729        472          346          460         580
        1200≤sq.ft.               4,149        542          378          519         680
       By Building Height1
        ≤10 Stories               3,686        377          252          365         474
        10<Stories≤20             5,760        400          269          385         500
        20<Stories≤30             3,199        497          396          482         577
        30<Stories≤40             5,227        498          384          489         589
        40<Stories                4,788        573          438          543         678
       By Building Size1
        <20 Units                 1,063        406          256          380         526
        20≤Units<100              5,548        415          285          398         513
        100≤Units<200             5,729        458          338          447         562
        200≤Units                10,720        506          383          488         603
       By Year1
        1984                     700           373          221          359         488
        1985                     982           451          305          450         550
        1986                     1105          467          371          482         584
        1987                     1616          507          420          505         591
        1988                     2032          518          419          498         586
        1989                     1535          515          391          484         586
        1990                     911           443          340          434         516
        1991                     722           421          310          383         499
        1992                     755           363          273          343         426
        1993                     41            385          284          379         463
        1994                     87            369          279          341         431
        1995                     232           354          267          342         408
        1996                     1044          353          272          331         409
        1997                     952           384          284          357         433
        1998                     2114          410          315          392         476
        1999                     2484          460          366          446         533
        2000                     1873          557          451          553         652
        2001                     1642          601          503          592         696
        2002                     972           621          529          606         706
1. Source: Condominium sales records from First American Real Estate Corporation. Nominal sales
prices are converted to real 2002 dollars using the Consumer Price Index.
2. Source: New York City Housing and Vacancy Survey. Price is the reported market value for owner-
  occupied condos. Unit square feet is imputed from the number of rooms using the average square
  feet/room from condos in the New York MSA of the American Housing Survey.




                                                                                                     44
           Table 2: Distribution of Price Per Square Foot by Geographic Area
                                                         25th              75th    Average
                                 # Obs.     Mean      Percentile Median Percentile Height1
 NYC Condos
  Manhattan             23,060               468         339          455          572              27
 By Neighborhood in Manhattan
  Greenwich Village/     2,703               416         309          405          501              16
  Financial District
  Lower East Side /        711               373         240          378          474              7
  Chinatown
  Chelsea / Clinton /    4,086               515         355          490          648              34
  Midtown
  Stuyvesant Town/       6,534               436         330          443          539              31
  Turtle Bay
  Upper West Side        3,913               494         361          476          592              24

   Upper East Side               4,759       509         372          490          611              29

   Morningside Heights /            18       162         130          141          190              5
   Hamilton Heights
   Harlem                          131       277         191          245          371              6

   Washington Heights /            128       169          91          162          210              6
   Inwood
Source: Condo sales records. All nominal values are converted to real 2002 dollars using the CPI.
1. Average number of stories.




                                                                                                         45
            Table 3: Distribution of Cooperative Prices in Manhattan
                                                    25th             75th
                               # Obs.   Mean Percentile Median Percentile
   Owned Cooperatives
    Value per Square Foot       794      382        176       310     501
Source: New York City Housing and Vacancy Survey.




                                                                            46
                                  Table 4: Construction Costs
                                                                           Cost/sq.ft.
              RS Means: Apartments in New York City
               8-24 story                                                       160
               4-7 story                                                        144
               1-3 story                                                        142
              Marshall & Swift: Apartments in Manhattan1
               High-quality luxury apartments                                   218
               Average-quality luxury apartments                                156
               Good-quality apartments, 3+ stories                              123
               Average-quality apartments, 3+ stories                            96
              NYU Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy2
               15 story luxury high-rise                                        193
               6 story mid-rise                                                 134
              AHS Condos in Apartment Buildings3
               Chicago                                                          144
                 10<Stories                                                     148
               US excl. NY MSA                                                  129
                 10<Stories                                                     176
1. Costs per square foot are from the Marshall & Swift Commercial Cost Estimator. Values are the average
of reported costs for building classes A, B, C and D in November 2002.
2. Cost estimates are from Zaxon, Inc and converted to real 2002 dollars using the CPI.
3. Reported values are average price per square foot. Price is reported market value of owner-occupied
units. Values are converted to real 2002 dollars using the CPI.




                                                                                                     47
             Table 5: The Distribution of Estimated Zoning Taxes in Manhattan,
             Annual Flow Cost Estimates for Condominium Owners
                           # Obs.    Mean         25th    Median       75th
                                               Percentile           Percentile
     Manhattan Condos1
                            23,060     7,382     2,927     5,554      9,668
1.    Source: Condo sales data from First American Real Estate Corporation. The zoning tax is
      calculated as the cost of capital times the difference between the sales price of a unit and estimated
      construction costs, where the cost of capital equals .03 and constructions costs equal $200/square
      foot times the size of each unit.




                                                                                                         48
                    Table 6: Hedonic Land Prices and Zoning Taxes,
    Select Metropolitan Areas from American Housing Survey Metropolitan Files

                                       Hedonic Price          Average            Zoning
 Metropolitan Area          Year           of Land             House            Tax/House
                                       ($/square foot)         Value              Value
     Baltimore              1998            $0.88             $154,143            0.018
    Birmingham              1998            $0.13             $114,492              0
       Boston               1998            $0.68             $236,231            0.186
      Chicago               1999            $1.62             $187,669            0.057
     Cincinnati             1999            $0.40             $133,050              0
       Detroit              1999            $0.37             $144,686              0
      Houston               1998            $0.15             $103,505              0
    Los Angeles             1999            $2.59             $260,744            0.339
    Minneapolis             1998            $0.38             $144,719              0
     New York               1999            $1.38             $253,232            0.122
 Newport News (VA)          1998            $0.48             $127,475            0.207
      Oakland               1998            $2.34             $284,443            0.321
    Philadelphia            1999            $0.81             $135,862              0
     Pittsburgh             1998            $0.70             $100,060              0
    Providence              1998            $0.56             $148,059              0
     Rochester              1998            $0.21             $109,050              0
   Salt Lake City           1998            $0.83             $167,541            0.119
   San Francisco            1998            $4.10             $418,890            0.531
     San Jose               1998            $3.92             $385,021            0.469
       Tampa                1998            $0.37             $103,962              0
  Washington, DC            1998            $0.64             $213,281            0.219

Notes:
    1.Hedonic prices of land were estimated using data from 1998 and 1999 metropolitan area surveys of
    the American Housing Survey. In some cases, areas were over sampled and included in the 1999
    national file of the AHS. Four hedonic models were estimated. See the text and footnote 12 for those
    details. The prices reported here reflect the average of the prices associated with the second and third
    highest estimates across all four specifications (i.e., we discarded the highest and the lowest estimates
    and report the mean of the two remaining estimates).
    2.The house price for each metropolitan area is the mean for the sample of single-unit homes with lot
    sizes less than two acres.
    3.The computation of the zoning tax as a fraction of mean house value is as follows for each area j:
                               ⎛ MeanHouseValue j − CC j                                  ⎞
                               ⎜                            − HedonicLand Pr icePerSqft j ⎟ * MeanLotSize j
                               ⎜      MeanLotSize j                                       ⎟
                            =⎝                                                            ⎠
            ZoningTax j
        MeanHouseValue j                                    MeanHouseValue j
         Mean House Value and Mean Lot Size are metropolitan area-specific and pertain to the sample of
         single-unit, owner-occupied residences with less than two acres of land. See the first note for
         more on the hedonic price of land.




                                                                                                           49
Figure 1: Housing Permits in Manhattan and Prices
          (Four-year moving averages)
                                     Manhattan permits, units   Real housing prices

                           18000                                                             1


                           15000
Manhattan permits, units




                                                                                             .9




                                                                                                      Real housing prices
                           12000


                                                                                             .8
                            9000


                            6000
                                                                                             .7

                            3000

                                                                                             .6
                               0
                                   1950     1960      1970      1980     1990         2000
                                                             year
Source: Building permits are combined single- and multi-family permits for Manhattan from the US
Department of Commerce. Real housing price series is the NY-NJ-LI MSA Consumer Price Index for
Shelter, deflated by the GDP deflator from the National Income and Product Accounts and rescaled to
equal 1 in 2002.




                                                                                                      50
Figure 2: Distribution of Price-to-Cost Ratio, Manhattan Condominiums
                       1



                       .8
Cumulative Frequency




                       .6



                       .4



                       .2



                       0
                            0     1               2           3                   4   5
                                                 Price/Cost Ratio
Source: Prices are from condo sales records and costs are $200 per square foot.




                                                                                      51
Figure 3: Cumulative Distribution of Price/Cost Ratio for Coops in Manhattan

                       1



                       .8
Cumulative Frequency




                       .6



                       .4



                       .2



                       0
                            0   1     2           3             4              5
                                     Price/Cost Ratio




                                                                               52
Figure 4: Changes in Manhattan Permits and (Lagged) House Prices, by Decade
                  1955-1969                                                                                       1970-1979
          22000                                                1962                                       22000
                                                                                 1961



                                                                                                                                                                                              1972
                                                          1959                                            15000
          15000
                                                                      1960
Permits




                                                                 1963


                                                                                  1955                                                                          1974
                                                                     1958
                                                                   1965                                   8000
          8000                                1956                                                                                                                                    1973
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1971
                                         1968                                                                                        1978
                                       1957
                                                                                                                                                                                      1970
                                                                                                                                1979        1977
                                                1967                1964
                                                        1966
                                                       1969
                                                                                                          1000                                 1975
                                                                                                                     1976
          1000
                  -.04          -.02                    0                          .02              .04           -.04        -.02                    0                         .02                  .04

                  1980-1989                                                                                       1990-2002

          22000                                                                                           22000




          15000                                                                                           15000
Permits




                                                        1985




          8000                                                                                            8000
                                                                                                                                                                      2001
                                              1983                                                                                                                   20002002

                                                                          1984                                                                                1997      1998          1999
                                                                                             1987                                                            1996
                                                             1981
                         1980                                                              1989                                                                                   1990
                                  1982                                              1988
                                                            1986                                                                                                       1995 1993
                                                                                                          1000                                        1994               1992
                                                                                                                                                                                       1991
          1000
                  -.02          0             .02              .04                                  .06           -.04        -.02             0               .02                                    .04
                                Change in Real Housing Price (t-1)                                                              Change in Real Housing Price (t-1)



Source: Building permits are combined single- and multi-family permits for Manhattan from the US
Department of Commerce. Real housing price series is the NY-NJ-LI MSA Consumer Price Index for
Shelter, deflated by the GDP deflator from the National Income and Product Accounts and rescaled to
equal 1 in 2002.




                                                                                                                                                                                                      53
