NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXTERNAL CONSTRAINTS ON MONETARY POLICY
AND THE FINANCIAL ACCELERATOR
Mark Gertler
Simon Gilchrist
Fabio Natalucci
Working Paper 10128
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10128
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

The views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting
the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or of any other person associated with
the Federal Reserve System. We thank Philippe Bacchetta, Ricardo Caballero, V.V. Chari, and Philip Lowe,
as well as participants at the BIS conference on “Monetary stability, financial stability, and the business
cycle" The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2003 by Mark Gertler, Simon Gilchrist, and Fabio Natalucci. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

External Constraints on Monetary Policy and the Financial Accelerator
Mark Gertler, Simon Gilchrist, and Fabio Natalucci
NBER Working Paper No. 10128
December 2003
JEL No. E5, F3, F4
ABSTRACT
We develop a small open economy macroeconomic model where financial conditions influence
aggregate behavior. We use this model to explore the connection between the exchange rate regime
and financial distress. We show that fixed exchange rates exacerbate financial crises by tieing the
hands of the monetary authorities. We then investigate the quantitative significance by first
calibrating the model to Korean data and then showing that it does a reasonably good job of
matching the Korean experience during its recent financial crisis. In particular, the model accounts
well for the sharp increase in lending rates and the large drop in output, investment and productivity
during the 1997-1998 episode. We then perform some counterfactual exercises to illustrate the
quantitative significance of fixed versus floating rates both for macroeconomic performance and for
welfare. Overall, these exercises imply that welfare losses following a financial crisis are
significantly larger under fixed exchange rates relative to flexible exchange rates.
Mark Gertler
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
mark.gertler@nyu.edu
Simon Gilchrist
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
sgilchri@bu.edu

Fabio Natalucci
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
fabio.m.natalucci@frb.gov

1

Introduction

Over the past twenty years there has been a dramatic rise in the frequency of financial crises
that have led to significant contractions in economic activity. One feature of these crises,
that pertains in particular to open economies, is the strong connection with a fixed exchange
rate regime. In a study covering the 1970s through the 1990s, Kaminsky and Reinhart
[30] document the strong correlation between domestic financial strains and currency crises.
Put diﬀerently, countries in the position of having to defend an exchange rate peg were
more likely to have suﬀered severe financial distress. The likely reason is straightforward:
defending an exchange rate peg generally requires the central bank to adjust interest rates in
a direction that reinforces the crisis. Moreover, this connection between external constraints
on monetary policy and financial crises is not simply a post-war phenomenon: during the
Great Depression, as Eichengreen [24] and others have shown, countries that stayed on the
gold standard suﬀered far more severe financial and economic distress than countries that
left early.
In this paper we develop a small open economy macroeconomic model where financial
conditions influence aggregate behavior. Our goal is to explore the connection between the
exchange rate regime and financial distress. Specifically, we extend to the open economy the
financial accelerator framework developed in Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist [7] (hereafter
BGG), that is in turn based on earlier work by Bernanke and Gertler [6], Kiyotaki and Moore
[31], Carlstrom and Fuerst [13] and others. We then consider how the choice of the exchange
rate regime influences an economy’s response to a financial crisis.
To judge the empirical relevance of our framework, we conduct a quantitative exercise
aimed at replicating the key features of the Korean experience during the Asian financial
crisis of 1997-98. We focus on the Korean episode because it is symptomatic of many financial
crises that have occurred over time: the country experienced a sharp contraction in both
output and measured productivity, along with a sharp deterioration in credit conditions,
including falling asset prices and increasing credit spreads. As well, in the process the
country’s central bank was attempting to defend a fixed exchange rate regime.
Our quantitative model is able to account for the roughly fourteen percent drop in
Korean output during the 1997-98 crisis, as well as most of the other salient features of this
episode. The financial accelerator mechanism is key: we show that it accounts for nearly
half of the decline in economic activity. We also perform some counterfactual exercises to

1

illustrate how being tied to the fixed exchange rate regime may have exacerbated the crisis.
Because our model is optimization-based, we are able to compute the explicit welfare costs
of the crisis and explore the welfare consequences of pursuing alternative policies.
Several papers have recently emphasized that sharp declines in measured productivity
are a robust characteristic of financial crises, raising the possibility that productivity shocks
(broadly defined) may be the true underlying causal force (e.g., Cole and Ohanian [21] and
Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan [16]). We demonstrate, however, that it is possible to explain
most of the variation in measured productivity during the Korean crisis by appealing to
endogenous utilization of capital. Specifically, within our model, the investment and output
collapse brought about by the financial crisis induces a drop in capital utilization, leading to
a decline in measured productivity. Of course, in this case the drop in productivity reflects
mismeasurement of capital input utilization and not a true shift in productivity. To support
this modelling approach, we present evidence that electricity utilization (a conventional proxy
for capital utilization) fell sharply in tandem with measured productivity.
Finally, we note that there is now a lengthy literature containing theoretical models of
financial crises in emerging market economies. Our paper is in the spirit of a large subset
of this literature that emphasizes how balance sheets on borrower spending (arising from
credit market frictions) give rise to a financial accelerator mechanism that works to propagate financial crises. Some prominent examples include: Aghion, Bacchetta, and Banerjee
[2], Cespedes, Chang and Velasco [14] (hereafter CCV), Caballero and Krisnamurthy [11],
Christiano, Gust and Roldos [17], Devereux and Lane [23], and Schneider and Tornell [40].
Our paper is probably closest to CCV, who similarly emphasize the role of the exchange
rate policy. The analysis in virtually all of this literature, however, is focused on qualitative
results. In contrast, we develop a quantitative model and then explore how well the model
can account for an actual crisis experience.2
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the Korean experience
and presents evidence on a set of key macroeconomic variables. Section 3 introduces the
model. Section 4 first presents some policy experiments to illustrate the interaction between
the financial accelerator and the exchange rate regime. It then presents an exercise to assess
how well the model can capture the Korean experience, along with several counterfactual
policy experiments. Section 5 provides concluding remarks.
2

Christiano, Gust and Roldos (2002) also perform a quantitative analysis, though they focus on explaining
the implications for monetary transmission in a crisis, as opposed to matching model performance against
an actual crisis experience.

2

2

The Korean Financial Crisis

The Korean financial crisis began in October of 1997, following crises in Thailand and other
Asian countries that had unfolded few months earlier. Even though it was not the first in
a chain, the Korean crisis was largely unanticipated, according to Krueger and Yoo [33].
Although Korean banks were heavily exposed to risk in emerging market economies, this
was not widely appreciated until October 1997 when Standard & Poors downgraded the
country’s sovereign risk status.3 Massive capital flight along with a sharp rise in the country
risk premium followed. Dwindling foreign currency reserves then forced the central bank to
raise the overnight call rate over a thousand basis points. The sharp rise in the country risk
premium and short-term interest rates was the prelude to a substantial deterioration of real
economic activity.
Figure 1 plots the real-side behavior of the Korean economy during this time period.
Real GDP had been consistently above trend for several years before the crisis and showed
no weakness until the fourth quarter of 1997. During the first quarter of 1998, real GDP fell
eight percent and subsequently contracted by another six percent. Investment played a key
role in the overall decline. Real gross capital formation had been gradually weakening since
the beginning of 1997 and then experienced a forty percent contraction in the first quarter of
1998, before falling another ten percent in the subsequent two quarters. Real consumption
spending tracked GDP during the downturn, falling by fourteen percent in the first quarter
of 1998 and eighteen percent overall during the crisis period. Employment fell by somewhat
less than GDP — eight percent from peak to trough, implying a six percent reduction in
labor productivity, as measured by GDP per worker. The drop in labor productivity is
associated with a sharp reduction in capital utilization over this time period, using electricity
consumption as a proxy for capital services.4
Figure 2 plots the behavior of various financial variables. As we noted earlier, the
country borrowing premium, as measured by the EMBI Global spread, rose five hundred
basis points (from one hundred to six hundred) in a two-month period following the onset
3

In particular, Korean oﬀ-shore banks held substantial quantities of dollar-denominated foreign loans
from countries such as Indonesia and Russia.
4
If energy and capital services enter the production function as perfect complements owing to a Leontief
technology, then electricity is a perfect measure for capital utilization. Econometric estimates imply a very
low degree of substitutability between capital and energy especially in the short-run, making electricity a
very good proxy even in the absence of perfect complementarity.

3

of the crisis in October 1997.5 The central bank’s attempt to defend the exchange rate led
to an increase in the overnight call rate of twelve hundred basis points in the final quarter of
1997. Associated with the sharp increase in the country risk premium and the call rate was
a substantial rise in credit spreads, together with a substantial decline in asset prices. The
corporate-treasury bond spread rose nine percentage points. The stock market, which had
been trending downward prior to the crisis, lost two hundred points, or a third of its value,
in the immediate aftermath of the crisis. Following a brief rally, stock prices lost another
hundred points before beginning a recovery in the second quarter of 1998.
Once the central bank abandoned the peg in favor of a flexible exchange rate, interest
rates were gradually reduced in 1998. It is reasonable to believe that prior expectations
regarding the probability that Korea would abandon the fixed exchange rate were low.6
Once it was clear that the Bank of Korea failed in its attempt to defend the won, however,
the currency depreciated by almost fifty percent. Inflation, which was averaging four percent
before the crisis, increased five percentage points in the first quarter of 1998 as import prices
rose sharply following the devaluation. The overall reduction in economic activity led to a
sharp contraction in inflation however. By the first quarter of 1999, inflation had fallen to
half percent, well below its pre-crisis level.
Figure 3 plots the foreign sector of the Korean economy. The forty percent decline in the
real exchange rate led to a fifteen percent increase in the ratio of net exports to GDP. Nearly
all of this increase in net exports is attributable to the forty percent decline in imports rather
than an expansion in exports however. Thus it appears that the competitiveness eﬀect of
the devaluation had, at best, only a modest expansionary eﬀect on the economy.7
In sum, the initial stages of the Korean crisis were associated with an unanticipated large
outflow of capital and a simultaneous increase in the country borrowing premium. Shortterm interest rates rose rapidly because the central bank was attempting to defend a fixed
exchange rate. In the months that followed, both financial and real conditions deteriorated
sharply. Eventually the economy recovered, though only after the central bank had clearly
5

The country risk spread also rose sharply following the Russian crisis. This had very little eﬀect on the
Korean economy however. By this time, the Korean monetary authority had abandoned the fixed exchange
rate regime.
6
Even though Thailand, after a strong speculative attack, let the currency float on July 2, 1997, the
EMBI Global for Korea climbed above hundred basis points only on October 9, 1997.
7
This reflects, in part, the fact that many of Korea’s Asian trading partners were also suﬀering from the
crisis environment. It also reflects the fact that the Korean economy was unable to grow its way out of the
recession by exporting more goods to economically stable trading partners such as the U.S and Europe.

4

abandoned the peg. We next proceed to develop a quantitative model designed to capture
these phenomena.

3

The Model

The core framework is a small open economy model with money and nominal price rigidities,
along the lines of Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ [37], Svensson [41], Gali and Monacelli [28], Chari,
Kehoe and McGrattan [15], and others. The key modification is the inclusion of a financial
accelerator mechanism, as developed in BGG. The financial accelerator mechanism links the
condition of borrower balance sheets to the terms of credit, and hence to the demand for
capital. Via the impact on borrower balance sheets, the financial accelerator magnifies the
eﬀects of shocks to the economy. As in Kiyotaki and Moore [31] and BGG, unanticipated
movements in asset prices provide the main source of variation in borrower balance sheets.
As in BGG, a countercyclical monetary policy can potentially mitigate a financial crisis:
easing of rates during a contraction, for example, helps stabilize asset price movements and
hence borrower balance sheets. External constraints on monetary policy, instead, limit this
stabilizing option.
Within the model there exist both households and firms. There is also a foreign sector
and a government sector. Households work, save, and consume tradable goods that are produced both at home (H) and abroad (F). Domestically and foreign-made goods are imperfect
substitutes.
Within the home country, there are three types of producers: (i) entrepreneurs; (ii)
capital producers; and (iii) retailers. Entrepreneurs manage the production of wholesale
goods. They borrow from households to finance the acquisition of capital used in the production process. Due to imperfections in the capital market, entrepreneurs’ demand for
capital depends on their respective financial positions - this is the key aspect of the financial
accelerator. In turn, in response to entrepreneurial demand, capital producers build new
capital. Finally, retailers package together wholesale goods to produce final output. They
are monopolistically competitive and set nominal prices on a staggered basis. The role of
the retail sector in our model is simply to provide the source of nominal price stickiness.
We now proceed to describe the behavior of the diﬀerent sectors of the economy, along
with the key resource constraints.

5

3.1
3.1.1

Households
Consumption Composites

Let Ct be a composite of tradable consumption goods. Then the following CES index defines
household preferences over home consumption, CtH , and foreign consumption, CtF :
ρ
h 1 ¡ ¢ ρ−1
i ρ−1
¢ ρ−1
1 ¡
H
F
ρ
ρ
ρ
ρ
+ (1 − γ) Ct
Ct = (γ) Ct

(1)

The corresponding consumer price index (CPI), Pt is given by

1
h ¡ ¢
¡ ¢1−ρ i 1−ρ
1−ρ
+ (1 − γ) PtF
.
Pt = (γ) PtH

(2)

The domestic consumption good, CtH , is a composite of diﬀerentiated products sold by
domestic monopolistically competitive retailers. However, since we can describe household
behavior in terms of the composite good CtH , we defer discussion of the retail sector until
section (3.3.3) below.
3.1.2

The Household’s Decision Problem

Let Ht denote household labor and Mt /Pt denote real money balances. Household preferences
are given by
¶
µ
∞
X
Mt
t
(3)
β U Ct , Ht ,
E0
Pt
t=0
with

¤1−σ
¶ £
µ ¶
µ
(Ct )1−ς (1 − Ht )ς
Mt
Mt
=
+ ξ log
U Ct , Ht ,
Pt
1−σ
Pt

(4)

and with σ ≥ 0, ς ∈ (0, 1) , and ξ > 0.
Let Wt denote the nominal wage; Πt real dividend payments (from ownership of retail
∗
nominal
firms); Tt lump sum real tax payments; St the nominal exchange rate; Bt+1 and Bt+1
bonds denominated in domestic and foreign currency, respectively; and (1 + it ) and (1 + i∗t )
the domestic and foreign gross nominal interest rate, respectively. In addition, Ψt represents
a gross borrowing premium that domestic residents must pay to obtain funds from abroad.
The household’s budget constraint is then given by
¡
¢
∗
− St Ψt 1 + i∗t−1 Bt∗
Wt
Mt − Mt−1 Bt+1 − (1 + it−1 ) Bt St Bt+1
Ht +Πt −Tt −
−
−
(5)
Ct =
Pt
Pt
Pt
Pt
6

where Ψt , the country borrowing premium, depends on total net foreign indebtedness, N Ft ,
and a random shock, Φt , as follows: Ψt = f (NFt )Φt , with f 0 (·) > 0. We introduce this
country borrowing premium partly for technical reasons. Without it, net foreign indebtedness may be non-stationary, complicating the analysis of local dynamics. Thus, following
Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe [39] we introduce a small friction in the world capital market. We
set the elasticity of Ψt with respect to NFt very close to zero, so that this distortion does
not alter the high frequency model dynamics but nonetheless makes NFt revert to trend.
A second important reason for introducing the country borrowing premium Ψt is that it is
a simple way to model sudden capital outflows of the type that appeared to initiate the
Korean crisis, as described in the previous section. In particular, we represent a sudden
capital outflow as a positive blip in the random variable Φt , which in turn directly raises Ψt .
The household maximizes (3) subject to (4) and (5).
3.1.3

Consumption Allocation, Labor Supply, and Saving

The optimality conditions for the consumption allocation, labor supply, and the consumption/saving decision are reasonably conventional:
γ
CtH
=
F
1−γ
Ct

µ

PtH
PtF

¶−ρ

1 Wt
1
=ς
Ct Pt
1 − Ht
½
¾
Pt
λt = βEt λt+1 (1 + it )
Pt+1
(1 − ς)

(6)

(7)

(8)

where λt , the marginal utility of the consumption index, is given by
λt = (1 − ς) (Ct )(σ−1)(ς−1)−1 (1 − Ht )ς(1−σ)

(9)

t
and (1 + it ) PPt+1
denotes the gross real interest rate. In addition, the optimality condition
governing the choice of foreign bonds in conjunction with equation (8) yields the following
uncovered interest parity condition:

½
·
¸¾
Pt
∗ St+1
(1 + it ) − Ψt (1 + it )
= 0.
Et λt+1
Pt+1
St
7

(10)

The household also decides money holdings. However, we do not report this relation
in the model. Because we restrict attention to monetary regimes where either the nominal
exchange rate or the nominal interest rate is the policy instrument, money demand plays no
role other than to pin down the nominal money stock (see, e.g., Clarida, Gali and Gertler
[18]).

3.2

Foreign Behavior

In considering arbitrage in goods markets, we distinguish between the wholesale (import)
price of foreign goods and the retail price in the domestic market by allowing for imperfect
competition and pricing-to-market in the local economy (see section 3.3.3). At the wholesale
F
denote the wholesale price of foreign goods in
level, the law of one price holds. Let PW,t
F∗
domestic currency, and Pt the foreign currency price of such goods. The law of one price
then implies:
F
= St PtF ∗ .
(11)
PW,t
We take as exogenous both the gross foreign nominal interest rate (1 + i∗t ) and the nominal
price (in units of foreign currency) of the foreign tradable good, PtF ∗ . Finally, we assume
∗
that foreign demand for the home tradable good, CtH , is given by
#ν
"µ
¶
H∗ −κ
¡ H ∗ ¢1−ν
P
∗
t
Yt∗
, 0≤ν≤1
(12)
Ct−1
CtH =
∗
Pt
¡ H ∗ ¢1−ν
represents inertia
where Yt∗ is real foreign output, which we take as given. The term Ct−1
in foreign demand for domestic products. Because the home economy is small (in the sense
that it cannot aﬀect foreign output, the foreign price level, or the foreign interest rate), it is
sensible to simply postulate an empirically reasonable reduced-form export demand curve.
In addition, we assume balanced trade in the steady state and normalize the steady
terms of trade at unity.

3.3

Firms

We consider in turn: entrepreneurs, capital producers, and retailers.
3.3.1

Entrepreneurs, Finance, and Wholesale Production

Entrepreneurs manage production and obtain financing for the capital employed in the production process. Entrepreneurs are risk neutral. To ensure that they never accumulate
8

enough funds to fully self-finance their capital acquisitions, we assume they have a finite
expected horizon. Each survives until the next period with probability φ. Accordingly, the
1
. The entrepreneurs’ population is stationary, with new entrepreexpected horizon is 1−φ
neurs entering to replace those who exit. To ensure that new entrepreneurs have some funds
available when starting out, we follow BGG by endowing each entrepreneur with Hte units
of labor which is supplied inelastically as a managerial input to production. Entrepreneurs
receive a small wage in compensation.
The entrepreneur starts any period t with capital, Kt , acquired in the previous period
(shortly we describe the capital acquisition decision.) He then produces domestic output,
Yt , using labor, Lt , and capital services, ut Kt , where ut is the capital utilization rate. (For
notational simplicity we omit entrepreneur-specific indices.) The labor input Lt is assumed
e(1−Ω)
. We normalize Hte to
to be a composite of household and managerial labor: Lt = HtΩ Ht
unity. The entrepreneur’s gross project output, GYt , consists of the sum of his production
revenues and the market value of his remaining capital stock. In addition, we assume his
project is subject to an idiosyncratic shock, ωt , that aﬀects both the production of new
goods and the eﬀective quantity of his capital. The shock ωt may be considered a measure
of the quality of his overall capital investment.
Let PW,t be the nominal price of wholesale output, Qt the real market price of capital,8
PI,t the nominal replacement price of capital (see section 3.3.2), δ t the depreciation rate,
and At a common productivity factor. Then, by definition, GYt , equals the sum of output
P
Yt , and the market value of the capital stock, Qt ωt Kt , net of the cost of repairing
revenues, PW,t
t
P
the worn out equipment, PI,tt δ t ω t Kt :
PW,t
PI,t
Yt + (Qt −
δ t )ω t Kt
Pt
Pt
where wholesale good production, Yt , is given by
GYt ≡

Yt = ω t At (ut Kt )α L1−α
.
t

(13)

(14)

Note that the entrepreneur has the option of either selling his end-of-period capital on the
market or keeping it for use in the subsequent period. Finally, we assume that ω t is an i.i.d
random variable, distributed continuously with mean equal to one, i.e. E{ω t } = 1.
8

Qt is in units of the household consumption index (1).

9

Following Greenwood, Hercowitz and Huﬀman [29], we endogenize the utilization decision by assuming that the capital depreciation rate is increasing in ut . As in Baxter and
Farr [5], depreciation is the following convex function δt (·) of the utilization rate:
δ (ut ) = δ +

b
(ut )1+ξ with δ, b, ξ > 0.
1+ξ

(15)

At time t, the entrepreneur chooses labor and the capital utilization rate to maximize
profits, conditional on Kt , At and ω t . Accordingly, labor demand satisfies
Yt
Wt
=
Ht
PW,t
Yt
Wte
(1 − α)(1 − Ω) e =
Ht
PW,t
(1 − α)Ω

(16)

where Wte is the managerial wage. The optimality condition for capital utilization is
α

Yt
PI,t
= δ 0 (ut ) Kt
.
ut
PW,t

(17)

Equation (17) equates the marginal value of the output gain from a higher rate of utilization
with its marginal cost owing to a higher rate of capital depreciation.
We now consider the capital acquisition decision. At the end of period t, the entrepreneur
purchases capital which can be used in the subsequent period t + 1 to produce output at
that time. The entrepreneur finances the acquisition of capital partly with his own net
worth available at the end of period t, Nt+1 , and partly by issuing nominal bonds, Bt+1 .
Then capital financing is divided between net worth and debt, as follows:
Bt+1
.
(18)
Pt
The entrepreneur’s net worth is essentially the equity of the firm, i.e., the gross value of
. The entrepreneur accumulates net worth through past
capital net of debt, Qt Kt+1 − BPt+1
t
earnings, including capital gains. We assume that new equity issues are prohibitively expensive, so that all marginal finance is obtained through debt.9 We also assume that debt
is denominated in units of domestic currency. Later we will consider the case where debt is
issued in foreign currency units.
Qt Kt+1 = Nt+1 +

9

To be clear, being an equity holder in this context means being privy to the firm’s private information,
as well as having a claim on the earnings stream. Thus, we are assuming that the firm cannot attract new
wealthy investors that costlessly absorb all firm-specific information.

10

The entrepreneur’s demand for capital depends on the expected marginal return and
the expected marginal financing cost. The marginal return to capital (equal to the expected
average return due to constant returns) is next period’s ex-post gross output net of labor
costs, normalized by the period t market value of capital:

1+

k
rt+1

=
=

GYt+1 −

Wt+1
L
Pt+1 t+1

QK
h t t+1
P
Y t+1
αK
−
ω t+1 PW,t+1
t+1
t+1

(19)
PI,t+1
δ (ut+1 )
Pt+1

Qt

+ Qt+1

i

where Y t+1 is the average level of output per entrepreneur (i.e., Yt+1 = ω t Y t+1 ). Note
that the marginal return varies proportionately with the idiosyncractic shock ω t+1 . Since
Et {ω t+1 } = 1, we can express the expected marginal return simply as
Et {1 +

k
rt+1
}

Et {

PW,t+1 Y t+1
α Kt+1
Pt+1

−

PI,t+1
δ
Pt+1

(ut+1 ) + Qt+1 }

.
(20)
Qt
The marginal cost of funds to the entrepreneur depends on financial conditions. We
postulate an agency problem that makes uncollateralized external finance more expensive
than internal finance. As in BGG, we assume a costly state verification problem. The
idiosyncratic shock ωt is private information for the entrepreneur, implying that the lender
cannot freely observe the project’s gross output. To observe this return, the lender must pay
an auditing cost - interpretable as a bankruptcy cost - that is a fixed proportion µb of the
k
)Qt Kt+1 . The entrepreneur and the lender negotiate a
project’s ex-post gross payoﬀ, (1+rt+1
financial contract that: (i) induces the entrepreneur not to misrepresent his earnings; and (ii)
minimizes the expected deadweight agency costs (in this case the expected auditing costs)
associated with this financial transaction.
We restrict attention to financial contracts that are negotiated one period at a time
and that oﬀers lenders a payoﬀ that is independent of aggregate risk. As we show in the
appendix, under these assumptions it is straightforward to show that the optimal contract
takes a very simple and realistic form: standard debt with costly bankruptcy. If the entrepreneur does not default, the lender receives a flat payment. If the entrepreneur defaults,
the lender audits and seizes whatever it finds. It is true that we are arbitrarily ruling out the
possibility of enterpreneurs obtaining insurance against aggregate risks to their net worth.
However, some experiments that we do not report here suggest that the households in our
=

11

framework are too risk averse to be willing to provide this insurance, at least given our model
parametrization.10 In general, though, we simply appeal to realism and features outside the
model (e.g. diﬃculties in enforcing wealth transfers in bad times) to rule out aggregate
state-contingent wealth insurance.11
Overall, the agency problem implies that the opportunity cost of external finance is
more expensive than that of internal finance. Because the lender must receive a competitive
return, it charges the borrower a premium to cover the expected bankruptcy costs. Because
the external finance premium aﬀects the overall cost of finance, it therefore influences the
entrepreneur’s demand for capital.
In general, the external finance premium varies inversely with the entreprenuer’s net
worth: the greater the share of capital that the entrepreneur can either self-finance or finance
with collateralized debt, the smaller the expected bankruptcy costs and, hence, the smaller
the external finance premium. Rather than present the details of the agency problem here, we
simply observe, following BGG, that the external finance premium, χt (·), may be expressed
as an increasing function of the leverage ratio,
ÃB

t+1

χt (·) = χ

Pt

Nt+1

Bt+1
Pt

Nt+1

:

!

(21)

χ0 (·) > 0, χ(0) = 0, χ(∞) = ∞.
The specific form of χt (·) depends on the primitive parameters of the costly state verification problem, including the proportional bankruptcy cost µb and the distribution of the
idiosyncratic shock ωt (see the appendix for details.) In addition, note that χt (·) depends
only on the aggregate leverage ratio and not on any entrepreneur-specific variables. This
10

Specifically, in the model experiments we consider below, we compared the percent variation in the
shadow value of a unit of wealth for entrepreneurs versus households. For entrepreneurs, this shadow
value corresponds to the discounted value of the change in profits that stem from having another unit of
wealth. It varies countercyclically because credit constraints vary countercyclically. For households, this
shadow value corresponds to the marginal utility of consumption. Each household’s shadow value also
varies countercyclically since consumption is procyclical. Our computational experiments suggested that,
for the financial crisis we simulate below, the percent increase in household’s marginal utility of consumption
exceeded the percent rise in the entrepreneurs’ shadow value of wealth. These results suggest that, at least
for the parametrizations used here, households would not be willing to insure enterpreneurs against the kind
aggregate risks that lead to crises.
11
Krishnamurthy [32], for example, motivates incomplete wealth insurance against aggregate risk by appealing to credibility problems on the part of the supplier.

12

simplification arises because, in equilibrium, all entrepreneurs choose the same leverage ratio, which owes to having constant returns in both production and bankruptcy costs due to
risk neutrality (see, e,g. Carlstrom and Fuerst [13] and BGG.)
By definition, the entrepreneur’s overall marginal cost of funds in this environment is the
product of the gross premium for external funds and the gross real opportunity cost of funds
that would arise in the absence of capital market frictions. Accordingly, the entrepreneur’s
demand for capital satisfies the optimality condition
½
¾
©
ª
Pt
k
Et 1 + rt+1 = (1 + χt (·))Et (1 + it )
Pt+1

(22)

t
where Et {(1 + it ) PPt+1
} is the gross cost of funds absent capital market frictions.
Equation (22) is interpretable as follows: at the margin, the entrepreneur considers
acquiring a unit of capital financed by debt. The additional debt, however, raises the leverage
ratio, increasing the external finance premium and the overall marginal cost of finance.
Relative to perfect capital markets, accordingly, the demand for capital is lower, the exact
amount depending on χt (·) .12
Equation (22) provides the basis for the financial accelerator. It links movements in
the borrower financial position to the marginal cost of funds and, hence, to the demand for
capital. Note, in particular, that fluctuations in the price of capital, Qt , may have significant

eﬀects on the leverage ratio,

Bt+1
Pt

Nt+1

=

Bt+1
Pt

Qt Kt+1 −

Bt+1
Pt

. In this way, the model captures the link

between asset price movements and collaterals stressed in the Kiyotaki and Moore [31] theory
of credit cycles.
The other key component of the financial accelerator is the relation that describes the
evolution of entrepreneurial net worth, Nt+1 . Let Vt denote the value of entrepreneurial firm
capital net of borrowing costs carried over from the previous period. This value is given by
¸
·
¡
¢
Pt−1 Bt
k
Vt = 1 + rt Qt−1 Kt − (1 + χ(·)) (1 + it−1 )
.
Pt Pt−1

(23)

In this expression, (1 + rtk ) is the ex-post real return on capital, and (1 + χ(·))(1 + it−1 ) PPt−1
t
is the ex-post cost of borrowing. Net worth may then be expressed as a function of Vt and
the managerial wage, Wte /Pt ,
12
While we use the costly state verification problem to derive a parametric form for χt (·), we note, however,
that the general form relating external finance costs to financial positions arises across a broad class of agency
problems.

13

Nt+1 = φVt + Wte /Pt

(24)

where the weight φ reflects the number of entrepreneurs who survive each period.13
As equations (23) and (24) suggest, the principle source of movements in net worth stems
from unanticipated movements in returns and borrowing costs. In this regard, unforecastable
variations in the asset price Qt likely provide the principle source of fluctuations in (1 + rtk ).
It is for this reason that unpredictable asset price movements play a key role in the financial
accelerator. On the liability side, unexpected movements in the price level aﬀect ex post
borrowing costs. An unexpected deflation, for example, reduces entrepreneurial net worth.
If debt were instead denominated in foreign currency, then unexpected movements in the
nominal exchange rate would similarly shift net worth - we explore this possibility later.
Entrepreneurs going out of business at time t consume their remaining resources. Let Cte
denote the amount of the consumption composite consumed by the exiting entrepreneurs.14
Then
(25)
Cte = (1 − φ)Vt
is the total amount of equity that exiting entrepreneurs remove from the market.
3.3.2

Capital Producers

Competitive capital producers engage in two separate activities: the repair of depreciated
capital and the construction of new capital goods. Both of these activities take place after
production of output at time t. Following Eisner and Strotz [25] and Lucas [34], we assume
that the construction of new capital goods is subject to adjustment costs whereas the repair
of old capital goods is not. We further assume that there is no scope for substitution between
repair of old capital and construction of new capital — that is, in order for old capital to be
productive it must be repaired.
Both activities, repair and construction, use as input an investment good that is composed of domestic and foreign final goods:
h

It = (γ i )
13

1
ρi

(ItH )

ρi −1
ρi

+ (1 − γ i )

1
ρi

(ItF )

ρi −1
ρi

i ρ ρi

i−1

.

(26)

In our quantitative exercises, Wte is of negligible size, and the dynamics of Nt is determined by Vt .
We assume that entrepreneurs have preferences over domestic and foreign goods that are identical to the
households’ preferences specified in equation (1). The optimal mix of foreign and domestic tradable goods
for entrepreneurial consumption satisfies an equation analogous to (6).
14

14

The production parameter γ i measures the relative weight that domestic and foreign inputs
receive in the investment composite. Capital producers choose the optimal mix of foreign
and domestic inputs according to the intra-temporal first-order-condition
µ H ¶−ρi
γi
ItH
Pt
=
(27)
F
1 − γ i PtF
It
with the investment price index, PI,t , given by
1
h
¡ ¢1−ρi i 1−ρ
i
PI,t = (γ i ) (PtH )1−ρi + (1 − γ i ) PtF
.

(28)

To repair depreciated capital, producers require δ(ut )Kt units of the investment good
P
which may be purchased at a cost of PI,tt δ t Kt . Consistent with equation (13), these costs are
borne by the entrepreneurs who own the capital stock.
To construct new capital, producers use both investment goods and existing capital,
which they lease from entrepreneurs. Let Itn denote net investment — the amount of the
investment good used for the construction of new capital goods
Itn = It − δ(ut )Kt .

(29)
In

Each capital producer operates a constant returns to scale technology Φ( Ktt )Kt . Consistent
with the notion of adjustment costs for net investment, Φ(·) is increasing and concave. Under
constant returns to scale, the resulting economy-wide capital accumulation equation is
Itn
)Kt .
(30)
Kt
Individual capital producers choose inputs Itn and Kt to maximize expected profits from
the construction of new investment goods. New capital goods are sold at a price Qt . We
assume, following BGG, that capital producers make their plans to produce new capital one
period in advance. The idea is to capture the delayed response of investment observed in
the data. The optimality condition for net investment satisfies
Kt+1 = Kt + Φ(

½
µ
¾
¶
It
PI,t
0
= 0.
(31)
− δ(ut ) −
Et−1 Qt Φ
Kt
Pt
Equation (31) is a standard “Q-investment” relation, modified to allow for the investment
delay15 . The variable price of capital, though, plays an additional role in this framework: as
we have discussed, variations in asset prices will aﬀect entrepreneurial balance sheets, and
hence, the cost of capital.
15

The second input into production, Kt , is required to preserve constant returns to scale. Let rtl denote

15

3.3.3

Retailers, Price Setting, and Inflation

We assume there is a continuum of monopolistically competitive retailers of measure unity.
Retailers buy wholesale goods from entrepreneurs/producers in a competitive manner and
then diﬀerentiate the product slightly (e.g., by painting it or adding a brand name) at a
fixed resource cost κ. We assume that the fixed (from the retailers’ point of view) resource
cost represents distribution and selling costs that are assumed to be proportional to the
steady-state value of wholesale output. We choose the level of the fixed costs so that profits
to the retail sector are zero in steady-state.16
Let YtH (z) be the good sold by retailer z. Final domestic output is a CES composite of
individual retail goods:
YtH

=

·Z

1

ϑ−1
YtH (z) ϑ dz

0

ϑ
¸ ϑ−1

− κ.

(32)

The corresponding price of the composite final domestic good, PtH , is given by
PtH =

·Z

1

PtH (z)1−ϑ dz

0

1
¸ 1−ϑ

.

(33)

Domestic households, capital producers, the government, and the foreign country buy final
goods from retailers. Cost minimization implies that each retailer faces an isoelastic demand
³ H ´−ϑ
for his product given by YtH (z) = PtP H(z)
YtH . Since retailers simply repackage wholesale
t
goods, the marginal cost to the retailers of producing a unit of output is simply the relative
P
wholesale price, PW,t
H .
t
As we have noted, the retail sector provides the source of nominal stickiness in the
economy. We assume retailers set nominal prices on a staggered basis, following the approach
in Calvo [12]: each retailer resets his price with probability (1 − θ), independently of the time
elapsed since the last adjustment. Thus, each period a measure (1 − θ) of producers reset
In

P

the lease rate for existing capital; then profits equal Qt Φ( Ktt )Kt − PI,t
Itn − rtl Kt . The optimality condition
t
l
for the choice of Kt determines the equilibrium lease rate rt :
½ µ µ n¶
µ n ¶ n ¶¾
It
It
It
Et−1 Qt Φ
− Φ0
= rtl .
Kt
Kt Kt
At the steady-state, there are no adjustments costs so that Φ(0) = Φ0 (0) = 0. As a result, lease payments
rtl Kt are second-order and are negligible in terms of both steady-state and model dynamics.
16
In addition to justifying zero profits for the retail sector, the presence of fixed costs in the production
chain increases the economy-wide benefit to varying capital utilization at the margin.

16

their prices, while a fraction θ keeps their prices unchanged. Accordingly, the expected time
1
. Thus, for example, if θ = .75 per quarter, prices are fixed on
a price remains fixed is 1−θ
average for a year.
Since there are no firm-specific state variables, all retailers setting price at t will choose
H
the same optimal value, P t . It can be shown that, in the neighborhood of the steady state,
the domestic price index evolves according to
H

H θ
) (P t )1−θ .
PtH = (Pt−1

(34)

Retailers free to reset choose prices to maximize expected discounted profits, subject to the
constraint on the frequency of price adjustments.17 Here we simply observe that, within a
local neighborhood of the steady state, the optimal price is
H
Pt

∞
Y
i
= µ (PW,t+i )(1−βθ)(βθ)

(35)

i=0

where µ =

1
1−1/ϑ

is the retailers’ desired gross mark-up over wholesale prices. Note that
H

if retail prices were perfectly flexible, equation (35) would simply imply P t = µPW,t , i.e.,
the retail price would simply be a proportional mark-up over the wholesale price. However,
because their prices may be fixed for some time, retailers set prices based on the expected
future path of marginal cost, and not simply on current marginal cost.
Combining equations (34) and (35) yields an expression for the gross domestic inflation
rate (within the neighborhood of a zero-inflation steady state):
PtH
=
H
Pt−1

¶λ ½ H ¾β
µ
Pt+1
PW,t
µ H
Et
Pt
PtH

(36)

is decreasing in θ, the measure of price rigidity. Equation
where the parameter λ = (1−θ)(1−βθ)
θ
(36) is the canonical form of the new optimization-based Phillips curve that arises from an
environment of time-dependent staggered price setting (see, e.g., Gali and Gertler [27]). The
curve relates inflation to movements in real marginal cost and expected inflation.
Owing to imperfect competition, foreign goods sold in the local economy are subject to
an analogous mark-up over the wholesale price. We assume that retailers of foreign goods
F
- see equation (11) - and set prices according to a Calvo-style
face the marginal cost PW,t
17

Since it is standard in the literature, we do not report the maximization problem here.

17

price setting equation. Let 1 − θf denote the probability that a retailer of foreign goods
resets its price in any given period. The inflation rate for foreign goods then satisfies
PtF
=
F
Pt−1
f

¶λf
½ F ¾β
µ
F∗
Pt+1
f St Pt
µ
Et
F
Pt
PtF

(37)

f

)
.. This specification of the pricing process for domestically-sold
where λf = (1−θ )(1−βθ
θf
foreign goods implies temporary deviations from the law of one price owing to delay in the
exchange rate pass-through mechanism.18 The coeﬃcient θf captures the degree of this delay.
When calibrating the model, we assume that retailers of domestic and foreign goods face the
same degree of price rigidity, so that θf = θ.19
CPI inflation is a composite of domestic and foreign good price inflation. Within a local
region of the steady state, CPI inflation may be expressed as
µ H ¶γ µ F ¶1−γ
Pt
Pt
Pt
=
.
(38)
H
F
Pt−1
Pt−1
Pt−1

3.4

Resource Constraints

The resource constraint for the domestic tradable good sector is
YtH = CtH + CteH + CtH∗ + ItH + GH
t

(39)

eH
where GH
is entrepreneurial consumption of the dot is government consumption and Ct
mestic good.

3.5

Government Budget Constraint

We assume that government expenditures are financed by lump-sum taxes and money creation as follows:
PtH H Mt − Mt−1
G =
+ Tt .
(40)
Pt t
Pt
Government expenditures are exogenous. Lump sum taxes adjust to satisfy the government
budget constraint. Finally, the money stock depends on monetary policy, which we will
specify in the next section.
18

Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan [15] also consider pricing-to-market specifications to explore the role of
nominal rigidities in explaining exchange rate dynamics.
19
Since foreign prices are exogenous, we can assume, without loss of generality, that the steady-state
markup µf = µ .

18

Except for the description of monetary policy, we have completed the specification of the
model. The distinctive aspect is the financial accelerator, characterized by just two equations:
(22) and (24). The former characterizes how net worth influences capital demand. The latter
describes the evolution of net worth. If we restrict the external finance premium χ(·) to zero
in equation (22), we eﬀectively shut oﬀ the financial accelerator, and the model reverts to
a reasonably conventional new open economy macroeconomic framework. In what follows,
we will explore the performance of the model under alternative exchange rate regimes, with
and without an operative financial accelerator.

3.6

Fixed versus Flexible Exchange Rate Regimes

In the quantitative analysis discussed in the next section, we consider shocks to the economy
under three diﬀerent scenarios: (i) a pure fixed exchange rate regime; (ii) a floating exchange
rate regime, where the central bank manages the nominal interest rate according to a Taylor
rule; and (iii) a hybrid case, where the central bank initially fixes the exchange rate, but then
eventually abandons the peg in favor of the floating exchange rate regime. The latter regime
is meant to approximate the monetary policy response over the crisis episode in Korea.
Under the fixed exchange rate regime, the central bank keeps the nominal exchange rate
pegged at a predetermined level, i.e.
St = S, ∀t.

(41)

In doing so, the central bank sets the nominal interest rate to satisfy the uncovered interest
parity condition given by equation (10).
Under the flexible exchange rate regime, the policy instrument becomes the nominal
interest rate. The central bank adopts a feedback rule that has the nominal interest rate
adjust to deviations of CPI inflation and domestic output from their respective target values.
Let Yt0 denote the output target level, which we take to be the level that would arise if prices
were perfectly flexible. The feedback rule, accordingly, is given by
¶γ π µ H ¶γ y
µ
Yt
Pt
ss
(42)
(1 + it ) = (1 + rr )
Pt−1
Yt0

with γ π > 1 and γ y > 0, and where rrss is the steady state real interest rate. For simplicity,
we take the target gross inflation rate to be unity.20 We interpret this rule as being a form
20

The results are robust to allowing for a managed float, where the Tayor rule is appended with a term
that allows for a modest adjustment of the nominal interest rate to deviations of the nominal exchange rate
from target.

19

of flexible inflation targeting, in the sense of Bernanke et al. [8]. The central bank adjusts
the interest rate to ensure that over time the economy meets the inflation target, but with
flexibility in the short term so as to meet stabilization objectives. Importantly, we assume
that the central bank is able to credibly commit to the Taylor rule.
In the hybrid regime, as a shock hits the economy, the central bank initially maintains
the exchange rate peg. Conditional on being on the peg in the current period, it abandons
the peg with probability Π in the subsequent period, where Π is independent of time. Once
oﬀ the peg, the central bank reverts to the interest rate feedback rule given by equation (42).

3.7

Model Parametrization

Our quantitative analysis is meant to capture the broad features of an emerging market
economy such as South Korea for which financial frictions seem particularly relevant. We
first discuss the choice of the parameters governing preferences and technology, and then
describe the choice of the parameters pertinent to the financial structure.
3.7.1

Preferences

We fix the quarterly discount factor β at 0.99. We set the elasticity of inter-temporal
substitution, σ1 , equal to 0.2, consistent with the evidence of low sensitivity of expected
consumption growth to real interest rates. Since consumption goods are thought to have
a higher degree of substitution than intermediate or investment goods,21 we set the intratemporal elasticity of substitution for the consumption composite, ρh , at unity and the intratemporal elasticity of substitution for the investment composite, ρi , at 0.25. To match the
average ratio of consumption to GDP in Korea over the period 1990-2002 - approximately
0.5 - we set the share of domestic goods in the consumption composite, γ, equal to 0.5.
Finally, we assume that the elasticity of labor supply is equal to 2 and that average hours
worked relative to total hours available are equal to 13 .
With regard to the parameters of the export demand, equation (12), we set the elasticity
κ equal to 1 and the share parameter, ν, equal to 0.25. This implies a relatively high degree
of inertia in export demand, in line with the response of Korean exports during the 1997-98
crisis.
21

Around fifty percent of Korean imports are intermediate goods.

20

3.7.2

Technology

Over the period 1990-2002, the average gross capital formation-to-GDP and exports-to-GDP
ratios in Korea were approximately 0.3 and 0.4, respectively. To match these characteristics,
we set the capital share, α, equal to 0.5, the share of domestic goods in the investment
composite, γ i , equal to 0.5, and the steady state ratio of exports to domestic output equal
to 0.4. We set Ω = 0.01, implying that entrepreneurial labor accounts for 1% of the total
wage bill. The steady state utilization rate is normalized at 1 and the steady state quarterly
depreciation, δ (uss ), is assigned the conventional value of 0.025, consistent with the evidence.
The parameter ξ, which represents the elasticity of marginal depreciation with respect to
00
(u)
, is set equal to 1, consistent with Baxter and Farr [5], who rely on
the utilization rate, uδδ0 (u)
estimates provided by Basu and Kimball [3]. The steady state mark-up value, µ, is set at
1.2. Consistent with the retail sector earning zero profits in steady state, the fixed resource
cost κ is assumed to be 20 percent of wholesale output. The elasticity of the price of capital
with respect to the investment-capital ratio is taken to be 2. As is common in the literature
on the Calvo [12] pricing technology, we assume the probability of the price not adjusting,
θ, to be 0.75.
3.7.3

External Finance Premium

The data suggest that capital markets in Korea are somewhat less developed relative to the
U.S.. Debt-equity ratios were particularly high at the onset of the financial crisis.22 Early
in 1998, the Korean authorities urged the thirty largest chaebols to reduce their debt-equity
ratios to ”below 2” by the end of 1999. Conservatively, we set the steady state leverage ratio
equal to 1.1, approximately twice the historical U.S. average.
The spread between corporate and government bond rates appears to be consistently
zero prior to 1997 (see Figure 2). We interpret this as evidence of some sort of explicit/implicit
government guarantees to the Korean corporate sector. After reaching nine percent in December 1997-January 1998, the spread dropped and stabilized at around 1-2 percent in the
late spring of 1998. Since there is still some evidence of government meddling in capital
markets in Korea, we set the steady state external finance premium at 3.5 percent, roughly
150 basis points higher than U.S. historical data.
22

According to Krueger and Yoo [33], in 1997 the debt-equity ratio was 5.2 for the thirty largest chaebols,
4.8 for the five largest chaebols, 4.6 for the five largest manufacturing firms, and 3.9 for all firms in the
manufacturing sector

21

To obtain these steady state values, we need to set the non-standard parameters of the
model that aﬀect the relation between real and financial variables. In particular, we set
the entrepreneurs’ death rate, (1 − φ), equal to 0.0272. We assume that the idiosyncratic
productivity variable ω t is log-normally distributed with variance equal to 0.28. Finally, we
fix the fraction of realized payoﬀs lost in bankruptcy, µb , to 0.12.
3.7.4

Government Policy

We set the Taylor rule coeﬃcients on CPI inflation and domestic output gap, γ π and γ y
respectively, equal to 2 and 0.75, respectively. These coeﬃcients provide a reasonable approximation of the response of the real interest rate in Korea after the abandonment of the
fixed exchange rate regime. Finally, we take the steady state government expenditure ratio,
GH
, to be 0.2.
YH

4

External Shocks and Financial Crises: a Quantitative
Assessment

In this section we evaluate how well the model is able to replicate a financial crisis, such
as the one that occurred in Korea. In particular, we consider the response of the model
economy to an exogenous rise in the country risk premium, meant to reflect the sudden
and unanticipated capital outflows that appear to have triggered the events that followed
the Korean crisis, as we discussed in section 2. We begin with some simple exercises meant
to illustrate the model dynamics and the sensitivity of these dynamics to the exchange rate
regime. We then turn to an experiment meant to replicate the Korean crisis episode. Finally,
for Korea, only about twenty-five percent of debt was in units of foreign currency.23 For this
reason, in our baseline exercises we assumed that debt was in domestic currency units. We
conclude this section, however, by considering the implications of having debt denominated
entirely in units of foreign currency.
23

This refers to the share of liabilities denominated in foreign currency for commercial banks in Korea in
January/February 1998. See Krueger et al. [33] for details.

22

4.1

Country Borrowing Premium Shock

To illustrate the workings of the model, we consider an unanticipated one hundred basis point
increase in the country borrowing premium, Ψt .24 We assume further that the shock obeys
a first-order auto-correlation process that persists at the rate of 0.95 per quarter. Figures
4A and 4B plot the response of twelve key variables under fixed versus floating rates.
Under the fixed exchange rate regime, the domestic nominal interest rate rises to match
the increase in the country borrowing premium. Due to nominal price rigidities, there is
also a significant increase in the real interest rate which, in turn, induces a contraction in
output. The financial accelerator magnifies the output drop — the rise in the real interest
rate induces a contraction in asset prices, which raises the leverage ratio and the external
finance premium. The increase in the latter further dampens investment and output.
Under a flexible exchange rate, the domestic nominal interest rate is no longer tied to the
foreign interest rate, and is instead governed by the feedback rule, equation (42). The rise
in the country risk premium produces an immediate depreciation of the domestic currency,
which in turn prompts an increase in exports and a sharp rise in CPI inflation. The central
bank raises the nominal interest rate to fight inflation, according to the feedback rule. This
monetary policy implies only a modest increase in the real interest rate however, and a
moderate drop in investment. Because the rise in domestic inflation is due to the currency
depreciation, it is short-lived. Nominal rates fall back to trend one period after the shock
while real rates fall slightly below trend. Output falls slightly on net, due to oﬀsetting eﬀects
of a reduction in investment demand and increasing exports. Overall, output is significantly
more stable under the flexible exchange rate regime.25
Figure 4A also shows the eﬀect of the contraction in output on capital utilization and
labor productivity. With either fixed or flexible exchange rates, the reduction in output
implies a reduction in capital utilization of almost equal magnitude. As a consequence,
labor productivity falls following a demand-driven slow-down, despite the fact that hours
24
Note that, in this framework, this shock is formally equivalent to a shock to the foreign interest rate.
In addition, we have explored alternative experiments, such as shocks to foreign prices. These experiments
yield very similar conclusions with regard to the eﬀects of fixed versus flexible exchange rates in the presence
of the financial accelerator.
25
The monetary policy rule includes the output gap as well as inflation. In principal, output stability is
influenced by the combined eﬀect of targeting inflation and the output gap. Using an interest rate rule that
puts zero weight on the output gap produces very similar results however. With zero weight on the output
gap, the contraction in output produces less inflationary pressures and hence less need to raise real rates to
fight inflation.

23

are contracting. The model implies a strongly pro-cyclical movement in measured TFP —
under fixed rates, measured TFP drops one and one half percent in response to a two percent
drop in utilization — despite the absence of any exogenous change in technology. Note that
the drop in measured TFP and utilization relative to output is roughly in line with data from
the Korean crisis period (where, again, utilization is measured by electricity usage.) These
results suggest that the model is capable of producing quantitatively realistic dynamics of
measured productivity, even though the underlying shock is financial in nature, and not
technological.
The last two panels of Figure 4A show the eﬀect of the rise in the country risk premium
on consumption and net exports. With a flexible exchange rate, consumption falls more than
output owing to the increased cost of imported consumer goods following the depreciation.
With fixed rates, this eﬀect is muted and consumption falls by slightly less than output. As
expected, with flexible rates, net exports increase, albeit by a modest amount. Net exports
also increase under fixed rates, due to the contraction in import demand, stemming from the
sharp investment and output decline. Indeed, the rise in net exports is substantially larger
under fixed exchange rates, despite the fact that the real exchange rate depreciates more
under the flexible exchange rate regime.
Overall, these results imply a much larger drop in output, hours (not shown), and
investment under a fixed exchange rate regime than under a flexible exchange rate regime
in response to a rise in the country risk premium. That output should decline more under
fixed rates in this scenario is, of course, a feature of the standard model absent a financial
accelerator. What we wish to stress here is that the financial accelerator greatly magnifies the
diﬀerence. Figure 5 makes this point directly. The figure plots the response of output and
investment across the two diﬀerent exchange rate regimes, with and without an operative
financial accelerator. Under fixed rates, the financial accelerator doubles the contraction in
investment (lower left panel) and more than doubles the contraction in output (upper left
panel) at the trough. Under flexible rates, instead, the eﬀect of the financial accelerator is
far more modest.

4.2

The Korean Experience

We now turn to a quantitative exercise that is intended to capture the macroeconomic
consequences of the rise in the country risk premium that occurred in Korea during its
recent financial crisis. Our goal is to analyze the quantitative response of our model under
24

such a scenario and compare the model outcome with the actual Korean data. Within the
context of our model, an exogenous rise in the country borrowing premium introduces a
wedge between domestic and foreign interest rates in the uncovered interest parity condition
(see equation 10). Formally, it is equivalent to a shock to the foreign interest rate. As
discussed above, we believe that treating the rise in the country risk premium as exogenous
is a reasonable approximation of the Korean situation.26
We consider a five percentage point rise in the country risk premium, which is in line with
the rise in the EMBI Global that occurred in Korea during the financial crisis. We assume
that the shock persists as a first-order autoregressive process with a 0.95 coeﬃcient, which is
also in line with the evidence.27 We capture the notion that Korea began the episode under a
fixed exchange rate regime and then subsequently abandoned the peg as follows: we assume
that the exchange rate is initially fixed when the shock hits, but that the central bank may
either bandon the regime in any subsequent period with a fixed probability Π or continue the
peg with fixed probability 1 − Π. Because the Korean devaluation was largely unanticipated,
we set the abandonment probability at a relatively low value, 0.1. Accordingly, conditional
1
= 10 quarters. To roughly match
on being on the peg, the expected duration is Π1 = 0.1
the Korean experience, we set the actual abandonment at two quarters after the shock28
(thus, the abandonment occurs sooner than the market would have guessed ex-ante). For
benchmark purposes, we also report how the economy would have responded under a pure
fixed exchange rate regime and a pure flexible exchange rate regime.
Figure 6A and 6B plot the response of twelve key variables under the policy of probabilistic abandonment, along with the response under fixed and flexible exchange rates. Overall,
the model with probabilistic abandonment does well at capturing the key outcomes of the
Korean experience displayed in Figures 1-3 above. In the Korean data, the drop in real GDP
26

Cooper and Ejarque [22] provide a model with an endogenous collapse of the banking sector applied to
the Great Depression. Their model, however, does not provide an endogenous amplification of the collapse
through a financial accelerator mechanism.
27
Even after controlling for the sharp spike in the EMBI Global following the Russian crisis in 1998, it
appears that the increase in the Korean spread was persistently high after the 1997 Asian crisis.
28
The reason why we set two quarters before the regime switch in our Korean experiment is the following.
Even though the IMF stand-by credit for Korea, approved on December 4, 1997, included a flexible exchange
rate policy, monetary policy was tightened to restore and sustain calm in the markets, and to contain the
inflationary impact of the won depreciation. This implied a reversal of liquidity injected prior to the IMF
program and a sharp increase in money market rates - see Figure 2 - to stabilize the markets. Since rates
were reduced only gradually in 1998, we don’t characterize the end-1997/beginning-1998 period as a switch
to flexible inflation targeting yet.

25

is fourteen percent whereas the model produces roughly a thirteen percent drop.29 The reduction in gross capital formation for Korea is on the order of forty-five percent, again in line
with, albeit somewhat larger than, the model’s thirty-five percent response. Net exports (as
a percentage of GDP) increase by fifteen percent in the data, compared with nearly fourteen
percent in the model. Notably, both the data and the model imply a large reduction in
imports, especially capital goods, which drives the expansion in net exports. In the data,
consumption falls by roughly eighteen percent, which is about double the nine percent implied by the model. A good chunk of this discrepancy, though, might be explained by the
fact that data includes durables as well as non-durables, while consumption in the model
includes only non-durables.
The model also does well at capturing the productivity and utilization variables observed
in Korea over this time period. The Korean data imply a five percent drop in labor productivity over the period December 1997 through September 1998 while the model implies
roughly a three percent drop. The magnitude of the decline in labor productivity observed
in the data is probably exagerated, however, since it is based on output per worker and not
on output per hour.30 As shown in figure 1, electricity consumption for the Korean economy
falls fourteen percent during the crisis period. In the model, capital utilization drops eleven
percent, in the same ballpark as the decline in electricity utilization.31 Overall, these results
imply that variable capital utilization provides a reasonable explanation for the contraction
in productivity that emerging market economies such as Korea experience in the wake of a
financial crisis.
Finally, the model also does well at capturing various financial features of the Korean
experience. The nine percentage point rise in the corporate-treasury bond spread observed
in the data is very close in magnitude to the response obtained by the model’s external
finance premium. In addition, the model does a good job of capturing the sudden reduction
29

Because agents expect the monetary authority to abandon eventually, expected future inflation is higher
and, consequently, so is current inflation. As a result, both nominal and real interest rates rise by more
under the model with probabilistic abandonment than in the case of a pure fixed exchange rate.
30
A stylized fact for U.S. data is that, of the total drop in hours during a typical recession, roughly one
third reflects a drop in hours per worker. Not taking into account the hours per worker change, accordingly, suggests a significant exageration of the movement in labor productivity (based on measures that use
employment as opposed to hours).
31
Given that oil is an imported good, we would expect some substitution away from energy towards other
capital goods and inputs in the case where energy and capital show some degree of substitutability. Hence
the fourteen percent drop in energy is likely to overstate the decline in capital services owing to a drop in
utilization rates.

26

in the corporate-treasury bond spread following the abandonment of the peg. It also does
well at mimicing both the nominal and real interest rate movements observed in the data.
In particular, in the data, the (ex-post) real interest rate initially rises by eight percentage
points prior to the abandonment, and then falls by sixteen percentage points following the
abandonment — a result that is similar to the real rate path generated by the model.32
Consistent with this path, both the data and the model exhibit a surge in inflation — on the
order of five percentage points — following the abandonment.
The financial variable that is diﬃcult to match is the actual exchange rate movement
when the monetary authority abandons the fixed exchange rate regime probabilistically.
The fact that quantitative macroeconomic models have diﬃculty in matching exchange rate
movements comes as no surprise however. Our model nonetheless produces a sizable depreciation in the real exchange rate — on the order of ten percent. As it is well known, movements
in the nominal exchange rate dramatically over-state movements in the real exchange rate
and the terms of trade.33 To the extent that our model does well at capturing the dynamic
response of net exports, we are less concerned that it does not fully account for the volatility
of the exchange rate during this time period.
Up to the point where the peg is abandoned, the contraction is as severe as if the economy
had been on a lasting peg. The abandonment, of course, frees the hand of monetary policy
and allows the economy to recover much faster than otherwise. As the figures indicate,
the crisis would have been much less severe had the economy all along been operating in a
credible floating exchange rate regime.
We now consider the welfare loss associated with the financial crisis, as well as the loss
that might have occurred under alternative policy scenarios. In particular, we compute the
drop in household and entrepreneurial utility suﬀered during the crisis and then convert
this drop into consumption-equivalents. In doing so, we measure the crisis period to be six
32

Although we don’t have data on ex-ante real interest rates, it is useful to look at the ex-post real interest
rate as a guide. The nominal interest rate rises from thirteen to twenty-five percent on an annual basis in
January 1998, before falling to five percent by September 1998. The inflation rate rises from five percent
in the third quarter of 1997 to nine percent in the first quarter of 1998 before falling to six percent by
September of 1998. Thus, the ex-post real rate is approximately eight percent in October 1998, sixteen
percent in January 1998 and zero percent in September 1998, indicating an initial eight percentage point
rise followed by a sixteen percentage point fall in the real interest rate.
33
As emphasized by Burstein, Eichenbaum and Rebelo [9], in the absence of a substantial non-tradable
good sector, it is extremely diﬃcult to match movements in the nominal exchange rate. Barth and Dinmore
[4] provide further discussion of the response of the real exchange rate and the terms of trade for various
Asian countries during the financial crisis.

27

Table 1: Welfare Loss As a Percent of Steady-State Consumption
Model with Financial Accelerator
Flexible Rates
12.1%
Switching Re gime
16.4%
Fixed Rates
20.5%
quarters, approximately the amount of time it took for Korea’s detrended GDP to recover
to its pre-crisis level. We then calculate the amount of steady state consumption that an
appropriately weighted average of households and entrepreneurs would be willing to forgo as a
one-time payment to avoid the present-discounted loss in utility associated with the crisis.34
We express the amount that individuals are willing to forgo as a fraction of one year’s
steady state consumption. Details of the calculations are in an accompanying appendix.
These results are reported in table 1. In the case meant to capture the Korean crisis, the
“Switching Regime,” the welfare loss of the crisis is quite substantial, sixteen percent of
one year’s consumption. Had the economy stayed on fixed rates throughout, the loss would
have been considerable worse, twenty percent of steady state annual consumption. Had the
economy been on flexible rates, the welfare loss would have still been considerable - twelve
percent of one year’s consumption - but, nonetheless, significantly lower than under the other
policy regimes, especially the pure fixed exchange rate regime.

4.3

Foreign-denominated Debt

A number of authors have recently stressed that if private debts are denominated in foreign
currency units - as was recently the case for many emerging market economies - a fixed
exchange rate regime may in fact be more desirable than a flexible exchange rate regime,
since devaluations weaken borrower balance sheets.35 As we have discussed, in the Korean
case, only about a quarter of all debts were denominated in foreign currency, which led us to
consider debt in domestic currency as the baseline case. Nonetheless, it is useful to explore
the extent to which our conclusions are robust to having foreign-indexed debt. Accordingly,
we briefly consider the eﬀect of foreign-indexed debt for the response of the model to an
34

The loss incorporates the current and future foregone consumption of households and entrepreneurs as
well as the gain in current and future household leisure that accompanies the crisis.
35
See, for example, Aghion, Bacchetta and Banerjee [2].

28

unanticipated one hundred basis point increase in the country borrowing premium.36
Figure 6 plots the response of output and investment under three diﬀerent scenarios:
flexible exchange rate with debt denominated entirely in foreign currency; flexible exchange
rate with domestic-denominated debt; and fixed exchange rate. As one would expect, foreign
currency debt makes the flexible exchange rate regime considerably less attractive. Allowing
for foreign currency debt implies a contraction in investment that is twice as large as the
contraction obtained in the case of domestic currency debt. With foreign currency debt,
the depreciation of the exchange rate reduces entrepreneurial net worth, thus enhancing the
financial accelerator mechanism. Nonetheless, even in this instance, the output drop remains
smaller under flexible rates than under fixed rates. Put diﬀerently, the impact of the exchange
rate on the balance sheets under flexible rates is less damaging than the contraction in asset
prices under fixed rates. Our conclusion that a flexible rate regime remains dominant, even
with foreign-indexed debt, is consistent with the conclusions of Cespedes, Chang and Velasco
[14], though the details of the transmission mechanisms under fixed versus flexible rates diﬀer
significantly.

5

Concluding Remarks

We developed a small open economy general equilibrium framework that featured money,
nominal price rigidities, and a financial accelerator mechanism. The goal was to explore the
interaction between the exchange rate regime and financial crises. As a way to judge the
framework, we explored how well it was able to explain the behavior of the Korean economy
over the 1997-98 period of financial crisis. We found that overall the model does well. It is
able to match the observed drop in Korean output, investment, and productivity during this
time period. The financial accelerator mechanism turns out be quantitatively significant —
accounting for about 50 percent of the total reduction in output. In addition, the model can
36

In the presence of debt denominated in foreign currency, the entrepreneurial net wealth and the external
finance premium equations are modified as follows:
¸
·
¢
¢ St Pt−1 Bt∗
¡
¡
k
∗
Vt = 1 + rt Qt−1 Kt − (1 + χ(·)) 1 + it−1
St−1 Pt Pt−1

and

½
¾
©
ª
k
∗ St+1 Pt
Et 1 + rt+1 = (1 + χt (.))Et (1 + it )
St Pt+1

29

account for most of the large drop in measured labor productivity by appealing to variable
capital utilization.
Our counterfactual exercises suggested that a policy of fixed exchange rates can lead to
substantially higher welfare losses following a financial crisis than would have been obtained
under a policy of flexible inflation targeting. The flexible inflation targeting policy was characterized by floating exchange rates and a well formulated Taylor rule that had the nominal
interest rate adjust to stabilize inflation and the output gap. Of course, our counterfactual
experiment assumed that the Taylor rule was fully credible. In practice, however, successful
implementation of a “good” Taylor rule requires that the overall economic infrastructure
must be sound, e.g., the domestic budget cannot be out of control. This kind of considerations, however, poses a dilemma for the successful working of any kind of monetary regime.
Indeed, as Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ [36] note, given that fixed exchange rate regimes never seem
to last, it is not clear that this kind of policy can solve the credibility problem. Nonetheless,
we concede that a better understanding of how credibility considerations factor into the
choice of exchange regimes is an important topic for future research.

30

References
[1] ANDERSON, G. and G. MOORE (1985), “A Linear Procedure for Solving Linear
Perfect Foresight Models”, Economics Letters, 17, 247-252.
[2] AGHION, P., BACCHETTA, P. and BANERJEE, A. (2000), “A Simple Model of
Monetary Policy and Currency Crises”, European Economic Review, 44, 728-738.
[3] BASU, S. and KIMBALL M. (1997), “Cyclical Productivity and Unobserved Input
Variation” (NBER Working Paper No. 5915).
[4] BARTH, M.J. and DINMORE T. (1999), “Trade Prices and Volumes in East Asia
Through the Crisis” (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System IFDP Paper
No. 643).
[5] BAXTER, M. and FARR D. (2001), “Variable Factor Utilization and International
Business Cycle” (NBER Working Paper No. 8392).
[6] BERNANKE, B. and GERTLER M. (1989), “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
Fluctuations”, American Economic Review, 79, 14-31.
[7] BERNANKE, B., GERTLER M. and GILCHRIST S. (2000), “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework”, Handbook of Macroeconomics (North
Holland).
[8] BERNANKE, B., LAUBACH, T., MISHKIN, F., and Posen, A. (1999) Inflation Targeting. Lessons from the International Experience (Princeton University Press).
[9] BURSTEIN, A., EICHENBAUM, M. and REBELO, S. (2002), “Why are Rates of
Inflation so Low After Large Devaluations?” (NBER Working Paper No. 8748).
[10] BURNSIDE, C., EICHENBAUM, M., and REBELO, S. (2001), “Hedging and Financial
Fragility in Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes”, European Economic Review, 45, 1151-1193.
[11] CABALLERO, R.J. and KRISHNAMURTHY, A. (2000), “Emerging Markets Crises:
an Asset Markets Perspective” (MIT, mimeo).
[12] CALVO, G. (1983), ”Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 12, 383-398.
31

[13] CARLSTROM, C. and FUERST, T. S. (1997), “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations: a Computable General Equilibrium Analysis”, American Economic
Review, 87, 893-910.
[14] CESPEDES, L.P., CHANG, R. and VELASCO, A. (2000), “Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate Policy” (NBER Working Paper No. 7840).
[15] CHARI, V.V., KEHOE, P.J., and MCGRATTAN, E. (2002), “Can Sticky Price Models
Generate Volatile and Persistent Real Exchange Rates?” (Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, Staﬀ Report No. 277).
[16] CHARI, V.V., KEHOE, P.J., and MCGRATTAN, E. (2003), “Accounting for the Great
Depression”, Quarterly Review, Vol. 27 No. 2, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
[17] CHRISTIANO, L., GUST, C., and ROLDOS, J. (2002), ”Monetary Policy in a Financial
Crisis” (NBER Working Paper No. 9005).
[18] CLARIDA, R., GALI, J. and GERTLER, M. (1998), “Monetary Policy Rules in Practice: Some International Evidence”, European Economic Review, 42, 1033-1067.
[19] CLARIDA, R., GALI, J. and GERTLER, M. (1999), “The Science of Monetary Policy:
a New Keynesian Perspective”, Journal of Economic Literature, 37, 1661-1707.
[20] COLE, H. and OHANIAN, L. (2001), “Re-Examining the Contributions of Money and
Banking Shocks to the U.S. Great Depression” in Ben Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoﬀ
(eds.),. NBER Macroeconomics Annual (MIT Press).
[21] COLE, H. and OHANIAN, L. (2002), “Did Monetary Forces Cause the International
Great Depression” (Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis).
[22] COOPER, R. and EJARQUE, J. (1995), “Financial Intermediation and the Great Depression: A Multiple Equilibrium Interpretation”, Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public
Policy, 43, 285-323.
[23] DEVEREUX, M. and LANE, P. (2003), “Exchange Rates and Monetary Policy in
Emerging Market Economies” (UBC ,mimeo).
[24] EICHENGREEN, B. (1992), The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-1939
(New York: Oxford University Press).
32

[25] EISNER, R. and STROTZ, R. (1963), “Determinants of Business Investment”, (with
bibliography by G.R. Post) in Commission on Money and Credit Impacts of Monetary
Policy, 59-337 (Englewood Cliﬀs: Prentice-Hall).
[26] FUERST, T. S. (1995), ”Monetary and Financial Interactions in the Business Cycle”,
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 27, 1321-1338.
[27] GALI, J. and GERTLER, M. (1999), “Inflation Dynamics: a Structural Analysis”,
Journal of Monetary Economics, 44, 195-222.
[28] GALI, J. and MONACELLI, T. (2002), “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility
in a Small Open Economy” (NBER Working Paper No. 8905).
[29] GREENWOOD, J., HERCOWITZ, Z. and HUFFMAN, G. (1988), “Investment, Capital
Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle”, American Economic Review, 78, 402-417.
[30] KAMINSKY, G.L and REINHART, C.M. (1999), “The Twin Crises: the Causes of
Banking and Balance-of-Payments Problems”, American Economic Review, 89, 473500.
[31] KIYOTAKI, N. and MOORE, J. (1997), “Credit Cycles”, Journal of Political Economy,
105, 211-248.
[32] KRISHNAMURTHY, A. (2003), “Collateral Constraints and the Amplification Mechanism,” Journal of Economic Theory, 277-292.
[33] KRUEGER, A. and YOO, J. (2001), “Chaebol Capitalism and the Currency-financial
Crisis in Korea” (NBER Conference on Currency Crises Prevention).
[34] LUCAS, R.E. Jr. (1967), “Optimal Investment Policy and the Flexible Accelerator,”
International Economic Review, 8, 78-85.
[35] MONACELLI, T. (1999), “Into the Mussa Puzzle: Monetary Policy Regimes and the
Real Exchange Rate in a Small Open Economy” (Boston College Working Paper in
Economics No. 437).
[36] OBSTFELD, M. and ROGOFF, K. (1995), “The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9, 73-96.
33

[37] OBSTFELD, M. and ROGOFF, K. (1999), “New Directions for Stochastic Open Economy Models” (NBER Working Paper No. 7313).
[38] REBELO, S. and VEGH, C. A. (1995), “Real Eﬀects of Exchange Rate-Based Stabilization: an Analysis of Competing Theories” (NBER Working Paper No. 5197).
[39] SCHMITT-GROHE, S. and URIBE, M. (2001), “Stabilization Policy and the Costs of
Dollarization”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 33, 482-509.
[40] SCHNEIDER, M. and TORNELL, A. (2000), “Balance Sheet Eﬀects, Bailout Guarantees and Financial Crises” (NBER Working Paper No. 8060).
[41] SVENSSON, L.E.O. (2000), “Open-Economy Inflation Targeting”, Journal of International Economics, 50, 155-183.
[42] TAYLOR, J. B. (1993), “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice”, CarnegieRochester Series on Public Policy, 39, 195-214.
[43] TOWNSEND, R. M. (1979), “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly
State Verification’, Journal of Economic Theory, 21, 265-293.
[44] URIBE, M. (1997), “Exchange-Rate-Based Inflation Stabilization: the Initial Real Effects of Credible Plans”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 39, 197-221.

34

Appendix
Welfare calculations:
Assuming real money balance eﬀects are negligible, we can write the household’s utility
function at time t as
¤1−σ
£
(Ct )1−ς (1 − Lt )ς
h
Ut =
.
1−σ
Since the entrepreneur’s utility function at time t is given by
Ute = Cte
then in steady state we have
h
Uss

and

¤1−σ
£
(Css )1−ς (1 − Lss )ς
=
1−σ
e
e
= Css
.
Uss

From equation (9), the household’s marginal utility of consumption at time t is given
by
∂Uth
= (1 − φ) (Ct )(σ−1)(φ−1)−1 (1 − Lt )φ(1−σ)
∂Ct
while the entrepreneur’s marginal utility of consumption is 1.
Let the present discounted value of the household’s and entrepreneur’s utility along the
time path be
k
X
β t−1 Uth
Wth =
λht =

t=1

and

Wte =

k
X

β t−1 Ute .

t=1

Finally, let the utility of the household and the entrepreneur corresponding to a constant
sequence of consumption and leisure be
¡
¢
k
h
1
−
β
U
h
= ss
Wss
1−β
and
e
Wss

¡
¢
e
1 − βk
Uss
.
=
1−β
35

Then the welfare cost of the business cycle is given by
¸
·
tot
h
e
∆Css
Wth − Wss
Wte − Wss
= (τ )
+ (1 − τ )
tot
e
Css
Css
λhss Css
where τ is the household share of total steady state consumption:
τ=

Css
.
e
Css + Css

The financial contract:
In this section of the appendix, we describe the derivation of the optimal contract in the
non-stochastic steady-state. We then show how to log-linearize the key financial equation,
around this steady-state value. Given the solution to the contract, the rest of the model can
be log-linearized in a standard fashion.
k
Let profits per unit of capital equal ωR where ln(ω) ∼ N(−(1/2)σ 2 , σ 2 ) so that E(ω) =
1.37 Let N denote the steady-state level of net worth, Q the price of capital (equal to one in
steady-state) and K the steady-state value of the capital stock. The entrepreneur borrows
k
QK − N to invest K units of capital in a project. The total return on capital is ωR QK
k
where R denotes the steady-state return on capital. We assume ω is unknown to both the
entrepreneur and the lender prior to the investment decision. After the investment decision
k
is made, the lender can only observe ω by paying the monitoring cost µb ωR QK, where
0 < µb < 1. The required return on lending equals R = 1/β .
The optimal contract specifies a cutoﬀ value ω such that if ω ≥ ω, the borrower pays
k
k
the lender the fixed amount ωR QK and keeps the equity (ω − ω)R QK. Alternatively, if
ω < ω, the borrower receives nothing, while the lender monitors the borrower and receives
k
(1 − µb )ωR QK in residual claims net of monitoring costs. In equilibrium, the lender earns
an expected return equal to the safe rate R implying
µZ ω
¶
Z ∞
Z ω
k
ωf (ω)dω + ω
f (ω)dω − µb
ωf (ω)dω R QK = R(QK − N).
(43)
0

37

ω

0

To be consistent with the notation used in section 3.3.1, we are implicitly defining Rk as
Rk = ωR

36

k

The optimal contract maximizes the payoﬀ to the entrepreneur subject to the lender earning
the required rate of return:
µZ ∞
¶
k
ωf (ω)dω R QK
max
K,ω

ω

subject to equation (43).
Given constant returns to scale, the cutoﬀ ω determines the division of expected gross
k
profits R QK between borrower and lender. We define Γ(ω) as the expected gross share of
profits going to the lender:
Z ω
Z ∞
ωf (ω)dω + ω
f (ω)dω.
Γ(ω) ≡
0

ω

We similarly define µb G(ω) as the expected monitoring costs:
Z ω
µb G (ω) ≡ µb
ωf (ω)dω.
0

The net share of profits going to the lender is Γ(ω) − µb G(ω), and the share going to the
entrepreneur is 1 − Γ(ω), where by construction Γ(ω) satisfies 0 ≤ Γ(ω) ≤ 1.
Under the assumption that ln(ω) ∼ N(−(1/2)σ 2 , σ 2 ) we have
Γ(ω) = Φ(z − σ) + ω[1 − Φ(z)]
and
Γ(ω) − µG(ω) = (1 − µ)Φ(z − σ) + ω[1 − Φ(z)].
where Φ(·) is the c.d.f. of the standard normal and z is related to ω through z ≡ (ln(ω) +
0.5σ 2 )/σ.
In steady-state, the contracting problem may be written as:
k

max(1 − Γ(ω))R QK
K,ω

subject to:
k

k

[Γ(ω) − µG(ω)]R QK = R(QK − N).

the steady-state ratio of
Let s = RR denote the premium on external funds and k = QK
N
capital to net worth. The first-order conditions for the contracting problem imply that
s(ω) ≡
37

λ(ω)
Ψ(ω)

(44)

k(ω) ≡
where

Ψ(ω)
1 − Γ(ω)

(45)

Γ0 (ω)
.
Γ0 (ω) − µb G0 (ω)
denotes the Lagrange multiplier on the constraint that lenders earn their required rate of
return in expectation and
λ(ω) =

Ψ(ω) = 1 − Γ(ω) + λ(ω)[Γ(ω) − µG(ω)].
Equations (44) and (45) provide an implicit relationship between capital expenditures per
unit of net worth k(ω) and the premium on external funds that is the basis for equation (22)
To complete our derivation of the steady-state contract, we need to consider the steadystate determinants of the return on capital and the net worth accumulation equation. The
steady-state return on capital is determined according to the standard Jorgensonian formula:
1 Y
k
α = R − (1 − δ).
µ K

(46)

The steady-state net worth accumulation satisfies
N
V
1 Y
=φ + Ω
K
K µ K

(47)

where

V
k
= (1 − Γ(ω)) R
(48)
K
Y
are total managerial labor earnings normalized by the
is the return on equity and µ1 Ω K
capital stock. Combining equations (46), (47), and (48), we obtain
Ã
!
k
k
(1 − δ)
α 1N
R
R
−
=
− φ (1 − Γ(ω))
.
R
R
Ω RK
R
Applying equations (44) and (45) we have
s (ω) − (1 − δ)β =

¢
α¡
βk (ω)−1 − φ (1 − Γ(ω)) s (ω) .
Ω

(49)

Given structural parameters (Ω, α, µ, β, σ, φ, µb ), it is straightforward to solve equation (49)
for the cutoﬀ ω using numerical techniques. Once ω is obtained, we can compute the implied
premium s(ω) and the implied capital-net worth ratio k (ω) using equations (44) and (45).
The the rest of the model’s steady-state can then be computed in a standard fashion.
38

In our calibration exercise, we set σ = 0.28, µb = 0.12, 1 − φ = 0.0272, α = 0.5, µ =
1.2, Ω = 0.01. These values imply a 6 percent default rate, a 3.5 percent premium on
external funds, and a ratio for QK/N = 2.1.
Having derived the steady-state of the model, we now consider log-linearizing the key
financial equations. For notational ease during our computations, we eliminate the debt
variable from equation (22) by noting that Bt+1 /Pt = Qt Kt+1 − Nt+1 . Accordingly, equation
(22) can be written in log-linear form as:

where

´i
³
© k ª
1h
b
Et rbt+1 − rbt = − n
bt+1 − qbt + kt+1
v
v=

Γ0 (ω)
Ψ0 (ω)
+
Ψ(ω)
1 − Γ(ω)

is the steady-state elasticity of k with respect to s. This elasticity may be obtained by
diﬀerentiating equations (44) and (45) with respect to ω and evaluating these derivatives at
the steady-state value of ω implied by equation (49).

39

FIGURE 1
Real GDP
(log, detrended)

Real Gross Capital Formation
(log, detrended)

0.06

0.30

0.04

0.20

0.02

0.10

0.00

0.00

-0.02

-0.10

-0.04

-0.20

-0.06
-0.10

-0.40

-0.12

-0.50
M

M

ar
-9
6
Ju
l-9
6
N
ov
-9
6
M
ar
-9
7
Ju
l-9
7
N
ov
-9
7
M
ar
-9
8
Ju
l-9
8
N
ov
-9
8
M
ar
-9
9
Ju
l-9
9
N
ov
-9
9

-0.30

ar
-9
6
Ju
l-9
6
N
ov
-9
6
M
ar
-9
7
Ju
l-9
7
N
ov
-9
7
M
ar
-9
8
Ju
l-9
8
N
ov
-9
8
M
ar
-9
9
Ju
l-9
9
N
ov
-9
9

-0.08

Total Employment
(log, detrended)

Real Consumption
(log, detrended)
0.10

0.06
0.04

0.05

0.02
0.00

0.00
-0.02

-0.05

-0.04
-0.10

-0.06

-0.15

M
ar
-9
6
Ju
l-9
6
N
ov
-9
6
M
ar
-9
7
Ju
l-9
7
N
ov
-9
7
M
ar
-9
8
Ju
l-9
8
N
ov
-9
8
M
ar
-9
9
Ju
l-9
9
N
ov
-9
9

M
ar
-9
6
Ju
l-9
6
N
ov
-9
6
M
ar
-9
7
Ju
l-9
7
N
ov
-9
7
M
ar
-9
8
Ju
l-9
8
N
ov
-9
8
M
ar
-9
9
Ju
l-9
9
N
ov
-9
9

-0.08

Real GDP per worker
(log, detrended)

Electricity Consumption
(log, detrended)

0.02

0.08

0.01

0.06

0.00

0.04
0.02

-0.01

0.00

-0.02

-0.02

-0.03

-0.04
-0.06

-0.05

-0.08

-0.06

-0.10

M
ar
-9
6
Ju
l-9
6
N
ov
-9
6
M
ar
-9
7
Ju
l-9
7
N
ov
-9
7
M
ar
-9
8
Ju
l-9
8
N
ov
-9
8
M
ar
-9
9
Ju
l-9
9
N
ov
-9
9

M
ar
-9
6
Ju
l-9
6
N
ov
-9
6
M
ar
-9
7
Ju
l-9
7
N
ov
-9
7
M
ar
-9
8
Ju
l-9
8
N
ov
-9
8
M
ar
-9
9
Ju
l-9
9
N
ov
-9
9

-0.04

40

n-

Ja
n96
M
ay
-9
6
Se
p96
Ja
n97
M
ay
-9
7
Se
p97
Ja
n98
M
ay
-9
8
Se
p98
Ja
n99
M
ay
-9
9
Se
p99

9
M 6
ay
-9
Se 6
p96
Ja
n9
M 7
ay
-9
Se 7
p97
Ja
n98
M
ay
-9
Se 8
p98
Ja
n99
M
ay
-9
Se 9
p99

Ja

ar
-9
Ju 6
nSe 96
pD 96
ec
M 96
ar
-9
Ju 7
nSe 97
pD 97
ec
M 97
ar
-9
Ju 8
nSe 98
pD 98
ec
M 98
ar
-9
Ju 9
nSe 99
pD 99
ec
-9
9

M

Ja
n9
M 6
ay
-9
Se 6
p96
Ja
n9
M 7
ay
-9
Se 7
p97
Ja
n9
M 8
ay
-9
Se 8
p98
Ja
n99
M
ay
-9
Se 9
p99

Ja
n96
M
ay
-9
6
Se
p96
Ja
n97
M
ay
-9
7
Se
p97
Ja
n98
M
ay
-9
8
Se
p98
Ja
n99
M
ay
-9
9
Se
p99

1/
1
5/ 996
06
/1
9/ 996
09
/1
1/ 996
13
/1
5/ 997
19
/1
9/ 997
22
/1
1/ 997
26
/1
6/ 998
01
/
10 199
8
/0
5/
1
2/ 998
08
/1
6/ 999
14
/
10 199
9
/1
8/
19
99

1/
0

FIGURE 2

EMBI Global Korea
(% pa, daily)
Spread, corporate-treasury bonds
(% pa, monthly average, 3 yr maturity)

10
10

8
8

6
6

4
4

2
2

0
0

-2

Call Rates, overnight
(% pa, monthly average)

CPI Inflation
(%, quarterly, o-y-a)

30
10

25

20
8

15
6

10
4

5
2

0
0

Korean Won to US Dollar
(Monthly average)
Korean Stock Exchange: KOSPI
(monthly, 4/01/1980=100)

1800
1200

1600
1000

1400

1200
800

1000
600

800
400

600

200

41

ar
-9
6
Ju
l-9
6
N
ov
-9
6
M
ar
-9
7
Ju
l-9
7
N
ov
-9
7
M
ar
-9
8
Ju
l-9
8
N
ov
-9
8
M
ar
-9
9
Ju
l-9
9
N
ov
-9
9

M

ar
-9
6
Ju
l-9
6
N
ov
-9
6
M
ar
-9
7
Ju
l-9
7
N
ov
-9
7
M
ar
-9
8
Ju
l-9
8
N
ov
-9
8
M
ar
-9
9
Ju
l-9
9
N
ov
-9
9

M

M
ar
-9
6
Ju
l-9
6
N
ov
-9
6
M
ar
-9
7
Ju
l-9
7
N
ov
-9
7
M
ar
-9
8
Ju
l-9
8
N
ov
-9
8
M
ar
-9
9
Ju
l-9
9
N
ov
-9
9

M
ar
-9
6
Ju
l-9
6
N
ov
-9
6
M
ar
-9
7
Ju
l-9
7
N
ov
-9
7
M
ar
-9
8
Ju
l-9
8
N
ov
-9
8
M
ar
-9
9
Ju
l-9
9
N
ov
-9
9

FIGURE 3

Net Exports
(% of GDP)
Trade-weighted Real Exchange Rate
(log, detrended)

20
0.20

15
0.10

10
0.00

5
-0.10

0
-0.20

-5
-0.30

-10
-0.40

Real Exports
(log, detrended)
Real Imports
(log, detrended)

0.08
0.30

0.06

0.04
0.20

0.02
0.10

0.00
0.00

-0.02
-0.10

-0.04
-0.20

-0.06
-0.30

-0.08
-0.40

42

FIGURE 4A: COUNTRY RISK PREMIUM SHOCK
FIXED VS. FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATE
OUTPUT

INVESTMENT

0

0

-0.005
-0.02
-0.01
-0.015

-0.04

-0.02
-0.06
-0.025
-0.03

-0.08
1

5

9
Fixed

13

1

5

Flexible

9
Fixed

CAPITAL UTILIZATION RATE

13
Flexible

LABOR PRODUCTIVITY

0.005

0

0
-0.002
-0.005
-0.01

-0.004

-0.015
-0.006
-0.02
-0.025

-0.008
1

5

9
Fixed

13

1

5

Flexible

9
Fixed

HOUSEHOLD CONSUMPTION

13
Flexible

NET EXPORTS
0.03

0.005

0.025

0

0.02

-0.005

0.015
-0.01

0.01

-0.015

0.005

-0.02

0
1

5

9
Fixed

13

1

Flexible

5

9
Fixed

43

13
Flexible

FIGURE 4B: COUNTRY RISK PREMIUM SHOCK
FIXED VS. FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATE (cont’d)
NOMINAL INTEREST RATE

REAL INTEREST RATE
0.02

0.016
0.014

0.015

0.012
0.01

0.01

0.005

0.008
0.006

0

0.004
-0.005

0.002
0

-0.01
1

5

9
Fixed

13

1

5

Flexible

9
Fixed

CPI INFLATION

13
Flexible

EXTERNAL FINANCE PREMIUM

0.015

0.024

0.01

0.02

0.005

0.016

0

0.012

-0.005

0.008

-0.01

0.004

-0.015

0
1

5

9
Fixed

13

1

5

Flexible

9
Fixed

13
Flexible

REAL EXCHANGE RATE

NOMINAL EXCHANGE RATE
0.03

0.025

0.025

0.02

0.02

0.015

0.015

0.01

0.01

0.005

0.005

0

0

-0.005
1

5

9
Fixed

13

1

Flexible

5

9
Fixed

44

13
Flexible

FIGURE 5: COUNTRY RISK PREMIUM SHOCK
WITH VS. WITHOUT FINANCIAL ACCELERATOR
OUTPUT: FIXED RATES

OUTPUT: FLEXIBLE RATES

0

0

-0.005

-0.005

-0.01

-0.01

-0.015

-0.015

-0.02

-0.02

-0.025

-0.025

-0.03

-0.03
1

5

9
Fin. Acc.

13

1

5

No Fin. Acc.

9
Fin. Acc.

INVESTMENT: FIXED RATES

13
No Fin. Acc.

INVESTMENT: FLEXIBLE RATES

0

0

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04

-0.06

-0.06

-0.08

-0.08
1

5

9
Fin. Acc.

13

1

No Fin. Acc.

5

9
Fin. Acc.

45

13
No Fin. Acc.

FIGURE 6A
KOREAN CRISIS EXPERIMENT
OUTPUT

INVESTMENT

0

0

-0.03

-0.08

-0.06

-0.16

-0.09

-0.24

-0.12

-0.32

-0.15

-0.4
1

5

9

Flexible

13
Switch

1
Fixed

5

9

Flexible

13
Switch

Fixed

LABOR PRODUCTIVITY

CAPITAL UTILIZATION RATE
0

0.02
0

-0.01

-0.02
-0.04

-0.02

-0.06
-0.08

-0.03

-0.1
-0.12

-0.04

-0.14
1

5

9

Flexible

1

13
Switch

5

9

Flexible

Fixed

HOUSEHOLD CONSUMPTION

13
Switch

Fixed

NET EXPORTS
0.15

0.04
0.02

0.12

0
0.09

-0.02

\

-0.04

0.06

-0.06
0.03

-0.08
-0.1

0
1

5
Flexible

9

13
Switch

1
Fixed

5
Flexible

46

9

13
Switch

Fixed

FIGURE 6B
KOREAN CRISIS EXPERIMENT (cont’d)
NOMINAL INTEREST RATE

REAL INTEREST RATE

0.12

0.12
0.08

0.08

0.04

0.04

0
0

-0.04

-0.04

-0.08

-0.08

-0.12
1

5

9

Flexible

13

1

Switch

Fixed

5

9

Flexible

CPI INFLATION

13
Switch

Fixed

EXTERNAL FINANCE PREMIUM

0.08

0.12

0.06

0.1

0.04

0.08

0.02

0.06

0

0.04

-0.02

0.02

-0.04
-0.06

0
1

5

9

Flexible

13

1

Switch

Fixed

5
Flexible

NOMINAL EXCHANGE RATE

9

13
Switch

Fixed

REAL EXCHANGE RATE

0.15

0.12
0.1

0.12

0.08
0.09

0.06

0.06

0.04
0.02

0.03

0
-0.02

0
1

5
Flexible

9

1

13
Switch

5
Flexible

Fixed

47

9

13
Switch

Fixed

FIGURE 7: COUNTRY RISK PREMIUM SHOCK
DOMESTIC VS. FOREIGN DENOMINATED DEBT
OUTPUT
0
-0.005
-0.01
-0.015
-0.02
-0.025
-0.03
1

5

9

Flex. domestic den.

13

Flex. foreign den.

Fixed rates

INVESTMENT
0

-0.02

-0.04

-0.06

-0.08
1

5

9

Flex. domestic den.

Flex. foreign den.

48

13
Fixed rates

