NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LAW AND EMPLOYMENT:
LESSONS FROM LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN
James Heckman
Carmen Pagés
Working Paper 10129
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10129
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

We thank Ricardo Avelino, Giuseppe Bertola, John Donohue, David Bravo, Fernanda Ruiz, Jagadeesh
Sividasan, Sergio Urzua, and two anonymous referees for helpful comments. Heckman.s contribution to this
work was supported by the American Bar Foundation. The views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the Inter-American Development Bank or its board of directors. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by James Heckman and Carmen Pagés. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean
James Heckman and Carmen Pagés
NBER Working Paper No. 10129
December 2003
JEL No. K31, L50
ABSTRACT
This paper summarizes the main lessons learned from Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin
America and the Caribbean, a forthcoming NBER book. It places Latin American economies and
economic policies in a world context. The paper quantifies the cost of regulation in Latin America
and OECD Europe and discusses the origin of regulation. It shows the fragility of time series data
analyses of the sort widely used to analyze the impact of regulation in OECD Europe and the
benefits of using microdata data. The evidence shows that regulation reduces labor market
flexibility, reduces the employment of marginal workers and generates inequality in the larger
society.
James Heckman
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
j-heckman@uchicago.edu
Carmen Pagés
Inter American Development Bank
1300 New York Avenue
Washington, DC 20057
carmenpag@iadb.org

Law & Employment: Lessons From Latin America and The Caribbean
Table of Contents
1. Law and Employment: Lessons From Latin America and The Caribbean. An
Introduction
By James Heckman and Carmen Pagés
2. Measuring the Impact of Minimum Wages: Evidence from Latin America
By William F. Maloney and Jairo Nuñez Mendez
3. Labor Market Reforms and their Impact over Formal Labor Demand and Job
Market Turnover: The case of Peru
By Jaime Saavedra and Máximo Torero
4. The Effect of Job Security Regulations on Labor Market Flexibility: Evidence
from the Colombian Labor Market Reform
By Adriana Kugler
5. Determinants of Labor Demand in Colombia: 1976-1996.
By Mauricio Cardenas and Raquel Bernal
6. The Impact of Regulations on Brazilian Labor Market Performance
By Ricardo Paes de Barros and Carlos H. Corseuil
7. The Effect of Labor Market Regulations on Employment Decisions by Firms:
Empirical Evidence for Argentina
By Guillermo Mondino and Silvia Montoya
8. Who Benefits from Labor Regulation? Chile 1960-1998.
By Claudio E. Montenegro and Carmen Pagés
9.

Unions and Employment in Uruguay
By Adriana Cassoni, Steven G.Allen and Gaston J. Labadie
3

10. Labor Market Policies and Employment Duration: The Effects on Labor
Market Reform in Argentina
By Hugo A. Hopenhayn
11. Labor Market Regulation and Employment in the Caribbean
By Andrew Downes, Nlandu Mamingi and Rose-Marie Antoine
12. Labor Demand in Latin America and The Caribbean: What Does it Tell Us?
By Daniel S. Hamermesh

4

1. Introduction
This book uses microdata from diverse Latin American and Caribbean countries to
investigate the impact of regulation on their labor markets. Common methodologies are
applied to extract empirical regularities from the region. Latin America and the Caribbean
are of interest in their own right. But for several reasons, the lessons learned from studies
of these labor markets have much greater generality.
The shifts in the policy regimes experienced in the region are dramatic by OECD
standards, and many of these regime shifts are exogenous. This large and exogenous
variation provides identifying power not available to analysts studying regulation in
Europe and North America. Given the evidence on the comparability of labor demand
functions around the world summarized in Hamermesh (1993 and this volume), lessons
about the impact of regulation learned from Latin labor markets apply more generally.
The studies in this volume are based on microdata. Use of such data avoids reliance
on fragile country aggregate statistics that have been the main source of information used
to study European regulation (see, e.g. the evidence summarized in Nickell and Layard,
1999). Countries have diverse economic regions and agents and aggregation over these
regions and their economic agents masks this diversity. In this chapter, we show the
sensitivity of estimates of the impact of regulation obtained from conventional pooled time
series-cross sections of countries to alternative choices of samples and models, although a
few important empirical regularities established at the microlevel hold up in macrodata.
Our analysis builds the case for doing disaggregated analyses of the type reported in this
book.
The evidence presented here challenges one prevailing view that labor market
regulations affect only the distribution of labor incomes and have minor effects on
5

efficiency.4 The results presented in this volume suggest that mandated benefits reduce
employment and that job security regulations have a substantial impact on the distribution
of employment and on turnover rates. The most adverse impact of regulation is on youth,
marginal workers, and unskilled workers. Insiders and entrenched workers gain from
regulation but outsiders suffer. As a consequence, job security regulations promote
inequality among demographic groups. Most of the individual country studies demonstrate
that regulations promoting job security reduce covered worker exit rates out of
employment and out of unemployment, and on net reduce employment.
This introductory essay has three main goals. (1) It summarizes the main lessons to
be drawn from the studies assembled here. (2) It places Latin American and Caribbean
(LAC) regulatory burden in an international context by comparing the level and changes in
LAC labor regulation policies with those in OECD countries as well as providing some
historical context about the origins of this regulation. (3) It updates the work of Heckman
and Pagés (2000) with an expanded sample and better measures of regulation, providing a
cross-country time-series analysis of the impact of regulation on employment and
unemployment. We quantify the cost of regulation in LAC and OECD region. The fragility
of the macro-based estimates documented in our paper suggests one reason why relatively
little is known about the impact of regulations in Europe despite an abundance of crosscountry time-series papers analyzing policies in that region. However, the macro timeseries literature does produce some empirical regularities. The methods used to analyze the
micro-evidence presented in this book should be extended to produce more convincing
evidence of the impacts of regulations on employment in the OECD region5.
4

Freeman (2000) and Nickell and Layard (1999), among others, adopt this view.
See, however, the studies of Abowd et al. (1997, 1999, 2000), Machin and Stewart (1996), Kugler, Jimeno
and Hernanz (2002) and others, who use microdata to investigate the impact of regulation in Europe.
5

6

This Chapter proceeds in the following way. Section 2 provides background on
Latin American economic and labor market performance. Section 3 presents some basic
facts about regulation in LAC, and compares LAC with OECD countries both in terms of
the level and composition of labor cost and in terms of the labor market reforms
experienced in the region. Section 4 summarizes the main lessons from the essays
presented in this book. Section 5 updates Heckman and Pagés (2000) and uses the cost
measures derived in Section 3 to examine the impacts of labor regulation on Latin
American and OECD employment and unemployment rates. Section 6 concludes and
makes suggestions for future work on regulation in Latin American and OECD labor
markets. We first present some background on Latin America and the nature of labor
market regulation in the region.

2. Latin American Economic and Labor Market Performance
Latin American economic performance has been quite disappointing. Since 1970,
growth of income per capita has been just over one percent a year, higher than in Africa or
the Middle East, but much lower than in Asia or in the developed countries (Figure 1). Up
to the 1980s, trade policies heavily protected Latin economies from foreign competition.
There was a substantial degree of intervention by the state in the economy. The collapse of
most economies during that decade due to growing fiscal and monetary imbalances led
many countries to implement large structural reforms towards the end of the 1980s and
early 1990s. Macroeconomic stabilization policies reduced fiscal deficits and brought
inflation under control. Sweeping, fast-paced trade reforms lowered substantial tariff
barriers on manufactured goods. Governments undertook fiscal reforms, lifted control over
financial markets and privatized most state-owned firms. Some countries also embarked on
7

labor reforms described in the next section. While growth rates in the 1990s were higher
than they were during the 1980s, the rates of growth in this period still fell short of those
attained in other parts of the world.
Among the countries covered in this volume (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Peru, Uruguay, Barbados, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago), Chile was the best
performer, with an average growth rate of GDP of 4.8 during the period 1980-2001 (see
Table 1). Argentina and Trinidad and Tobago experienced the lowest average growth
during the past two decades, despite high average growth rates during the nineties.
In spite of this weak economic performance, GDP per capita (PPP US$ adjusted)
levels in Latin American countries are higher than those of other developing regions.
According to the World Bank Development Indicators, in 2001, the average GDP per
capita in the Latin America and the Caribbean region was $7,050, considerably higher than
that of East Asia and the Pacific (4,233), Central and Eastern Europe (6,598), South Asia
(2,730), Sub-Saharan Africa (1,831) or the Arab States (5,038). Similarly, the regional
Human Development Index computed by the United Nations for LAC (0.77) was almost as
high as in Central and Eastern Europe (0.78) and higher than in any other region except for
the OECD (0.90). Among the countries whose labor markets are analyzed in this volume,
Barbados and Argentina exhibited the highest income per capita and human development
indexes while Jamaica and Peru rank the lowest among the countries both in per capita
income and in human development (see Table 1).
While GDP growth rates were not high, during the period 1980-1999 employment
rates grew in the nine countries studied here. The highest growth rates were recorded in
Colombia and Peru, countries that also experienced fast growth in female labor force
participation. In contrast, average employment growth rates were low in Trinidad and
8

Tobago and in Argentina. According to International Labor Organisation (ILO) and
Economics Commission For Latin America and The Caribbean (ECLAC) data, average
urban unemployment rates during the eighties and nineties exceeded 8 percent in all
countries analyzed in this book except for Brazil. Unemployment comparisons should be
treated cautiously because they are not strictly comparable. For instance, in the Caribbean
countries, the unemployment rates include discouraged workers (those who drop out of the
labor force), while such workers are excluded in the Latin American countries, which
compute unemployment rates according to more traditional definitions. 6 Many have
remarked that the high level of regulation of economic activity in the region accounts for
problems in the labor markets in the region, and the essays assembled here shed light on
this conjecture.

3. Labor Market Regulations and Institutions in Latin America and the Caribbean
This section sketches the history of labor market regulation in the region and
describes and quantifies the regulatory environment in Latin America and the Caribbean. It
compares the level of regulation and pace of regulatory reform in LAC countries and
OECD countries. When it is credible to do so, we also make an effort to quantify the
monetary costs (as a percentage of wages) of full compliance with regulations without
discussing whether costs are borne by workers or firms. We discuss this issue more
extensively in sections 4 and 5.

Regulations governing individual contracts
6

That is, they only include persons that are available for work and who are taking specific steps to search for
a job.
9

Throughout Latin America, labor codes determine the types of contracts, the
lengths of trial periods, and the conditions of part-time work. Regulations favor full-time,
indefinite contracts over part-time, fixed-term or temporary contracts. As a form of worker
protection, labor codes mandate a minimum advance notice period prior to termination,
specify which causes are considered justified causes for dismissal, and establish
compensation to be awarded to workers depending on the reason for the termination. In
contrast, temporary contracts can be terminated at no cost provided that the duration of the
contract has expired. To prevent firms from exclusively hiring workers under temporary
contracts, in most countries the use of such arrangements is severely restricted. Labor
codes also limit trial periods – that is, the period of time during which a firm can test and
dismiss a worker at no cost if his or her performance is considered unsatisfactory.
Although most OECD countries began regulating their labor markets when they
had attained relatively high income per capita, Latin America and other developing
countries started regulating their markets much earlier in the development process
(Lindauer, 1999). The first regulations date from the beginning of the twentieth century.
The motivation for these regulations was the perceived need to protect the welfare of
workers against the excessive power of employers, and to insure workers against the risk
of job loss and income security (Lindauer, 1999). The Mexican constitution of 1917
articulated the principle that protecting workers was one of the duties of the State. By the
1930s and 1940s most countries had a Labor Code. The belief that each new reform should
only strengthen the set of warranties and benefits awarded from previous laws became
widespread. For many years, successive reforms expanded the protection that the law
afforded to workers. There was little examination of the question whether such regulations
would affect economic performance. However, until the 1980s most countries in the LAC
10

region were isolated and their industries heavily protected. Labor regulations were one way
to distributing the rents from protection among covered workers and employers.
Regulations are a low cost way (from the point of government fiscal authorities) of
providing social insurance to protect workers. The weak fiscal systems in place in the
region joined with the low level of income and a tradition of tax evasion, corruption and
noncompliance made the social insurance schemes used in more developed countries
prohibitively costly.
Military rule often led to deregulation of many labor markets. Unions were frequent
targets, as much for political as for economic reasons. The political and economic
environment in LAC changed substantially in the 1980s and 1990s. Most countries
restored democracy after long periods of military rule. These political changes bred some
labor reforms, first to restore union activity, which had been made illegal in many military
regimes, and second to reach a new social pact. In Chile, Brazil and the Dominican
Republic, at the beginning of the 1990s and later in Nicaragua (1996) these reforms
produced more protective labor regulations.
A new Constitution was enacted in 1988 in Brazil as part of the process of redemocratization during the second half of the 1980s (See Paes de Barros and Corseuil, this
volume). This new Constitution revised labor regulations and changed many labor codes
that had been in place since the 1940s. The new Constitution reduced the maximum
working hours per week from 48 to 44 hours; reduced the maximum number of hours for a
continuous work shift from 8 to 6 hours; increased the minimum overtime premium from
20 percent to 50 percent; increased maternity leave from 3 to 4 months; and the value of
paid vacations increased from 1 to, at least, 4/3 of the normal monthly wage. The new
Constitution also modified the mandatory individual saving accounts system created in
11

1966. Prior to the reforms, the law required employers to deposit 8 percent of employees’
wages in a worker-owned account. In case of separation, workers could withdraw the
accumulated funds (plus the interest rate). In addition, if a firm initiated a separation it had
to pay a penalty equivalent to 10 percent of the amount accumulated in the account. As
part of the 1988 reform, this penalty was increased to 40 percent, considerably increasing
the cost of dismissing a worker.
In the case of Chile, the 1990 reform introduced with the return to democracy
reestablished some of the protection to workers that had been eliminated during the
military regime. Under the dictatorship, union activity had been severely restricted and
some benefits, such as indemnities for dismissal had been substantially reduced.7 See
Montenegro and Pagés (this volume). In 1990, the new law increased maximum
indemnities from 5 to 11 months of pay. It also re-introduced the need for firms to prove
just cause for dismissal, although unlike the case in other countries, the new law
considered the economic needs of the firm a just cause.
While in some countries lawmakers were busy increasing legal protection for
workers, the economic environment was changing substantially. The deep economic crisis
that ensued with the Debt Crisis of the early 1980s called into question the protectionist
model. The relatively good performance of the Chilean economy, which in the mid 1970s
opened to trade and introduced many pro-market reforms, spawned imitators all across
Latin America. By the second half of the 1980s and the early 1990s, most countries had
drastically reduced tariffs on imports. The new openness to international trade increased
the demand for labor market flexibility. It was argued that without sweeping labor market
reforms, Latin American economies would not be able to compete internationally. This
7

See Montenegro and Pagés, this volume.
12

was the main motivation behind the reforms that introduced temporary contracts in
Argentina, Colombia, Ecuador, Nicaragua and Peru and that reduced the cost of dismissing
workers with indefinite contracts in Colombia (1990) and Peru (1991). Temporary and
fixed-term contracts were introduced in Argentina in 1991 and their role was expanded in
1995 (See Hopenhayn, this volume). These changes were influenced by similar reforms in
Spain during the 1980s. Special fixed-term duration employment promotion contracts
could be awarded to unemployed workers and to workers younger than 25 and older than
40 years old. For some types of contracts, severance pay was reduced by 100 percent.
However, these contracts were eliminated in 1998, when the share of persons working
under these arrangements had increased substantially. Ecuador, Peru and Colombia also
lifted restrictions on the use of these types of programs in the early 1990s. In Peru, the
number of workers hired under these contracts increased enormously. In Brazil, the use of
such contracts has been liberalized since 1998.
The 1991 reforms in Peru reduced the cost of dismissing workers hired under
indefinite contracts. During 1971-1991, workers who had completed trial periods were
granted permanent job security. If a firm dismissed a worker and could not prove "just
cause" in labor courts, the worker could choose between being reinstated in his or her job
or receiving a severance payment of three monthly wages per year of work (with a
maximum of 12 months pay). In practice, since workers could always ask to be reinstated
and then settle for a higher severance pay, the mandatory amount was a lower bound of the
firing cost. See Saavedra and Torero (this volume).
Beginning in 1991, workers hired after that year could be dismissed at will upon
payment of a severance benefit. In addition, “just cause” clauses were extended to allow
the dismissal of workers who did not perform up to expectations. The severance pay
13

schedule was reduced from three to one wage for every year of tenure for workers with
more than one year in the firm, with a minimum of three wages and a maximum of twelve.
The 1993 Constitution replaced the right of workers to a permanent job with the right of
firms to dismiss workers. In July 1995, a second wave of labor reforms, simplified the
severance payment to one month per year of work up to a maximum of 12 months and the
two-tier severance system was eliminated. These modifications substantially reduced the
cost of dismissing workers. However, in November 1996, the severance payments rule was
increased again to one and a half wages per year of work with an unaltered maximum cap
of twelve wages.
In Colombia, the 1990 Labor reforms liberalized many aspects of labor regulation.
Besides regulations introducing the use of temporary contracts, the most important changes
were those in the Cesantias, or severance pay that firms owed to workers at the end of the
work relationship regardless of the cause or the party that initiated separation. Prior to the
reforms, employers were mandated to pay severance of one month per year at the time of
the separation based on the salary at the separation. Workers could obtain advanced
payments against their benefits. Such withdrawals were credited against the severance pay
due workers at the end of the labor relationship in nominal terms as of the date of the
withdrawal. High rates of inflation increased the costs of such schemes to employers. After
the reform, the withdrawals were credited in real terms, substantially reducing costs for
firms. In addition, the reforms eliminated the right to re-instatement for workers with
more than ten years of tenure. Offsetting these cost-reducing features, the reforms
increased the cost of indemnities for dismissal.
Panama (1995) and Venezuela (1997) also undertook labor reforms with the goal of
increasing labor market flexibility while preserving some form of protection to workers.
14

In both countries reforms increased mandatory pay in case of separation, but considerably
reduced the additional amount that firms had to pay in case of a firm-initiated dismissal.
In contrast to Latin American regulation, in the Caribbean a mixture of legislation,
common law doctrines, custom and policy characterizes the institutional context. At the
beginning of the Twentieth Century, in all countries of that region, regulation of the labor
market was based on common law rather than on the Civil Law tradition predominant in
Latin America (see Downes, Mamingi and Antoine, this volume). While in some countries,
like Barbados, most aspects of labor relation are still left to the courts to determine, in
others, such as in Trinidad and Tobago, the enactment of different regulations has
progressively increased the level of statutory protection to workers. In Barbados (1973),
Trinidad & Tobago (1974) and Jamaica (1985) labor reforms instituted mandatory
severance pay, although as shown in the next section at levels that are much lower than
those prevalent in Latin America.

Payroll Contributions and other Mandatory Benefits
As in most industrial countries, in LAC many social protection programs, such as
old-age pensions, public health systems, unemployment subsidies, and family allowances
are funded from payroll contributions. In addition, regulations mandate other employeepaid benefits such as occupational health and safety provisions, maternity and sick leave,
overtime pay and vacations.
Unlike changes in labor codes that tend to be infrequent events, changes in the level
of contributions to these programs occur often. In addition, during the 1990s, many
countries implemented reforms, which transformed pay-as-you-go systems into full or
partial capitalization systems. One of the advantages of such schemes is that they tend to
15

increase the link between contributions and benefits. However, at the same time, many
countries, most noticeably Colombia, El Salvador, Mexico, Uruguay, and Brazil, increased
the level of payroll taxes to reduce the actuarial imbalances present in their social security
systems. Below, we quantify the levels and changes in these contributions across Latin
America and OECD countries.

Collective Bargaining
Unions in Latin America tend to be firm or sector-based and weak. In most cases,
the state intervenes in union registration and accreditation as well as in the process of
collective bargaining. The state authorizes only certain unions to have representation
authority (Argentina, Mexico, Peru, Brazil), and intervenes in the resolution of conflicts
and the arbitration process (Argentina, Mexico). Only in Brazil and Argentina is collective
bargaining highly centralized at the sector level, while in Nicaragua and Colombia, sectorlevel bargaining coexists with firm-based negotiation. In Mexico, collective bargaining
takes place at the firm level but a high level of centralization is achieved through a strong
corporatist structure and through union discipline (O’Connell, 1999). In contrast, unions
are stronger and collective bargaining tends to be national or sector-based in OECD
countries with the exception of Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United
States.
According to data from ILO (97-98), union density as percentage of nonagricultural employment is higher in Brazil, Mexico, Argentina and Nicaragua and smaller
in the rest of the Latin American countries. Union affiliation tends to be higher in countries
where collective bargaining is more centralized. Overall, union density is lower in Latin

16

America (14.7) than in industrial countries (36.6).8 There are also large differences in
coverage rates. Thus, while collective bargaining agreements in countries such as Spain,
France and Greece, which are negotiated by a minority, are extended to almost all
employees, in Latin American countries this is generally not the case. As a result,
coverage rates in Latin America tend to be much lower than those observed in OECD
countries with similar affiliation rates.
The influence that collective bargaining exerts on wage and employment
conditions, measured by affiliation rates, is declining over time. Thus, Latin American and
Caribbean countries share a trend that has been well documented for OECD countries.
Affiliation rates have declined in all of the countries of the region.9 This decline has been
especially large in Mexico, Argentina, Venezuela, Costa Rica and Uruguay. In this
chapter, we only present estimates for Uruguay on the impact of unionization on
employment. Cassoni, Allen and Labadie (this volume) estimate a strong adverse impact
of unionism on employment in Uruguay. The evidence for other Latin American countries
is still too sparse.

Minimum Wages
Minimum wages are widely used in Latin America to increase the wages of the
poorest workers. Figure 2 (taken from Maloney and Nuñez-Mendez, this volume) ranks
various Latin American and OECD countries by their minimum wage, standardized by the
8

ILO data corresponds to the mid nineties. The comparison between LAC and Industrial countries reflects
the difference between unweighted regional averages. The average for industrial countries includes the
following countries (France, Spain, US, Greece, Germany, Italy, UK, Denmark, Belgium, Finland, Iceland,
Ireland, Sweden and Canada)
9
ILO data for 1985 and 1993 indicates that union affiliation increased in Chile during that period. Yet, data
from a later period indicates that union affiliation has been declining since 1993.

17

mean wage.10 While some Latin American countries appear in the lower range of this
distribution, most notably Uruguay, Bolivia, Brazil, Argentina, Chile and Mexico, others,
such as, Venezuela, El Salvador, Paraguay and Honduras have very high minimum to
average minimum wages by OECD standards. These high levels suggest that minimum
wages are likely to be binding, and, as a result, to reduce employment, and to retard
downward wage movements in the presence of adverse demand shocks.
Data on enforcement of the minimum wage is incomplete. However, some
evidence available for workers between 25 and 40 years old suggests that about 10 percent
of wage employees in that age range earn salaries below the minimum wage (See Table 2).
In some countries, such as Mexico, Uruguay, Bolivia and Argentina, the proportion below
the minimum in this age range is very small. In other countries, such as Colombia,
minimum to average wages are high but a large proportion of the labor force in the 25 to
40 age-range earns wages below the statutory minimum. Whether the adverse effect of a
high level of minimum wages is offset by substantial non-compliance remains an open
empirical question.

What motivates reforms?
In studying the effect of reforms in the labor market it is important to examine what
factors initiate these relatively infrequent episodes. It could be argued that labor market
outcomes are driven by the same events that drive the reforms, and not by the labor
reforms themselves. Figures 3A-3F (for Latin America) and 3G-3I (for the Caribbean) plot
GDP growth rates and unemployment rates for the countries covered in the individual
10

The observations are from the early nineties for the OECD countries and from the mid and late nineties for
LAC. Data from OECD were obtained from Dolado et al (1996), data from LAC comes from IADB (19981999) and Maloney and Nuñez.
18

country studies of this volume during the period 1980-2000. They also plot major episodes
of labor reform (marked with a continuous line if a liberalization of the labor market
occurred and dotted line if the reforms increased protection to workers).11 In addition,
these figures mark episodes of major tariff reductions (double line) or the end of military
regimes and the return to democracy (discontinue line).
In Argentina, Colombia, Peru, and Uruguay, reforms that liberalized the labor
market occurred within one or two years before or after major reductions in tariffs, and
were part of efforts to liberalize economies and increase the participation of the market in
the production and allocation of goods and services. In Chile and Brazil, reforms that
increased the legal protection of workers occurred in the context of a transition to
democracy. In all of these episodes it could be argued that labor reforms were exogenous
to the economic system since they were driven either by a new economic philosophy or by
profound transformations in political regimes, although one could counter that these
political transitions were facilitated by economic developments. Some reforms and
transformations are clearly driven by changes in economic activity. There is evidence that
many reforms tend to occur around periods of negative economic growth. In the countries
and periods analyzed in this volume, there have been at least 15 episodes of reform. Out of
these fifteen, six episodes of reform occurred in years in which GDP had declined the year
before. However, four of those reforms increased the legal protection to workers and two
liberalized the labor market.
Overall there is no empirical relationship between labor reforms and labor market
outcomes driven by economic performance. Our cross-country time-series analysis
11

Only major changes in labor codes or other major government interventions in the labor market are
included. Changes in social security contributions or payroll taxes, as well as changes in the level of
minimum wages –which occur quite frequently-- are not included.
19

presented in this chapter controls for present and past levels of economic activity, to
account for the possibility of endogeneity. The disaggregated studies use year effects and
other strategies to control for endogeneity.

Quantifying the Cost of Regulation
This section constructs measures of labor laws that can be compared across
countries and time (see also Heckman and Pagés, 2000). Many studies that summarize
institutional data across countries construct qualitative indices that rank variables across
countries. For instance, Grubb and Wells (1993) construct a series of indicators of
employment protection by ranking different aspects of job protection across countries and
averaging these different rankings in one summary indicator. Although such measures
summarize many complex institutional features, they are not comparable over time. A
second group of studies constructs measures that aggregate institutional aspects of the
labor market by assigning to each country/year a value in a certain range, for instance,
between zero and one. These measures summarize a large number of interesting aspects
and are comparable across time. However, they can also be quite arbitrary since it is
difficult to justify any assigned numerical values for qualitative variables and it is difficult
to compare one measure against another. Moreover, the measures are very sensitive to the
weights assigned to the different components of these measures. From a policy standpoint,
summarizing many features of a regulatory system in one indicator makes it impossible to
distinguish which components, if any, have an adverse effect on employment.
We take a different route by constructing measures of the direct cost (measured as a
fraction of average monthly wages) of complying with labor laws. These measures can be
compared not only across countries and over time, but they can also be compared against
20

each other. This allows us to quantify, for instance, the share of the total costs given by
each type of regulation. Our measure of mandatory total costs (TC) of regulations is:
TC = SSP + JS
It is the sum of the cost of social security payments (SSP) plus the cost of abiding by job
security provisions (JS). These costs are expressed as fractions of the average monthly
wage.
This measure of the cost of regulation omits some important components of labor
cost. For example, the costs of abiding by certain laws are hard to quantify and are omitted.
One example of laws whose costs are difficult to quantify, is the prohibition against
dismissing workers in bad times. In addition, this measure does not include the cost of
regulating the length of the standard workweek and overtime work. It does not include the
cost of complying with minimum wage laws or other income floors. We do not include
regulations on temporary labor contracts. Although these regulations are likely to have
effects on employment and unemployment, we choose to exclude them because
comparable data on the share of the labor force affected by these regulations across time
and countries are difficult to obtain. We leave the quantification of these features of
regulations for future work.
There is one major conceptual problem with this index. It does not distinguish
between static and dynamic aspects of the cost of labor. Job security affects both
components of costs by raising the total cost of labor and by increasing the cost of
adjusting labor. Social security costs affect the unit cost of labor without affecting dynamic
costs of labor. Our index of total cost is not a measure of the price of labor facing firms at
different stages of the business cycle. We develop this point below and in Appendix B.

21

Quantifying Job Security Provisions
Our index includes in job security legislation those provisions of the law that increase
the cost of dismissing a worker for economic reasons.12 Across countries, termination laws
require firms to incur at least five types of costs: administrative procedures, advance
notification, indemnities for dismissal, seniority pay and the legal costs of a trial if workers
contest dismissals. Administrative procedures require the firm to notify and seek approval
by labor unions or the Ministry of Labor to extend the period between layoff decisions and
the actual occurrence of layoffs. They may also involve long negotiations to place workers
in alternative jobs. The period of advance notification should also be included in the
computation of labor costs because in many countries, laws allow firms to choose between
providing advance notice or paying a compensation equivalent to the wages for the
corresponding period. Moreover, since productivity declines substantially after notice,
advance notification should be considered as a part of dismissal costs even when firms
choose to notify workers in advance. Therefore, we assume that employees do not work at
full productivity levels after notification.13 In most countries, mandatory advance notice
periods increase with tenure, and in others they are higher for white-collar than for bluecollar workers.
Most Latin American and OECD countries mandate indemnities in cases of firminitiated dismissal. In general, indemnities are based on multiples of the most recent wage
and the years of service. Some countries calculate the amount of mandatory indemnities
based on whether the dismissal is deemed just or unjust or whether the worker is blue12

In most countries, the law does not mandate compensation for dismissal if the separation is due to
employees’ misdemeanors. However, if such behavior cannot be proved, the worker has to be compensated
at the regular legal rate.
13
There is some evidence that advance notice stimulates on-the-job search during the notification period
(Addison and Portugal 1992), which suggests a reduction in the effort devoted to work.

22

collar or white-collar. In contrast, seniority pay is only mandated in a few Latin American
countries in which the law requires employers to make a payment upon termination of the
work relationship regardless of the cause or party initiating the separation. In these
countries, firms initiating dismissal are required to pay both indemnities and seniority pay.
In some countries, this payment is deposited as a regular contribution to the worker’s
individual savings account. In these countries, workers can withdraw principal and interest
from their account upon separation. In other countries, seniority pay is determined as a
given amount that has to be paid to the worker upon termination of the work relationship.14
Finally, firms can incur considerable additional costs if workers contest dismissal in courts.
If judges rule in favor of workers, firms not only have to pay indemnities, but also the
workers’ foregone wages during trial.
To compute the monetary cost of labor laws, we improve on the job security measures
developed in Heckman and Pagés (2000) in three ways. First, we expand our previous data
base to include the 1980s in all OECD countries. This expansion of the data set allows us
to capture some additional labor reforms in OECD countries not previously captured.
Second, we revise and correct some of our previous data on advance notice and
indemnities for a number of countries to better capture the actual cost of the law (see
Appendix A for a complete description of the methodology and assumptions involved).
Finally, we include the cost of seniority pay in our measure of job security, which we did
not include in our previous work.
Our measure of the cost of job security JS jt for country j at time t is constructed
from the following formula:

14

For an extensive description of job security measures see OECD (1993, 1999) for OECD countries and IADB (1996).

23

(

)

(

)

T
T
T
JS jt = ∑ β iδ i −1(1 − δ ) b j ,t +i + ∑ β iδ i −1(1 − δ ) a j * y j ,t +i jc + (1 − a j )* yuc
+ ∑ β i c j,t +i
,
+
j
t
i
i =1
i =1
i =0

(1)

=

AN j,t +

ID j ,t + SenPj,t
Advanced Indemnity Seniority
Notice
Pay

where δ is the probability of a worker remaining in a job in a period, β is the discount
factor, i denotes tenure at the firm, and T is the maximum tenure that a worker can attain in
a firm which is assumed to be twenty years (T=20). The expression is broken down into
three terms corresponding to advanced notice costs ( AN j,t ), indemnity costs ( ID j,t ) and
seniority pay ( SenPj,t ). The first term in expression (1) is the discounted cost of future
advance notice, weighted by the probability that a worker will be dismissed, after one, two,
three, and so on, periods at the firm where bj,t+i is the advance notice to a worker who has
been i years at a firm measured in monthly wages. The second term in expression (1) is
the discounted cost of future indemnities, weighted by the probability of dismissal after i
periods at the firm. In this expression, aj denotes the probability that the economic
difficulties of the firm are considered a just cause of dismissal while yj,t+ijc (yj,t+iuc) is the
mandated indemnity in case of just cause (unjust cause) dismissal, again measured in
monthly wages. Finally, the third term in expression (1) captures the cost of severance
pay, and cj,t+i denotes contributions to a workers’ savings account measured in monthly
wages.15 We assume a common discount and dismissal rate of 8 and 12 percent,
respectively across countries. The choice of the discount rate is based on the historical
returns of an internationally diversified portfolio. Our choice of the turnover rate is
motivated by the concern that turnover rates are affected by the legislation in countries

24

with job security provisions. We use a benchmark turnover rate from the United States, a
country with lower job security costs than any country in our LAC sample. If intrinsic
turnover in LAC is higher than in the U.S, we understate costs. The choice of this
benchmark is clearly a rough way to avoid endogeneity problems. To assign values to the
discounted future payments of advance notice, indemnities and seniority pay, we use the
information contained in Tables A.1 and A.2 in Appendix A. When regulations mandate
different provisions for white-collar and blue-collar workers, we take the unweighted
average for the two types of workers.
By construction, our job security measures give a higher weight to dismissal costs
that may arise soon after a worker is hired since they are discounted less at the time of
hiring, while they discount more firing costs that arise further in the future. Our measure
captures the expected average cost. Consequently, it does not measure the true marginal
labor cost, which is state contingent, nor does it distinguish dynamic from static costs, as
we have previously noted. We discuss these issues further in Appendix B.

Quantifying the Cost of Social Security
To quantify the cost of social security regulations and payroll taxation, we gather
data on mandatory payroll contributions to old age, disability and death, sickness and
maternity, work injury, unemployment insurance and family allowances programs. Since
the nominal incidence of the contributions (whether they fall on the employer or the
employee) is irrelevant in measuring total social cost (although it is not irrelevant for the
study of labor demand), we add both contributions as a percentage of wages.
15

In countries where the law mandates seniority pay, but this pay is not capitalized in individual savings
accounts, cj, t+i measures the costs associated with this provision, which will arise in the future with
probability one.
25

To quantify the cost of social security provisions in a way that is comparable to the cost of
job security, we compute the expected cost of social security provisions at the time of
hiring as:

T

SSPjt = ∑ β i ( ss ej , t + i + ss wj ,t + i )
i=0

where ss ej ,t +i and ss wj ,t +i are, respectively, the costs of payroll taxes paid by the employer
and the worker expressed as a percent of wages, and β is the discount rate.16

The Cost of Labor Laws across Countries
Table 3 summarizes our measures of the cost associated with different labor regulation
regimes. In the first three columns, we summarize the cost of abiding by employment
protection laws at the end of the 1990s. We generate these indices for all countries in all
years for which we have data. Table 3 only reports those values for the last year of our
sample. Column (1) summarizes the cost of giving advance notice to workers. In the Latin
American countries, the typical required advance notice is a month or the equivalent to
0.63 monthly wages in expected value terms. Bolivia stands out as the country that
requires a longer advance notice period (1.77 months in expected terms), while Peru and
Uruguay require no advance notice. Mandatory advance notice provisions tend to be more
stringent in OECD countries. Many OECD countries mandate fairly long advance notice
periods, particularly for skilled workers. In addition, in most countries, advance notice
periods increase with seniority. In Belgium, for instance, the mandatory advance notice for
16

We obtain the information on these contributions from the series “Social Security Programs Throughout
the World,” edited by the United States Social Security Administration (1983-1999).

26

skilled workers with 10 years of seniority is 9 months, while for workers with 20 years of
seniority it is 15 months. In Sweden, all workers with 10 years of seniority are entitled to
an advance notice period of 5 months, whereas for a worker with 20 years of seniority, the
mandatory advance notice period is 6 months. The fact that Belgium and Sweden have
very similar values in Table 3 reflects the fact that in Belgium very high advance notice
only applies to skilled workers whereas in Sweden it applies to all workers. It also reflects
the fact that our measure heavily discounts costs that are expected to occur far in the
future. On average, mandated advance notice periods are significantly longer in OECD
countries than in the Latin American and Caribbean sample.
The second column displays the cost of indemnities for dismissal. Within the LAC
sample, Colombia, Peru, Ecuador, Bolivia, El Salvador, and Honduras stand out as
countries where the cost of abiding by these regulations is the highest. In the sample of
OECD countries, Portugal, Turkey, Korea, Italy and Spain are the ones where indemnities
for dismissal laws are more costly (in terms of expected monthly wages), while a number
of countries including Belgium, Finland, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland and the United States do not mandate indemnities
for dismissal. Comparing the two regional samples, it is clear that, on average,
compensation for dismissal is three times larger in LAC than in the OECD countries
despite the much lower level of income in the LAC region.
The third column refers to seniority pay. This additional payment is mandatory in only
six Latin American countries, but the estimated expected discounted costs are large when
this feature is present. In Colombia, Brazil, Ecuador and Peru, employers are required to
deposit about one month of pay every year to workers’ individual savings accounts. Over
the life of a worker, this provision is expected to cost about 10 monthly wages in these four
27

countries. Once advance notice, compensation for dismissal and severance pay are added,
we find that the cost of job security provisions is much higher in the poorer Latin
American and Caribbean region than in the richer OECD sample.
The fourth column reports the expected costs of complying with social security laws.
Compared to the costs of employment security, social security costs are very large and
therefore constitute the lion’s share of the total costs of labor laws. In Argentina, for
example, expected discounted costs of social security are 44.5 months of pay while in
many OECD countries these costs are even larger. In the average Latin American country,
social security payments amount to 82 percent of the total costs of labor laws. This
percentage is even larger in OECD countries where, on average, they reach 96 percent of
the total regulatory costs.
Once all the costs are aggregated, labor laws impose a much larger cost in OECD
countries. However, the composition of these costs is quite different. While the typical
Latin American country mandates shorter advance notice periods and lower social security
contributions than the average OECD country, job security provisions are substantially
higher in LAC.
Latin American and Caribbean countries have a higher burden of regulations that affect
adjustment processes in the labor market. European countries have a higher burden of
payroll taxation that affects labor demand but not labor adjustment. Both regions have a
much higher burden of labor costs than North America.
Exploring the relationship between income per capita and social protection across
countries, it is clear that job security provisions are strategies of low income regions.
Figure 4 graphs regression relationships for each of our measures of labor cost on GDP per
capita (PPP adjusted) and GDP squared. Across countries, advance notice costs tend to
28

increase with income; seniority pay and indemnities for dismissal decline with country
income. Social security contributions follow an inverted U-shape pattern in income. They
tend to increase with income in the Latin American sample and reach a maximum in
medium income countries, while they tend to decline with income within the sample of
upper-income countries. Regulation is an inferior good. It is the response of poor countries
to the demand for worker security. By imposing a mandate on firms, central governments
avoid the direct fiscal cost of financing social safety nets albeit at the cost of affecting their
labor market performance.
We next examine the evolution of these measures over time. Since the early 80’s
there have been few reforms in job security provisions in Latin America and even fewer in
OECD countries. Social security contributions have changed more, but even they seldom
change drastically. This lack of variability, particularly in job security provisions, poses a
challenge for empirical studies of the impact of regulations. Figure 5 shows the level and
the changes in job security since the late eighties across Latin American countries. The
general view that there have been important reductions in dismissal costs in Latin America
is not accurate once we aggregate across all components of job security. Only Colombia,
Panama, Peru and Venezuela have experienced a reduction in the costs of terminating
indefinite contracts. In Venezuela and Panama, the reduction in indemnities has been partly
offset by increases in the costs of severance pay. Our measures reveal that Brazil, the
Dominican Republic, Chile and Nicaragua undertook reforms that increased the cost of
dismissal. Assembling Latin American and OECD events, there are 13 episodes in which
job security provisions were changed. Nine of these episodes occurred in Latin America
and four occurred in the OECD sample. Figure 6 shows the percentage change in advance
notice and indemnities for dismissal in the countries that have experienced reforms. It
29

makes clear that changes in job security costs have been substantial in Latin America
relative to the OECD sample. The enormous variation in the Latin American region and
the exogeneity of some of the reforms is the reason why we think that the study of Latin
American labor markets can inform further analyses of the impacts of regulation in
economies around the world.
Figure 7 reports social security contributions (measured in expected discounted
cost terms) at the beginning and at the end of the nineties for Latin American Countries.
There have been important changes during the last decade. In many countries, social
security contributions increased during the nineties as a consequence of pension reforms
and population aging. Yet, in some countries, most significantly in Argentina, social
security contributions were reduced during the decade.

Enforcement and Informality
The measures summarized in Table 4 calculate de jure cost of regulations,
assuming that firms and workers abide by the text of the law. In practice, however,
enforcement is at best weak, and many workers end up not being covered by mandatory
regulations. Such workers are often referred to as informal workers. Given the difficulties
in measuring the extent of informality, different approaches have been followed in the
literature. Some authors follow the traditional ILO approach of classifying as informal
those workers who are either self-employed, work for firms with five or less employees,
work as unpaid family help or are employed as domestic workers. Although some of these
workers may be receiving the benefits prescribed by the law, there tends to be a high
correlation between being in any of these categories of employment and not being covered
by labor laws. Other authors use a more direct measure of informality, computing the
30

percentage of workers who are affiliated with social security programs or have a formal
labor contract. All authors in this volume use a “benefits” definition of informality except
for the study by Maloney and Nuñez-Mendez, which follows the ILO convention.
Measured by the extent of compliance with social security regulations in Latin
America, non-compliance is substantial. According to IADB (2003), only 39 percent of all
workers and 60 percent of all wage employees are contributing to such programs (See
Table 2). Among the countries covered in the individual studies of this volume,
compliance as percentage of total employment is the highest in Chile and Uruguay and the
lowest in Peru. Compliance tends to be higher among skilled workers, among workers
employed in larger firms and in the manufacturing and high-paying finance and business
services sectors. In these latter sectors, the effect of regulations should be easier to detect.
Compliance is higher when the burden of regulation is lower.

4. The Impact of Labor Market Regulations
This section summarizes the studies of the impact of labor market regulations that are
presented in this volume and places them in the context of the literature on more
economically developed countries. We distinguish between policies that alter employment
levels (generating static costs) from policies that affect employment flows (generating
dynamic transition costs). The essays contained in this book present evidence on both
types of policies. We also report findings on the effects of temporary contracts and
minimum wages.

4.1 A Static Labor Demand-Labor Supply Analysis

31

A convenient starting point from which to assess the impact of labor market
regulations on employment levels the standard neoclassical labor demand-labor supply
framework. If mandatory legislation increases labor costs, economic theory predicts that a
move up the labor demand function produces a fall in employment. The slope of the labor
demand schedule provides a good measure of the policy-induced change in employment
when governments or trade unions set labor costs administratively. The standard theory is
silent about the effects of the regulation on unemployment because it depends on whether
the displaced workers drop out of the labor force or attempt to seek new jobs.
Table 4 summarizes estimates of constant-output labor demand elasticities for Latin
America. As noted by Hamermesh (this volume), these estimates are comparable to those
estimated for other countries.17 Although labor demand studies abound, we focus on those
studies that use disaggregated industry or individual firm data to infer the labor demand
parameters, since models fit on such data produces more reliable estimates of underlying
production parameters than models fit on data at higher levels of aggregation (Hamermesh,
1993). Comparisons across types of workers indicate that labor demand elasticities are
larger for blue-collar than for white-collar workers, suggesting a lower impact of
regulations on the employment rates of the latter. Estimates of labor demand for Latin
America tend to be somewhat lower than those obtained for other countries of the world,
especially those estimated for Peru and Mexico. (See the estimates from industrial
countries in the lower panel of the table.) Nonetheless, all estimates are between 0 and –
1.5, and most of them cluster between –0.2 and -0.6, well within the range for worldwide
17

A more comprehensive measure of the impact of regulations on employment is given by the total elasticity,
that includes the possible scale effects of an increase in regulation including the entry and exit of firms due to
changes in labor costs. Unfortunately, there is very little empirical evidence in this book regarding the
magnitude of the total elasticity although studies by Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993) and Nicoletti and
Scarpetta (2003) suggest that entry and exit decisions are an important component of the response to
regulation.
32

estimates reported by Hamermesh (1993) for output- constant labor demand elasticities.18
This range of estimates implies that a 10 percent increase in labor costs will result in a
sizable decline in employment, between 2 percent and 6 percent.
The preceding analysis assumes that the cost of regulations is entirely paid by
employers. However, when the supply of labor is not perfectly elastic, part of the increase
in labor costs will be compensated by lower wages, reducing the disemployment effect of
the regulations. Alternatively, workers may not perceive the cost of regulation as a tax,
since higher contributions pay for improved job benefits, which are valued. In this case,
workers will be willing to pay for this benefit, reducing their wage demands. This wage
offset would also contribute to lessening the impact of regulations on employment.
How likely is it that the costs of labor market regulations are shifted to workers in
Latin America? Before reviewing the existing evidence, it is important to note important
features of Latin American labor markets. First, high evasion implies that the relevant
labor supply to the formal sector in developing countries is likely to be more elastic than in
developed ones. Thus, if workers have access to similar jobs in both the formal and
informal sectors, the possibilities of shifting costs to workers are lessened, resulting in a
high elasticity of labor supply to formal sector firms that comply with regulations. Second,
as previously noted, in some countries minimum wages are quite high, both absolutely and
in relation to the average wage and this reduces the scope for wage shifts (see Figure 2).
Moreover, Maloney and Nuñez-Mendez (this volume) show piling up of workers at
minimum wage levels, suggests that compliance with the minimum wage is substantial
even in the so called “informal” sectors so that wage shifting will be attenuated in
countries with a binding minimum wage that also affects the informal sector. Third,
18

Hamermesh reports a range between -0.15 and -0.75 and an average estimate of -0.45.
33

although most social security programs in the region are restricted to covered workers, and
this tightens the link between contributions and benefits, the dismal financial condition of
some social security systems and the high degree of discretion exercised by governments
over the determination of benefits weaken this link. In this respect, the recent social
security reforms aimed at privatizing pensions should strengthen the relationship between
benefits and costs in many countries of the region.
Several empirical studies have attempted to measure the impact of mandatory
benefits on employment rates. Gruber (1994) analyzes the effects of insurance for
workplace injuries and mandated maternity benefits in the U.S. and finds that a large share
of the cost is shifted to wages with only minor disemployment effects. In contrast,
Kaestner (1996) examines the effect of unemployment insurance contributions on the
employment of U.S. youth and finds large disemployment effects and little wage shifting.
For developing countries, there is some evidence on the magnitude of wage shifts
predating the studies collected in this volume. MacIsaac and Rama (1997) assess the
fungibility of the cost of mandated benefits in Ecuador. In 1994, the year they study,
Ecuador had one of the most cumbersome labor legislation regimes in Latin America.
Beyond mandated contributions to social security programs, the law also mandated
payment of thirteen, fourteen, fifteen and sixteen-month payments for separation at various
times of the same year. MacIsaac and Rama’s analysis suggests that while labor market
regulations increase labor costs, part of the increase is shifted to workers in the form of
lower base wages. Thus, for an average Ecuadorian worker, social security contributions
and other mandated benefits amount to at least 57 percent of the base wage. However,
workers whose employers comply with regulations earn on average only 18 percent more
than workers at non-compliant firms. This difference is explained by a 39 percent
34

reduction in the base earnings of workers in compliant firms. Interestingly, these
reductions are not uniform across firms; they are smaller in larger firms and essentially
zero in the public sector and in unionized firms.
Mondino and Montoya (this volume) and Edwards and Cox-Edwards (1999)
explore this topic for Argentina and Chile, respectively, by comparing wages of workers
who have access to social security programs with wages of uncovered workers. In
Argentina, Mondino and Montoya (this volume) find that during the period 1975-1996,
wages of non-covered workers were 8 percent higher than the gross wages of covered
workers. Considering that employee-paid payroll contributions average 40 percent of the
payroll, the share of contributions paid by workers is around 20 percent of total labor costs.
In Chile, Edwards and Cox-Edwards find evidence of a larger wage shift. In 1994, cash
wages for workers covered by mandatory pension, health, and life insurance were 14
percent lower than wages for non-covered workers. Since in that year, social security
contributions amounted to 20 percent of wages and were nominally paid by workers, their
estimates suggest that about 70 percent of the cost of social security contributions were
absorbed by workers, while the other 30 percent fell on employers. Gruber (1997) reports
evidence of an even larger wage shift in the aftermath of the 1981 pension reform in Chile.
The 1981 reform reduced employer-paid labor taxes and increased taxes paid by
employees. In addition, the funding of some programs was shifted to general revenue.
Using this tax change as a “natural experiment” and data on individual firms’ payments in
labor taxes and wages, he seeks to determine whether lower employer-paid labor taxes are

35

associated with higher wages within a firm. His results suggest a full-shift of payroll taxes
to wages and no effect on employment.19
Marrufo (2001) examines the 1997 reform in Mexico, which, as in Chile,
transformed the pay-as-you-go pension system into an individual retirement accounts
(IRA) system. She finds evidence of substantial employment reallocation between noncovered and covered sectors suggesting that the labor supply to covered sectors is fairly
elastic. However, she also finds evidence of a wage shift in response to a reform that ties
benefits to taxes collected. Decomposing the effect of the reforms into the effect of a tax
reduction and the effect of tying benefits to contributions, she finds that increasing social
security taxes reduces wages by 43 percent of the tax increase, while increasing benefits
decreases wages by 57 percent of the value of benefits.
An important factor determining the extent of wage pass-through is whether
minimum wages bind. Maloney and Nuñez-Mendez (this volume) document that the
minimum wage binds in Colombia. This explains the weak pass-through effects reported
by Cardenas and Bernal (this volume) for Colombia. At the same time, the minimum wage
is less binding, and pass-through effects may be more substantial, in Mexico and Chile,
and this may explain the Marrufo and Gruber results.
All in all, the available evidence suggests that at least part of the cost of non-wage
benefits is passed on to workers in the form of lower wages, and therefore, the employment
19

Measuring the impact of such an “experiment” is complicated by many factors. (See the discussion in
Edwards and Cox-Edwards, 2000). First, although payroll taxes declined, worker contributions increased. If
measured wage payments by firms include employee contributions, then a decline in employer-paid taxes
will be associated with higher measured wages due to higher employee-paid contributions. Second,
measurement error in wages biases his estimates toward finding full shifting, as he reports. The quality of his
instruments is questionable and he is forced to make strong assumptions to circumvent a severe measurement
error problem. Third, at a time when social security reform made work benefits more attractive, he estimates
that wages were rising. The only way that wages can rise to match the decreased employer taxes in an
environment with an improved link between employee contributions and benefits is if labor supply is
perfectly inelastic to covered sector firms, which seems implausible.

36

cost of such programs will be lower than what is predicted by the elasticity of the labor
demand. Combining wage-shift and labor demand estimates indicates that a 10 percent
increase in non-wage labor costs can lead to a decline in employment rates ranging
between .6 and 4.8 percent with most of the evidence shaded toward the high end of this
spectrum.
Given the significance of these estimates for policy decisions, it is important to
estimate them as accurately as possible. In this regard, the room for improvement in the
literature is still large. As they stand, they might overestimate or underestimate the true
employment impact depending on which of the following two effects dominates. On the
one hand, the reported estimates are based on constant-output labor demand elasticities,
which do not consider the employment effects of regulations through a negative effect on
the scale of production of existing firms and on entry and exit decisions of firms. From this
perspective, the reported range of estimates provides a lower bound on the disemployment
effects of regulation. Moreover, the estimates of the wage shift in MacIsaac and Rama
(1997), Mondino and Montoya (this volume) and Edwards and Cox-Edwards (1999) only
include the cost of social security programs, but do not include the cost of other regulations
such as job security or vacation time. Once the cost of these regulations is taken into
account, the computed wage shift could be lower than what we report above, and,
therefore, the estimated effects of those costs on employment would be larger.
On the other hand, studies comparing wages of covered and non-covered workers
performed using a cross-section of workers, such as most of the ones discussed above, may
underestimate wage shifts and overestimate employment costs. It is necessary to model
selection into covered sectors. This is because unobserved personal characteristics

37

correlated with social security affiliation might explain higher wages in covered sectors.20
If this correlation is substantial, it will lead to an underestimation of wage differences
between covered and uncovered workers, and hence reduce estimates of the fraction of
wage costs shifted to workers. This concern highlights the importance of the Marrufo study
because she controls for sectoral self-selection bias and still finds substantial evidence of
wage shifting. If her selection adjustments to the Mexican data are typical of what would
be found in other Latin American countries, the weight of the evidence in this book and the
literature on firm entry in response to incentives, suggest that the studies reported in this
volume underestimate the disemployment effects of regulation.

4.2 Job Security Provisions Alter Hiring and Firing Decisions
Regulations affecting transition costs are not adequately analyzed within a simple
static labor-demand labor-supply framework. Dismissal costs and other regulations not
only increase labor costs, but also alter firms’ firing and hiring decisions. The importance
of dismissal costs in Latin America is clearly shown in Figure 5. Whereas non-wage labor
costs are low relative to those of OECD countries, dismissal costs tend to be very high.
These costs make Latin American labor markets less flexible than OECD markets and
likely impair productivity and adaptation to new technology and trade patterns as they do
in Europe (see Heckman, 2003). It is thus important to assess the impact, if any, that such
policies have on the functioning of the labor market.

Theoretical Discussion
20

For instance, if workers covered by social security programs also happen to be more productive, then they
will also have higher wages. Yet, higher wages are explained by unobserved productivity and not by social
security affiliation.
38

To analyze the full impact of job security provisions requires a more complex
framework that encompasses dynamic decisions of firms. Bertola (1990) and Bentolila and
Bertola (1990) develop dynamic partial-equilibrium models to assess how a firm’s firing
and hiring decisions are affected by dismissal costs. In the face of a given shock, the
optimal employment policy of a firm involves one of three state-contingent responses: (i)
dismissing workers, (ii) hiring workers or (iii) doing nothing. Appendix B presents a
simple two period model of labor adjustment that summarizes the main ideas in this
literature.
In the face of a negative shock and declining marginal value of labor, a firm might
want to dismiss some workers. However, it faces a dismissal cost in most regulatory
regimes in LAC. This cost has the effect of discouraging firms from adjusting their labor
force, resulting in fewer dismissals than the number of dismissals that would occur in a
scenario in the absence of such costs. Conversely, in the face of a positive shock, firms
might want to hire additional workers but would take into account that it would be costly
for some workers to be fired if future demand declined. This potential cost acts as a hiring
cost, effectively reducing the creation of new jobs in a relatively healthy economy. The
net result is lower employment rates in expansions, higher employment rates in recessions
and lower turnover rates as firms hire and fire fewer workers than they would in the
absence of adjustment costs.
Adjustment costs produce a decline in employment variability associated with
firing costs. The implication of these models for average employment is ambiguous. In
particular, whether average employment rates increase or decline as a result of firing costs
depends on whether over the cycle the decline in hiring rates more than compensates for
the reduction in dismissals. Simulations reported in Bertola (1990) and Bentolila and
39

Bertola (1990) suggest that average employment in a given firm is likely to increase when
firing costs increase. However, these results are quite sensitive to different assumptions
about the persistence of shocks, the elasticity of the labor demand, the magnitude of the
discount rate, and the functional form of the production function. Less persistent shocks
and lower discount rates produce larger negative effects of job security on employment
because both factors reduce hiring relative to firing (Bertola, 1992; Bentolila and Saint
Paul, 1994). Furthermore, a higher elasticity of the demand for goods implies a larger
negative effect of job security on employment rates. In addition, when investment
decisions are also considered, firing costs lower profits and discourage investment,
increasing the likelihood that they reduce the demand for labor (Risager and Sorensen,
1997).
The Bertola (1990) and Bertola and Bentolila (1990) analyses focus on
employment rates in a “representative” firm without considering the impact of firing costs
on the extensive margin, that is, on how firing costs affect the creation and destruction of
firms. Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993) develop a general equilibrium model based on the
U.S. economy. The partial equilibrium framework of Bertola (1990) is embedded in their
model as part of a general equilibrium framework in which jobs and firms are created and
destroyed in every period in response to firm-specific shocks. In the context of their model,
Hopenhayn and Rogerson find that increasing firing costs in the U.S. would lead to an
increase in the average employment of existing firms as a consequence of the reduction in
firings. However, they also find that such a policy would result in lower firm entry, and
lower job creation in newly created firms. These final two effects could potentially offset
the increase in employment in existing firms, and they would thus reduce overall
employment rates.
40

The recent literature has also emphasized the possible impact of job security
regulations on the composition of employment. Kugler (this volume) proposes a model in
which job security regulations provide incentives for high turnover firms to operate in the
informal sector. This decision would entail producing at a small, less efficient scale in
order to remain inconspicuous to tax and labor authorities. In this framework, high job
security costs paid by formal sector firms would likely increase informality rates. Pagés
and Montenegro (1999) develop a model in which job security provisions, which depend
on tenure, bias employment against young workers and in favor of older ones. As
severance pay increases with tenure, and tenure tends to increase with age, older workers
become more costly to dismiss than younger ones. If wages do not adjust appropriately,
negative shocks result in a disproportionate share of layoffs among young workers.
Therefore, job security based on tenure results in lower employment rates for the young
relative to older workers because it reduces hiring and increases layoffs for young workers.
This effect has also been found in studies of European employment. (Heckman, 2003).
Finally, it is important to understand that not all components of dismissal costs may
have the same effect on employment and unemployment rates. Thus, in principle, there is
an important conceptual distinction between advance notice and indemnities, which are
state-contingent and affect the cost of adjustment to different states, and seniority pay
provisions, which are paid in all states and do not affect transitions. The latter are more
comparable to other non-wage costs such as vacation and other mandatory benefits.
The existing evidence regarding the impact of employment protection is abundant
but inconclusive. Table 5 from Addison and Teixeira (2001) summarizes the current
literature. While, Addison and Grosso (1996), Grubb and Wells (1993), Lazear (1990),
Heckman and Pagés (2000), Nickell (1997) and Nicoletti and Scarpetta (2001) find a
41

negative relationship between job security provisions and employment, other studies, such
as Addison, Teixeira and Grosso (2000), OECD, (1999), Garibaldi and Mauro (1999) and
Freeman (2001) do not find evidence of such a relationship. The evidence on the effects of
job security on unemployment is equally ambiguous. Some studies find a positive link
between job security and unemployment (Elmeskov, et al., 1998; Lazear, 1990; and
Addison and Grosso, 1996) while others find no effect (Blanchard, 1998; Heckman and
Pagés, 2000; Nickell, 1997). Our own estimates at the end of this chapter give reasons for
these mixed findings. All these studies are based on the analysis of aggregates of crosscountry time-series data with little variation in regulatory policies. The studies presented in
this volume surmount some of these difficulties by studying episodes of major labor
reform using large micro data sets. Using disaggregated data for single countries,
Mondino and Montoya (this volume) and Saavedra and Torero (this volume) find a large
negative relationship between employment protection and employment. The studies
presented in this volume contribute substantially to a literature that analyzes the
consequences of reforms. Recent studies for OECD countries using disaggregated data
suggest a negative effect of job security regulations on employment. Autor et al. (2003)
estimate the effects of recent common law wrongful discharge doctrines adopted by courts
across states in the U.S that limit employment at will. They find that the wrongful
discharge doctrine has a negative impact on employment to population rates in state labor
markets. Similarly, Kugler et al (2002) find that in Spain a combination of a reduction in
payroll taxes and the reduction of dismissal costs increased the employment of workers on
permanent contracts. Finally, Acemoglu and Angrist (2001), replicating the earlier work of
Deleire (2000), examine the effects of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), which
outlaws discrimination against the disabled in hiring, firing and pay on the employment
42

rate of workers with disabilities. Their findings and prior work by Deleire suggest that the
passage of the Act reduced employment for disabled workers.

Empirical Evidence for Latin America and the Caribbean
The essays assembled in this volume assess the impact of job security regulation on
employment and turnover rates in Latin America and the Caribbean, and provide the first
systematic evidence of its impact on the labor market. Several studies assess the impact of
job security on turnover rates in the labor market. Changes in turnover are measured using
changes in the duration of jobs (tenure), the duration of unemployment and rates of exiting
out of employment and unemployment.21 Higher employment exit rates indicate more
layoffs (or more quits), while higher exit rates out of unemployment and into formal jobs
indicate higher job creation in the formal sector. Other studies examine the impact of job
security on employment rates. The definition of employment used in the empirical studies
varies depending on the country being analyzed. In general, most studies focus on
employment in large firms, although some also examine more aggregated measures of
employment. In addition, a small group of studies also examine the impact of job security
on the composition of employment. See Table 6 for an overview of the empirical evidence
for Latin America and the Caribbean presented in this volume.

Turnover Rates
As predicted by most theoretical models, the bulk of empirical evidence reported in
this volume confirms that less stringent job security tends to be associated with higher
21

These studies estimate hazard rates. The hazard rate is defined as the rate at which a given spell of
employment or unemployment ends in a given period conditional on having lasted a given period of time in
the spell (e.g., one month, one year).
43

turnover and greater flexibility in the labor market. Kugler (this volume) analyzes the
impact of the 1990 labor market reforms in Colombia. She finds that a reduction in job
security costs reduces average tenure and increases employment exit rates.22 This decline is
significantly larger in the formal sector, which is covered by the regulations, than in the
uncovered or informal sector. In addition, the increase is greater in large firms than in the
smallest ones. Her results show similar patterns within tradable and non-tradable sectors,
providing a clear indication that the decline in tenure cannot be attributed to contemporary
trade reforms. The increasing use of temporary contracts explains only part of the increase
in formal turnover rates since job stability also declined for workers employed at
permanent jobs.23
Kugler also finds a decline in the average duration of unemployment after the
reforms. In addition, exit rates out of unemployment increase more for workers who leave
unemployment by going into the formal sector than they do for those who exit into
informal jobs. As with average tenure, her results show quite similar patterns across
sectors and a higher exit rate toward larger firms. Finally, only two-thirds of the increase in
the rate of entry into unemployment can be attributed to higher use of temporary contracts.
The rest is explained by increased exit rates into permanent jobs in the formal sector.
Saavedra and Torero (this volume) conduct a similar study, evaluating the impact
of the 1991 reform in Peru. Like the reform in Colombia, the 1991 Peruvian reform
considerably reduced the cost of dismissing workers. Their analysis shows a consistent
decline in average tenure from 1991 onward, suggesting higher exit rates from
22

In this study tenure is measured by the duration of incomplete employment spells.
In her study, Kugler performs two types of analyses. First, she uses a difference-in-difference estimator to
analyze whether changes in average duration of employment (unemployment) are significantly different in
the formal and informal sectors. Second, she estimates an exponential duration model to control for changes
in demographic covariates, pooling data from before and after the reform and using interaction terms to
assess the differential impact on the formal and informal sectors.
23

44

employment. As in the Kugler study, the decline is significantly more pronounced in the
formal sector than it is in the informal sector. In addition, the tenure patterns were quite
similar across economic sectors, suggesting that these findings cannot be explained by the
trade reforms that took place in the early nineties.
In contrast to these findings, Paes de Barros and Corseuil (this volume) find little
evidence that the substantial 1988 Brazilian Constitutional reform altered employment exit
rates. In that year, the cost of dismissing workers was raised, and therefore a reduction in
exit rates would be expected as a result. (Many other reforms were also put in place as
well.) Their results indicate that aggregate employment exit rates decline in the formal
sector relative to the informal sector for short employment spells (two years or less), but
increase for longer spells. Their measured increase in exit rates for long spells could be
driven by the special characteristics of the Brazilian system. In this system, employers
contribute 8 percent of a worker’s wage to the worker’s individual account. In case of
voluntary dismissal, the worker can claim the principal, the compounded interest rate and a
penalty paid by the firm, which in the 1988 reform was raised from 10 percent to 40
percent of principal plus interest. In the case of a voluntary quit, the worker receives
nothing. This asymmetry in the treatment of termination induces workers to force dismissal
or to collude with firms to obtain the funds accumulated in the account. It can be argued
that the 1988 reform greatly increased the incentives to force dismissals, particularly for
workers with longer tenures. This may explain the increase in exit rates for workers with
longer employment spells.
These three studies use the informal sector as a control group unaffected by the
reforms. Their credibility hinges on the validity of this assumption. Kugler shows that
estimates based on formal-informal sector comparisons are likely to be biased. However,
45

such comparisons are still valid under certain conditions – at least as tests of the null
hypothesis of no effect of the reform.24 When viewed as a whole, these studies provide
evidence that dismissal costs and other employment protection mechanisms reduce worker
reallocation in the labor market. Unfortunately, these studies do not identify whether
reduced worker reallocation is due to reduced layoffs, lower quits or a mix of both.
Some studies in this book assess the impact of regulations on the speed of
adjustment using the length of the lag (the speed of adjustment) as an alternative measure
of the constraints faced by firms. The intuition supporting this is based on the original
work of Holt, Modigliani, Muth and Simon (1960).
Let nt* be the optimal level of employment at date t determined by some implicit
(usually static) theory. Let the cost of being out of equilibrium ct0 be quadratic in
deviations of current employment from optimal employment:
(2)

ct0 = γ 0 (nt* − nt )2

γ 0 > 0.

The greater the discrepancy between employment at t and optimal employment, the greater
the cost. There is also a cost of adjustment cta , which is also assumed to be quadratic in the
adjustment from nt −1 to nt :
(3)

cta = γ a (nt − nt −1 ) 2 .

Minimizing the sum of these costs produces an optimal labor demand nt
24

Kugler shows that lower severance pay may induce high-turnover informal firms to move to the formal
sector. Assuming either no overlap in the distribution of turnover between covered and uncovered firms, or
that entry to the covered sector comes from the high-end –or at least from the end that is higher than the
formal sector, this shift results in higher turnover in both the formal and the informal sector. Higher turnover
in the informal sector biases the difference-in-difference estimator downward. Therefore, a positive estimate
still provides substantial evidence of increased turnover in the formal sector.

46

nt = (1 − λ )nt* + λnt −1
where

λ=

γa
γa +γ0

.

The greater the cost of adjustment, the bigger the value of λ. Abraham and Houseman
(1993) and many others use this method to assess the effect of different regulatory regimes
across countries on adjustment costs while others interact λ with measures of regulations to
assess whether the speed of adjustment increases or declines when the regulatory
environment is changed. Cardenas and Bernal (this volume), Paes de Barros and Corseuil
(this volume) and Saavedra and Torero (this volume) use this methodology to examine
whether the speed of adjustment increased or declined after labor reforms. In the study of
Saavedra and Torero, their estimated interaction term suggests that more stringent
regulations reduce the speed of adjustment, particularly in the pre-reform period, when
regulation was very stringent. In the other two studies, this methodology is unable to
identify any changes in adjustment due to reforms. This is particularly relevant in the
study of Cárdenas and Bernal on Colombia since other methodologies based on duration
data (Kugler, this volume) show clear effects of regulation on adjustment. Addison and
Teixeira (2001) indicate that “none of the implementations of this (adjustment cost) model
in core OECD countries were able to detect a discernible impact of job security regulations
on the speed of employment adjustment”. In the concluding section of this paper, we
discuss why the lag coefficient is not a reliable measure of the regulatory costs, especially
when applied to cross country data.
Average Employment
47

The available evidence for LAC countries shows a consistent, although not always
statistically significant, negative impact of JS provisions on average employment rates.
Saavedra and Torero (this volume) and Mondino and Montoya (this volume) use firm-level
panel data to estimate the impact of job security on employment in Peru and Argentina,
respectively. Both studies estimate labor demand equations in which an explicit measure
of job security appears on the right hand side of the equation, and both find evidence that
higher job security levels are associated with lower employment rates.25 In the case of
Peru, Saavedra and Torero find that the size of the impact of regulations is correlated with
the magnitude of the regulations themselves. Thus, the impact is very high at the beginning
of their sample (1987-1990), coinciding with a period of very high dismissal costs (see
their Table 4). Afterward, and coinciding with a period of deregulation, the magnitude of
the estimated coefficient declines after a new increase in dismissal costs, only to increase
again from 1995 onward. Their estimates for the long-run elasticities of severance pay are
very large (in absolute value). Between 1987 and 1990 a 10 percent increase in dismissal
costs is estimated to reduce long-run employment rates by 11 percent, keeping wages
constant. In subsequent periods, the size of the effect becomes smaller but is still quite
large in magnitude (between 3 and 6 percent). In Argentina, the estimated long-run
elasticity of a 10 percent increase in dismissal costs is also between 3 and 6 percent. 26
25

The data for the Peruvian study covers firms with more than 10 employees in all sectors of the economy.
The Argentinean study only covers manufacturing firms. Given the nature of these surveys, these studies
analyze formal employment rather than employment as a whole. The data used in these two studies does not
capture job creation by new firms, since both panels are based on a given balanced panel census of firms,
which does not adjust for attrition.
26
The methodology used by these studies might lead to upward biased estimates of the elasticity of
employment to job security. Thus, for example, Mondino and Montoya construct explicit measures of job
security based on:
JSjt= δj TjtPjt SPjt
Where δj is the average layoff rate in sector j, Tjt is average tenure in sector j, for a time period t, Pjt is the
share of firms in sector j, time period t that are covered by regulations and SPjt is the mandatory severance
pay in sector j, given average tenure Tjt . This measure provides variability across sectors and periods, and
therefore it yields a more precise estimation of the impact of job security than before-after types of
48

Kugler (this volume) computes the net impact of the Colombian 1991 labor reform
on unemployment rates. Using unemployment and employment exit rate estimates before
and after the reform, she finds that the reforms cause a decline in unemployment between
1.3 and 1.7 percentage points. Thus, as in Mondino and Montoya (this volume) and
Saavedra and Torero (this volume), Kugler’s estimates of the impact of deregulation
indicate that the positive impact of reduced labor costs on hiring outweighs the negative
impact of reduced severance costs on firing, resulting in a decline in unemployment rates.
Heckman and Pagés’ (2000) analysis of cross section-time series aggregates also
finds evidence of a negative impact of employment protection on employment. However,
the evidence presented at the end of this chapter suggests that their results for Latin
America are not robust although their results for OECD Europe are robust. The fragility of
their estimates for Latin America based on aggregate data suggests the value of using more
disaggregated data in reaching sharp conclusions.
Other studies find negative, but statistically less precisely estimated, effects of job
security on average employment rates. Pagés and Montenegro (1999) find that JS has a
negative but statistically insignificant effect on overall wage-employment rates in Chile.
Similarly, Marquez (1998), using a cross-section sample of Latin American and OECD
countries, finds a negative but insignificant coefficient of job security on aggregate
employment rates. Table 6 summarizes the various estimates of job security on
employment.
Downes et al (this volume) also use aggregate time series data to examine changes
in the labor demand associated with changes in the regulatory framework in three
comparisons. Yet, such a measure may also be correlated with the error term in a labor demand equation
since both layoffs and the tenure structure of a firm might be correlated with its employment level. However,

49

Caribbean countries. Their inconclusive results are typical of an entire literature. They use
an indicator variable that measures periods with more or less stringent regulations. Their
estimates do not capture changes in labor demand before and after the reform. However, as
in the case in most of the OECD-based literature, their sample variation in regulations and
institutions may be too limited and the level of aggregation too great to capture any effects
of regulation on employment.

The Composition of Employment

Economists have paid relatively more attention to studying the effects of job
security on the level of employment and unemployment than to studying the effects of
such policies on the distribution of jobs. However, a few studies shed some light on the
impact of job security on the composition of employment in LAC. Marquez (1998)
constructs a ranking of the relative severity of labor market regulations (including
workweek, contract and other regulations besides job security provisions) for LAC and
OECD countries and uses it to estimate the effects of JS on the formal/informal
distribution of employment. He finds that across countries more stringent regulations
coincide with a larger percentage of self-employed workers. In a study of Chile,
Montenegro and Pagés (this volume) use repeated cross-section micro-data spanning forty
years of data and substantial variation in labor market policies. They control for year
effects that are common across workers, as well as for the differential effects of the
business cycle, and other labor market policies on each demographic group. They find that
more stringent job security measures reduce the employment rates of youth and the
unskilled, while increasing the employment rates of older and skilled workers. Their
robustness analyses reported in Mondino and Montoya suggest that not considering some of this variability
50

results also suggest that job security regulations increase the self employment of women
and unskilled workers, relative to other demographic groups. This evidence is consistent
with evidence in Bertola (2001) and Heckman (2003) that job security provisions protect
the relatively privileged workers at the expense of the less advantaged ones. In a review of
the recent OECD literature, relying on cross-country, time-series analysis, Addison and
Teixeira (2001) reach similar conclusions stating that while prime-age male employment
rates have not been affected by job security provisions, the employment rates of other
groups, most notably younger workers, have been affected.

4.3 Temporary Contracts

Hopenhayn (this volume) discusses the impact of temporary contracts on the
Argentine labor market. Such contracts were introduced following the Spanish model. He
finds that these contracts induce an increase in hiring and a substitution away from longterm employment toward short-term employment. So, in the short-run, these contracts
remove one barrier from the labor market and make it more fluid. At the same time, they
tend to promote turnover. Hopenhayn finds that the average hazard rate for the first three
months out of employment increased by 30 percent and for tenure above three months by
10 percent. While temporary contracts promote fluidity, they reduce firm attachment and
the incentive of firms to invest in workers. Alonso-Borrego and Aguirregabiria (1999)
document that in Spanish labor markets, the effect of temporary contracts is to reduce
investment in workers and hence to produce lower quality (less skilled) workers in the long
run.

still produces positive and statistically significant estimates for the coefficient of the job security measure.
51

4.4 Minimum Wages

Maloney and Nuñez-Mendez (this volume) present novel estimates of the impact of
minimum wages on wage distributions and employment. Their evidence demonstrates
convincingly that minimum wages are binding in most Latin American countries and have
substantial effects on employment and wage distributions. An important finding in their
analysis is that both covered and uncovered sectors (“formal” and “informal” sectors)
respond in similar fashion to wage minimums. The informal sector does not show the
downward wage flexibility that traditional models of labor market dualism predict.
Another important finding is that minimum wages percolate much more widely across
wage distributions in Latin America than they do in the U.S. There are substantial effects
of minimum wages on wages far up in the distribution of wages. Their study puts to rest
the claim that minimum wages are innocuous, even in countries with large “informal”
sectors.
Montenegro and Pagés (this volume) study the effects of minimum wages on the
distribution of employment in Chile. They find that, like job security provisions, minimum
wages reduce the employment probabilities of the young and the unskilled relative to older
and more skilled workers. Not surprisingly, as suggested in other studies for developed
countries, their results indicate that minimum wages are particularly binding for young
unskilled workers. However, their results also indicate an adverse effect of the minimum
wage on prime-age unskilled workers. Minimum wages adversely affect disadvantaged
workers of all ages.
We next turn to a pooled time series cross-country study of the impact of regulation
on employment. The fragility and sensitivity of the estimates for the Latin American
region that we find highlight the benefits of the microdata analysis reported in this volume.
52

5. Evidence from A Cross-Section Time-Series Sample of LAC and OECD Countries

In this section, we summarize and expand on some of the main results of our recent
work, updating our earlier paper (Heckman and Pages, 2000). We use time series of crosssections of countries and we exploit the substantial variability in labor laws in Latin
America to estimate their effects on employment and unemployment. These studies serve
to place the essays in this volume within the broader context of a literature that almost
exclusively focuses on time series of cross section averages of countries. Unfortunately,
few empirical regularities emerge when an honest sensitivity analysis is conducted.
Nonetheless a few robust regularities do appear. Payroll taxes reduce employment and
(less robustly) in OECD countries, job security regulation reduces employment.

The Data

Labor market studies focusing on developing countries are hampered by serious data
problems. Thus, labor market variables contained in most cross-country databases suffer
from a lack of comparability and reliability. To overcome these problems, we construct a
new data set that includes OECD and LAC countries. For OECD countries, we collect
employment and unemployment data from the OECD statistics. For the Latin American
sample, we directly construct the same indicators out of a large set of Latin American
Household Surveys. See Appendix A for a more detailed description of the employment
and unemployment variables as well as the countries and years used to obtain the LAC
data. Population variables are obtained from the UN Population database while GDP
measures are from the World Bank Development Indicators. To characterize labor market

53

regulations we use the set of measures summarized in Table 4, but defined for each year
and country.
Our joint sample collects more than 400 data points from 38 countries; 23 in the OECD
and 15 in LA. (Mexico is included in the Latin America sample although it belongs to the
OECD). We analyze country means and do not disaggregate further. The sample is an
unbalanced panel covering the period 1983-1999. Table 7 reports summary statistics of our
data for both our whole sample and for the sub-regional ones. There are large differences
between the OECD and the LAC samples. GDP per capita measures tend to be
substantially lower in the LAC than in the OECD region. Conversely, GDP growth is
lower in the latter. Indemnities for dismissal and seniority pay are higher in Latin America
than in OECD countries while advance notice provisions and social security contributions
are lower. There are important differences in labor market aggregates as well. On average,
employment rates are higher in the LAC region than in OECD countries. The reverse is
true for unemployment rates. The LAC region also displays a lower percentage of the
working age population in the 25 to 54 and the 55 to 65 years old brackets than OECD
countries and a higher share of the population in the 15 to 24 years age group. By
constructing our own data set from individual household-level surveys, we are guaranteed
that all of the labor market variables are comparable and reliable. One drawback of our
data is that for the LAC sample, we only have a few time series observations per country
(usually six or seven), and not necessarily from consecutive years.
Our objective is to relate our measures of regulations to employment and
unemployment outcomes. Although we perform multivariate analyses, it is interesting to
examine the bivariate relationship between regulations and employment. This is
particularly easy for regulations such as job security provisions that, within our sample,
54

change at most once or twice per country. In figures 8 and 9, we graph employment before
and after reforms for countries that experienced job security reforms. The graphs for LAC
should be interpreted with caution because they have been interpolated from incomplete
time series data.
There is little evidence that reforms that reduced job security increased
employment rates in Colombia. There is also not much evidence that reforms that
increased job security had a deleterious effect on employment in Brazil, Chile or
Nicaragua. However, there is some evidence indicating that reforms that liberalized labor
markets in Peru increased employment rates, while reforms that increased labor market
rigidities reduced employment. For Germany, our data suggest that employment declined
at a slower rate after a reform that increased job security, while in Spain and UK the
opposite seems to be true after liberalization. These figures suggest that periods of less
stringent job security regulations coincide with higher employment rates in some countries,
while the reverse is also true in other countries. The data presented in these figures,
however, fail to control for contemporaneous changes in economic activity or other factors
that could be correlated with employment and labor reforms. In the next section, we
perform an empirical analysis in an attempt to control for contemporaneous effects that
may be correlated with reforms, employment and unemployment outcomes.

Methodology and Results

To relate labor market regulations to employment and unemployment outcomes, we
estimate the following model:

Yit = α i + β1 X it + β 2 git + β 3GDPPCit + β 4 Z it + ε it

55

where Yit is a labor market variable (employment or unemployment) of country i at period

t, αi denotes a country fixed effect, Xit denotes a vector of employment regulation
variables, git, and GDPPCit denote GDP growth and (log of) GDP per capita, respectively,

Zit is a vector of demographic controls and ε it is a mean zero error.
Given the nature of the data with incomplete gaps, we decided not to average
observations from a given period to control for business cycle effects, as is often done in
OECD studies. Instead, we control for the state of the business cycle in a given year using
GDP growth27. Although a large part of our variation is cross-sectional, we use fixed
effects estimates to control for unobserved variables that may be correlated with measures
of regulation across countries. In addition, we control for demographic changes that may
be correlated with employment and unemployment rates as well as regulatory variables
that change over time. Finally, we use GDP per capita (adjusted by PPP) to control for
differences in levels of country economic activity across years.28 We estimate a reduced
form model to investigate whether periods of high non-wage labor costs stemming from
advance notice, indemnities for dismissal, severance pay or social security contributions
are associated with lower employment or higher unemployment rates. We thus estimate an
average net effect of labor laws as they operate through intermediate variables, which we
do not include in the regression. We do not estimate a theoretically more appropriate statecontingent labor demand specification because we lack the information on the firmspecific state of the product market confronting individual firms. Therefore, we only
attempt to identify the effect of labor laws through their effect on expected (across labor
27

GDP growth is obtained from the World Bank Development indicators. It turns out that deleting or
including this variable has no important effect on our empirical conclusions. Deleting or including GDP per
capita (PPP adjusted) does not alter our results, either.

56

market states) labor cost. This is a severe limitation. However, what we offer is an
improvement over the existing literature on cross-country time series that does not quantify
labor costs. Appendix B discusses conceptually more appropriate specifications of labor
demand functions.
Table 8A displays our estimates for employment in the overall and regional
samples. In these and subsequent results, we compute standard errors that are robust to
heteroscedasticity. Throughout this analysis, we extend social security data to yearly
frequencies since this information is only available biannually. We do so either by
interpolating or by inputting each missing data values with the value from the former year.
The results of our empirical analysis are robust across methods. The results do not vary
either when we consider only the original biennial data. However, in this case, the number
of available observations drops substantially.
The coefficients on GDP growth have the expected positive signs and are
statistically significant for the overall sample. The coefficients on the demographic
variables are positive, suggesting that countries with larger percentages of their working
age population above age 25 tend to have higher employment rates. However, none of the
coefficients on the demographic variables are statistically significant at conventional
levels. A higher GDP per capita tends to coincide with higher employment to population
rates. However, this estimated effect is not precisely determined.
Our main interest is on measuring the effect of the labor market regulations. We
find that once we expand our sample to include a larger number of OECD and LAC
countries, the strong negative effect on employment of indemnities for dismissal reported
28

We control for GDP growth and GDP per capita (PPP adjusted) because we have few data points per
country and they are not necessarily contiguous, so we cannot use the simple averaging method employed in
OECD studies to control for business cycle effects.
57

for the pooled sample in Heckman and Pagés (2000) disappears. This is somewhat
surprising because not only do we expand the set of countries and periods for which we
can construct the measure, but we also revise some of the variables used in our previous
analysis to more accurately model the laws. We still estimate a negative, statistically
significant, coefficient for indemnities in the OECD specification and this is an important
contribution to the European debate on the impact of regulations. This evidence suggests a
significant lack of robustness of the estimated effect of regulations that we explore in
detail.
With regard to the rest of the regulations, we find a positive although not
statistically significant coefficient on advance notice cost both in the joint and in the subregional samples. Since seniority pay regulations only exist in Latin America, we cannot
identify the impact of these regulations in the OECD sample. However, we find positive
coefficients for this variable both in the LAC and in the pooled sample. Moreover, the
coefficient in the joint sample is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. The
estimated coefficient suggests that an increase in payments equivalent to one month’s pay
(in expected present value) increases employment rates by 1.12 percentage points. One
might argue that the strong association between contributions and benefits associated with
these types of schemes contributes to an expansion of labor supply increasing overall
employment rates. However, the coefficients on advance notice and on indemnities are also
positive. In contrast to these results, our estimates suggest a negative effect of social
security contributions on employment both in the joint and the sub-regional samples.
(Recall this is the total contribution of employers and workers). This effect is statistically
significant. According to our estimates, a reduction in the social security contributions
from the OECD to the LAC average (see Table 4) would increase employment by 3.25
58

percentage points for the coefficients from the joint sample or by 4.26 points if the OECD
coefficient is used (table 8a, columns (1) and (6), respectively).
Since there is substantial correlation among our measures of labor market
regulation, we also estimate specifications that include these measures one at a time.29 The
number of observations used in each regression varies because there are countries for
which we do not have information for all the regulation measures. The results are
unchanged if we restrict all regressions to have the same observations than the ones used in
column (1). Adding the regulation measures separately tends to produce smaller
coefficients for each of them, suggesting that there are important complementarities that
are not captured by the one-at-a-time specifications. We strongly reject the hypothesis that
the four measures are not jointly significant (last row, Table 8A) and therefore include
them together in the remaining analysis.
Table 8B presents the estimates for unemployment. As for employment,
indemnities for dismissal have a strong positive effect on unemployment in the OECD
sample but no effect in the Latin America or the joint sample. The coefficient on advance
notice is negative in the overall and OECD samples, but not in the LAC sample. However
the coefficient is not statistically significant in any sample. The coefficient on seniority pay
is also positive, suggesting that these schemes increase labor supply. However, the
coefficient is not statistically significant. Finally, and consistent with our results on
employment, we find that higher social security contributions are associated with higher
levels of unemployment in the three samples considered. Our point estimates suggest that
reducing social security contributions from the OECD to the LAC average reduces
29

The correlation coefficient between advance notice, indemnities for dismissal and seniority pay is between
.15 and .21 (in absolute value) and statistically significant. Social security contributions are positively and

59

unemployment by 2.54 percentage points if we use the estimate for the joint sample or 3.11
points if we use the OECD one. As with the case of employment, adding the regulatory
measures one-at-a-time produces smaller coefficients for each of the measures. As before,
we reject the hypothesis that the coefficients of the four variables are jointly equal to zero,
and therefore we will include them in the rest of the unemployment analysis.
Our results in Tables 8A-8B suggest that not all regulations have the same effect on
employment and unemployment rates. Since all regulations are measured in multiples of
monthly wages we can compare the coefficients of the four regulations studied and assess
whether they have similar effects. In Table 9 we report the results of testing the hypothesis
of equality of coefficients. We reject the null hypothesis of identical coefficients for the
four measures in the employment, but not the unemployment, specifications. Interestingly,
we are also able to reject the hypothesis that social security payments exert the same effect
on employment as seniority pay, despite the fact that both variables imply mandatory
contributions defined as fraction of wages. Perhaps because contributions to finance
seniority pay are capitalized in individual accounts, the link between contributions and
payments is strengthened, and this reduces or eliminates the “tax” effect. Instead, our
results suggest that social security contributions tend to be perceived as taxes on labor and
therefore reduce the demand of labor above and beyond a possible reduction in the supply
of labor. Moreover, we reject the hypothesis that indemnities for dismissal and seniority
pay have the same coefficient or that all components of job security (advance notice,
indemnities for dismissal and seniority pay) have the same coefficient. When we impose
this (incorrect) constraint on the data, we obtain a positive and statistically significant
significantly correlated with advance notice, but the correlation with the other measures is close to zero and
not statistically significant.

60

coefficient, while the coefficient on social security regulations remains negative and
statistically significant.
Finally, although we reject the hypothesis that all four regulations have the same
effect on employment, imposing this constraint yields a negative, statistically significant
coefficient on employment and a positive, statistically significant coefficient on
unemployment. Moreover, the size of the coefficients is very similar to the ones reported
in Table 8.A and 8.B for social security. This is not surprising, since social security
regulations constitute the lion’s share of the total cost of regulations.
In summary, our results suggest that not all regulations have the same effect on
employment rates. Thus, while social security contributions are negatively associated with
employment (and positively associated with unemployment), the effect of job security
measures on employment is ambiguous. While in the joint and LAC samples, advance
notice and indemnities for dismissal have positive, although not statistically significant
coefficients, the coefficient on indemnities in the OECD sample is negative and
statistically significant at conventional levels. Seniority pay is positively associated with
employment and the coefficients on this variable are statistically significant in most
specifications. We also reject the hypothesis that the coefficients on seniority pay and the
coefficients on the rest of the components of job security are the same. These differences
in results across regions, specifications and samples, relative to our previous work, suggest
a lack of robustness that we further explore. Before turning to a robustness analysis, we
first consider the evidence on the shifting of the payroll tax.

Wage shifts

61

What is the estimated wage pass-through implied by our coefficients on social
security contributions? The social security effect is a robust finding of our aggregate
country analysis and so is worth exploring further. Define α as the elasticity of
employment with respect to the cost of labor. Assume that social security taxes are
expressed as a percentage of wages. Writing labor demand as a function of wages
inclusive of taxes in log linear form, we obtain:
ln Emp ( SS ) = α ln W ( SS )(1 + SS )  + C
where SS is the fraction of wages marked up by social security and W(SS) is the wage
which depends on SS through equilibrium shifting effects and C is a constant standing in
for all other factors. Taking derivatives with respect to the SS markup, we obtain:
 ∂ ln W ( SS ) 
∂ ln EMP( SS )
=α 
+ 1 .
ln
SS
∂ ln SS
∂
(
)


Solving for
∂ ln W ( SS )
∂ ln SS

∂ ln W ( SS )
, we obtain:
∂ ln SS
=


1  ∂ ln EMP ( SS )
−α  .

α
∂ ln SS


To estimate the wage shift, we estimate

∂ ln EMP( SS )
from a specification with the same
∂ ln SS

control variables as the specification reported in table 8.A, column 1, but where the
dependent variable is in logs, advance notice, indemnities for dismissal and seniority pay
are defined in logs and social security contributions are defined as fractions of gross wages
and we use ln (1 + SS ) as a regressor. Finally,

62

∂ ln Emp
is assumed to be within the ranges
∂ ln W

of estimates reported in Table 4 and consistent with the estimates reported in these studies.
With all of these elements, we obtain the estimates presented in Table 10.30
We find that the elasticity of employment with respect to social security
contributions is -.7 for the whole sample, around –1 for the OECD sample and -.447 for
Latin America. This implies that increasing social security contributions by 10 percent
will lower employment by 7 percent in the overall sample, 10 percent in the OECD and 4.5
percent in Latin America. These are large numbers. They also imply that for a large range
of labor demand elasticities the estimated pass through is zero, particularly for the OECD
sample. Thus, for a labor demand elasticity of -.7, the pass through is zero in OECD and
36 percent in LA. Although this larger pass through in Latin America is at odds with the
presumption of a very elastic labor supply to the formal sector, it is consistent with a much
higher wage flexibility in Latin America than in industrial countries due to greater inflation
in the region (see IADB, 2003). All in all, this evidence suggests that part of the cost of
regulations is borne by workers, but that social security contributions tend to be perceived
as taxes on labor. Increasing social security taxes leads to substantial costs in terms of
reductions in employment and increases in unemployment.

The effect of recent social security reforms

Our negative coefficients on social security contributions suggest that the benefits
associated with these contributions are valued at less than 100 percent of their cost. An
interesting question is whether the recent wave of pension reforms in Latin America have
contributed to strengthen the link between contributions and benefits as well as to increase
the size of the wage pass-through. This is especially relevant because most reforms
30

Hamermesh (1993) reports a range of elasticities between -.15 and -.7. We constrain wage effects of SS in
63

transformed pay-as-you-go systems into full or partial capitalization systems. To examine
this possibility we create a dummy variable Reform, which, for each country, takes the
value of zero in the period pre-reform and 1 from the period of reform onward. We add this
variable and an interaction of reform with the cost of social security payments to the
specification given by expression (2). Our results suggest contemporaneous positive effects
of pension reforms on employment. (See Table 11) However, it is unclear whether this
positive effect is associated with the reforms themselves or with other factors. Thus, we
find a positive and statistically significant coefficient on the Reform variable, suggesting an
increase in employment rates in the post-reform period. However, the interaction term with
social security reform is negative and statistically significant, indicating that social security
taxes have larger disemployment effects after the reforms. This higher disincentive could
be due to the mixed effects resulting from the transition to the new system. As workers
move from the pay-as-you-go to the capitalization system, contributions to social security
finance individual accounts and, in many instances, the pensions of those left in the old
system. The contribution to fund the old system is likely to be viewed as a pure tax on
employment.

Robustness

The results reported in this section are based on larger samples and depart
substantially from those reported in Heckman and Pagés (2000).31 Unfortunately, a lack of
robustness to changes in specification or sample size is all too common in the cross-section
time-series literature that uses aggregate data. However, fragility is not the entire story.
Table 10 to be non-positive.
We are greatly indebted to David Bravo and Sergio Urzua, who made us aware that adding Chile to the
original sample used in Heckman and Pagés (2000) substantially changes our earlier conclusions.

31

64

The estimated payroll tax effects are robust as are the negative effects of indemnities on
employment. Given this potential weakness, we investigate whether our new results are
robust to changes in estimation method, measures of regulations, specification and sample
size, as well as to the exclusion of outliers.
Given the limited variance of the job security variables, it is interesting to compare
our fixed effects coefficients with the results obtained from estimating our main equation
using random effects (RE) (see Table 12) We reject the hypothesis of consistency of the
RE estimator for employment in the joint sample at 10 percent. The most substantial
difference is the considerably smaller magnitude of the coefficient on indemnities for the
OECD sample in the RE model. While in the OECD sample we still find a negative effect
of indemnities on employment and a positive effect on unemployment, these effects are no
longer statistically significant at conventional levels. The coefficient on advance notice is
now positive and statistically significant in the employment regressions and negative and
statistically significant in the unemployment regressions. The size and significance of the
social security contribution coefficients are robust to the change in method of estimation.
In unreported results available upon request, we also examine whether our results
are robust to alternative measurements of the cost of regulations that do not require
assumptions about discount or layoff rates. Following Lazear (1990), we measure job
security regulations as the mandatory amount (in multiples of monthly wages) that should
be paid to a worker who is dismissed after 10 years of tenure. A major disadvantage of this
measure is that it only reflects job security in one point of the job security-tenure schedule.
In our samples both his measure and our measure yield similar results.
We also assess the sensitivity of our results to the inclusion or exclusion of
additional control variables such as year effects, region-specific year effects, time trends
65

and region-specific time trends. The results on the effect of social security contributions on
employment and unemployment are very robust to changes in specification. Other results
are less robust. For instance, in a specification with region-specific year fixed-effects the
coefficient on seniority pay is still positive but it is no longer statistically significant at
conventional levels. Adding or deleting either g or GDP levels does not change our
conclusions.
Important differences also arise when we assess the sensitivity of our baseline
results to changes in sample size. In particular, we find that both the coefficients on
advance notice provisions and indemnities for dismissal are sensitive to the
inclusion/exclusion of some countries in the sample while the coefficients on social
security payments and seniority pay do not change. For instance, excluding Germany from
the sample greatly increases the coefficient on advance notice in the baseline employment
specification. Similarly, excluding Brazil or Peru changes the coefficient on indemnities
for dismissal in the employment regressions.
Finally, we check whether our results are robust to the exclusion of outliers, which
are defined as those observations for which the difference in the regression coefficient
when the i-th observation is included and when it is not, scaling the difference by the
estimated standard error of the coefficient, is larger than 2 n (Belsley, et al., 1980). Our
results confirm that there are no outliers that alter the coefficients for social security
contributions. There are a few outliers that modify the coefficients on job security
provisions (advance notice, indemnities and seniority pay). However, they do not
qualitatively alter our baseline results.
Taken as a whole, our results suggest that the negative (and statistically
significant) association between social security contributions and employment, as well as a
66

positive association between social security contributions and unemployment is very
robust to changes in estimation method, specification, regional sample, sample size and
outliers. The coefficients on our job security measures are much less robust. Thus, while
the FE estimates provide some evidence that in some OECD countries reducing
indemnities results in higher employment rates, the evidence across countries provided by
our RE estimates is less conclusive. One component of job security, seniority pay, is
positively correlated with employment.

Endogeneity

It is often argued that labor reforms are put in place when labor market
performance is poor. As demonstrated in the Figure 3 plots, this is sometimes true for
reforms in the LAC region. If a decline in employment rates (and an increase in
unemployment rates) prompts a reduction in labor market regulations, then least squares
estimates will be upward biased, potentially underestimating a negative relationship
between job security or social security taxes and employment. Our baseline specification
partly controls for the possibility of such reverse causality because the propensity for
reform is partly captured by changes in the GDP or demographic conditions. Another
source of concern is the timing of reforms. If labor reforms that liberalize the labor market
are undertaken at particularly bad times, an estimated negative relationship between
employment and regulations could just be the consequence of mean reversion.
In the results available on request, we address these issues in various ways. First,
we attempt to control for differences in the propensity to reform at different points in time
by including current and past GDP rates up to five lags. Since presumably, bad
employment outcomes are strongly associated with poor GDP outcomes, the inclusion of
67

this set of variables will control for the propensity to reform. Secondly, we control for the
timing of reforms by interacting changes in regulatory variables with a variable that
measures the distance (in years) between the current year and the last business cycle
trough. Finally, we directly address the problem of reverse causality by using the
dependency ratio, defined as the ratio of population 65 and older to the population in
working age (15 to 64), as an instrument for social security contributions.32 Our results
suggest that controlling for either the propensity or the timing of reforms does not alter the
conclusions of our analysis.33
Regarding our instrumental variable estimates, Table 13 indicates that in the three
samples considered, social security contributions increase with the dependency ratio. In
addition, demographic changes explain a substantial share of the within-country time
variation in social security contributions. The average dependency ratio in our sample is
0.17, while in OECD and LA are 0.19 and 0.08 respectively. The coefficients in Table 13
suggest that if the dependency ratio increases in one percentage point, expected discounted
social security contributions increase in 1.12 months for the total sample, 1.02 for the
OECD and 2.83 for Latin America. Moreover, our instrumental variable estimates (Table
14) suggest that there is a causal relation between changes in social security contributions
and changes in employment and unemployment rates at least in the overall and OECD
sample. In these two samples, IV estimates produce larger coefficients than the FE
regressions. Instead, the Latin America IV estimates yield coefficients with opposite signs
to the ones obtained with the FE regressions. However, such coefficients are not
32

The source of this data is the UN Population Statistics, 1998.
Another way to control for endogeneity is to use the information in the Figure 3 sequence to break out
episodes of reform that were not preceded by major downturns (or upturns) of the economy from other
episodes and analyze the latter. The problem with this approach in our sample is that it uses up too many
scarce degrees of freedom.

33

68

statistically significant. The small number of observations available for Latin America is
not sufficient to obtain precise IV estimates in this region.
Summary

Our analysis of pooled time-series cross-sections of countries underscores why the
studies examining the impact of regulations in OECD countries based on such data have
produced such ambiguous results. Lack of variation in the relevant policy measures and
poor measures of regulation have hampered empirical analyses of the effect of regulations
on labor market outcomes. To surmount these problems we have expanded the number of
countries comprising the LAC region, included more within-country variation, and
improved the measures of regulation. Contrary to previously reported estimates, we have
found little evidence of a systematic relationship between advance notice and indemnities
for dismissal on employment or unemployment in our improved and expanded sample for
Latin America. Estimates vary across countries with some countries showing gains in
employment after reducing job security, and others showing little benefit to the
employment rate or even employment reductions after such reforms, but no clear pattern
emerges from the aggregates.
However, we find robust evidence that social security contributions are not fully
shifted to workers. Payroll taxation tends to reduce employment and increase
unemployment rates across samples and specifications. At the aggregate level, our analyses
of reforms intended to increase the link between contributions and payments show mixed
results.

6. Conclusions and Directions for Future Research

69

Summarizing an entire school of thought, Freeman (2000) writes that “the
institutional organization of the labor market has identifiable large effects on distribution,
but modest hard-to-uncover effects on efficiency.” This view is shared by many
economists. However, the microevidence summarized in this volume suggests that
mandated benefits and job security regulations have a substantial allocative impact both in
Latin America and in OECD countries.
What policy lessons can be drawn from the essays in this volume? The evidence
assembled in this volume suggests that labor market regulations are an inequalityincreasing mechanism, because some workers benefit while many others are hurt. The
benefits of programs funded with mandatory payroll contributions should be weighed
against their costs in terms of employment. Funding such programs with general revenues
does not necessarily reduce employment costs (see Nickell, 1997), but strengthening the
link between payments and benefits contributes to shifting the cost of such programs to
workers, at least in the long run. Regulation acts unevenly across different groups in
society. Young, uneducated, and rural workers are much less likely to enjoy coverage than
older, skilled and urban workers.
While the aggregate evidence on the effects of job security on the level of
employment is inconclusive, the microstudies assembled here find a large and negative
effect of job security on employment. Individual country studies based on microdata
reduce the fragility and lack of robustness problems that pervade the cross-section of
countries time-series literature.

Lessons For Future Research

70

While these essays demonstrate that firms and workers respond to incentives in
predictable ways, and that regulation reduces employment and labor market turnover, more
precise quantitative estimates would be desirable. We conclude with a discussion of the
main areas in which future research could improve upon the current estimates.
(a) Incidence of Payroll Taxes and General Equilibrium

Several essays in this volume take significant steps towards addressing whether
workers accept lower wages if they receive mandated benefits. These estimates of
incidence can be improved. Comparing the wages of covered and uncovered sectors to see
if covered workers get lower wages, as in Cardenas and Bernal (this volume) and several
other essays in this volume, fails to control for self-selection into these sectors which
several studies in this volume have documented to be important. The method fails to adjust
for general equilibrium effects arising from induced entry and exit and the willingness of
workers to purchase benefits by accepting reduced wages.
The most comprehensive approach to the incidence question is the analysis of Marrufo
(2001), which finds that controlling for self-selection and accounting for general
equilibrium effects substantially affects estimates of tax incidence and difference-indifference estimates understate the true extent of wage adjustment. As argued by Kugler,
the simple difference-in-differences method is downward biased so that the estimates
reported in this volume are conservative.
(b) Dynamic Labor Demand

The empirical models of labor demand estimated by the authors in this volume are
traditional static models and dynamic labor demand models based on the assumption of
symmetric adjustment costs. They abstract from the asymmetries in labor demand that are
produced by severance and indemnity systems. Appendix B sketches out the main ideas in
71

the asymmetric demand literature using a two-period model. Alonso-Borrego and
Aguirregabiria (1999) develops the econometrics needed to estimate such models but the
methods remain to be implemented on LAC data. Given that all of the labor demand
models estimated in this book assume symmetric adjustment costs, it would be productive
to rework these studies using more advanced methods. As previously noted, the
inconclusive evidence on the effect of job security on firm adjustment dynamics may be an
artifact of the symmetry assumption.
In this class of models, it would also be useful to account for general equilibrium
effects of entry and exit of firms. Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993) demonstrate that in
principle accounting for general equilibrium effects can reverse the predictions of partial
equilibrium models.
(c) Accounting for Nonstationarity

All of the duration models used to determine the impacts of regulation on labor
market turnover assume stationary environments. Any student of Latin America knows
how poor that assumption is. The high volatility of economic outcomes in Latin America
suggests that this assumption does not adequately characterize the region. Accounting for
nonstationarity more systematically would improve econometric estimates of behavioral
parameters for the region.
(d) Accounting for The Effects of Regulation on Output

All the labor demand studies estimate output-constant wage elasticities. Abstracting
from the potentially important econometric problem of endogeneity of output, outputconstant demand functions are more robust because they allow the analyst to abstract from
product market adjustments to relative price changes. At the firm level, the output-constant
effects of regulation understate the total effect of regulation if regulation raises the
72

marginal cost of labor to the firm and costs cannot be shifted onto wages or other factor
costs. The estimates reported here underestimate the full disemployment effects of
deregulation in sectors adversely impacted. At the level of the national economy, the
effects are more ambiguous because the burden of regulation may impact industries
differently although it will still have efficiency losses by distorting sectoral allocations. In
a closed economy, relative output prices adjust and will lead to an expansion of output in
those sectors least impacted. So in those sectors, greater regulation may lead to greater
employment. In an open economy facing world prices, when regulations are not
accommodated by a downward adjustment of factor prices, regulation reduces output and
accentuates reductions in employment.
A complete analysis of the impact of regulation would require accounting for both
product market and factor market adjustments. The presumption is that a full account
would produce disemployment effect of regulation on the overall economy but not
necessarily in each sector.
Notice, however, that even if wages adjust fully and there are no adverse effects of
regulation on labor demand, regulation may still have substantial effects on the welfare of
workers. If a job security mandate is offset by lower wages, worker welfare is not
necessarily improved, at least not for all workers. It may be higher or lower depending on
how much the mandate differs from what workers and firms would mutually agree upon in
an unregulated environment.
(e) Accounting for serial correlation

While most of the studies summarized in this volume measure the cost of
regulations by elaborating direct monetary measures of their cost to employers, several
authors use the length of the lag (the speed of adjustment) as an alternative measure of the
73

cost of regulation facing the firm. The intuition supporting this is based on the original
work of Holt, Modisliani, Muth, and Simon (1960), as previously described in section 4.2.
In the simple model of equations (2) and (3), if we introduce an error term, and an
implicit theory of optimal employment as a function of the real wage Wt, we obtain
(4)
nt* = a + bWt + ε t ,
If εt is serially correlated, we obtain
(5)

b ≤ 0.

ε t = ρε t −1 + ut

where ut has zero mean and is independently and identically distributed and ρ is the first
order serial correlation. Analysts obtain a high estimated value of λ (the coefficient on
lagged labor) from a least squares estimation that does not correct for serial correlation
since
(6)

nt =(1−λ)(a+bWt ) +λnt−1 +(1−λ)εt .

If 1<λ<1, ρ>0, OLS estimates of λ are upward biased. An asymptotically unbiased
estimator that accounts for this serial correlation is based on
(7)

nt = (1− λ )(1− ρ )a + (1− λ )b(Wt − ρWt −1 ) + (λ + ρ )nt −1 − λρ nt −2 + (1− λ )ut

which is derived from (6) by lagging it one period, solving for (1-λ)εt-1, writing

εt=ρεt-1+ut in (6) and substituting for εt-1. This bias is especially important in making cross
country comparisons where serial correlation coefficients may differ greatly across
economies. For studies of regulations in a single country, this bias will not affect estimates
of the relative cost of different reforms if the serial correlation pattern is invariant across
reforms. However, no meaning can be attached to the absolute value of the lag coefficient.
This conventional model assumes symmetric hiring and firing costs. Yet even in
the original Holt et al study, this assumption was only introduced as a mathematically
simplifying one that was contrary to their evidence. A more accurate description of the
74

data from Latin America and other regions is that there are substantial asymmetric
adjustment costs.
A measurement model accounting for asymmetric adjustment costs requires a new
econometric approach. In work available on request, we consider a model of asymmetric
hiring and firing costs based on Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993). The coefficient on
lagged labor is not necessarily monotonic in the cost of labor regulations. This may
account for the ambiguous evidence on the impact of regulation on the cost of adjustment
obtained from the conventional estimates.34

Taking Stock

Although there is clearly room for improvement, the body of evidence summarized
in this chapter, and reported in this book, demonstrates that regulation matters, that the
choice of labor market institutions matters and that further labor reforms offer the promise
of promoting both efficiency and equity across demographic groups in Latin America.
They demonstrate the power of microdata to answer important questions when the
evidence from cross-country macro-time series is ambiguous.
34

The intuition behind this result is simple. Different serial correlation-fixed cost pairs produce the same
lagged employment coefficient. This is also possible in the simple model (6). So it is possible that a regime
with higher labor transition costs is also one with lower serial correlation in shocks and so would display a
lower estimated lag and a faster adjustment rate. See Barbarino and Heckman (2003).

75

References

Abowd, J., F. Kramarz, T. Lemieux, and D. Margolis, 1997. “Minimum Wages and Youth
Employment in France and The United States,” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 6111, July.
Abowd, J., F. Kramarz and D. Margolis, 2000. “Minimum wages and Employment in
France and The United States,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 6996.
Abowd, J., F. Kramarz, D. Margolis, and T. Phillippon, 2000. “The Tail of Two Countries:
Minimum Wages and Employment in France and the United States,” Institute for
the Study of Labor (IZA) Discussion Papers No. 203.
Abraham, K. and S. Houseman, 1993. “Job Security and Work Force Adjustment: How
Different are U.S. and Japanese Practices?” In Christoph F. Buechtemann ed.
Employment Security and Labor Market Behavior – Interdisciplinary Approaches
and International Evidence, Ithaca, NY: ILR Press, 180-199
Acemoglu D. and J. Angrist, 2001. “Consequences of Employment Protection? The Case
of the Americans with Disabilities Act.” Journal of Political Economy 109(5): 91557
Addison, J.T. and J.L. Grosso, 1996. “Job Security Provisions and Employment: Revised
Estimates.” Industrial Relations. 35(4).
_____, 2000. “The Effect of Dismissals Protection on Employment: More on a Vexed
Theme,” Southern Economic Journal 67(1): 105-22.
Addison, J.T. and P. Portugal, 1992. “Advance Notice: From Voluntary Exchange to
Mandated Benefits.” Industrial Relations 31(1), 159-78.

76

Addison, J. and P. Teixeira, 2001. “The Economics of Employment Protection,” IZA
Discussion Paper 381, October.
Addison, J. T., P. Teixeira, and J.L. Grosso, 2000. “The Effect of Dismissals Protection on
Employment: More on a Vexed Theme.” Southern Economic Journal 67; 105-22.
Alonso-Borrego, C. and V. Aguirregabiria, 1999. “Labor Contracts and Flexibility:
Evidence from a Labor Market Reform in Spain.” Universidad Carlos III de
Madrid, Working Paper No. 99-27.
Autor, D. H., J. Donohue III, and S. Schwab, 2003. “The Costs of Wrongful Discharge
Laws.” NBER Working Paper w9425, Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Barbarino, A. and J. J. Heckman, 2003. “A Framework for the Study of the Effects of
Labor Market Policies with Asymmetric Costs and Entry and Exit,” Unpublished
working paper. University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Belsley, D. A., E. Kuh, and R. E Welsch, 1980. Regression diagnostics: identifying
influential data and sources of collinearity. New York: Wiley.
Bentolila, S. and G. Bertola, 1990. “Firing Costs and Labour Demand: How Bad is
Eurosclerosis?” Review of Economic Studies. 57. 381-402.
Bentolila, S. and G. Saint-Paul, 1994. “A Model of Labor Demand With Linear
Adjustment Costs.” Labour Economics. (1):303-26.
Bertola, G., 1990. “Job Security, Employment and Wages.” European Economic Review.
34:851-86.
Bertola, G., 1992. “Labor Turnover Costs and Average Labor Demand,” Journal of Labor
Economics 10(4): 389-411

77

Bertola, G., 2001. “Aggregate and Disaggregated Aspects of Employment and
Unemployment,” European University, April.
Blanchard, O., 1998. “Thinking about Unemployment” Mimeo.
_______ and J. Wolfers, 2000. “The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the Rise of
European Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence,” Economic Journal. 11, 1-33.
De Pelsmacker, P., 1984 “ Long-Run and Short-Run Demand for Factors of Production in
the Belgian Industry” In D. Vitry and B. Marechal, editors. Emploi-Chomage:
Modelisation et Analyses Quantitatives. Dijon: Librairie de la Université.
Deleire, T., 2000. “The Wage and Employment Effects of the Americans with Disabilities
Act,” Journal of Human Resources 35(4): 693-715.
Denny, M., M. Fuss, and L. Waverman, 1981. “Estimating the Effects of Diffusion of
Technological Innovations in Telecommunications: The Production Structure of
Bell Canada.” Canadian Journal of Economics. 14:24-43.
Di Tella, R., and R. MacCulloch, 1999. “The Consequences of Labor Market Flexibility:
Panel Evidence Based on Survey Data.” Unpublished paper, Harvard Business
School.
Dolado, J., F. Kramarz, S. Machin, A. Manning, D. Margolis, and C. Teulings, 1996. "The
Economic Impact of Minimum Wages in Europe" Economic Policy October 23
1996. pp 319-372.
Downes, A. et al., 2000. “Labor Market Regulation and Employment in the Caribbean.”
Research Network Working Paper R-388. Washington, D.C., United States: InterAmerican Development Bank.
Edwards, S. and A. Cox-Edwards, 1999. “Social Security Reform and Labor Markets: The
Case of Chile.” Los Angeles, Long Beach, and Cambridge, United States:
78

University of California at Los Angeles, National Bureau of Economic Research,
and California State University. Mimeographed document.
Edwards, S. and A. Cox-Edwards, 2000. “Social Security Reform and Labor markets: The
Case of Chile,” Economic Development and Cultural Change. 50(3): 465-489.
Elmeskov, J, J.P. Martin and S. Scarpetta, 1998. “ Key lessons from Labor Market
Reforms: Evidence from OECD Countries’ Experience.” Swedish Economic Policy
Review. 5(2): 207-252.
Fajnzylber, P. and W.F. Maloney, 2000. “Labor Demand and Trade Reform in Latin
America.” Belo Horizonte, Brazil, and Washington, D.C., United States:
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, World Bank. Mimeographed document.
Field, B. and C. Grebenstein, 1980. “Capital Energy Substitution in U.S. Manufacturing.”
Review of Economics and Statistics. 70:654-59.
Freeman, R.B., 2000. “Single Peaked vs. Diversified Capitalism: The Relation Between
Economic Institutions and Outcomes,” NBER Working Paper 7556. Cambridge,
United States: National Bureau of Economic Research.
_______, 2001. “Institutional Differences and Economic Performance Among OECD
Countries.” Papers presented at the Bank of Portugal Conference Labor Market
Institutions and Economic Outcomes. Cascais, Portugal.
Garibaldi, P. and Paulo Mauro, 1999. “Deconstructing Job Creation.” International
Monetary Fund Working Paper WP/99/109.
Grubb, D. and W. Wells, 1993. “Employment Regulation and Patterns of Work in EC
Countries.” OECD Economic Studies No. 21. Winter.
Gruber, J., 1994. “The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits”. American Economic
Review 84(3), 622-41
79

Gruber, J., 1997. “The Incidence of Payroll Taxation: Evidence from Chile.” Journal of
Labor Economics 15(3) (Part 2 July), S72-101.
Hamermesh, D. S., 1993. Labor Demand. Princeton, N.J. United States: Princeton
University Press.
Heckman, J., 2003. “Flexibility, Job Creation and Economic Performance,” in Knowledge,
information, and expectations in modern macroeconomics : in honor of Edmund S.
Phelps. P. Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz and M. Woodford, eds. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Heckman, J. and C. Pagés, 2000. “The Cost of Job Security Regulation: Evidence from
Latin American Labor Markets.” Economia: the Journal of the Latin American and
Caribbean Economic Association. 1(1), 109-154.
Holt, C.C., F. Modigliani, R. Muth and H. Simon, 1960. Planning Production, Inventories,
and Work Force. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Hopenhayn, H. and R. Rogerson, 1993. “Job Turnover and Policy Evaluation: A General
Equilibrium Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy. 101(5), 915-38.
Inter American Development Bank (IADB), 1996. Economic and Social Progress Report.
Washington DC. November.
V Inter American Development Bank (IADB), 1998-1999. Economic and Social Progress
Report. Washington DC. November.
Inter American Development Bank (IADB), 2003. Economic and Social Progress Report.
Washington DC. October.
International Labour Organization (ILO), 1997-1998. World Labour Report. Geneva
Kaestner, R., 1996. “The Effect of Government-Mandated Benefits on Youth
Employment,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 50(1): 122-42.
80

Krusell P., and A. Smith, Jr., 1997. “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity, Portfolio Choice
and Equilibrium Asset Returns.” Macroeconomic Dynamics 1, 387--422.
Kugler A., J. F. Jimeno and V. Hernanz, 2002 “Employment Consequences of Restrictive
Permanent Contracts: Evidence from Spanish Labor Market Reforms” IZA
Discussion Paper Series. No 657 Germany.
Lazear, E., 1990. “Job Security Provisions and Employment.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 105(3), 699-726
Lindauer, D., 1999. Labor Market Reforms and the Poor. Unpublished paper available at
http://www.worldbank.org/poverty/wdrpoverty/background/lindauer.pdf
Lora, E. and C. Pagés, 2000. “Hacia un envejecimiento responsable: Las reformas de los
sistemsas pensionales América Latina.” Cuadernos Económicos de I.C.E. No 65.
283-324.
MacIsaac, D. and M. Rama, 1997. “Determinants of Hourly Earnings in Ecuador: The
Role of Labor Market Regulations.” Journal of Labor Economics. 15(3-Part Two).
Machin, S. and M. Stewart, 1996. “Trade Unions and Financial Performance,” Oxford
Economic Papers 48, 213-241
Marquéz, G., 1998. “Protección al empleo y funcionamiento del mercado de trabajo: una
aproximación comparativ.¨ Mimeo Inter-American Development Bank.
Marquéz, G. and C. Pagés, 1998. “Ties That Bind: Employment Protection and Labor
Market Outcomes in Latin America.” Research Network Working Paper 373.
Washington, D.C. United States: Inter-American Development Bank.
Marrufo, G., 2001. “The Incidence of Social Security Regulation: Evidence from the
Reform in Mexico” Ph.D Dissertation. University of Chicago.

81

Nickell, S., 1997. “Unemployment and Labor Market Rigidities: Europe versus North
America.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 11(3): 55-74.
________ and R. Layard, 1999. “Labor Market Institutions and Economic Performance,”
in Handbook of labor economics. Volume 3C, O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds.
New York: North-Holland. 3029-84.
Nicoletti, G. and S. Scarpetta, 2001 "Interactions between Product and Labor Market
Regulations: Do they affect Unemployment? Evidence from OECD Countries"
Paper presented at the Bank of Portugal Conference Labor Institutions and
Economic Outcomes. Cascais, Portugal (June 3, 2001).
Nicoletti, G. and S. Scarpetta, 2003. “Regulation, Productivity and Growth: OECD
Evidence,” Economic Policy No. 36 (April): 9-51, 54-69
Nicoletti, G., S. Scarpetta, and O. Boylaud, 1999. “Summary Indicators of Product Market
Regulation with an Extension to Employment Protection Legislation.” Working
Paper No. 226. Paris: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.

Nohlen D. Enciclopedia Electoral Latinoamericana y del Caribe. Instituto InterAmericano
de Derechos Humanos, 1993.
O’Connell, L., 1999. “Collective Bargaining Systems in Six Latin American countries:
Degrees of Autonomy and Decentralization.” Research Network Working Paper R399. Washington, D.C., United States: Inter-American Development Bank.
OECD, 1993. Employment Outlook. Paris, France.
OECD, 1994. The OECD Jobs Study: Facts, Analysis, Strategies, Paris: Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development.

82

OECD, 1999. “Employment Protection and Labour Market Performance.” OECD
Economic Outlook. Chapter 2. Paris : Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development. 49-132.
Pagés, C. and C. Montenegro, 1999. “Job Security and the Age-Composition of
Employment: Evidence from Chile.” Working Paper 398. Washington, D.C.,
United States: Inter-American Development Bank.
Risager, O and J. R. Sorensen 1997, “On the Effects of Firing Costs When Investment is
Endogeneous: An Extension of a Model by Bertola”. European Economic Review
41(7): 1343-53
Roberts, M.J. and E. Skoufias, 1997.”The Long-Run Demand for Skilled and Unskilled
Labor in Colombian Manufacturing Plants.” Review of Economics and Statistics
79(2), 330-34.
Scarpetta, S., 1996. “Assessing the Role of Labour Market Policies and Institutional
Settings on Unemployment: A Cross-Country Study.” OECD Economic Studies
No. 26.
United States Social Security Administration, Division of Research and Statistics, 19831999 Social Security Programs Throughout the World. Washington, D.C. U.S.
Dept. of Health and Human Services, Social Security Administration, Office of
Research and Statistics.
Waud, R., 1968. “Man-Hour Behavior in U.S. Manufacturing: A Neoclassical
Interpretation.” Journal of Political Economy. 76:407-27.
World Bank, 2000. World Development Indicators CD-ROM. Washington, D.C.: The
World Bank.

83

Wylie, P., 1990. “Scale-biased Technological Development in Canada’s Industrialization,
1900-1929.” Review of Economics and Statistics. 72:219-27.

84

Appendix A: Definitions and sources of variables used in section 5

For the empirical analysis described in section 5, we build an unbalanced panel data
covering the period 1983-1999. Table A.3 describes the variables and their sources.
Table A.4 describes the countries and the years covered in our sample.
Computation of Labor Market Regulation Measures
(1) Advance Notice and Indemnities for dismissal:
OECD Countries
We gather information on advance notice and indemnities for dismissal for OECD
countries from the OECD Employment Outlook (1999), Table 2.A.2: Required notice and
severance pay for individual dismissal, pp. 94-96, which summarizes the “case of a
regular employee with tenure beyond any trial period, dismissed on personal grounds or
economic redundancy but without fault”. For countries for which is likely that individual
dismissals be considered “unjust” (measured as those countries to which the OECD gives
a score of 2 or more in a 1-3 scale in Table 2.A.4 pp.100), that, is countries where a
“transfer and or retraining to adapt to different work must be attempted prior to
dismissal” and where “worker capability cannot be ground for dismissal”, we consider
the information summarized in the “Compensation and related remedies following
unjustified dismissal”. From this table, and for this subset of countries, in at least one
country, unjust dismissals carry a much higher penalty. This is the case of Spain. We
make this contingency explicit by computing the expected severance pay assigning a ½
probability that a dismissal will be considered unfair and will carry the higher severance
pay that the law mandates in this event. We obtain information on labor reforms from
Table 2.1 pp. 53 (Employment Outlook, 1999), which describes the main changes in
legislation since the mid eighties. We also compare the information described in OECD
(1999) with the one presented in Grubb and Wells (1993). If they diverge, we take the
information in the latter to be valid up to 1993 while we take the information presented in
OECD (1999) to be valid from 1997 onwards. For the years in between the index has a
missing value. There are only four countries where there are some divergences between
the former and the latter source. This is the case of Denmark, Greece, Netherlands and
Sweden. Finally, in countries where the law prescribes different severance pay and
advance notice for blue and white-collar workers we compute the cost of dismissal as the
unweighted average for the two groups. For Hungary, Korea, New Zealand and Turkey
the job security measures only take non-missing values from 1990 onwards since we
could not find legal information for former years. To construct our index, we do not
consider upper monetary limits. In addition, we do not consider benefits that firms pay or
unions can obtain for their workers, which exceed the legal mandatory. Finally, we do not
consider what workers can get in courts if they sue their employers.
Individual country notes: In Australia, we consider the severance pay awarded to
workers dismissed for redundancy. For Canada, we take the maximum of the severance
pay and advance notice mandated by the federal and the local jurisdiction. In Greece, for
white-collar workers, advance notice can be waived if full severance pay is given. We
thereby assume that firms pay in full to avoid paying additional advance notice. In
Ireland, the awarded severance pay depends on the age of the worker. We assume that
workers receive 0.18 monthly wages per year worked, which corresponds to the
(unweighted) average of half a week per year worked (workers under the age of 41) and a
week per year worked (workers over the age of 41). In Norway, after 10 years of tenure,
85

notice period increases with age. To capture this effect, we have increased notice period
from 3 months to 4 and 5 in the case of individuals of more than 15 years of tenure. For
Spain, we adjust the severance pay obtained in case of just dismissal by the fact that
many dismissals are considered unjust. We therefore weigh mandatory dismissals in case
of just and unjust causes by a probability of ½ for each event.
Latin America
We consider the legal information summarized in Tables A.1 and A.2 obtained from the
Ministries of Labor of individual countries.
Notes: In Brazil, employers are required to deposit 8 percent of a workers’ wage
in individual workers’ accounts, which accrue interest rates. In case of a firm initiated
dismissal, firms are required to pay a worker severance pay that is a given fraction of
what a worker owns in his individual account. The 1988 constitutional reform increased
this share from .1 to .4 of the total amount in the fund. To compute the fraction of what is
accrued in the individual fund, we assume that the interest rate equals the discount rate.
Therefore, the indemnity is computed as:
T

Indemnities = ∑ δ i −1(1 − δ ) ( i

i =1

)

where i denotes tenure at the firm, δ is the per period probability of survival (equal to
0.88) and T denotes the maximum tenure of a worker in a firm, which is assumed to be
equal to twenty. In Honduras, Jamaica, Nicaragua and Dominican Republic, a constant
advance notice equal to one month is assumed. In Peru, there were reforms in job security
in 1991, 1995 and 1996. Tables A.1 and A. 2 only report the schedule as in 1990 and in
1999. See Saavedra and Torero (this volume) for a more detailed description of the
changes in the Peruvian labor code throughout the nineties.
(2) Seniority Pay:
Seniority payments only exist in Latin America. There are two kinds. In Brazil,
Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru, workers deposit 1/12 of their monthly wages in individual
accounts. In this case, seniority pay is computed as:
T

Senp= ∑ β i

i =0

where T = 20. This reflects the discounted value of a stream of payments equivalent to
one month of pay per year. For Colombia, Kugler (this volume) reports that before the
1990 labor reform, workers were entitled to one month of salary per year of work as a
seniority fund upon separation independently of the cause of separation. However, partial
withdrawals were allowed and deducted in nominal terms from the final payment,
implying a “double retroactivity” with an estimated cost of 35 percent of the total
payments of seniority pay in the manufacturing sector. We therefore apply a surcharge of
35 percent to the legislated scheduled for seniority pay during the period before 1990.
Instead, in Venezuela and Panama, labor codes mandate a mandatory seniority
payment that is computed as multiples of the last wage per year of work. In those cases,
seniority pay is computed as:

86

T

Senp = ∑ δ i −1(1 − δ ) (α j * i ) ,

i =1

where αj denotes multiples of the last wage and i denotes tenure at the firm. In
Venezuela, the legal codes specified a seniority pay of one monthly wage per year of
work (αj =1). After the 1997, seniority pay was increased to two monthly wages per year
of work (αj =2). Notice that this formula assumes that the probability of worker turnover
is identical to the probability of job turnover. Since in general, worker turnover rates tend
to be higher than job turnover rates, we also experimented with a probability of worker
turnover equal to two times and three times the probability of job turnover. The cost of
seniority pay declines with the rate of turnover (since the probability of surviving in the
firm and obtaining larger amounts declines). Our estimated results are robust to different
assumptions in the worker turnover rate.
(3) Social Security Regulations:
Information provided by Social Security Programs Throughout the World (biannually
1983- 1999, US Social Security Administration. Office of Research, Evaluation and
Statistics). Social security contributions include contributions by employers and
employees to old age, disability and death; sickness and maternity; work injury;
unemployment insurance and Family allowances programs. Since this information is only
available biannually, we extend the data to yearly frequency in two alternative ways: by
interpolating or by inputting each missing data values with the value in the former year.
The results of our empirical analysis do not vary with the method used. The results also
do not vary when we consider only the original biannual data.
For Argentina, we obtained direct information from the country. Rates apply to
Buenos Aires. In all countries, we consider the rates applied to wage earners. We do not
include contributions made by government to fund social security programs. In cases
where contributions differ across individuals, states, or industry risk, only one rate is
chosen, and the choice varies somewhat across countries. However, the same criterion is
used within countries across time. This somewhat reduces cross-country comparability
but preserves across time comparability within countries.
(4) Social Security Reform:
The variable Reform takes a value of 1 after a country has implemented a social security
reform that totally or partially replaces a pay as you go system by an individually
capitalization system. Based on social security reforms information summarized in Lora
and Pages (2000) this variable takes the value of 1 in Chile on and after 1981; in
Colombia on and after 1994; in Argentina on and after 1994; in Uruguay on and after
1996; in Mexico and Bolivia on and after 1997; in El Salvador on and after 1998.

87

Table A.1: Legislation Concerning Termination of Indefinite Contracts in 1987 and 1999.
x=Monthly Wages, N=Years of Tenure, r =Interest Rate of Fund
Date of
Reform

Advance notice

Seniority premium

Compensation if worker quits?

Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados

None
None
None

Belize

None

1987
1-2 months
1/2-1 month
Negotiable,
in practice
1month
1/2 – 1 month

1999
No changes
No changes
No changes

1987
0
0
0

1999
0
0
0

1987
0
0
0

1999
0
0
0

No changes

0

0

1/6x*N
if N>10

No changes

Bolivia

None

3 months

No changes

0

0

1 x*N.
if N>=5

No changes

Brazil

1988

1 month

No changes

Chile

1991

1 month

FUND
(8% wage
goes to
FUND, plus
interest rate)
No changes
0

No
Changes

0

0

0

No

x*N

FUND
(8%
wage+r)

x*N

1/2 x*N (*)
if N>=7
FUND
(8% wage+ r)

Colombia

1990

15 days

No changes

Costa Rica
Dominican
Republic
Ecuador

None
1992

0
0

0
0

0
0

1991

1 month

No changes

FUND
(8% wage
+ r)

El
Salvador

1994

0-7 days

No changes

0

0

0

0

Guatemala

None

0

No changes

0

0

0

0

1 month
No changes
1/4 -1 month No changes

No
FUND
Changes (8% wage+ r)

0
0
No changes

(*) workers can choose between getting an unconditional payment after 7 years in the firm, or getting a higher indemnity in
case of dismissal. Most workers opt for the latter.
FUND: A certain fraction of a worker’s wage is deposited in an individual account every month. The principal plus the interest
can be withdrawn by the worker upon dismissal and in some cases, upon voluntary separation.

88

Table A.1: Legislation Concerning Termination of Indefinite Contracts in 1987 and 1999.
x=Monthly Wages, N=Years of Tenure, r =Interest Rate of Fund . (Continuation)
Date of
reform

Advance notice

Guyana

1997

Honduras
Jamaica

None
None

1987
1999
1/2 month
1 month
if N>=1
1day-2 months No changes
2-12 weeks No changes

Mexico
Nicaragua

None
1996

0 - 1 month No changes
1- 2 months
0

Panama

1995

Paraguay

None

1 Month

No changes

Seniority premium
1987

1999

0

0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

1/4x*N
if N>=10

1/4x *N

1/4x*N
if N>=10

0
x*N if N=1-3
3x*N +
+ 2/3x*N if N>3
¼*x*N

0

0

0

0

Suriname

None

1/4-6 months

0

Trinidad
and
Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

None

2 months

0
x*N
x*N

None
1997

1987

0

1-2 months No changes
No changes

1999

0

1996, 1995,
1991

Peru

Compensation if worker quits?

FUND
No changes
FUND
(8% wage+r)
(8% wage+r)

0
No changes
1/4 –3 months No changes

0
No changes

0

0

0

0

0

No changes
2x*N

0
x*N

0
2x*N

FUND: A certain fraction of a worker’s wage is deposit in an individual account every month. The principal plus the interest can
be withdrawn by the worker upon dismissal and in some cases, upon voluntary separation.
Source: Ministries of Labor in Latin America and the Caribbean

89

Table A.2: Legislation Concerning Indemnities for Dismissal in 1987 and 1999.
x=Monthly Wages, N=Years of Tenure, r =Interest Rate of Fund
Date of
reform

Compensation for dismissal due to
economic reasons
1987
2/3x*N, Min 2 months
Negotiable
0.41x*N
if N>=2

1999
No changes
No changes
No changes

No changes

0.4*FUND
No changes

Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados

None
None
None

Belize

None

Bolivia

None

1/4x*N
If N>5
1 x*N.

Brazil
Chile

1988
1991

0.1*FUND
1 x*N.

Colombia

1990

45 days+
x*N*0.5 if N<5

Costa Rica
Dominican
Republic
Ecuador

El Salvador

Guatemala

None

2 days-4months if
bankruptcy. X*N
otherwise

Changes
in max. x
No changes

90

Upper limit to
compensation for
dismissal?
1987
1999
Max. lim. in x No changes
No
No changes
3.75 monthly
salaries

Max 42 weeks No changes

No changes

45 days+
x*N*0.5 if
N<5
x*N*0.66 if
N≥5 & x*N*0.66 if
N≥5 & N<10
N<10
x*N*1.33
if
x*N if N≥10
N≥10
None
No changes
x*N
1992
1/2*x*N
.67x*N if
N=1-4
.74x*N if
N>=5,
1991
2 if N <=2
3 if N <=3
4 if N = 2 - 5
x* N if N>3
6 if N = 5 – 20
12 if N>20
1994
x*N
x*N

0 if bankruptcy

To whom do the
reforms apply?

No

No changes

All Workers
All workers

No
5 monthly
salaries

No changes
11 monthly
salaries

All workers

No

No changes

New employees

8 monthly sal. No changes
No
No changes

All workers

12 monthly
salaries.

25 monthly
salaries

All workers

Max. base
wage=
4 min. wages

No changes

No

No changes

Table A.2: Legislation Concerning Indemnities for Dismissal in case of Termination of Indefinite Contracts in
1987 and 1999.
x=Monthly Wages, N=Years of Tenure, r =Interest Rate of Fund (Continuation)
Date of
reform

Honduras

Compensation dismissal due to economic
reasons
1987
1999
1997 Negotiable In practice,
1/4x*N
2 1/2 weeks per N
if N=1-5
1/2x*N
if N=5-10
None
No changes
x*N

Jamaica

None

Mexico

None

Nicaragua

1996

Panama

1995

Guyana

None
Paraguay
1996, 1995,
Peru
1991
Suriname
Trinidad

None
None

Uruguay
Venezuela

1/3x*N if x=2-5
1/2X*N if x>5

To whom do the
reforms apply?

All workers

No changes

No changes
2/3 x*N
(Min. 3*x)
Negotiated
x*N if N=1-3
In practice, 2 x*N 3x*N + 2/3x*N if N>3
x*N if N<=1
3/4x*N if N<10
3x if N=2
3x + 3/4x*N if
7.5x+1/4x*N if
N>2<10
N>=10
9x+ 1/4x*N if N>=10
1/2 x*N
1/2 x*N
3 x*N
1.5*x*N

New employees

All workers

Upper limit to compensation
for dismissal?
1987
1999

No

12 monthly
salaries

15 monthly
wages
No

No changes

No

No changes

No changes

No 5 monthly
salaries
No
No changes

No
12 monthly
salaries

No changes
No changes

Negotiated
No changes

No
No

No changes
No changes

None

Negotiated
1/3 x*N if N = 1- 4,
1/2 x*N if N>5
x*N

No changes

No changes

1997

2/3-2 x*N

x*N

6 monthly
salaries
No

All workers

5 monthly
salaries

FUND: A certain fraction of a workers’ wage is deposit in an individual account every month. The principal plus the interest can be
withdrawn by the worker upon dismissal and in some cases, upon voluntary separation.
Source: Ministries of labor in Latin America and the Caribbean.

91

Table A.3 Definitions and sources of variables used in Section 5
Variable

Source

Description

Employment/Population

OECD Statistics and
Household Surveys
Data from Latin
America

OECD: Employment to population Rate of people 15-64. National and/or European
Labour Force Surveys are the main source for the “Labour Force Statistics” database.
LATIN AMERICA: Computed directly from Household Survey Data for the countries,
years and sources listed in Table A.4. Employment to population rate for workers 15-65.
Are considered employed all workers that declared having a job in the week of reference.
It also includes unpaid workers. National data except in Argentina, Bolivia and Uruguay.

Unemployment

OECD Statistics and
Household Surveys
Data from Latin
America

OECD: Unemployment rate of people 15-64. National and/or European Labour Force
Surveys are the main source for the “Labor Market Statistics indicator” (LMSI) database,
OECD.
LATIN AMERICA: % of the labor force 15-65 that did not work in the period of
reference but are actively looking for a job. National data except in Argentina, Bolivia and
Uruguay.

GDP growth

World Bank
Development Indicators

Annual percentage growth rate of GDP at market prices based on constant local currency.
Aggregates are based on constant 1995 U.S. dollars. GDP measures the total output of
goods and services for final use occurring within the domestic territory of a given country,
regardless of the allocation to domestic and foreign claims.

GDP per capita, PPP
(current international $)

World Bank
Development Indicators

Share of WAP 25-54

UN Population
Statistics 1998

GDP per capita based on purchasing power parity (PPP). GDP PPP is gross domestic
product converted to international dollars using purchasing power parity rates. An
international dollar has the same purchasing power over GDP as the U.S. dollar in the
United States. GDP measures the total output of goods and services for final use occurring
within the domestic territory of a given country, regardless of the allocation to domestic
and foreign claims.
Share of population 15 to 64 that are between 25 to 54 years old

Share of WAP 55-64

UN Population
Statistics 1998

Share of population 15 to 64 that are 55 or older

Advance Notice (AN)

Own Construction

Expected discounted cost of providing mandatory advance notice measured in multiples of
monthly wages

Indemnities for Dismissal
(ID)

Own Construction

Expected discounted cost of providing mandatory indemnities for dismissal measured in
multiples of monthly wages

Seniority Pay (SenP)

Own Construction

Expected discounted cost of providing Seniority Pay measured in multiples of monthly
wages

Social Security
Contributions (SSC)

Own Construction

Expected discounted cost of providing mandatory advance notice measured in multiples of
monthly wages

Social Security
Contributions (ss)

US Social Security
Administration

Per period cost of Social Security Contributions measures as a % of monthly wages

WAP denotes Working Age Population

92

Table A. 4 Countries and years included in baseline specification
(Table 8.A col. 1; N=417)
Country
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bolivia

Years included in baseline specification
1996, 1998, 1999
1983-1999
1983-1999
1983-1988
1986, 1990, 1993, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1999

N
3
17
17
16
7

1995, 1997, 1998
1983-1999
1983-1999
1992-1999
1983-1993
1989, 1992, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999

3
17
17
8
11
6

Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
México
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua

1983-1999
1983-1999
1983-1999
1991-1999
1984, 1989, 1992, 1994, 1996, 1998
1983-1992, 1997
1991-1999
1993,1998

17
17
17
9
6
11
9
2

Norway
Panama
Paraguay
Peru

1983-1999
1991, 1995, 1997,1998,1999
1995, 1998
1985, 1991, 1994, 1996, 1997, 1998

17
5
2
6

Poland
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United
Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela

1991-1998
1983-1999
1983-1999
1983-1999
1983-1999
1991-1999
1987-1999

8
17
17
17
17
9
13

1983-1999
1989, 1992, 1995, 1997, 1998
1983,1986, 1989, 1993, 1995, 1997-1999

17 LMSI, OECD
5 Encuesta Continua de Hogares
8 Encuesta de Hogares por Muestra

Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominican
Rep.
El Salvador
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Honduras

Source of Employment and Unemployment Data
Encuesta Permanente de Hogares
LMSI, OECD
LMSI, OECD
LMSI, OECD
Encuesta Continua de Hogares/ Condiciones de
Vida
1983, 1986, 1988, 1992, 1993, 1995-1999
10 Pesquisa Nacional de Amostra de Domicilios
1983-1999
17 LMSI, OECD
1987, 1990, 1992, 1994, 1996, 1998
6 Encuesta de Caracterización Socioecómica Nacional
1990, 1991, 1993, 1995, 1996-1999
8 Encuesta Nacional de Hogares
1983, 1985, 1987, 1989, 1991, 1993, 1995, 9 Encuesta Nacional de Hogares
1997, 1998
1996, 1998
2 Encuesta Nacional de Fuerza de Trabajo

Note: LMSI stands for Labour Market Statistics Indicators

93

Encuesta de Hogares de propósitos múltiples
LMSI, OECD
LMSI, OECD
LMSI, OECD
LMSI, OECD
Encuesta Permanente de Hogares de Propósitos
Multiples
LMSI, OECD
LMSI, OECD
LMSI, OECD
LMSI, OECD
Encuesta Nacional de Ingreso Gasto de los Hogares
LMSI, OECD
LMSI, OECD
Encuesta Nacional de Hogares sobre Medición de
Niveles de Vida
LMSI, OECD
Encuesta continua de Hogares
Encuesta de Hogares
Encuesta Nacional de Hogares sobre Medición de
Niveles de Vida.
LMSI, OECD
LMSI, OECD
LMSI, OECD
LMSI, OECD
LMSI, OECD
LMSI, OECD
LMSI, OECD

Appendix B1
Dynamic Demand SpeciÞcations

All of the papers on labor demand in this volume ignore the asymmetric nature of labor adjustment costs. In this appendix, we explore the consequences of this asymmetry on labor demand. The
main conclusion is that static and dynamic costs of labor have separate eﬀects on labor demand,
and in general no scalar index adequately summarizes these costs. In order to specify labor demand
functions in the presence of asymmetric hiring and Þring costs, it is convenient to use a two period
model. Such a model is implicit in Kugler (this volume). Let f(") denote output as a function of
labor input ". Let θ be a second period productivity shock. It is normalized against a Þrst period
productivity shock of “1.” We assume, for simplicity, that workers do not quit once they are hired.
Labor hired in period 1 is "1 . Labor employed in period 2 is "2 = "1 + ∆. ∆ is thus the change in
the stock of period 1 labor. Spot wage W is assumed to be common in both periods, and is assumed
to be exogenous to the Þrm. The cost of Þring a worker is C. Oﬀsetting this cost is the saving
in wages. The cost of hiring a worker is the wage. Asymmetry arises when C 6= 0. Assume no
discounting. Labor "1 is kept on in period 2 unless second period demand shocks (θ) are suﬃciently
low. The Þrm maximizes proÞts:

f("1 ) − W "1 + E[θf ("1 + ∆) − W ("1 + ∆) − CMax(−∆, 0)]

(B-1)

where the Þrst period labor productivity is normalized to 1.
We assume that the support of θ is (0, ∞) and that θ is an (absolutely continuous) random
variable. If θ ≥ 1 with probability 1, the Þrm in the second period wants ∆ ≥ 0. Labor productivity
has increased when θ is bigger than its Þrst period value, which implicitly is set at 1.
The presence of second period Þring costs inhibits hiring in the Þrst period. Thus, anticipating
1

We thank Jagadeesh Sivadasan for helpful comments on this draft.

the possibility of an adverse shock in the second period, the Þrm hires less labor than it would hire
in the Þrst period in the absence of Þring costs. If, for the sake of making an heuristic argument,
we characterize the Þrm as myopically maximizing period-by-period proÞts, the Þrm acts as if the
Þrst period productivity shock is less than 1 in making its Þrst period decisions and hires less labor
than it would if there were no second period Þring costs. Letting θ̄ be the value of the “as if” Þrst
µ ¶
W
0
0 −1
period productivity shock, if θ > θ̄ in period 2, then θf ("2 ) = W and "2 = [f ]
> "1 .
θ
If θ = θ̄, the Þrm stays put at "1 so that "1 = "2 and ∆ = 0. If productivity is below θ̄, the
Þrm may still keep its workforce at "1 = "2 because it is costly to Þre labor. We now determine the
lower bound on θ that gives rise to inaction. For a Þxed "1 , the two required conditions for inaction
(∆ = 0) are θf 0 ("1 ) < W , so it pays in gross terms to get rid of a unit of "1 , and θf 0 ("1 ) > W − C,
so it does not pay in net terms. Thus the inequalities determining the zone of inaction are (for a
given "1 )
W − C ≤ θf 0 ("1 ) ≤ W.
The lower boundary θ∗ is

W −C
= θ∗ . Holding "1 Þxed, raising C lowers the threshold θ∗ . Thus
f 0 ("1 )

the zone of inaction for a given ("1 , C) is θ∗ ≤ θ ≤ θ̄, where θ̄ = W/(f 0 ("1 )).
The Þrst order condition for "1 is f 0 ("1 )−W +E(θf 0 ("1 +∆)−W ) = 0, where ∆ = 0 if θ∗ ≤ θ ≤ θ̄,
∆ < 0 if θ < θ∗ and ∆ > 0 if θ > θ̄. From concavity, "1 is decreasing in cost C. Intuitively, Þrms
with high Þring costs hold back on hiring "1 . There is an option value of holding back on hiring "1
to avoid the cost of Þring unwanted second period labor. In order to characterize "1 , we must Þrst
characterize ∆("1 ).
Second Period (Conditional on "1 ) Demand Functions
Letting ∆− denote the reduction in the stock of labor, we obtain the Þrst order condition for
∆− as
θf 0 ("1 + ∆− ) = W − C
2

or
−

0 −1

"1 + ∆ = (f )

µ

W −C
θ

¶

.

Take "1 as given. Observe that if 0 < θ < θ∗ , ∆ < 0. DeÞne ϕ ≡ f 0−1 . Observe that from concavity
ϕ0 < 0. Then

µ

W −C
"1 + ∆ = ϕ
θ
−

¶

.

µ ¶
W
. If θ∗ < θ < θ̄,
Observe that at θ = θ , ∆− = 0. If θ > θ̄, θf 0 ("1 +∆+ ) = W and ("1 +∆+ ) = ϕ
θ
¶
µ
W −C
∗
0
−
−
the Þrm operates at "1 and ∆ = 0. If θ < θ , θf ("1 + ∆ ) = W − C and "1 + ∆ = ϕ
.
θ
∗

DeÞne g(θ) as the density of θ. Given "1 , expected demand in period 2 (averaged over the θ states)
is, for a given Þrm,

E("2 |W, C, "1 ) =

Z

θ∗

0

µ

W −C
ϕ
θ

¶

g(θ)dθ + "1

Z

θ̄

g(θ)dθ +

θ∗

Z

∞

θ̄

µ ¶
W
ϕ
g(θ)dθ.
θ

Thus
¶
µ
¶
µ
Z ∞µ ¶ µ ¶
Z θ∗
1 0 W −C
1 0 W
∂E("2 | W, C, "1 )
∂θ∗
W −C
∗
g(θ ) +
g(θ)dθ +
=
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
g(θ)dθ
∗
∗
∂W
∂W
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
0
θ̄
·
¶ µ ¶
¸ µ
¡ ¢
∂ θ̄
∂θ∗
W
∂ θ̄
∗
g θ̄ ,
g(θ̄) −
g(θ ) −
ϕ
+"1
∂W
∂W
∂W
θ̄
µ ∗¶ µ
¶
¶
µ
Z θ∗
∂E("2 | W, C, "1 )
1 0 W −C
∂θ
W −C
∗
=
ϕ
ϕ
g(θ)dθ
g(θ ) −
∂C
∂C
θ∗
θ
θ
0
·
¸
µ ¶
¡ ¢
∂ θ̄
∂ θ̄
∂θ∗ ∗
W
g θ̄ .
g(θ̄) −
g(θ ) −
ϕ
+"1
∂C
∂C
∂C
θ̄
µ
¶
µ ¶
W −C
W
Using the demand function, ϕ
= "1
= "1 and ϕ
∗
θ
θ̄
∂E("2 | W, C, "1 )
=
∂W

Z

0

θ∗

¶
µ
µ ¶
Z ∞
1 0 W −C
1 0 W
ϕ
g(θ)dθ +
ϕ
g(θ)dθ < 0
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ̄

and
∂E("2 | W, C, "1 )
=−
∂C

Z

0

3

θ∗

µ ¶
1 0 W
ϕ
g(θ)dθ > 0.
θ
θ

The positivity of this Þnal expression arises from the fact that as C increases, the Þrm is more risk
averse (θ∗ falls) so that it is more likely that it hires labor in the second period.
If θ is iid across Þrms in period 2, and iid across time, then the mean conditional (on "1 ) labor
demand function is not a direct function of W + Pr(0 < θ < θ∗ )C which, in this simple framework,
is the measure of labor cost used in Heckman and Pagés (2000) and in the empirical analysis of
Section 5. In fact, the model predicts that

∂E("2 | W, C, "1 ) ∂E("2 | W, C, "1 )
+
<0
∂W
∂C

so that

∂E("2 | W, C, "1 )
∂E("2 | W, C, "1 )
is larger in absolute value than
although they are of
∂W
∂C

opposite signs.
This analysis suggests that empirical speciÞcations of labor demand functions should use C and
W separately. W corresponds to static costs as deÞned in the text. C corresponds to costs of
adjustment. OLS regressions of conditional (on "1 ) demand functions do not identify the standard
substitution terms used in static demand analysis.
One way to avoid problems with direct estimation of labor demand functions is to estimate
production functions. These can be used to derive the demand functions given Þxed costs without
directly estimating demand functions with Þxed costs.

First Period Demand Functions

These are obtained by substituting each state-contingent "2 = "1 + ∆ demand function into
(B-1) and maximizing with respect to "1 . As in the analysis of the second period demand function,
W + Pr(0 < θ < θ∗ ) C is not an appropriate marginal price in any state. Substituting into (B-1),
and making the dependence of ∆− and ∆+ on W, C, "1 explicit, we obtain total proÞts (as perceived
in the Þrst period) as

4

f("1 ) − W "1

+

Z

θ∗

0

+
+

Z

θ̄

£
¤
θf ("1 + ∆− (W, C, "1 , θ)) − (W − C)∆− (W, C, "1 ) − W "1 g(θ)dθ

[θf("1 ) − W "1 ] g(θ)dθ

∗
Zθ ∞
£

¤
θf("1 + ∆+ (W, C, "1 ) − W ("1 + ∆+ (W, C, "1 ) g(θ)dθ.

θ̄

Assuming an interior solution, and using the envelope theorem,

0

f ("1 ) − W +

Z

0

θ∗

0

−

[θf ("1 + ∆ (W, C, "1 , θ)) − W ]g(θ)dθ +

Z

θ

θ̄
∗

[θf 0 ("1 ) − W ]g(θ)dθ = 0

so the Þrst period demand obtained as the solution to this equation " is a function of W and C
separately and not W + Pr(0 < θ ≤ θ∗ )C. Observe, trivially, that the "1 obtained as a solution of
this Þrst order condition is lower than the "1 obtained when C = 0. This rationalizes our choice of
θ̄ < 1 in the heuristic solution outlined above.

5

Table 1 Latin American & Caribbean Economic Performance Indicators
GDP per
capita
(PPP US$)
2001

Human
GDP
Employment Female Labor Force Average Urban
development
Growth Growth 1980Participation
Unemp. Rate
index
1980-2001
1999
Growth 19801980-2000
(HDI)
1999
value
2001
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Argentina
11320
0.849
1.132
1.16
1.12
9.30
Brazil
7360
0.777
2.488
2.72
2.11
5.62
Chile
9190
0.831
4.814
2.63
2.17
10.09
Colombia
7040
0.779
3.089
3.23
3.56
12.10
Peru
4570
0.775
1.553
3.52
2.27
8.03
Uruguay
8400
0.834
1.795
1.43
2.37
10.62
Barbados
15560
0.888
1.173
1.28
1.30
15.77
Jamaica
3720
0.757
1.557
1.60
0.89
19.40
Trinidad and Tobago
9100
0.802
0.108
0.78
1.30
15.85
Average
8473.33
0.810
1.970
2.04
1.90
Notes: (3) measured in local currency at constant prices; (6) Caribbean rates are not comparable to LA rates because they are
computed with a different methodology;
Sources: (1), (3) and (5) World Development Indicators (World Bank CD-ROM, 2000), The World Bank; (2) United Nations; (4)
and (6) ECLAC and ILO.

94

Table 2: Compliance with Regulations

Country

% of workers affiliated with
% of workers 25-40
mandatory Social Security programs years old with net
earnings below
Minimum Wage
% of Total
% of Wage
Non Compliance
Employment
Employment
with Minimum
wages
Mean 1990s

Mean 1990s

End 1990s

39.35

60.05

10.06

Argentina

48.45

66.56

3.11

Bolivia (1999)

26.36

38.56

1.11

Brazil

48.18

64.04

5.80

Chile

64.47

77.45

7.3

Colombia (1999)

46.13

66.77

26.9

Costa Rica

65.92

74.61

15.7

Dominican Republic (1998)

29.08

49.40

NA

Ecuador (1995)

30.94

43.02

NA

El Salvador (1998)

33.49

50.04

3.6

Mexico

52.53

67.96

0.5

Panama (2001)

55.66

74.50

14.8

Paraguay (1995)

16.70

30.66

NA

Average Latin America (*)

Peru

17.99

51.90

23.5

Uruguay

74.12

93.12

0.5

Venezuela (1998)
31.37
52.22
17.9
Notes: (*) Unweighted Average. Percentage of workers between 15 and 64 that are affiliated to social security.
Time series data for the nineties is incomplete, the mean and trend were computed when data included 3 or more
years, spread over 3 periods: early (1990-93), mid (1994-97) and late (1998-01). Non Compliance with Minimum
Wage refers to employees between 25 and 40 years old working more than 30 hours. Figures for this variable date
from the late nineties. Source: IADB (2003) based on individual country household surveys

95

Table 3: Measures of Labor Market Regulations. End of the 1990’s
Country

Year

Advance Indemnities Seniority
Notice for dismissal
Pay
(EPV)
(EPV)
(EPV)

Social Security
Contributions
(EPV)

Total Cost
(EPV)

Social Security Social Security
Contributions as Contributions
% of Total
(% Wage)
Costs

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)+(2)+(3)+(4)
Australia
1999
0.73
0.99
0.00
1.95
3.67
53.04%
0.02
Austria
1999
0.85
0.94
0.00
58.29
60.07
97.03%
0.45
Belgium
1999
1.73
0.00
0.00
40.17
41.89
95.87%
0.31
Canada
1999
0.60
0.19
0.00
18.56
19.35
95.93%
0.14
Denmark
1999
1.73
0.04
0.00
NA
1.77
Finland
1999
1.61
0.00
0.00
35.62
37.23
95.67%
0.27
France
1999
0.98
0.36
0.00
64.77
66.11
97.97%
0.50
Germany
1999
1.14
0.00
0.00
53.48
54.63
97.91%
0.41
Greece
1999
0.00
1.34
0.00
46.54
47.88
97.20%
0.36
Hungary
1999
0.87
0.73
0.00
65.56
67.15
97.63%
0.51
Ireland
1999
0.45
0.58
0.00
24.67
25.70
95.99%
0.19
Italy
1999
0.60
2.63
0.00
91.53
94.76
96.60%
0.71
Japan
1999
0.59
0.00
0.00
36.36
36.95
98.40%
0.28
Korea
1999
0.59
2.99
0.00
18.08
21.66
83.49%
0.14
Netherlands
1999
0.88
0.00
0.00
84.99
85.87
98.97%
0.65
New Zealand
1999
0.22
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.22
0.00%
0.00
Norway
1999
0.88
0.00
0.00
28.43
29.31
97.00%
0.22
Poland
1999
1.22
0.00
0.00
60.48
61.70
98.02%
0.47
Portugal
1999
1.18
3.30
0.00
49.01
53.49
91.63%
0.38
Spain
1999
0.59
2.58
0.00
49.43
52.60
93.98%
0.38
Sweden
1999
1.79
0.00
0.00
28.86
30.65
94.16%
0.22
Switzerland
1999
1.25
0.00
0.00
19.26
20.51
93.92%
0.15
Turkey
1999
0.99
2.99
0.00
44.79
48.76
91.85%
0.35
United Kingdom
1999
0.71
0.72
0.00
28.82
30.25
95.27%
0.22
United States
1999
0.00
0.00
0.00
23.56
23.56
100.00%
0.18
Average OECD
1999
0.89
0.82
0.00
40.55
42.25
95.97%
0.31
Argentina
1999
0.80
2.20
0.00
44.49
47.48
93.69%
0.34
Bolivia
1999
1.77
2.99
0.00
31.16
35.91
86.76%
0.24
Brazil
1999
0.59
2.45
9.82
37.65
50.51
74.53%
0.29
Chile
1999
0.59
2.79
0.00
27.20
30.58
88.95%
0.21
Colombia
1999
0.30
3.49
9.82
38.75
52.35
74.01%
0.30
Costa Rica
1999
1.05
2.60
0.00
35.05
38.69
90.58%
0.27
Dominican Rep.
1999
0.59
2.16
0.00
16.23
18.97
85.52%
0.13
Ecuador
1999
0.59
3.30
9.82
22.85
36.56
62.50%
0.18
El Salvador
1999
0.06
2.99
0.00
27.26
30.31
89.94%
0.21
Honduras
1999
0.59
2.94
0.00
13.63
17.16
79.43%
0.11
Jamaica
1999
0.59
1.41
0.00
6.49
8.49
76.47%
0.05
Mexico
1999
0.59
2.57
0.00
29.50
32.66
90.33%
0.23
Nicaragua
1999
0.59
1.97
0.00
19.47
22.04
88.37%
0.15
Panama
1999
0.59
2.09
0.75
15.19
18.62
81.58%
0.12
Paraguay
1999
0.68
1.49
0.00
27.26
29.43
92.63%
0.21
Peru
1999
0.00
3.80
9.82
27.26
40.88
66.69%
0.21
Trinidad & Tobago
1999
1.18
1.33
0.00
10.90
13.41
81.31%
0.08
Uruguay
1999
0.00
2.23
0.00
52.58
54.81
95.93%
0.41
Venezuela
1999
0.93
2.03
5.97
18.43
27.36
67.37%
0.14
Avg. Latin America
0.63
2.46
2.42
26.39
31.91
82.45%
0.20
Source: Authors' calculations based on OECD (1999), Grubbs and Wells (1993), US Social Security Administration and Ministries of
Labor in Latin America and the Caribbean. EPV denotes Expected Present Discounted Value

96

Table 4: Estimates of long-run constant-output labor demand elasticity
Study

Data
Description
A. Latin America
Mondino & Montoya (this
Panel of Establishments. No capital. Instruments
volume)
Manufacturing.1990for output and wages.
1996. Quarterly.
From dynamic labor
Argentina
demand
Saavedra & Torero (this volume) Panel of Establishments. No capital. Instruments
Firms with more than 10 for output. Labor costs
workers.1986-1996.
includes legislative
Bimonthly. Peru
costs. Static labor
demand
Fajnzylber & Maloney (2000)

Roberts & Skoufias(1997)

Cassoni et al. (this volume)

Cardenas and Bernal (this
volume)

Waud
(1968)
de Pelsmacker (1984)
Field & Grebenstein (1980)
Denny, Fuss and Waverman
(1981)

Wylie
(1990)

Wage Elasticity
[-.353,-.94]

Panel of Establishments.
Yearly. Various countries
Chile(1981-1986)
White Collar
Blue Collar
Colombia (1990-1991)
White Collar
Blue Collar
Mexico (1986-1990)
White Collar
Blue Collar

-.19

-0.214
-0.373
-0.26
-0.489
-0.128
-0.203

Panel of manufacturing data.
1981-1987. Colombia
Skilled
Unskilled

-0.42
-0.65

2-digit manufacturing.
No capital. System of equations
1975-1997. Uruguay.
1975-1984
1985-1997
Panel of 92
No capital. Dynamic
Manufacturing Sectors
labor demand
4 digit CIIU. 1978-1995
B. Rest of the World
2-digit manufacturing.
Capital
1954-1964. Quarterly.
U.S.
5 auto manufacturing
Capital, labor prices,
firms. 1976-82; Belgium production workers
10 2-digit manufacturing Capital and energy
ind. 1971. U.S.
prices included
2-digit manufacturing.
Capital & energy
Annual.
prices
Canada 1962-1975
U.S. 1948-1971
Four 2-digit manufacturing.
Annual, 1900-1929. U.S.

97

-0.69
-0.22
-1.43

-1.03
-0.44
-0.51

-0.46
-0.56
-0.52

OECD 19
countries;
1979-1991.

4 Grubb and 11 EU
Wells
countries;
(1993)
1989.

3 OECD
(1993)

EP Measure

Quadratic time
trend plus, in some
specifications,
controls for
population of
working age and
growth in per capita
GDP (interacted
with EP measure).
As above but uses
full Lazear
specification.

Other Variables

Authors' own indicators Employment; None.
of restrictions on
selfoverall employee work employment;
(ORDW) dismissal of part-time work;
regular workers
temporary
(RDSM), fixed-term
work; agency
contracts (RFTC) and work.
temporary work
agencies (RTWA).

As above.

Employment
population
ratio,
unemployment
rate, average
hours worked
per week.

Outcome
indicator(s)

Pooled timeseries/cross-section
estimates. Selective
corrections for fixed
effects, random
effects and autocorrelation.

Methodology

98

EP has positive effects on
jobless duration,
especially in southern
Europe.

EP is statistically
insignificant.

In favored specifications,
EP raises unemployment
and reduces employment
participation, and hours.

Finding

Simple cross-section ORDW reduces
regressions.
employment, increases
self-employment, and
reduces part-time work.
RDSM (RFTC) increases
(decreases) temporary
work. RTWA but not
RDSM reduces temporary
agency work.

Fixed and random
effects, with
correction for
autocorrelation, plus
FGLS estimates.
Severance pay and
Long-term
UI benefit duration; Pooled timenotice periods
unemployment. active labor market series/cross-section
combined across bluepolicy (ALMP)
estimation.
and white-collar
expenditures
workers. Moment –individed by UI
time indicator.
benefit
expenditures.

As above.

20 Countries; Severance pay due blue
1956-1984
collar workers with 10
years’ service. Timevarying measure

Sample

As above.
2 Addison,
Teixeira,
and Grosso
(2000)

1 Lazear
(1990)

Study

Table 5: Effects of Employment Protection (EP) on Employment and Unemployment: Selected Studies

Sample

EP Measure

99

Outcome
Other Variables
Methodology
indicator(s)
17 OECD OECD strictness ranking Structural
ALMP calculated as Random effects,
5 Scarpetta
(1996)
countries; for regulation of
unemployment, expenditure on active FGLS.
1983-1993 dismissal averaged over plus separate measures per person
regular and fixed-term
regressions for relative to output per
contracts (OECD, 1994, youth
capita; summary index
Table 6.7, Panel B, Col unemployment, of UI benefits (OEC,
2).
long-term
1994, Chapter 8);
unemployment, union density; union
and noncoordination,
employment
employer
rates.
coordination, and their
sum; centralization of
collective bargaining;
tax wedge; proxy for
product market
competition; real
interest rates; output
gap.
ALMP (as above); UI Random effects,
6 Elmsekov, 19 OECD OECD (1994, Table 6.7, Structural
scarpetta,
countries; Panel B, Col. 2) ranking, unemployment. benefits (as above);
FGLS.
and Martin 1983but modified to take
union density;
1998)
1995.
account of changes since
dummies for the
late 1980's. Twodegree of coordination
observation, time-varying
on the employer and
indicator.
union sides; dummies
for degree of
centralization of
collective bargaining;
tax wedge; output gap,
minimum wage
relative to average
wage.

Study

Table 5, Continued

EP raises structural
unemployment but
interaction effects are
important. EP not
statistically significant in
either highly
centralized/coordinated d
or decentralized
bargaining regimes.

EP raises structural
unemployment, with
stronger effects for youth
and long-term
unemployment. EP
increases nonemployment rate.

Finding

20 OECD
countries;
1983-1988
and 19891994)

Sample

As above, plus
measures of labor and
total factor
productivity growth,
1976-1992.

Outcome
indicator(s)
OECD (1996, Table 6.7,
EmploymentPanel B, Col. 5) ranking. population ratio for
Also use of labor standards whole working –age
measure covering in
population and for
addition to EP working
prime-age males.
time, minimum wages, and Overall labor supply,
employee representation
defined as actual
rights (OECD, 994, Table annual hours divided
4.8, Col. 6).
by normal annual
hours multiplied by
employmentpopulation ratio. Log
unemployment rate
and component shortand long-term rates.

EP Measure

8 Nickell and As above. As above.
Layard
(1999)

7 Nickell
(1997)

Study

Table 5, Continued

100

As above, plus
owner-occupation
rate as a negative
proxy for
geographic
mobility.

As above. OLS
for analysis of
productivity
growth.

As above. EP is positive
and statistically
significant in labor and
total factor productivity
equations, but effect
vanishes with correction
for initial productivity
gap.

EP reduces overall
employment rate but not
that of prime-age males.
EP also reduces overall
labor supply. For
unemployment, EP effect
is negative but
statistically insignificant.
EP reduces short-term
unemployment and
increased long-term
unemployment.
Coefficient estimate for
worker labor standards
variable is statistically
insignificant in
unemployment
regression.

Methodology Finding

UI benefit
GLS random
replacement rate; effects using
UI benefit duration two cross
in years; union
sections.
density; union
coverage index;
sum of indices of
union and employer
coordination;
instrument for
ALMP expenditure;
tax wedge; change
in inflation.

Other Variables

9 OECD 19 OECD
(1999) countries;
1985-1990,
1992-1997.

Study Sample

Table 5, Continued

OECD (1999, Table
2.5) measures for
"late 1980's" and
"late 1990's." Single
overall indicator and
also separate
indicators for regular
employment,
temporary
employment and
collective dismissal.
In some
specifications further
disaggregations for
regular and
temporary
employment.

EP Measure

101

Log unemployment
UI benefit
rate, log employment- replacement rate;
population ratio, and
UI benefit
changes in
maximum
unemployment and
duration; ALMP
employment. For
expenditures as
unemployment;
percentage of
separate results for
GDP; degree of
prime-age males,
centralization of
prime-age females,
collective
youth, and low-skilled. bargaining;
For employment;
degree of
separate results for
coordination of
prime-age males, prime collective
-age females, youth,
bargaining; trade
share of selfunion density;
employment, share of trade union
temporary employment, coverage; tax
and temporary
wedge; output
employment, and
gap.
temporary share in
youth employment.
Two-period
Irrespective of the form of the
panel estimated indicator, EP coefficient estimate is
by random
statistically insignificant for overall
effects, GLS. employment. It is positive and
(Changes in
statistically significant for prime-age
levels model male unemployment (overall indicator
estimated by only). For all other demographic
OLS.)
groups EP is statistically insignificant.
Further, changes in EP do not affect
changes in unemployment for other
than prime-age females, where the
effect is negative and statistically
significant (strictness of EP with
respect to regular employment). For
employment, the coefficient estimates
for EP are negative but statistically
insignificant for overall, prime-age
female, youth, and temporary
employment. Otherwise they are
positive and in the case of selfemployment statistically significant
(overall EP measure and its regular
employment variant). Further,
changes in EP have statistically
insignificant effects for overall
employment and for all demographic
groups. For self-employment and the
share of temporary employment,
some statistically significant negative
effects are observed.

Outcome indicator(s) Other Variables Methodology Finding

Sample

EP Measure

Outcome
indicator(s)
10 Garibaldi 21 OECD OECD (1994, Table Average growth
and
countries; 6.5, Panel B, Col. 5) in total civilian
Mauro
1980-1998 ranking. Moment-in- employment.
(1999)
time measure.

Study

Table 5, Continued
Random effects,
GLS: six-year
averages of data
(1980-1985,
1986-1991,
1992-1997)

Average change in
inflation; average
total taxation as share
of GDP; average
payroll taxes as share
of GDP; average UI
benefit net
replacement rate for
an unemployed
worker (OECD 1994,
Chapter 8); union
density; index of the
coordination
collective bargaining;
time dummies.

102

Methodology

Other Variables

There is a strong negative
association between EP measure
and employment growth in cross
section (for 24 out of 27 cases), but
in panel regressions the association
is less precisely estimated and is
statistically significant in one of
five specifications only.

Finding

Sample

EP Measure

103

Outcome
Other Variables Methodology
Finding
indicator(s)
In initial fixed effects specification,
11 Nicoletti 20 OECD Two indicators of the Nonagricultural Public employment Fixed effects
and
without product EP is associated with a statistically
countries; stringency of the
employment rate. rate; tax wedge
Scarpetta 1982-1998. regulatory apparatus.
market regulation significant reduction in
union density;
(2001)
The first is EP per se,
dummy variables indicator; random employment. When EP enters in
effects with static interaction with the coordination of
and is based on the
for high and
product market collective bargaining dummies, its
time-varying OECD
intermediate
regulation
1999, Table 2.5)
effects are negative and statistically
coordination of
measure. The second is
significant for both intermediate
bargaining based indicators and
two stage
a measure of the degree
and high coordination. The same
on a summary
regression
of product model
results obtain for the random effects
indicator
approach, the
regulation and is both
and second state regressions. In
combining
static (based on
each case, the negative effect on
centralization and second state
involving
Nicoletti et al., 1999)
employment is stronger in countries
coordination; UI
benefit replacement regression of
and time varying (based
with an intermediate degree of
rate composite
fixed country
on the authors'
coordination. The effect of the
measure (OECD
effects on the
evaluation of regulation
static product market regulation
1994, Chapter 8); static product
and market conditions
variable is statistically significant
and the output gap. market regulation and negative. Finally, for the fixed
in 7 energy and service
indicator. Also effect panel regressions, EP is
industries, 1970-1998)
fixed effects
negative and statistically significant
panel estimates in the basic specification. In
with time-varying interactive form, however, the
EP and product negative coefficient estimate for EP
market indicators. is only statistically significant for
the intermediate coordination
measure. In interaction with the
coordination measure, the product
market regulation variable is
negative throughout, but is
statistically significant for low and
intermediate coordination.

Study

Table 5, Continued

Sample

EP Measure

104

Outcome
Other Variables
Methodology
Finding
indicator(s)
EmploymentUI benefit composite
Random effects,
Statistically significant
12 Di Tella and 21 OECD World
MacCulloch countries; Competitiveness population ratio; measure (OECD, 1984, LSDV with country positive association between
(1999)
1984-1990 Report data.
participation rate; Chapter 8), plus level of fixed effects,
flexibility indicator and
Indicator of
unemployment GDP. Selective results LSDV with country overall employment
flexibility (see
rate; long-term are also provided for a
and time fixed
population ratio across all
text). Timeunemployment specification that includes effects, and GMM specifications. By
varying measure rate; and average union coverage, a dummy estimates for each demographic group this effect
with five data
hours worked per for decentralized
outcome indicator. is much stronger for females
points.
week. For the
collective bargaining, and
than for males. Parallel
first two
degree of home
results are obtained for the
variables,
ownership
participation rate. Some
disaggregations
evidence that flexibility
by gender are
increases average hours
provided.
worked. The association
between flexibility and the
unemployment rate is
negative throughout but not
always statistically
significant. The results for
long-term unemployment are
less precisely estimated.

Study

Table 5, Continued

Sample

EP Measure

Outcome
indicator(s)
13 Heckman and 41 countries Authors’ own Employment; total,
Pages (2000) from Latin cardinal
prime-age male,
America, the measure based prime-age female,
Caribbean, on severance youth, and selfand OECD; pay, notice
employment.
1980-1997 interval, and
Unemployment;
compensation total, prime-age
(max).
for unfair
male, prime-age
dismissal (see female, youth, and
text). Twoshare unemployed
period timefor more than 6
varying
months.
measure.

Study

Table 5, Continued

105

Pooled crossEP effect is negative and
section/time series, statistically significant for
random effects, and total employment for each
fixed effects.
estimating procedure. Similar
Results for full
results obtained for males and
sample and
youth - but not females - the
separate samples of impact of EP on male
OECD and Latin- employment being half the
American nations. total employment effect and
the youth effect is almost
double the average effect. EP
effects for females and self
employment vary widely
across estimating procedure.
The results for unemployment
depend on methodology and
there is no statistically
significant effect of EP on
longer-term unemployment.
Disaggregation by broad
national grouping reveals that
employment effects of EP by
demographic group are
negative and mostly
statistically significant. The
exception is females in the
Latin-American grouping.
The effects on EP on
unemployment are nearly
always positive and stronger
for the OECD grouping.

Level of GDP, GDP
growth, and two
demographic controls,
namely, female
participation rate and
proportion of the
population aged 15-24
years.

Finding

Methodology

Other Variables

EP Measure

Countries with a high degree of
economic freedom have higher
GDP per capita, high employmentpopulation rates, high GDP per
employee, and low unemploymentat least in terms of levels. With the
exception of unemployment these
results do not survive the inclusion
of country fixed effects. Estimating
GDP per capita in levels and change
form for a sample of less developed
countries produces statistically
significant positive coefficient
estimates for the freedom indicator
in cross-section and panel estimates.

Finding

Source: Addison and Teixeira, 2001

106

Static and timeNational
Basic
Nonlinear least squares
Shock-EP interaction terms point to
varying measures. unemployment specification uses with time effects are
amplification of the effects of
Static measure
rates (i.e., non- 7 (other) labor
interacted with fixed
adverse shocks. Essentially the
taken from Nickell standardized).
market
institutions/time-varying same is true for the remaining
(1997). TimeBasic argument is institutions taken institutions. Robustness institutional variables with two
varying measure
that unemploy- from Nickell
checks offered. Non linear exceptions. The exceptions are
taken from Lazear ment can be
(1997).
least squares with country- coordination of collective
(1990) and updated. explained by
Alternative
specific observable shocks bargaining and active labor market
shocks which
specification(s) (total factor productivity policies, which ameliorate the
interact with
uses two
grow, the real rate of
effects of adverse shocks. In
labor market
measures of UI interest, and a labor
general, much weaker interaction
institutions.
benefits (authors' demand shift measure) that effect and poorer fit when static EP
Shocks are first own calculations) are interacted with all 8
(and UI) measures replaced by their
modeled as
that are deployed labor market institutions. time-varying counterparts.
common and
in fixed and time- As before, estimates
unobservable and varying form.
provided for fixed and
then as country
time-varying institutions.
specific.

Outcome
Other Variables Methodology
indicator(s)
23+
Fraser Institute
Level of log GDP Squared freedom Cross section and "panel"
countries; index of economic per capita, log
index term (in
estimates.
1970-1990. freedom (see text). employmentsome
Time-varying
population ratio, specifications);
measure with 6 data log GDP per
country
points.
employee; and
dummies; time
unemployment dummies.
rate. Also
changes in levels
for the first three
variables.

Sample

15 Blanchard 20 OECD
and Wolfers countries;
(2000)
1960-1999.
8 five-year
averages of
data.

14 Freeman
(2001)

Study

Table 5, Continued

Table 6: Summary of existing evidence on the impact of job security (JS) costs
in Latin America
Study
Kugler
(This volume)

Country

Data
Results
A. Studies that analyze exit rates into and out of employment
Colombia Household data
Decline in JS leads to reduction in employment duration, reduction in
unemployment duration. Some effect due to de-regulation of temporary
contracts but not all

Saavaedra and
Torero
(This volume)
Paes de Barros and
Corseuil (This
volume)

Peru

Household data

Lower JS leads to lower average tenure. Higher decline in formal sector.
Hazard rates increase just at the end of probation period.

Brazil

Employment Surveys, Administrative Hazard rates for short durations declined but Hazard rates for longer
data and Household surveys
durations increased after an increase in job security. No effects either on
adjustment costs or wage elasticities.

Hopenhayn (This
volume)

Argentina Household data Rotating Panel

Deregulation of temporary contracts leads to increase in hazard rates.
Hazard rates for short spells (1-3 months) increase by 40% and for 3-6
months spells by 10%.

B. Studies that analyze average employment and unemployment
Colombia Household data on employment.
Decline in JS in 1990 brings a decline in unemployment rates. This is
based on computing the net effect of changes in hazard rates, in and out of
unemployment, induced by the reduction in JS.
Saavedra and Torero Peru
Firm and sector level data. 1986-1997 They include a direct measure of JS regulations in labor demand function.
(This volume)
They estimate a negative and statistically significant coefficient, which is
larger (in absolute value) in the more regulated period.
Kugler
(This volume)

Mondino and
Montoya
(This volume)
P. de Barros and
Corseuil (2000)

Argentina Panel of manufacturing firms. It does
not account for firm creation.

As Saavedra and Torero (this volume), they include a direct measure of JS
in labor demand. They also find a negative effect of JS on LD.

Brazil

Aggregated employment. Annual. It
covers large firms (>10 emp)

Two step procedure. First, find parameters for labor demand (LD) function
for every month. Then see whether those parameters change with labor
reforms and other development. They find no effect of JS on LD
parameters.
The effects of JS on employment are statistically insignificant and the
signs are positive in some cases.

Household data on employment.
Annual 1960-1998

Not a significant effect of JS on aggregated employment but important
effect on its composition.

Downes et al. (This Barbados
volume)
Trinidad
Jamaica
Pagés and
Chile
Montenegro (1999)

Monthly establishment-level data.
1985-1998 Manufacturing. Firms
employing 5 or more workers

Marquez (1998)

CrossCountry

Cross-section data for Latin America, Rank indicator of Job Security. JS is not significantly associated with
Caribbean and OECD countries.
lower employment once GDP per capita is accounted for.

Marquez (1998)

CrossCountry
Chile

Cross-section data for Latin America, Self-employment rates are positively associated with JS even after
Caribbean and OECD countries.
accounting for differences in GDP per capita.
Household Survey Data. 1960-1998
Job security is associated with lower employment rates for young workers,
female and unskilled workers and higher employment for older and skilled
workers

C. Studies that analyze the composition of employment

Montenegro and
Pagés (This volume)

107

Table 7: Summary Statistics of Sample used in Baseline Regression
Variable
Mean Std. Dev.
Min Max
Employment/Population
Unemployment Rate†

A. Total Sample. N = 417
54.92
7.82

7.16
4.33

36.90 76.89
0.50 23.80

Log GDP per capita PPP adj.

9.43

0.63

7.35 10.37

GDP growth

2.92

2.77

-8.59 12.82

Share of working age pop. 25 -54
Share of working age pop. 55 -64

0.62
0.14

0.03
0.03

0.51 0.68
0.06 0.19

Social Security (% wage)

0.27

0.15

0.00 0.71

Advance notice (*)

0.82

0.48

0.00 1.97

Indemnities for Dismissal (*)

1.27

1.40

0.00 5.97

Seniority Pay (*)

0.65

2.35

0.00 9.82

35.65
0.274
B. Latin America. N = 88
59.09
6.52

19.13
0.147

0.00 91.53
0.00 0.70

5.35
3.23

47.10 76.89
0.63 17.10

Log GDP per capita PPP adj.

8.49

0.45

7.35 9.44

GDP growth
Share of working age pop. 25 -54

3.31
0.58

3.60
0.03

-8.59 12.82
0.51 0.64

Share of working age pop. 55 -64

0.09

0.02

0.06 0.16

Social Security (% wage)

0.23

0.08

0.10 0.42

Advance notice (*)

0.65

0.45

0.00 1.77

Indemnities for Dismissal (*)

2.82

1.05

0.00 5.97

4.33
10.17
0.07

0.00 9.82
12.98 53.87
0.1 0.41

7.17

36.90 68.60

Social Security (*)
Social Security (**)
Employment/Population
Unemployment Rate

Seniority Pay (*)
3.09
Social Security (*)
30.14
Social Security (**)
0.23
C. Industrial Countries Sample. N = 329
Employment/Population
53.81
‡

Unemployment Rate

8.17

4.52

0.50 23.80

Log GDP per capita PPP adj.
GDP growth

9.68
2.81

0.38
2.50

8.50 10.37
-7.00 10.74

Share of working age pop. 25 -54

0.62

0.03

0.57 0.68

Share of working age pop. 55 -64

0.15

0.02

0.09 0.19

Social Security (% wage)

0.29

0.16

0.00 0.71

Advance notice (*)

0.87

0.48

0.00 1.97

Indemnities for Dismissal
Seniority Pay

0.86
0.00

1.17
0.00

0.00 3.30
0.00 0.00

37.12
0.285

20.65
0.159

0.00 91.53
0.00 0.70

Social Security (*)
Social Security (**)

(*) Regulatory variables measured in multiples of monthly wages, (**) measured as % of wages
N = 416; ‡N = 328

†

108

Table 8A: Results for Employment to Population Rates

Advance
Notice (AN)

Whole
Sample
(1)
13.938
(15.959)

Indemnities
Dismissal (ID)

1.161
(0.897)

Whole
Sample
(2)
12.400
(16.841)

Whole
Sample
(3)

Whole
Sample
(4)

Whole
Sample
(5)

OECD
Sample
(6)
13.755
(14.564)

LA
Sample
(7)
16.637
(15.420)

-2.577
(1.196)*

0.330
(1.637)

N.A.

1.887
(2.197)

-0.191
(0.079)*

-0.301
(0.102)**

-0.187
(0.084)*

-0.469
(0.730)

Seniority
Pay (SenP)

3.292
(1.195)**

1.837
(0.213)**

Social Sec
Cont. (SSC)

-0.230
(0.081)**

GDP growth

0.094
(0.046)*

0.125
(0.050)*

0.123
(0.049)*

0.110
(0.042)**

0.108
(0.046)*

0.034
(0.050)

0.106
(0.072)

Log GDP per
Capita

2.318
(1.277)

-0.320
(1.044)

-0.451
(1.079)

0.834
(2.253)

3.122
(2.260)

1.828
(1.334)

11.639
(8.152)

Share WAP
25-54

17.584
(16.750)

29.171
(16.608)

33.259
(18.135)

22.143
(21.704)

16.534
(23.535)

12.112
(19.197)

9.126
(70.273)

Share WAP
55-64

48.456
(35.685)

20.450
(27.018)

27.060
(27.465)

20.614
(26.721)

59.725
(33.501)

50.009
(35.553)

-197.99
(317.709)

Constant

13.588
(17.743)

28.759
(18.736)

37.614
(13.754)**

32.086
(13.318)*

17.013
(13.165)

8.519
(31.305)

-40.525
(55.759)

Number of
417
476
480
564
484
329
88
Observations
R2
0.91
0.90
0.89
0.88
0.90
0.93
0.82
P-Value F test***
0.00
0.04
0.00
Robust standard errors in parentheses. All specification include country fixed effects. * indicates significant at 5% level; ** significant
at 1% level; *** P Value of test that all regulation are jointly equal to zero. N.A. = not applicable. WAP denotes Working Age
Population

109

Table 8B: Results for Unemployment

Advance
Notice (AN)

Whole
Sample
(1)
-9.13
(11.08)

Whole
Sample
(2)
-7.29
(11.03)

Whole
Sample
(3)

Whole
Sample
(4)

Whole
Sample
(5)

OECD
Sample
(6)
-9.19
(10.62)

LA
Sample
(7)
4.06
(9.96)

Indemnities
Dismissal (ID)

0.50
(1.00)

3.00
(1.01)**

0.43
(1.12)

Seniority
Pay (SenP)

0.79
(1.33)

N.A.

0.84
(1.43)

Soc. Sec.
Cont. (SSC)

0.18
(0.07)*

0.13
(0.05)*

0.22
(0.09)*

0.15
(0.09)

GDP growth

-0.16
(0.04)**

-0.19
(0.05)**

-0.18
(0.04)**

-0.18
(0.05)**

-0.14
(0.04)**

-0.13
(0.05)*

-0.23
(0.09)*

GDP per
Capita

-2.28
(1.26)

1.78
(1.27)

1.55
(1.05)

1.87
(1.28)

-1.47
(1.30)

-2.70
(1.36)

4.37
(3.13)

Share WAP
25-54

18.85
(14.26)

-2.72
(16.00)

-5.72
(16.72)

-4.27
(14.98)

17.19
(16.96)

25.20
(16.44)

-66.30
(29.54)*

Share WAP
55-64

-7.35
(28.58)

6.69
(24.90)

2.17
(25.19)

-15.41
(22.29)

-14.69
(25.26)

-7.97
(31.36)

134.98
(214.64)

Constant

23.01
(13.02)
416

1.13
(12.88)
475

-3.20
(9.99)
479

1.05
(7.40)
563

13.19
(7.63)
483

28.44
(23.31)
328

-16.54
(34.32)
88

-0.01
(0.40)
0.21
(0.13)

Number of
observations.
R2
0.84
0.79
0.78
0.79
0.84
0.86
0.72
P-Value F ***
0.02
0.03
0.00
Robust standard errors in parentheses. All specification include country fixed effects;* significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1%
level; *** P Value of test that all regulation are jointly equal to zero. N.A. = not applicable. WAP denotes Working Age Population

110

Table 9: Do all regulations have an equal effect? : Whole Sample
AN+ID
SenP +SSC

Employment
(1)
-0.644
(0.651)

Employment
(2)

Employment
(3)

-0.229
(0.081)*

AN+ID+SenP
Social Security Cont. (SSC)

Unemployment
(4)
0.121
(0.342)

Unemployment
(5)

Unemployment
(6)

0.169
(0.066)*
0.492
(1.102)

0.226
(0.925)

-0.230
(0.078)**

0.169
(0.066)*

AN+ID+SenP
+SSC

-0.231

0.169

(0.079)**

(0.066)*

GDP Growth

0.089
(0.045)

0.090
(0.045)*

0.089
(0.045)

-0.157
(0.040)**

-0.157
(0.040)**

-0.157
(0.040)**

Log (GDP)
Per capita
PPP adj.

2.283
(1.314)

2.222
(1.319)

2.246
(1.324)

-2.276
(1.272)

-2.283
(1.271)

-2.281
(1.269)

% of WAP

19.660

20.788

20.662

20.431

20.557

20.548

25-54

(17.441)

(18.116)

(18.018)

(15.120)

(14.953)

(14.926)

% of WAP
55-64

56.924
(35.411)

57.644
(36.408)

58.367
(35.863)

-5.119
(29.241)

-5.007
(29.024)

-4.949
(29.031)

Constant

27.194
(13.367)

23.669
(13.226)

25.604
(13.741)

15.621
(10.285)

15.285
(10.434)

15.438
(9.910)

417
0.91

417
0.91

417
0.91

416
0.84

416
0.84

416
0.84

Number of Obs..
R2

Test AN=ID***
0.42
0.39
Test Senp=SSC
0.005
0.64
Test
AN=ID=Senp
0.00
0.49
Test ID=Senp
0.00
0.39
Test AN=ID=
=Senp=SSC
0.01
0.63
Robust standard errors in parentheses. All specifications contain individual countries, fixed-effects * significant at 5% level; **
significant at 1% level; *** P-Values of the Tests in this row and below. WAP denotes Working Age Population

111

Table 10: Estimates of Wage Pass-Through for Different Labor Demand Elasticities.
Labor
Demand
Elasticity

Whole
Sample

OECD
Sample

Latin American
Sample

∂ ln Emp*
∂ ln SS

N/A

-.702

-1.048

-.447

(0.293)**

(0.381)**

(0.270)

∂ ln W
∂ ln SS

-0.15

0

0

0

∂ ln W
∂ ln SS

-0.7

0

0

-.36

∂ ln W
∂ ln SS

-1.2

-.415

-.12

-.62

*: ∂ ln E m p is obtained from a regression in which the dependent variable is computed in logarithms and
∂ ln S S
all regulatory variables are also computed in logs. The other control variables used in Table 8A are used
here. Social security contributions are defined as logarithms of the fraction of the contribution rate, that is
we use ln(1+SS). Standard errors are in parentheses. The other three rows are obtained from the formula in
the text, using alternative values of α, as shown in the first column of the table. When estimated effects on
wages are positive, they are constrained to be zero. ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.

112

Table 11: The effect of pension reforms on employment and unemployment

Adv. Notice
(AN)
Indem Dismissal
(ID)
Seniority Pay
(SenP)
Soc. Sec. Cont.
(SSC)
SSC*Reform
Reform
GDP growth
Log GDP pc
% WAP 25-54
% WAP 55-64
Constant
N
R2

Emp.
Whole
Sample
(1)
14.08

Emp.
OECD
Sample
(2)
13.755

Emp.
Latin A.
Sample
(3)
1.184

Unemp.
Whole
Sample
(4)
-9.090

Unemp.
OECD
Sample
(5)
-9.195

Unemp.
Latin A.
Sample
(6)
17.297

(15.629)
1.286
(0.979)

(14.564)
-2.577
(1.196)*

(14.721)
0.087
(1.702)

(11.011)
0.470
(1.001)

(10.617)
3.005
(1.008)**

(11.379)
0.742
(1.089)

3.480
(1.305)*
-0.253
(0.088)**
-0.138
(0.072)
7.290
(3.174)*
0.096
(0.048)
2.348
(1.227)
15.011
(16.884)
45.690
(35.828)
15.044
(17.348)
417
0.92

0.000
(0.000)
-0.301
(0.102)*
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
0.034
(0.050)
1.828
(1.334)
12.112
(19.197)
50.009
(35.553)
8.519
(31.305)
329
0.93

1.624
(2.299)
-0.168
(0.086)
-0.327
(0.134)*
10.665
(4.765)*
0.123
(0.084)
10.742
(7.643)
34.692
(69.954)
-449.346
(298.027)
1.087
(52.262)
88
0.84

0.739
(1.332)
0.173
(0.071)*
0.124
(0.044)**
-4.349
(1.926)*
-0.164
(0.041)**
-2.336
(1.236)
20.505
(14.199)
-2.593
(28.761)
20.739
(12.965)
416
0.84

N.A.

1.247
(1.406)
0.118
(0.087)
0.248
(0.109)*
-7.234
(3.758)
-0.239
(0.086)*
4.983
(3.292)
-93.257
(34.205)*
365.975
(223.294)
-49.617
(36.657)
88
0.76

0.215
(0.098)*
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.130
(0.053)*
-2.700
(1.355)
25.196
(16.442)
-7.975
(31.360)
28.443
(23.305)
328
0.86

Robust standard errors in parentheses. See Appendix A.1 for a definition of Reform variable. * significant at 5% level; ** significant
at 1% level. N.A. = not applicable. WAP denotes Working Age Population

113

Table 12: Random Effect Estimates
Emp.
OECD

Advance
Notice (AN)

Emp.
Total
Sample
(1)
4.142
(1.871)*

Indemnities
Diss. (ID)
Seniority Pay
(SenP)

Emp.
LAC

Unemp.
OECD

Unemp.
LAC

(2)
(3)
5.292
1.417
(1.986)** (4.461)

Unemp.
Total
Sample
(4)
-2.762
(1.278)*

(5)
-3.560
(1.733)*

(6)
-0.200
(1.997)

-0.250
(0.347)

-1.010
(0.809)

-0.358
(0.464)

0.027
(0.266)

0.326
(0.706)

-0.048
(0.298)

0.899
(0.331)**

0.000
(0.000)

0.562
(0.438)

-0.074
(0.225)

0.000
(0.000)

0.009
(0.202)

Soc. Sec.
-0.221
Contrib.(SSC) (0.031)**

-0.259
-0.164
(0.032)** (0.073)*

0.135
(0.023)**

0.153
(0.029)**

0.090
(0.050)

Growth of
GPD

0.089
(0.046)

0.030
(0.051)

0.123
(0.097)

-0.157
(0.038)**

-0.133
(0.047)**

-0.205
(0.068)**

Log GDP per
Capita (PPP)

2.292
(0.826)**

1.837
(0.784)*

8.931
(3.251)**

-2.117
(0.668)**

-2.606
(0.705)**

1.607
(1.869)

Share of
WAP
25-54

17.462

8.760

21.529

21.471

26.494

-11.405

(10.657)

(10.682)

(37.575)

(8.598)*

(9.616)**

(22.081)

Share of
WAP
55-64

48.130

34.748

-76.504

1.544

2.022

21.309

(20.842)*

(21.002)

(75.751)

(16.411)

(18.910)

(40.005)

Constant

18.202
(6.616)**

31.222
-19.363
(6.896)** (15.833)

12.749
(5.169)*

13.938
(6.160)*

-3.868
(9.823)

329

88

416

328

88

0.03
0.48

0.00
0.004

0.25
0.15

0.01
0.14

0.51
0.26

Observations 417
Hausman Test
(Pvalue )
0.09
R2
0.46

Standard errors in parentheses. WAP denotes Working Age Population. Columns (1) and (4) include a
dummy variable that identifies the region, and which takes the value equal to 1 if the country is in Latin America
and zero otherwise. * significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level.

114

Table 13: Correlation between Dependency Ratio
and social security contributions
Dependency
Ratio

SSP
Total
112.10
(14.65)**

SSP
OECD
102.38
(14.97)**

SSP
LA
283.6
(133.30)**

Country FE?
Observations
R-squared

YES
514
0.09

YES
411
0.09

YES
86
0.46

Dependency ratio computed as the ratio of the population 65 and older
to the working age population (15-64). Robust standard errors in
parentheses; *significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level.

Table 14: Instrumental Variable Estimates
Employment Employment Employment Unemployment Unemployment Unemployment
Total
OECD
LA
Total
OECD
LA
Advance Notice 26.66
23.77
30.77
-15.72
-15.10
-12.73
(16.26)
(13.51)
(24.61)
(11.29)
(10.01)
(19.86)
Indemnities
-1.08
-7.15
2.33
1.73
5.80
-1.64
Dismissal
(2.31)
(2.38)**
(3.71)
(1.68)
(1.94)**
(2.29)
Seniority Pay
-0.41
0.00
5.10
2.81
0.00
-2.55
(3.56)
(0.00)
(5.42)
(2.50)
(0.00)
(3.22)
Soc. Sec. Cont. -1.37
-1.28
0.36
0.77
0.80
-0.47
(0.38)
(0.78)†
(0.58)†
(0.48)†
(0.45)†
(0.66)†
Observations
404
321
83
404
321
83
R-squared
0.70
0.79
0.70
0.67
0.74
0.33
All regressions include country fixed effects as well as GDP pc (PPP adjusted), GDP growth, and the share of workers in
WAP between 25 and 54 and 55 and 64. We instrument Social Security Contributions (measures in EPV) with the
dependency ratio, computed as the ratio of the population 65 and older to the working age population (15-64). Robust
standard errors in parentheses. ~ significant at 10%; * significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level.

115

Africa

1970

1980

Middle East

1990

Latin America &
Caribbean

Whole Period

Developed

-2
Notes: Averages are GDP weighted
Source: IADB calculations based on World Development Indicators (World Bank, 2000).

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Figure 1
Per capita GDP Growth

East Asia

Rest of Asia

Figures and Tables
1
Maloney and Nunez

Figure 2: Minimum Wage/Mean Wage in OECD Countries* and in Latin America**
Venezuela
Italy
El Salvador
Paraguay
Greece
Austria
Honduras
Belgium
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Ireland
Germany
Denmark
Costa Rica
Switzerland
Sweden
Finland
France
Portugal
Panama
UK
Colombia
United States
Peru
Spain
Mexico
Chile
Argentina
Brazil
Bolivia
Uruguay
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

*Minimum wages from Dolado, et al. (1996), for one year within the range 1991 and 1995. **Minimum wages from 1995 or 1996 except:
Argentina (1998), Bolivia (1997), Brazil (1998), Colombia (1998), Honduras (1999), Mexico (1999), and Uruguay (1998).
Source:
Maloney
and Nunez-Mendez
(This volume)
Source:
Maloney
and Nunez-Mendez
(This volume).

1

82

19

83
19

87
19

88
89
19

90
19

91
92

19

93

19

94

19

95

Unemployment Rate

19

19

96

19

97

Labor Reforms that increased legal protection to workers (thickness of dotted line reflects scope of reform)
Return to democracy after military regime

Labor reforms that reduced legal protection for workers (thickness of line reflects scope of reform)

GDP growth

19

19

98

19

99

20

00

20

01

6

0

Trade Reform

86

-8

19

2

85

-6

19

4

84

-4

-2

19

8

0

19

10

2

81

12

4

19

14

6

80

16

8

19

18

10

Unemployment Rate
20

GDP Growth

12

Figure 3A: Economic Performance and Trade Labor Reforms
Argentina

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10

80
19

82
19

83
19

84
19

85
19

86
19

87
19

89
19

GDP growth

88
19
90
19

91
19

93
19

94
19

95
19

Unemployment Rate

92
19

Labor Reforms that increased legal protection to workers (thickness of dotted line reflects scope of reform)
Return to democracy after military regime

Labor reforms that reduced legal protection for workers (thickness of line reflects scope of reform)

Trade Reform

81
19

GDP growth

96
19

97
19

Figure 3B: Economic Performance and Trade Labor Reforms
Brazil

98
19

99
19

00
20

01
20

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Unemployment Rate

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

19

80

81

19

82

19

83
19

84
19

85
19

86
19

87

88
19

89

GDP growth

19

19

90
19

91
19

92

93
19

94

19

95

Unemployment Rate

19

Labor Reforms that increased legal protection to workers (thickness of dotted line reflects scope of reform)
Return to democracy after military regime

Labor reforms that reduced legal protection for workers (thickness of line reflects scope of reform)

Trade Reform

19

GDP growth

19

96

19

97

19

Figure 3C: Economic Performance and Trade Labor Reforms
Chile

98

19

99

20

00

20

01

0

5

10

15

20

25

Unemployment Rate

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

8
19

0

8
19

2

8
19

3
8
19

4
8
19

5
8
19

6
8
19

7
8
19

8
8
19

9
9
19

0
9
19

1
9
19

2

9
19

3

9
19

4

9
19

5

9
19

Labor Reforms that increased legal protection to workers (thickness of dotted line reflects scope of reform)
Return to democracy after military regime

6

9
19

7

9
19

Figure 3D: Economic Performance and Trade Labor Reforms
Colombia

GDP growth
Unemployment Rate
Labor reforms that reduced legal protection for workers (thickness of line reflects scope of reform)

1

Trade Reform

8
19

GDP growth

8

9
19

9

0
20

0

0
20

1

0

5

10

15

20

25

Unemployment Rate

19

82

19

83
19

87
19

19

89
19

90

GDP growth

88
19

91
19

92

93
19

94

19

95

Unemployment Rate

19

Labor Reforms that increased legal protection to workers (thickness of dotted line reflects scope of reform)
Return to democracy after military regime

Labor reforms that reduced legal protection for workers (thickness of line reflects scope of reform)

Trade Reform

86

19

96

19

97

19

98

19

99

20

00

20

01

0

19

-15

85

2

19

-10

84

4

19

-5

81

6

0

19

8

5

80

10

10

19

12

Unemployment Rate

15

GDP growth

Figure 3E: Economic Performance and Trade Labor Reforms
Peru

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

8
19

0

1

8
19

2

8
19

3
8
19

4
8
19

5
8
19

6
8
19

7
8
19

8
19

9
9
19

GDP growth

8

0
9
19

1

2
9
19

3
9
19

4
9
19

Unemployment Rate

9
19

5

Labor Reforms that increased legal protection to workers (thickness of dotted line reflects scope of reform)
Return to democracy after military regime

Labor reforms that reduced legal protection for workers (thickness of line reflects scope of reform)

Trade Reform

8
19

GDP growth

9
19

6

9
19

7

9
19

Figure 3F: Economic Performance and Trade Labor Reforms
Uruguay

8

9
19

9

0
20

0

0
20

1

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Unemployment Rate

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

19

80

19

19

82

19

83
19

84
19

85
19

86
19

87
19

88

89
19

90

GDP growth

19

19

91
19

92

93
19

94
19

95

19

Unemployment Rate

19

Labor Reforms that increased legal protection to workers (thickness of dotted line reflects scope of reform)
Return to democracy after military regime

Labor reforms that reduced legal protection for workers (thickness of line reflects scope of reform)

Trade Reform

81

GDP growth

96

19

97

19

Figure 3G: Economic Performance and Trade Labor Reforms
Barbados

98

19

99

20

00

20

01

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Unemployment Rate

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10

19

80

81

19

82

19

83
19

84
19

85
19

86
19

19

88
19

GDP growth

87

89
19

90
19

19

92
19

93

19

94

Unemployment Rate

91

19

95

Labor Reforms that increased legal protection to workers (thickness of dotted line reflects scope of reform)
Return to democracy after military regime

Labor reforms that reduced legal protection for workers (thickness of line reflects scope of reform)

Trade Reform

19

GDP growth

19

96

19

97

19

Figure 3H: Economic Performance and Trade Labor Reforms
Jamaica

98

19

99

20

00

20

01

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Unemployment Rate

80

81

19

82

19

83
19

84
19

85
19

86
19

87

88
19

89

GDP growth

19

19

90
19

91

92
19

93
19

94
19

Unemployment Rate

19

95

Labor Reforms that increased legal protection to workers (thickness of dotted line reflects scope of reform)
Return to democracy after military regime

Labor reforms that reduced legal protection for workers (thickness of line reflects scope of reform)

Trade Reform

19

19

96

19

97

19

98

19

99

20

00

20

01

0

5

10

15

20

25

Unemployment Rate

Sources: GDP growth from World Bank Development Indicators; Unemployment Rates from ECLAC and ILO. Period of Trade Reforms from IADB (1996);Year of end
of military Regimes from Nohlen (1993)

-12

-10

-8

-6

-4

9
-2 1

0

2

4

6

8

GDP growth

Figure 3I: Economic Performance and Trade Labor Reforms
Trinidad and Tobago

Exp. Disc. Advance Notice in Multiples of Monthly Wages/Quadratic Prediction

2
1.5
1

0

.5

10

5

0

−5
7

7

8

9

Advance Notice and GDP per Capita

Quadratic Prediction

Seniority Pay and GDP per Capita

9

10

10

Exp. Disc. Advance Notice in Multiples of Monthly Wages

Log of GDP Per Capita in PPP−Adjusted US Dollars

8

Log of GDP Per Capita in PPP−Adjusted US Dollars
Exp. Disc. Seniority Pay as Multiples of Monthly Wages
Quadratic Prediction

0

20

40

60

80

−1

0

1

2

3

4

Figure 4

11

11

Exp. Disc. Indemnities for Dismissal as Multiples of Monthly Wages/Quadratic Prediction
Exp. Disc. Soc. Sec. Cont. as Multiples of Monthly Wages/Quadratic Prediction

7

7

9

10

Indemnities for Dismissal and GDP per Capita

8

Log of GDP Per Capita in PPP−Adjusted US Dollars

Exp. Disc. Indemnities for Dismissal as Multiples of Monthly Wages
Quadratic Prediction

9

10

Social Security Contributions and GDP per Capita

8

Log of GDP Per Capita in PPP−Adjusted US Dollars

Exp. Disc. Soc. Sec. Cont. as Multiples of Monthly Wages
Quadratic Prediction

Source: Authors’ computations based on OECD, World Bank and Labor Ministries in Latin America and the Caribbean

Exp. Disc. Seniority Pay as Multiples of Monthly Wages/Quadratic Prediction

11

11

0

2

4

8

10

12

Cost of benefits measured in multiples of wages

6

Caribbean
Average, 1999

Industrial
Countries

Latin American
Average, 1999

Source: Ministries of Labor of Latin America and the Caribbean
Cost of Job security includes advance notice+Indemnities for dismissal +Seniority Pay

Paraguay

Uruguay

Nicaragua

Dominican Republic

Argentina

El Salvador

Mexico

Chile

Panama

Honduras

Costa Rica

Bolivia

Venezuela

Brazil

Colombia

Peru

Ecuador

14

Figure 5: The Cost of Job Security. End of the eighties relative to end of nineties

16

1987

1999

18

Venezuela

-57.18

Panama

-31.56

Peru
-25.49

11.11

29.17

Chile

27.30

31.87

152.94

-17.19

Spain
Nicaragua

Brazil

Ecuador

% change

-9.27

-1.91

51.67

Note: Percentage change of the cost of providing advance notice and indemnities for dismissal as a consequence of labor market reforms. Seniority
pay not included. Source; Ministries of Labor in Latin America and the Caribbean.

-70

-20

30

80

Dominican Republic

130

Colombia

334.52

United Kingdom

180

Sweden

Figure 6: Percent change in advance notice and indemnities for dissmissal
1990's relative to 1980's

Germany

0

10

30

40

50

Industrial countries
average, 1999

Latin American
Average, 1999

Expected contributions measured as multiples of monthly wages

20

* Includes the cost of seniority pay as well.
Source: Social Security Throughout the World, various years and Ministries of Labor in LAC

Honduras

Panama

Dominican Republic

Guatemala

Nicaragua

Venezuela

Chile

El Salvador

Paraguay

Mexico

Bolivia

Ecuador

Costa Rica

Peru

Argentina

Brazil

Colombia

Uruguay

Figure 7: Social Security Contributions*
Expected present value of payments after 20 year of employment

60

1999
1987

50

52

54

56

58

60

62

64

-6

-5

-4

Panama, 1995

Venezuela 1997

-3

-2

-1

0

Years since reforms

1

2

3

Colombia, 1990

4

5

Figure 8.A Effect of Job Security Reforms on Employment
Reforms that Reduced job Security

Source: HH Survey data, various years. Interpolated data

Employment to Population Ratio

6

45

50

55

60

65

70

-6

-5

-4

Note: Interpolated data

Employment to Population Ratio

-3

Nicaragua

-2

0

1

Years since reforms

-1

Peru

2

3

4

Chile

Brazil

Figure 8B: Effect of Job Security Reforms on Employment
Reforms that Increased job Security

5

6

Per, 96

Nic, 96

Chile, 90

Brazil,88

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

0

1
Years since reforms

-1

2

3

4

5

average

UK, 85

Spain, 97

Germany,93

6

Figure 9: The effect of Job Security reforms on Employment
Industrial Countries

Source: OECD Statistics

Employment to Population Rates

