NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT MEAN IMPACTS MISS:
DISTRIBUTIONAL EFFECTS OF
WELFARE REFORM EXPERIMENTS
Marianne P. Bitler
Jonah B. Gelbach
Hilary W. Hoynes
Working Paper 10121
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10121
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2003

Bitler gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development and the National Institute on Aging. This work has not been formally reviewed or edited. The
views and conclusions are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those fo the RAND
Corporation. We are very grateful to MDRC for providing the public access to the experimental data used
here. The data used in this paper are derived from data files made available to researchers by MDRC. The
authors remain solely responsible for how the data have been used or interpreted. We would also like to
thank Mary Daly, Guido Imbens, Lorien Rice, and Jeff Smith for helpful conversations, as well as seminar
participants from Berkeley, Chicago-Harris School, Cornell, Davis, GW, Johns Hopkins, the IRP summer
workshop, Maryland, the NBER, PPIC, Syracuse, and RAND. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Marianne Bitler, Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

What Mean Impacts Miss: Distributional Effects of Welfare Reform Experiments

Marianne Bitler, Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes
NBER Working Paper No. 10121
November 2003
JEL No. I3, C1
ABSTRACT
Labor supply theory predicts systematic heterogeneity in the impact of recent welfare reforms on
earnings, transfers, and income. Yet most welfare reform research focuses on mean impacts. We
investigate the importance of heterogeneity using random-assignment data from Connecticut's Jobs
First waiver, which features key elements of post-1996 welfare programs. Estimated quantile
treatment effects exhibit the substantial heterogeneity predicted by labor supply theory. Thus mean
impacts miss a great deal. Looking separately at dropouts and other women does not improve the
performance of mean impacts. Evaluating Jobs First relative to AFDC using a class of social welfare
functions, we find that Jobs First's performance depends on the degree of inequality aversion, the
relative valuation of earnings and transfers, and whether one accounts for Jobs First's greater costs.
We conclude that welfare reform's effects are likely both more varied and more extensive than has
been recognized.
Marianne Bitler
RAND Corporation
1700 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
bitler@rand.org
Jonah Gelbach
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
gelbach@glue.umd.edu

Hilary Hoynes
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
1152 Social Sciences & Humanities Building
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER
hwhoynes@ucdavis.edu

1

Introduction

Several years have now passed since the elimination of Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC), the principal U.S. cash assistance program for six decades. In 1996, enactment of the
Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) required all 50
states to replace AFDC with a Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program. State
TANF programs differ from AFDC in many fundamental ways. Key examples include lifetime
limits on program participation, enhanced work incentives through expanded earnings disregards,
stringent work requirements, and financial sanctions for failure to comply with these requirements.
A critical element in evaluating this dramatic policy change is measuring the impact of TANF on
earnings and income. In this paper, we focus on heterogeneity of the effects of these reforms. This
should be a key issue for evaluating welfare reform, because labor supply theory makes very strong
predictions concerning heterogeneity in both the sign and magnitude of labor supply responses to
recent reforms. As a consequence, mean impacts will tend to average together positive and negative
labor supply responses, possibly obscuring the extent of welfare reform’s effects.
Despite the theoretical indeterminacy of mean impacts, most existing research on welfare reform
and earnings takes that approach.1 Several studies use nonexperimental data from the Current
Population Survey (CPS) to examine the impact of PRWORA, and the state waivers that preceded
it, on income. Evidence from these studies is mixed. For example, Moffitt (1999) finds no impact
of waivers on family income, while Grogger (Forthcoming) finds that welfare reform increased
mean income for female heads of household. Further, experimental studies examining state reforms
implemented before 1996 via TANF-like waivers suggest that generous increases in the earnings
disregards are important for generating mean income gains. However, these gains disappear after
time limits (Bloom & Michalopoulos (2001), Grogger et al. (2002)).
In this paper, we shift attention away from mean impacts. Instead we allow for heterogeneous
impacts of welfare reform by estimating quantile treatment effects (QTE). We use public-use data
files from the Manpower Demonstration and Research Corporation’s (MDRC) experimental evaluation of Connecticut’s Jobs First waiver. The evaluation was conducted over a five-year period
1
The welfare reform literature that has developed in the last several years is enormous. We confine our discussion of
this literature to a few papers having particular relevance to our study of income and heterogeneity. For comprehensive
summaries of this research, see the excellent reviews by Blank (2002), Moffitt (2002), and Grogger, Karoly & Klerman
(2002).

1

beginning in 1996. Experimental data also are available for waiver demonstrations in other states.
We focus on Jobs First because of its radical increase in the earnings disregard and its very short
(21-month) time limit. Along these lines, Jobs First may be viewed as something of a supercharged
version of many states’ TANF programs. Thus it provides an excellent opportunity to study the
impacts of these key reforms.
Our choice to use experimental data and methods is not incidental. As discussed in Blank (2002)
and formalized in Bitler, Gelbach & Hoynes (2003, (Papers and Proceedings)), identifying the
impact of TANF using nonexperimental methods is difficult given that (i) TANF was implemented
in all states within a very short period, and (ii) the implementation took place during the strongest
economic expansion in decades. Since the relevance of many of our findings lies in the ability of
our techniques to detect heterogeneous treatment effects, we believe it is critical that our results
not depend importantly on nuisance issues related to selection bias. To this end, experimental data
provides a setting where identification is clear and essentially incontrovertible.
Our emphasis on heterogeneity is motivated partly because policymakers and researchers care
directly about it. For example, in a recent Joint Center for Poverty Research newsletter entitled
“What Policymakers Want to Know,” Cabrera & Evans (2000) ask “What is the variability of
response to welfare reform among families?. . . Typically, research findings are reported in terms of
the average response of the welfare reform population with respect to some behavior or status of
interest. This focus diverts attention from the subgroup of families that might be struggling, even
when most are not.” Such concerns have led a small number of authors to consider distributional
concerns. Schoeni & Blank (2003 (Papers and Proceedings)) compare the full distribution of the
income-to-needs ratio before and after TANF, finding increases at all but the very lowest percentiles.
However, as the authors note, their simple before-and-after methods cannot distinguish impacts of
TANF from the effects of strong labor markets. With the exception of these results and those in a
few other sources,2 the most common approach to addressing distributional concerns is to estimate
mean impacts for subgroups of the population (defined using education, race, and welfare and
2

Schoeni & Blank (2000) compare the 20th and 50th percentiles of the CPS family income distribution before and
after implementation of TANF. They find negative (but insignificant) impacts of TANF on the 20th percentile, and
positive and significant impacts on the 50th percentile for a sample of women with less than a high school education.
Some of the MDRC waiver evaluations (e.g., Bloom, Scrivener, Michalopoulos, Morris, Hendra, Adams-Ciardullo
& Walter (2002) and Bloom, Kemple, Morris, Scrivener, Verma & Hendra (2000)) include estimates comparing the
fraction of treatment and control group members with income in broadly defined categories. This approach, which is
essentially a tabular form of histogram plots, is similar in spirit to the approach we take.

2

employment history) thought to be particularly at risk for welfare dependence.3 Michalopoulos &
Schwartz (2000) review 20 randomized experiments, concluding that “Although the programs did
not increase [mean] income for most subgroups they also did not decrease [mean] income for most
subgroups” (p. ES-10). Grogger et al. (2002) summarize both nonexperimental and experimental
evidence concerning mean impacts as follows: “the effects of reform do not generally appear to be
concentrated among any particular group of recipients” (p. 231).
The focus in the literature on mean impacts contrasts with the very strong predictions that
labor supply theory makes concerning welfare reform and heterogeneity. Consider, for example,
Figure 1, which shows a stylized budget constraint in income-leisure space before and after Jobs
First (whose characteristics we describe in detail below). Jobs First dramatically increased the
disregard for calculating welfare benefits. In the pre-reform AFDC program, benefits were reduced
dollar-for-dollar with increased earnings, leading to the horizontal portion of the budget set (which
corresponds to a 100% tax rate).4 Under Jobs First, recipients retain their entire benefit payment
(a 0% tax rate) for earnings up to the poverty line.
Labor supply theory makes clear predictions about the impacts of this reform. Women who
would choose to participate in welfare and not work when they face AFDC rules will increase
earnings, provided their wages exceed a threshold level. By contrast, some women who would not
participate under AFDC rules will decrease earnings (to the poverty line or below) to become eligible
for Jobs First. Thus, mean impacts will average together positive and negative treatment effects,
obscuring the full range of effects welfare reform has had. Because recent welfare reforms yield such
clear theoretical predictions regarding heterogeneous treatment effects, they provide ideal terrain
for exploiting QTE methodology. To be sure, quantile treatment effects have been used in previous
experimental evaluations. Examples of their use in evaluating the Job Training and Partnership Act
include Heckman, Smith & Clements (1997) and Firpo (2003), while Friedlander & Robins (1997)
estimate QTE in evaluating employment training in earlier welfare reform experiments. However,
the source of heterogeneous treatment effects in these cases is difficult to identify, since they mostly
3

For example, Schoeni & Blank (2000) find that welfare reforms led to increases (insignificant in the case of TANF)
in mean family income for female dropouts in the CPS. Using similar data, Bennett, Lu & Song (2002) find that
TANF is associated with reductions in the income-to-needs ratio for poor children who live with a single parent
having less than a high school education.
4
As we discuss in section 2.3 below, the effective benefit reduction rate under AFDC may be much less punitive
than 100%; what matters here is that it is significantly more than 0%.

3

involve changes to training or job search assistance. Unlike such black-box reforms, theoretical
predictions are clear in the present context.
Our empirical findings may be summarized with two broad conclusions. First, we find evidence
of substantial heterogeneity in response to welfare reform. Second, the heterogeneity is broadly
consistent with the predictions of labor supply theory. Contrary to much recent discussion among
policymakers and researchers, under plausible assumptions our results suggest the possibility that
welfare reforms reduced income for a nontrivial fraction of treatment group members, especially
after time limits take effect. An important remaining methodological question is whether the
essential features of our empirical findings could have been revealed using mean impact analysis
on judiciously chosen subgroups. In the one important case we consider here, we find striking
evidence that the answer is a resounding no: we find evidence that intra-group variation in quantile
treatment effects greatly exceeds the inter-group variation in mean impacts.
Using mean impacts—which correspond to assuming risk/inequality neutrality—we find that
under some circumstances, Jobs First would pass a typical cost-benefit test. But when a reform
has heterogeneous effects, mean impacts are not sufficiently informative for an overall evaluation if
policymakers are inequality-averse. Thus, we also provide an evaluation of Jobs First’s effects on
the income distribution using a familiar class of social welfare functions that allow for inequality
aversion. For lower levels of inequality aversion, Jobs First still is found to be beneficial on net, but
this conclusion is reversed for relatively high levels of inequality aversion. The evaluation conclusion
depends importantly on how one accounts for Jobs First’s administrative costs, and also to some
extent on whether one accounts for the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we discuss the Jobs First
program and its expected impacts on labor supply, showing that both time limits and disregards
clearly were substantially implemented. In section 3, we present mean treatment effects for comparison purposes. We then report quantile treatment effects in 4. In section 5, we provide a social
welfare function analysis to draw welfare conclusions. We conclude in section 6.

4

2

Jobs First

In this section we summarize Jobs First’s programmatic features and their expected impacts, as
well as the public-use experimental data provided by the Manpower Demonstration and Research
Corporation (MDRC), which conducted the official Jobs First evaluation. In the next subsection,
we provide an overview of the Jobs First assignment regime and public-use data. In subsections 2.2
and 2.3, we discuss the two most important policy changes in Jobs First: time limits and the
expanded earnings disregard. We then discuss the remaining features of Jobs First in subsection 2.4.
We conclude this section in subsection 2.5 by discussing Jobs First’s labor supply implications.

2.1

Jobs First assignment and data

Table 1 summarizes the main features of Jobs First; further details beyond the discussion here
are available in MDRC’s final report on the evaluation [Bloom et al. (2002), henceforth “the final
report”]. The table also includes a summary of the pre-existing AFDC program for comparison.
The Jobs First waiver contained each of the key elements in PRWORA: time limits, changes to
earnings disregards, work requirements, and financial sanctions. Under federal law, evaluations
were required of states that implemented waiver programs. The Jobs First evaluation comprised
all cases that were either ongoing or opened in the New Haven and Manchester welfare offices
during the random assignment period, which took place between April 1996 and February 1997.
The evaluation continued through the end of December 2000, after which point no further data
were collected. MDRC’s evaluation and public-use samples include data on a total of 4,803 cases.
Of these, 2,396 were assigned to Jobs First and 2,407 to AFDC. Quarterly earnings data and
monthly data on welfare and Food Stamps income are available for the two years preceding program
assignment and for at least 4 years after assignment.5 Demographic data—including information
on educational attainment, age, race and ethnicity, marital status, and work history of the sample
5

There are 16 quarterly observations on Connecticut earnings after random assignment for every sample member,
with the exception of 30 people who entered the sample in January or February of 1997. Earnings data come from
Connecticut’s Unemployment Insurance (UI) system, so earnings not covered by the UI system are missed; fortunately
the vast majority of employment is covered by the UI system. Data on Food Stamps and welfare payments come
from Connecticut’s Eligibility Management System (EMS), which warehouses information about welfare use. To
preserve confidentiality, MDRC rounded several key variables before releasing the public-use data (e.g., they rounded
quarterly earnings data to the nearest $100 and AFDC and Food Stamps payments to the nearest $50). For cases
with true amounts between 0 and the lowest reported nonzero value (either $50 or $100), true values are rounded up,
so that there are no false zeroes in the data.

5

member—are collected at an interview prior to random assignment.6 During the evaluation, the
rest of Connecticut’s caseload was moved to Jobs First; only the control group continued under the
AFDC rules. Table 2 provides a number of summary statistics for the Jobs First population, as
well as for the national AFDC caseload in 1994.7 The Jobs First sample mirrors the characteristics
of the national sample, with exceptions reflecting the somewhat more disadvantaged recipients in
one of the evaluation sites (New Haven). This is reflected by somewhat greater fractions of never
married, Hispanic, and less-educated recipients compared to the national caseload average

2.2

The time limit

Jobs First’s 21-month time limit is currently the shortest in the U.S. (U.S. House of Representatives
Committee on Ways and Means (2000)). About 29% of the treatment group reached the time limit
in the first 21 months of the evaluation period, and more than half reached the time limit within
four years after random assignment (Bloom et al. (2002)). However, under certain circumstances,
Jobs First caseworkers were empowered to provide both indefinite exemptions (as described in
footnote 13) from the time limit and to provide 6-month extensions. According to the final report,
in the spring of 1998, 26% of the statewide (not just the Jobs First) caseload was exempt from the
time limit. This number rose to 49% by March 2001, though this appears to be the result largely
of progressive exits from the caseload by more able (and time-limited) recipients. Extensions were
granted to a non-exempt woman if her family income was below the applicable maximum benefit
payment and she had made a good-faith effort to find and retain employment.8 If no good-faith
determination was made, then an extension was still possible if “there were circumstances beyond
the recipient’s control that prevent[ed] her from working.”9
In light of these statistics, it is critical to show that the time limit policy has de facto relevance.
6

MDRC also conducted a survey on a subset of the sample about three years after random assignment. These
data, of which we only make slight use below, have been used by others to analyze impacts on other measures of
family and child well-being.
7
The estimates for the national caseload are constructed using March 1995 CPS data. The sample includes all
women aged 16–54 who have an own child in the household and whose family was reported to receive positive AFDC
income in the prior calendar year.
8
Determination of good faith appears to have been somewhat complicated, often involving “extensive investigation,
including talking with former employers, but staff reported that it often remains unclear why recipients left a job,
reduced hours, and so on.”
9
Details regarding exemptions and extensions are derived primarily from Chapter 3 of the final report (which
discusses implementation of the time limit) and from the overview in Chapter 1.

6

Figure 2 plots the monthly hazard rate for leaving welfare among women in our data who are still
in their first welfare participation spell (we discuss sampling issues below). The relatively smooth
series (dashed line) is the hazard rate for the control group, which faced the AFDC rules and, thus,
no time limit. The more jagged series (solid line) is the treatment effect on the hazard rate, which
is computed as the simple difference in hazards for the Jobs First and AFDC groups. There are
three salient features to this graph. First, there is an enormous spike in the treatment effect on the
hazard at exactly month 22, the first month when the statutory time limit binds. Second, there are
progressively smaller spikes at months 28, 34, and 46. These are months when 6-month extensions
would expire for women who receive them. There is also a spike at month 39, one month before
a third extension would expire (it is unclear why this spike is a month off). These spikes clearly
imply that the time limit policy was enforced for at least some women, which is a key result. A
third prominent feature of Figure 2 occurs in the first month following random assignment. The
month-1 control group hazard is very large, showing that a fifth of AFDC-assigned women either
leave welfare almost immediately or have their applications declined. For this month, the treatment
effect on the hazard is significantly negative (around -0.08). Thus, while Jobs First women are still
very likely to leave welfare very soon after assignment, they are significantly less likely than AFDC
women to do so. Our discussion below of the Jobs First disregard expansion will shed some light
on this finding.
Figure 2 concerns only the first spell, and hazards can be difficult to interpret after early
months, since the risk set shrinks over time. Consider then Figure 3, which plots monthly welfare
participation rates for women regardless of spell. The smooth series (dashed line) is the welfare
participation rate by month for the AFDC group, while the other series (solid line) is again the
treatment effect, calculated as the simple difference in the participation rate for the Jobs First
and AFDC groups. This figure has four key features. First, the treatment effect of Jobs First on
welfare participation is actually positive throughout the pre-time limit period. Second, there is a
large drop in the treatment effect at exactly the month when time limits can first bind. Third, the
treatment effect on welfare participation is negative after this point. Fourth, the figure also suggests
the time limit was not binding for everyone. At month 22, the control group welfare participation
rate was about 50%. If time limits were universally binding, we would have expected the drop in
the treatment effect between months 21 and 22 to be much larger than the figure shows. This is of

7

course just another way of saying that exemptions and extensions were provided, as suggested by
Figure 2. In any case, the two figures provide compelling evidence that the time limit policy was
binding for a substantial number of women. This is the important fact for our purposes.

2.3

The expanded earnings disregard

As discussed above, Jobs First’s disregard policy is quite simple: every dollar of earnings below
the federal poverty line (FPL) is disregarded for purposes of benefit determination. This policy is
very generous by comparison to AFDC’s. The statutory AFDC policy was to disregard the first
$120 of monthly earnings during a woman’s first 12 months on aid, and $90 thereafter. In the
first four months, benefits were reduced by two dollars for every three dollars earned (or otherwise
received), and starting with the fifth month, benefits were reduced dollar-for-dollar, so that the
long-run statutory implicit tax rate on earnings above the disregard was 100%.10 In practice, there
are two good reasons to think that the effective AFDC tax rate was lower than 100%, even after
the fourth month.
First, a number of work-related expenses (e.g., transportation and child care costs) are supposed
to be disregarded for benefit determination purposes.11 Second, it appears from the final report
that eligibility redetermination for AFDC recipients is done annually, rather than monthly. There
can be a long lag between the month when an AFDC participant earns income and the date when
benefits are reduced. In addition, the high 40% subsidy rate in the phase-in region of the EITC
further reduces the effective tax rate faced by AFDC recipients.
To illustrate the dramatic difference in the treatment of earnings under AFDC and Jobs First,
Figure 4 provides plots of local nonparametric (LOWESS) regression results for the observed relationship between quarterly earnings (the horizontal axis) and quarterly transfer income (defined
10

The Jobs First expanded disregard also affects Food Stamp eligibility and benefits. Under AFDC rules, eligibility
for AFDC conferred categorical eligibility for Food Stamps. Increasing the earnings disregard will, in general, lead to
an increase in eligibility for welfare and an increase in Food Stamp eligibility. However, losing eligibility for welfare
benefits (e.g., through time limits) need not eliminate Food Stamp eligibility, since one could still satisfy the Food
Stamps need standards. In addition, Jobs First Food Stamps rules mirrored cash assistance rules, with Food Stamps
benefits determined after disregarding all earnings up to the poverty line.
11
Expense deductions lower the observed tax on earnings. But it is less clear whether incentives faced by a woman
who has no work expenses and faces a 100% tax rate are any different from those faced by a woman who pays C in
work expenses and then has C dollars disregarded for benefit determination. The key question is whether women
derive per se utility from riding the bus to work or from sending children to daycare. If so, then the second kind of
woman is better off than the first. If not, the presence of disregards simply prevents the net return to work from
being negative.

8

as cash welfare plus Food Stamps).12 In these figures, every person-quarter is treated as a distinct
observation. Panel (a) of the figure is for the first seven post-assignment quarters, before time
limits can bind for anyone. The dotted line is for the AFDC group, while the solid line is for the
Jobs First group. The results show that for quarterly earnings below about $2,500, the slope for
Jobs First members is essentially 0. For AFDC members and for Jobs First members with higher
earnings, the slope implies that benefits fall about one dollar for every three earned. The picture
is generally similar (though shifted downward) for quarters 8–16, presented in Panel (c).
One complication in interpreting these figures is that while data on transfer income are available
monthly, earnings data are available only quarterly. One way to get a clearer picture is to consider
only cases that have nonzero transfer income in all 3 months of a given quarter. Panels (b) and (d)
replicate (a) and (c) with this selection criterion. The picture in Panel (b) is remarkable: for
the Jobs First group, the associated benefit reduction rate is almost exactly zero across the entire
earnings distribution, while the AFDC group’s slope is again approximately -1/3. It seems clear
that the effective tax rate on earnings is substantially below 1 for the AFDC group; this finding,
which has been made in other contexts (e.g., see McKinnish, Sanders & Smith (1999) and Fraker,
Moffitt & Wolf (1985)) is an interesting result in itself.
For our purposes, the key finding from these figures is that as implemented, Jobs First significantly reduced the effective tax rate on earnings. This finding has important implications for
analyzing the labor supply implications of Jobs First, which we do below in Section 2.5.

2.4

Other changes in Jobs First

Jobs First changed other features of welfare in Connecticut including job search assistance, work
requirements, sanctions, more generous child support pass-through, more generous asset limits,
child care and medical insurance expansions, and family caps. These changes are less important
in the current context either because they were relatively minor policy changes, or because they
were not enforced stringently. As will be seen below, these changes all have essentially uniform
predictions for labor supply.
Formal employment assistance under Jobs First was relatively limited. For example, the final
12
The lowess regressions were estimated using a bandwidth parameter that includes 10% of the sample in each
local regression.

9

report explains that in the first two-and-half years of the program, contracted providers supplied
only “roughly two weeks of classroom instruction in job-seeking and job-holding skills, followed by
several more weeks of monitored job search.” Moreover, the final report makes clear that monitoring
of compliance with employment mandates was very weak, partly due to low payments by the state to
contractors meant to track and promote employment. Partly as a consequence, financial sanctions
for failure to comply with the mandates were rarely levied. The report states that between 8–13%
of Jobs First participants were ever sanctioned, by comparison to 5% of the AFDC-eligible control
group. Unfortunately, the weak monitoring of employment patterns means that no reliable data
on noncompliance are available. Moreover, under some circumstances caseworkers are empowered
to grant Jobs First participants exemptions from work mandates and/or time limits.13 In fact,
over the life of the Jobs First evaluation, 30% of the sample received an exemption in at least one
month. Thus, it is impossible to estimate a reliable noncompliance rate. What is clear is that, at
least during the evaluation period, the Jobs First work requirements could generally be ignored by
program participants with limited risk of sanction.
Jobs First also increased the effective pass-through of child support payments from $50, though
only to $100.14 While Jobs First allowed families to have up to $3,000 in assets and more car equity
than under AFDC, the final report suggests that women assigned to Jobs First had no more savings
than did women in the control group. The final report also suggests that the practical differences
between child care assistance provided by AFDC and Jobs First were limited. With respect to
health insurance, Jobs First provided transitional medical assistance via Medicaid for one year
longer than the AFDC program. However, Connecticut expanded other health insurance policies
during the evaluation period (e.g., Medicaid, SCHIP), so the difference may not be practically
important. Finally, the partial family cap reduced by about half the incremental benefit paid after
the birth of a child conceived while the woman was receiving welfare. However, the incremental
welfare payment was only about $100 to begin with, and the final report notes that no differences
13

Those circumstances include physical or mental incapacitation, responsibility to care for a disabled relative,
having a child aged younger than 1, and being deemed unemployable due to limited work history and human capital.
Having an exemption means that a woman has no work requirement and that welfare participation does not count
toward the time limit as long as the exemption is in effect.
14
Under AFDC, only $50 of each monthly child support payment actually accrued to the mother, with the state
keeping the balance. Under Jobs First, families received all child support collected on their behalf, but only the
first $100 was disregarded in determining their welfare payment. According to the final report, Jobs First families
reported having received slightly higher child support payments (by about $30 a month).

10

in childbearing were observed across program assignment.

2.5
2.5.1

Expected impacts on earnings, transfers, and income
The disregard

Figure 1 uses stylized budget constraints to illustrate how the expanded disregard affects women’s
labor-leisure tradeoff. Consider first women who would locate at the corner of the AFDC budget
set, working 0 hours and receiving the maximum benefit. For these women, Jobs First raises the
effective wage from 0 to w, leading to unambiguous increases in employment rates, hours, earnings,
and income. However, transfer income will be unchanged for these women, since they are already
receiving the maximum payment. Of course, not all women will enter the labor market—even with
the more generous disregard, the after-tax wage still may not exceed the woman’s reservation level.
Next consider the impact of the Jobs First disregard on women who would ultimately have
hours of labor supply that exceed the AFDC breakeven hours level. Presumably such women are
those whose offered wages are temporarily low, due to frictional unemployment, marital dissolution,
or some other negative shock, but then return to a long run value that makes it optimal to increase
labor supply.15 Such women may be affected by Jobs First’s disregard expansion, which adds a
new, much higher kink to the budget constraint where earnings equal the federal poverty line and
benefits equal the maximum benefit. The usual prediction from such a massive shifting out of
the budget set is that some women will reduce hours below the breakeven level in order to gain
eligibility for transfers. Thus for these high-wage women, we expect both hours and earnings to
fall, while transfers should rise (from zero to the maximum benefit). The total impact on income
depends on whether the earnings reduction outweighs the increase in transfer payments.
For a final group of women, long run wages may be so high that in the absence of a negative
shock they would never participate in either AFDC or Jobs First. For such women, who will tend
to be at the top of the earnings distribution under either welfare system, the treatment effect on
all three of our outcome variables will be zero.
In sum, the predicted effects on the earnings distribution of the disregard expansion are hetero15

While a static model with a fixed offered wage—like that represented by Figure 1—cannot capture such dynamically varying labor supply, it is helpful in guiding our understanding of labor supply choices within periods of time
when the wage is fixed.

11

geneous: no change at the bottom, increases in the middle, decreases at high earnings, and perhaps
no change at the very top. While these predictions are well-known from earlier discussions of the
role of AFDC benefit reduction rates, the Jobs First disregard expansion is larger than any previous
change. And as mentioned in the introduction, mean impacts could mask sizable, opposite-signed
impacts across the distribution.
2.5.2

The time limit

Time limit-induced elimination of welfare eligibility reduces welfare participation and transfer income, and when it occurs it should also lead to increases in labor supply and earnings. Participants
may also “bank” their eligibility by reducing welfare and increasing labor supply even before the
time limit binds, as discussed in Grogger & Michalopoulos (2003). Because earnings are predicted
to rise while transfers are predicted to fall, theoretical predictions concerning total income and time
limits are ambiguous.
2.5.3

Other program changes

Mandatory work activities should also lead to increased earnings and reduced transfers, as discussed
in Moffitt (2002) and Besley & Coate (1998). Eliminating the option of receiving welfare and
working fewer than a set number of hours will cause recipients who remain on aid to increase
labor supply and earnings. Such work requirements reduce the utility associated with welfare
receipt, so we also expect reduced welfare participation and increases in work. Sanctions act to
financially penalize welfare participants for not complying with work requirements. Since they
impose new costs on (some) recipients, sanctions should reduce welfare participation and benefits,
while increasing work. The net impact on income is uncertain for both work requirements and
sanctions.

3

Mean treatment effects

In this section, we report mean treatment effects. Before proceeding, we must address a complication concerning the quality of random assignment. Table 3 reports our estimates of several
pre-treatment statistics: mean quarterly levels of earnings, cash welfare, and Food Stamps, as well

12

as the fraction of pre-treatment quarters in which each of these variables was nonzero.16 This table
shows that before treatment, the Jobs First group had significantly lower earnings and greater
cash welfare use than did the AFDC group. The final report notes this but does not provide any
explanation for how this occurred. To deal with this problem, all of MDRC’s reported treatment
effects in the final report are the estimated coefficients on a Jobs First treatment dummy in OLS
regressions that include pre-treatment data on earnings, cash welfare, and Food Stamps for the
four quarters preceding random assignment.
While this is a common way of adjusting for pre-treatment differences, it is now well known
that a more theoretically appropriate approach is to use inverse-propensity score weighting. This is
the approach we take. Briefly, we estimate the probability that a person is in the treatment group
using predicted values from a logit model in which the treatment dummy is related to the following
variables: quarterly earnings in each of the 8 pre-assignment quarters, quarterly AFDC and Food
Stamps payments in each of the 7 pre-assignment quarters, and dummies indicating whether each
of these 22 variables is nonzero. Denote the estimated propensity score for person i p̂i and the
treatment dummy Ti . Then the estimated inverse-propensity score weight for person i is

ω̂i ≡

Ti 1 − Ti
+
,
p̂i
1 − p̂i

(1)

with these weights then used in the standard fashion for all estimators employed below.17,18 In
practice, adjusting for pre-treatment differences leads to few changes in the estimated mean impacts
and does not change the overall picture.
16

For earnings, data are available for the 8 quarters preceding random assignment; for cash welfare and Food
Stamps, data for all observations are available only for the 7 quarters preceding random assignment.
17
The literature on propensity scores and mean treatment effects, which is large and growing, began with Rosenbaum & Rubin (1983). Recent papers focusing on mean treatment effects include Heckman, Ichimura & Todd (1998)
and Hirano, Imbens & Ridder (2003). Firpo (2003) has shown that the same approach corrects for bias in estimation
of quantiles of the counterfactual treated and control distributions, with the simple differences of adjusted quantiles
then serving as estimates of the quantile treatment effects. The weights given in (1) uncover treatment effects for
the entire population represented by the experimental population. Alternative weights could be used to estimate the
effects of treatment on the treated, but our objective is to estimate the effects of Jobs First under the assumption of
generalizability.
18
Two estimation issues arise when using inverse-propensity score weighting. The first is that theoretical results
generally require nonparametric estimation of the propensity score, while our estimates are parametric. Second,
the variance of estimated treatment effects (mean or quantile) will depend partly on the variance of the estimated
propensity score (and its covariance with treatment and with the unexplained part of the outcome of interest). We
address this issue with the bluntest instrument possible, by simply bootstrapping all of our estimates.

13

3.1

Mean treatment effects

The first column of Table 4 reports estimated mean levels among the Jobs First group for several
variables, over the entire 16-quarter post-treatment period. The first three rows concern average
quarterly values of total income, earnings, and total transfers (where total income is defined as the
sum of earnings and total transfers). The second column provides means for the AFDC group over
the same period, and the third column provides the resulting mean impacts. These results show
that over the four years following random assignment, the impact of Jobs First on average total
income was $135, compared to an estimated baseline quarterly income of $2,612 for the control
group. Thus, the mean impact of Jobs First on income was about 5%. About two-thirds of this
impact is due to an (insignificant) increase in earnings, with the other third due to a significant
increase in transfers.
The bottom three rows provide means and impacts for binary variables indicating whether the
person had positive levels of income, earnings, and transfers. For example, the value of 0.852 for
“Any income” among the treatment group means that among women assigned to Jobs First, 85.2%
of all person-quarters had a positive value for at least one of UI earnings, cash assistance, or Food
Stamps.19 The results show that the probability of having any earnings was 7 percentage points
greater among the Jobs First group than the control group, an effect of 14 percent relative to the
control group baseline. The probability of having any income or any transfers is essentially identical
across treatment status.
The findings from the previous section suggest that in the first 21 months—before time limits
bind for anyone—behavior induced by Jobs First is very different from behavior during the final
27 months. Thus, we separately estimate mean treatment effects for the pre- and post-time limit
periods. The second set of columns includes only the first 7 quarters of data, while the third set
includes only the last 9 quarters. The results suggest that average earnings increased 7 percent in
the pre-time limit period and (an insignificant) 6 percent in the post-time limit period (the impact
is greater in the later period, but average earnings for the control group are also significantly
greater). The fraction of Jobs First person-quarters with any earnings also rises in both periods,
19
This also means that about 15% of person-quarters had no value in any quarter for any of these variables. This
could mean that 15% of persons never have any income, that everyone has positive income for all but 15% of quarters,
or something in between. We return to this issue in the next subsection.

14

by 17 percent in the pre-time limit period and by 12.3% in the post-time limit.
The mean impacts for transfers are starkly different in the early and later periods. During
the first 7 quarters, Jobs First members received $217—or 16.3%—more transfer income than did
control group women. During the later period, Jobs First members received $98—or 12 percent—
less in transfers. The same pattern is clear for the fraction of person-quarters with positive transfers.
The net result of these changes in earnings and transfers is that Jobs First increased mean total
income significantly—in both economic and statistical terms—in the pre-time limit period. Nearly
three-fourths of this increase is due to increased transfer income, rather than earnings. By contrast,
in the post-time limit period, mean income was virtually identical across treatment status. This is
the result of nearly equal increases in mean income and reductions in mean transfers. Nonetheless,
the post-time limit employment rate (the fraction of quarters with any earnings) is considerably
greater for the Jobs First group. This means that, conditional on working, average earnings are
lower among women caused by Jobs First to work in the last 9 quarters.

4

Quantile treatment effects

We now turn to quantile treatment effects. The first subsection considers some key methodological
issues necessary for interpreting the quantile treatment effects results. In subsection 4.2, we present
the main results: quantile treatment effects for 98 centiles in graphical form, using all experimental
participants.20 We also investigate whether our results are likely to be driven by migration out
of Connecticut or by withdrawal from both the labor market and welfare following marriage or
increased child support. In subsection 4.3, we discuss whether the heterogeneity we find could
be satisfactorily uncovered by looking separately at high school dropouts and non-dropouts, a
widely used approach in the literature on welfare reform. In general, the answer is a clear no. We
summarize the QTE findings in subsection 4.4.
20

We computed the QTE at the 99th quantile but do not include it in the figures below because its variance is
frequently large enough to distort the scale of the figures. The extreme variance at high quantiles for unbounded
distributions is well known; we do not have the same problem at the bottom of the distributions because they are all
bounded below by zero.

15

4.1

Methodological issues

For the moment, ignore the need to adjust for propensity score differences. The quantile treatment
effect for quantile q may be estimated very simply as the difference across treatment status in the
two outcome quantiles. For instance, if we take the sample median for the treatment group and
subtract from it the sample median for the control group, we have the quantile treatment effect at
the .5 quantile. Other quantile treatment effects are estimated analogously.
One important methodological distinction must be made: that between quantile treatment
effects and quantiles of the treatment effect distribution. To understand the distinction, it will
be helpful to briefly introduce a model of causal effects. Let Ti = 1 if observation i receives
the treatment, and 0 otherwise. Let Yi (t) be i’s counterfactual value of the outcome Y if i has
Ti = t. The fundamental evaluation problem is that for any i, at most one element of the pair
(Yi (0), Yi (1)) can ever be observed: we cannot observe someone who is simultaneously treated and
not treated. Evaluation methodology thus focuses on inferences concerning various features of
the joint distribution of (Y (0), Y (1)). In particular, the marginal distributions F0 (y) and F1 (y)
are always observed, where Ft (y) ≡ Pr[Yi (t) ≤ y] for a randomly drawn i. These are marginal
distributions because the counterfactual control outcome for i can never be observed when Ti = 1,
so that implicitly we have to “integrate out” Y (0) when considering F1 , and vice versa. One
can also think of these marginal distributions as the conditional distributions of the observable
outcomes Yi ≡ Ti Yi (1) + (1 − Ti )Yi (0), with the conditioning done on Ti . There is an enormous
literature concerning the model described in the text (which is variously called the Roy Model, the
Quandt Model, and the Rubin Causal Model) and the assumptions under which it is useful. See,
for example, excellent papers by Heckman et al. (1997) or Imbens & Angrist (1994) for further
details.
Quantile treatment effects are features of the marginal distributions F0 (y) and F1 (y). As usual,
for treatment assignment t, the q th quantile of distribution Ft is defined as yq (t) ≡ inf{y : Ft (y) ≥ q}.
The quantile treatment effect for quantile q is then ∆q = yq (1)−yq (0); our above example concerning
the QTE for the median involves setting q = 0.5. To account for inverse propensity score weighting,
P
P
we define the empirical cdf as F̂t (y) ≡ i: Yi (t)≤y ω̂i / i ω̂i and then proceed as before.
For observation i, the treatment effect is δi ≡ Yi (1) − Yi (0), and the cumulative distribution
of treatment effects may be written as G(d) ≡ Pr[δi ≤ d] for randomly chosen i; quantiles of this
16

distribution satisfy dq ≡ inf{d : G(d) ≥ q}. By contrast to quantile treatment effects, quantiles
of the treatment effects distribution cannot be written as features of the marginal distributions.
Rather, they require more detailed knowledge of the joint distribution. Under some conditions,
the distribution of treatment effects is recoverable. A leading example assumes that the treatment
effect is equal for all observations, in which case G is degenerate (and fully identified by the mean
impact). However, the above discussion of labor supply impacts suggests that is not valid here.
A second example is rank preservation. Under rank preservation, any person whose outcome in
the counterfactual control distribution is the q th quantile will also have an outcome that is the
q th quantile in the counterfactual treated distribution. It then follows that ∆q and δq are equal,
and since ∆q is always identified by the difference of marginals at q, the cumulative distribution of
treatment effects G is also identified by sorting the set of estimated ∆q .
It may be that rank preservation holds for a large portion of the distribution. However, there will
likely be parts of the distribution—such as at the bottom of the distribution where some respond
to the Jobs First incentives and others do not—where rank preservation fails. As a consequence,
quantile treatment effects must be understood as what they are: differences in the treated and
control distributions, not the treatment effects for identifiable women in either distribution.
In the absense of rank preservation, certain important features of the joint distribution of
(Y (0), Y (1)) are still identified. A simple example is the mean treatment effect; if this is the object
of interest, the marginal distributions are just as informative as the joint distribution. Even with
heterogeneous treatment effects, some important features of the joint distribution can be identified,
depending on the estimated quantile treatment effects. For example:21
1. Fix a quantile q ∗ . The minimum treatment effect δq for all q ≥ q ∗ is no larger than
the smallest quantile treatment effect ∆q for q ≥ q ∗ . Thus if any QTE is negative,
at least one treatment effect is also negative.
2. The logical inversion also holds. Fix a quantile q ∗ . Then supG {δ : control group rank is q ≤
q ∗ } ≥ sup{∆q : q ≤ q ∗ }. Thus if any QTE is positive, at least one treatment effect
is also positive.
21

For an illuminating discussion concerning the distinction between the distribution of treatment effects and quantile
treatment effects, see Heckman et al. (1997). Some items in the list below are discussed there, while others are not
but can be shown easily.

17

3. The variance of the distribution of treatment effects is at least as great as the
variance of the quantile treatment effects.
4. If subgroups are defined with respect to characteristics that are either permanent
or fixed over the period of study, then the above results hold within subgroup,
which may yield further information (e.g., the maximum QTE may be greater in
a subgroup than in the pooled sample).
These examples show that quantile treatment effects do provide considerable information about
treatment effect heterogeneity. We have seen that, other things equal, expanded disregards should
leave earnings unchanged for women with sufficiently low offered wages, increase earnings as we
move up the wage distribution, and reduce earnings (due to entry effects) at the top of the wage
distribution. Moreover, theory suggests that, provided women remain in Connecticut and do not
get married, no element of Jobs First should cause anyone to reduce earnings from a positive level
to zero.22 This argument suggests that quantile treatment effects may be fruitfully used in tandem
with labor supply theory to understand the effects of Jobs First. Lastly, we note that classical social
welfare function analysis, as we discuss in section 5, requires only the marginal, fixed-treatment
distributions.
The nature of Jobs First, and the results in section 2, suggest that in practice Jobs First is best
thought of as two overlapping programs: one that increases the generosity of the welfare system for
women who combine welfare and work, and a second that greatly restricts this generosity for women
who initially stay on welfare and demonstrate nontrivial earnings capacity. This Jekyll-and-Hyde
program design raises methodological questions in using nonlinear estimators, including quantile
treatment effects. It seems clear that looking separately at the pre- and post-time limit periods
is important. But it is less clear how to do this. One approach is to estimate quantile treatment
effects for outcomes averaged over the relevant periods; for example, average quarterly earnings in
the seven pre-time limit quarters. A second approach is to use the person-quarter as the unit of
22

Welfare and unemployment insurance programs can be thought of as subsidizing job search, and expansions in
their generosity are typically thought to raise reservation wages for working. This sort of effect would delay the onset
of positive earnings, causing some treated women to have zero earnings in some months, when their counterfactual
earnings given AFDC assignment would have been positive. However, Jobs First does not actually subsidize off-thejob search, since the expanded disregard affects disposable income only for women who have positive earnings. If
anything, the expanded disregard (together with the time limit) should speed up exit from unemployment, which was
certainly Connecticut’s intention.

18

analysis.
There are arguments for each of these approaches. In general, one would like the unit of
analysis to be the longest period through which consumption smoothing is possible. Thus, if
women in the sample are able to smooth consumption across quarters over a two-year period, then
averaged outcomes before and after time limits may be an appropriate measure of Jobs First’s
effects. However, it is easy to imagine that consumption smoothing will be difficult for welfare
recipients: both the eligibility requirement of low assets and the fact that human capital for welfare
recipients is typically low suggest that liquidity constraints likely are binding. An alternative
argument for using average within-period outcomes is that it does not complicate standard error
estimation, whereas using the person-quarter as the unit of analysis induces dependence in an
otherwise-iid context. However, using inverse propensity score weighting complicates the estimation
of standard errors anyway, a problem that we address by bootstrapping. Rather than take a stand
on this issue, we simply report results computed each way; our results are qualitatively robust to
these two approaches.

4.2
4.2.1

QTE results for the full sample
Earnings

Figure 5 introduces the QTE estimator. The top panel plots centiles of the earnings distribution
using person-quarter observations among Jobs First and AFDC women in the first seven quarters
following implementation of Jobs First (before time limits bind). The vertical difference between
these lines at a given decile is an estimate of the reform’s treatment effect on earnings at that
quantile. We plot these QTEs in the bottom panel of Figure 5. For comparison purposes, the mean
treatment effect is plotted as a horizontal (dashed) line, and the 0-line is provided for reference.
Dotted lines represent 90% confidence intervals calculated using the empirical standard deviation
of 250 bootstrap replications of the quantile treatment effects.23 The variation in the impact across
the quantiles of the distributions is unmistakably significant, both statistically and substantively.
This figure shows that for quarterly earnings in the pre-time limit period, the quantile treatment
23

We use non-overlapping block bootstrap, with each person as a single block. This removes any within-person
dependence in the estimates using the person-quarter as the unit of observation. The confidence intervals are based
on a two-tailed test.

19

effect is identically zero for nearly half of all person-quarters. This result occurs because quarterly
earnings are identically 0 for 48% of the pre-time limit treatment group person-quarters and 55%
of the control group person-quarters. For quantiles 49–82, treatment group earnings are greater
than control group earnings. Between quantiles 83–87, earnings are again equal (though non-zero).
Finally, for quantiles 88–98, control group earnings exceed treatment group earnings. These results
are exactly what basic labor supply theory, discussed above, predicts. It is useful to note that
the range of the point estimates for the QTE is quite large: about [-$250 , $600], compared to
a mean treatment effect of $93 with an estimated standard error of $57. As we noted above, no
policy change in Jobs First should cause women to lower earnings from a positive amount to zero.
Thus for all women who are assigned to Jobs First and have zero earnings, the treatment effect (as
opposed to the QTE) is known to be zero.
For the remainder of the paper, we will present results like the bottom panel of Figure 5–
plotting QTE estimates for each centile of the earnings, transfer, and total income distributions.
The main results are reported in Figures6–8. In each figure, the graphs on the left hand side use
the person-quarter as the unit of analysis, while those on the right-hand side use within-person
quarterly averages. The top graphs are for the first 7 quarters, the middle ones for the last 9, and
the bottom ones for all 16 quarters.24 For comparison, Appendix figures 1–3 provide the inverse
cdfs analogous to the top panel of Figure 5.
For the post-time limit period, earnings effects are broadly similar to those just discussed,
though with a somewhat wider range. Considering all observations over the entire 16-quarter
period also yields similar results.
The three figures using averaged quarterly earnings are all considerably smoother than those
using person-quarters as the unit of analysis, as we expect when there is any within-person, overtime variation in earnings. Using averaged outcomes also reduces the range of estimated quantile
treatment effects, especially at the top. However, this range is still very large relative to the mean
treatment effects and their standard errors.
Finding that earnings quantile treatment effects are negative at higher quantiles suggests a
program-entry (or more likely non-exit) response among women who would have had high earnings
24

Thus, for the first seven quarters, quantile treatment effects are calculated using 7 × 4, 803 = 33, 621 observations.
For the last nine quarters, there are (9 × 4, 803) − 30 = 43, 207 observations.

20

and stayed off welfare were they subject to AFDC rules. Thus, the finding is consistent with the
prediction that Jobs First’s generous disregard will cause large negative income effects on hours
worked for high-wage women. Indeed, according to data from the three-year survey discussed in
the final report, hours worked in the month of the survey were lower among high-earnings Jobs
First women than among high-earnings AFDC women.
In our view, the reduction in earnings at the top of the distribution caused by Jobs First is most
likely due to the disregard expansion and its eligibility-inducing negative income effects. However,
time limits and some of the other features of Jobs First will tend to lower the wage at which women
are willing to exit welfare. Such accelerated search provides an alternative explanation fo the
negative QTE results at higher quantiles of the earnings distribution. In fact, data from the threeyear follow-up survey do suggest that employed Jobs First women have lower wages throughout
much of the top half of the wage distribution.
But if lower reservation wages for exiting welfare were the only cause of reduced earnings at
the top, then welfare participation rates at higher earnings levels should be lower among Jobs
First than among AFDC women. To test this hypothesis, we first sort average earnings into
10 bins corresponding to deciles of the control group earnings distribution. We then calculate
person-specific welfare participation rates and compare then across treatment status. If the search
explanation is correct, then welfare participation rates should be lower among high-earnings Jobs
First women; if the eligibility effect is correct, the opposite is true. In the pre-time limit period, we
find that welfare participation rates are significantly greater among Jobs First women with earnings
at least equal to the control group median. Moreover, this difference increases as we move to higher
earnings bins. For example, for the three highest control group deciles, welfare participation rates
are 12–15 percentage points greater in the Jobs First group. In the post-time limit period, this
difference at higher earnings largely disappears. We would expect this result, since women who are
induced to stay on Jobs First because of the generous disregard will generally have high earnings
and thus be unlikely to get extensions. We thus conclude that in the pre-time limit period, negative
quantile treatment effects at higher quantiles are likely due to disregard-induced negative income
effects. In the post-time limit period, reduced work-no-welfare reservation wages are a more likely
explanation.

21

4.2.2

Transfers

Figure 7 presents results for transfer income, defined as the sum of cash payments and the face value
of Food Stamps. The most notable feature of these results is the radical difference in the treatment
effects of Jobs First across the pre- and post-time limit period. Consider first the person-quarter
results in the program’s first seven quarters. The QTE is identically 0 for the bottom 20 quantiles,
reflecting the fact that for 20% of person-quarters, both the treatment and control group have zero
transfer income. For all person-quarter quantiles (except for two) above the 20th, transfer income
in the pre-time limit period is greater among Jobs First women than among AFDC women. This
finding greatly extends the result for mean treatment effects presented in section 3. Moreover,
the range of quantile treatment effects in this period is very large, with the largest QTE reaching
$700. As a basis of comparison, this is nearly three times the upper limit of the 90% confidence
interval around the mean effect of $217; it is also nearly a third of the maximum quarterly value
of Connecticut’s combined AFDC-Food Stamps payment for a family of three. By comparison to
AFDC, Jobs First in the pre-time limit period clearly is associated with a substantial upward shift
of the transfer income inverse cdf.
The person-quarter graph for the post-time limits period is much different. The graph shows
that for the lowest 48 quantiles, the Jobs First and AFDC transfer distributions are equal, with both
showing zero transfer income at all these quantiles. However, at essentially all quantiles between
49–96, the Jobs First group receives less transfer income. The size of the reductions in transfer
income can be quite large: the largest quarterly reduction is $550, and the reduction is at least $300
for all quantiles from 64–76. By stark contrast to the pre-time limit period, these results suggest
that Jobs First in the post-time limit period is associated with a substantial downward shift of the
transfer income inverse cdf. And again, these findings tell a much richer story than does the mean
treatment effect of -$98, together with its standard error of $25.
Putting together the pre- and post-time limit periods in the bottom graph shows that the full,
16-quarter effects of Jobs First on the transfer income distribution are relatively limited. Aside
from the $250 QTE at the 99th quantile, the largest QTE is only $150. The basic picture from the
person-quarter approach is that, over the full period, the large positive quantile treatment effects
in the pre-time limit period and the large negative effects in the post-time limit period more or less
cancel each other out.
22

Using averaged quarterly transfers yields a generally similar story. As with earnings, the crossquarter, within-person averaging reduces the variability of quantile treatment effects. For the preand post-time limit periods, averaging also reduces the range of the quantile treatment effects, but
without changing the basic qualitative results. For the overall time period, however, results using
averaging and person-quarter units appear somewhat different. First, the range of effects is actually
greater using the averaged transfers. Second, the treatment effects on the distribution of average
transfer income are clearly positive at lower quantiles and negative at higher quantiles.
4.2.3

Total income

We can now discuss the effects of Jobs First on total income. Total income as we observe it is the
sum of earnings and transfers. Since a given increase in total income could be driven by either
large reductions in transfers together with increases in earnings, or no change in transfers together
with smaller increases in earnings, there need not be any particular relationship between quantile
treatment effects for total income and for its components. Thus, it is worthwhile to consider quantile
treatment effects for total income, which we present in Figure 8.
Person-quarter results for the pre-time limit period again suggest a large degree of heterogeneity
in quantile treatment effects. Quantile treatment effects range from 0 for the bottom 9 quantiles—
where total income from administratively measurable sources is 0—to $800 at the top of the range.
The mean treatment effect for this period is $296, with a standard error of $47, so again, the range
of quantile treatment effects is much greater than the range provided by a confidence interval for
the mean treatment effect. For the post-time limit period, the mean treatment effect of $10 is
trivial, but the quantile treatment effect results clearly show that it would be wrong to think Jobs
First has no impact for the entire distribution. Quantile treatment effects for total income are
zero for the first 18 quantiles and are actually negative for about 25 quantiles. For some of these
quantiles the reduction in quarterly total income is as large as $300—the magnitude of the mean
treatment effect in the pre-time limit period.
Putting together the two periods, the person-quarter quantile treatment effects on total income
are presented in the bottom-left graph of Figure 8. The graph shows that for the bottom 14
quantiles, both the Jobs First and AFDC distributions have 0 total income. The quantile treatment
effects remain non-positive, and generally negative, until quantile 37, though the magnitudes of the

23

negative quantile treatment effects is not very large. Quantile treatment effects are positive, and
in some cases relatively large, for quantiles 41–98. Compared to the mean treatment effect of $135
(standard error=54), this is again quite a large range. As with earnings and transfers, results
using averaged quarterly total income as the dependent variable yield the same basic qualitative
conclusions regarding Jobs First’s impact.
Results for total income thus suggest that compared to AFDC, Jobs First exhibits reductions or
no effects on income at lower quantiles, with quantile treatment effects at higher quantiles clearly
being positive. This finding drives much of the analysis in the next section.
4.2.4

Robustness checks related to exits from administrative data

One concern in interpreting the above QTE results involves women who have zero total income in
some quarters. For these women to survive, they must have some way to finance consumption other
than UI-covered Connecticut earnings, cash assistance through either Jobs First or Connecticut’s
AFDC program, and Food Stamps. Such women could have some other source of earnings (UInoncovered or under-the-table), they could have support (cash or in-kind) from family members or
absent non-custodial parents, or they could have moved out of Connecticut. A substantial amount
of discussion in the final report (mostly using the three-year followup survey) suggests that neither
marriage nor migration rates were systematically affected by welfare policies and that child support
payments were only slightly impacted. That is not enough for our purposes, however, because it is
always possible (for example) that high-earnings women were systematically caused by Jobs First
to stay in Connecticut, while low-earnings women systematically moved out. In this situation, the
overall migration rate would be unaffected, but the zeroes in our total income data would be driven
partly by missing data.
To deal with this issue, we take the following conservative approach. For each woman with zero
total income in some quarter, we find the last chronological quarter in which she had nonzero total
income. We then act as if she moved out of the state at the beginning of that quarter, excluding all
subsequent quarters (all of which have zero earnings, transfers, and total income) for that woman
from the analysis. When we do this, slightly more than a fifth of the sample of person-quarters is
dropped. While this is a nontrivial share, there is virtually no variation across treatment status
in the overall probability of “exiting” the administrative data. Furthermore, at each quarter in

24

the followup period, there are no statistically significant differences in the probability of exiting
the sample between the treatment and control group.25 Nonetheless, we recalculated the quantile
treatment effects excluding our synthetic “movers”. Not surprisingly, the results estimated on this
sample of nonmovers are qualitatively virtually identical to the figures presented above.
To further explore the robustness of our results to potential movers, we also re-calculated our
estimates for the specifications using averaged outcomes as the dependent variables. To do this, we
drop all women who ever “move” (rather than just dropping quarterly post-“move” observations,
as just described). Again, this alteration makes no noticeable difference in our results.

4.3

Quantile treatment effects by subgroup

So far, we have included all women for whom we have usable data. One might argue that this stacks
the deck in favor of finding significant treatment effect heterogeneity. We think the heterogeneity
demonstrated above would still be important in this case. But it is interesting to examine whether
mean treatment effects together with judicious choice of observable subgroups would allow us to
capture most or all of the heterogeneity demonstrated above. To examine this question, we follow
a common approach in the welfare reform literature, considering separately high school dropouts
and women with at least a high school diploma.26 Non-dropouts are often used as a comparison
group: given non-dropouts’ lower welfare participation rates, reforms are often thought to affect
them less than dropouts. We note that to be part of the experiment, all women in our sample had
to apply for welfare, so this argument is less clearcut than is typically the case. Nonetheless, this
is a logical way to consider the subgroups question.27
The top row of Figure 9 provides graphs of quantile treatment effects in quarters 1–7 (person25

The highest absolute-value t-statistic is 1.42 in a regression of indicators for “moving out” each quarter on
treatment status.
26
Dropout status is collected at a baseline intake survey around the time of random assignment. This information
is then provided by MDRC in the same public-use file as the administrative records. This variable is missing for a
small number of observations, which we exclude from the subgroup analysis.
27
Various parts of the final report (especially Appendix I) contain analyses of a wide array of subgroups. However,
the focus is on groups labeled “most disadvantaged” and “least disadvantaged”. The most disadvantaged are those
who “had received cash assistance for at least 22 of the 24 months prior to random assignment, had not worked in
the year prior to random assignment, and did not have a high school diploma or GED certificate” (see footnote 12 on
page 22 of the final report). The least disadvantaged are those for whom none of these three conditions hold. While
the information on prior employment and welfare use is valuable and would probably be used by researchers when
available, most public-use datasets (e.g., the CPS) do not have such detailed data. For comparability, we use only
pre-treatment dropout status to cut the data. Analysis using the MDRC categorizations shows that this choice does
not affect the conclusion we reach here.

25

quarter as unit of analysis) among dropouts for each of earnings, transfers, and total income. The
bottom row provides analogous graphs for nondropouts. Figure 10 presents a similar collection of
graphs for the last nine quarters after treatment.
We offer several observations regarding these results. First, the differences in mean treatment
effects across dropout status are basically trivial, never exceeding $100 per quarter. Second, the
heterogeneity in quantile treatment effects within dropout status appears to be no less than the
heterogeneity when we pool observations. The profiles of the graphed quantile treatment effects are
sometimes shifted in one direction or another, but the basic fact of heterogeneity is pervasive, and
the basic shapes of the quantile treatment effects are similar. We note that the apparent compression
of the earnings and total income graphs among dropouts is just an artifact of scale distortion due
to the high variance in QTE estimates for dropouts; if we plot only the point estimates, the shapes
are very similar.28 These graphs provide abundant evidence that if we used the most common
mean impacts-based subgroup approach to dealing with potential treatment effect heterogeneity,
we would miss virtually the entire story.29 The conclusion that there is little heterogeneity in
treatment effects has in fact been drawn in the mean impacts literature, as shown by this quote
from Grogger et al. (2002, p. 231) summarizing both nonexperimental and experimental evidence:
“the effects of reform do not generally appear to be concentrated among any particular group of
recipients.”

4.4

Summary of QTE results

The results presented in this section establish several clear conclusions. First, mean treatment
effects miss a lot: estimated quantile treatment effects show a great deal of heterogeneity. Second,
the results for earnings are clearly consistent with predictions from labor supply theory that effects
at the bottom should be zero or positive, while effects at the top should be negative. It is important
that the true treatment effect on earnings appears to be zero for a large fraction of person-quarters.
28

We also computed estimates using averaged values of the outcomes. As above, the profile of these estimated
quantile treatment effects was smoother, but the basic story is entirely unchanged.
29
One interesting difference in the earnings quantile treatment effects across dropout status is that dropouts do not
exhibit negative earnings impacts for higher quantiles. This is likely due to the fact that the upper quantiles of the
dropout quarterly earnings distribution occur at very low levels. For example, among Jobs First women, the first 7
quarters, the 95th quantile is just $3,700, barely the federal poverty line for a family of three. By contrast, the 95th
quantile among nondropouts is $5,300, well above the point where Jobs First eligibility would be lost for a family of
three. This suggests that the disregard expansion’s income effect is less likely to affect dropouts than non-dropouts.

26

Third, the effects of Jobs First are very different in the pre- and post-time limit period, especially
with respect to the transfers distribution.
Fourth, it is not unreasonable to believe that Jobs First led to substantial increases in income
for a large group of women. On the other hand, it had at best no impact, and perhaps a negative
one, on another sizable group of women. This finding is at odds with that of Schoeni & Blank
(2003 (Papers and Proceedings)), discussed in our introduction. Moreover, we find that most of
the shift in the income distribution occurs at above-median quantiles.
Fifth, our results are unaffected by dropping observations from women who may have moved
out of state or otherwise left the public assistance system while having no earnings (e.g., gotten
married). Sixth, focusing on differences in mean treatment effects between dropouts and nondropouts—perhaps the most common comparison-group approach—is virtually useless in uncovering the treatment effect heterogeneity we demonstrate.

5

Assessing Jobs First using alternative social welfare functions

Perhaps the most common approach taken to evaluating whether programs like Jobs First are
worthwhile overall is mean cost-benefit analysis. For example, in the final report, MDRC computes
average income gains for Jobs First women relative to AFDC women, and then compares these
gains to the additional costs to the government of running Jobs First rather than AFDC. But since
Jobs First’s treatment effects vary considerably, mean cost-benefit analysis may miss important
distributional effects.
To evaluate the program, we take a classical social welfare function approach. Ignoring experimental assignment for the moment, let person i’s transfer income in quarter t be given by
τit , and let earnings be wit . Then, accounting for payroll taxes of 7.65% (and ignoring other
taxes), i’s disposable income in t is yit ≡ τit + 0.9235wit .30 The standard approach is to define
social welfare over yit . However, moving women from welfare to work has been an explicit goal of
virtually every welfare reform program undertaken in the last decade. To allow for this evident
preference among policymakers for earnings rather than transfer income, we define social welfare
30

We do not observe family size in the public-use data, which makes it more difficult to impute state and federal
income taxes. MDRC includes an imputed EITC, which we do use below. Note that payroll taxes are thus treated
as if their incidence is entirely on workers and valued at zero over the period of study.

27

∗ (α) ≡ 0.01 + y + αw , so that α measures the additional weight placed on a dollar of
over yit
it
it

earnings compared to a dollar of transfer income. We add 0.01 because in cases with a high degree
of inequality aversion, the social welfare function is unboundedly negative if anyone has zero consumption. Letting z = (τ, w) be the observed vector of disposable income for all N persons over
all T periods, our class of social welfare functions is

 yit∗ (α)1−ρ
1 X  1−ρ
S(z; ρ, α) ≡

NT
i,t ln y ∗ (α)
it

if ρ 6= 1

(2)

otherwise

We then compute SJ = S(z; ρ, α|J) and SA = S(z; ρ, α|A), where J and A respectively denote Jobs
First and AFDC assignment. To evaluate Jobs First in terms of the social welfare function, we
simply observe the sign of ∆S ≡ SJ −SA . The parameter ρ is the standard coefficient of relative risk
aversion. This functional form nicely nests the mean impacts case, which occurs when ρ = 0. For
now, we ignore administrative and operating costs of Jobs First, but we incorporate them below.
An advantage of this social welfare function approach is that it requires only the observed data
on the marginal distributions. In other words, when a social welfare function is the evaluation
criterion, “names don’t matter”: two policies that increase the social welfare function by 100 are
viewed equally, even if one reduces utility for all but one person (whose utility rises significantly)
and the other raises everyone’s utility equally. This approach is not new (e.g., see Atkinson (1970))
and has recently been advocated by Abadie, Angrist & Imbens (2002). An alternative view is that
distributions of treatment effects (or some functionals of them) are themselves necessary inputs to
the evaluation of programs. For example, Heckman et al. (1997, p. 488) write that “Appeal to a
mythical social welfare function begs fundamental questions of political economy. The distribution
of the benefits (and costs) from a programme determines the support for a programme if voters are
self-interested or if they are altruistic.” According to this view, “names matter”.31 In general, we
agree that the distribution of treatment effects will be important for determining political viability
31
A third approach is that taken by Dehejia (Forthcoming), who treats program evaluation as a decision-theoretic
problem. He uses data from the Alameda County portion of California’s job search- and training-based GAIN
experiment, conducted in the late 1980s, to assess the role of heterogeneity in guiding optimal program assignment in
the post-evaluation period. This approach solves the fundamental evaluation problem described above by assuming it
away, i.e., by assuming that the functional form of the joint distribution (Y (0), Y (1)) can be estimated parametrically.
Angrist & Dehejia (2001) also allow for individual and social welfare considerations in the presence of risk and
inequality aversion.

28

of a reform. But in the present context, we do not think this shortcoming is serious, since members
of the welfare population appear to have little political clout, either individually or as a group.
One must still decide whether the results of our evaluation can be generalized to some steady
state, or whether they are confined to the particular population and time period represented here.
The experimental sample was drawn in such a way as to represent the New Haven and Manchester
welfare populations during the period between April 1996 and February 1997. The fact that both
existing recipients and new applicants are included is helpful, since it means that our sample
represents the true population over the intake period.
On the other hand, the underlying process generating new potential welfare recipients (due
to job losses, divorces, and out-of-wedlock births) and welfare exits (due to new job matches,
marriages, and aging-out of children) may not be dynamically stable. In this case, our results will
not generally be informative about states of the world with different in- and out-flow rates. In
addition, generalizability requires that there be no state dependence in welfare use. Our results
show that Jobs First clearly changes the dynamic profile of welfare use, and true state dependence
would interact with these changes. Thus the observed short-run program dynamics would not
accurately represent steady-state behavior.32 Lastly, we would need to assume that a four-year
horizon is sufficient to evaluate a program. If (as is the case) some women spend many years on
welfare, and if those women are an important part of the welfare population, then a four-year
demonstration simply does not provide support for conclusions regarding the long-run effects of the
program.
Unfortunately, there is not much we can do about any of these concerns, since the demonstration
program is over. It is worth noting, however, that the same problem besets traditional meanimpact cost-benefit analysis: if dynamics are changed importantly by the reform, then no short-run
evaluation will be fully informative about steady-state program effects. This weakness is related
to experiments, not to our approach to using their data.33 With all these caveats in mind, we
believe the social welfare function exercise is worth doing. As above, we must also decide whether
to use person-quarters as the unit of analysis or to use averaged values, a choice that boils down
32

For a discussion of the econometric problems endemic to studies of welfare use and state dependence, see Chay,
Hoynes & Hyslop (1999). These authors find significant evidence of true state dependence using administrative data
from California.
33
For an excellent discussion of the pros and cons of social experiments, see Heckman & Smith (1995).

29

to one’s beliefs concerning the feasibility of consumption smoothing. Under either approach, if
we make the assumptions sufficient to regard our results as representing a steady-state, we are
entitled to argue that a given person in our sample represents all observably and unobservably
similar people in a steady state, so our population represents the relevant steady-state population.
If we think no consumption smoothing is possible, we can simply treat each person-quarter as
a separate observation. Different quarters for a given person would then appropriately represent
steady-state people of different cohorts. On the other hand, if we think that full consumption
smoothing is possible, it would be more appropriate to use average income over the entire postassignment period, since long run averages better represent the consumption resources available.
As above, we handle this issue by reporting results calculated each way.34
We begin in Table 5 by focusing on person-quarters as the unit of analysis. The first row reports
SA and ∆S = SJ − SA under the assumption that α = 0, so that a dollar of transfer income has
the same social value as a dollar of earnings. As noted, ρ = 0 yields the simple mean-impact
cost-benefit analysis.35 The first column shows that average quarterly income for the AFDC group
is just under $2,493, with the treatment effect being $127. For this social welfare function, Jobs
First passes the cost-benefit test. As we move to the right in the first row of this table, ρ increases,
and the social welfare function places greater weight on lower-income women. Thus in percentage
terms, the program gain with ρ = 1/2 (2.0, compared to a control group baseline of 87.8) is less
than half that for the means case. When we get to log utilities, the program effect is actually
slightly (though not significantly) negative. Lastly, when ρ reaches 2, Jobs First is associated with
a statistically significant decline in social welfare of between 3–4 percent.
The second row of Table 5 increases α from 0 to 0.9235. Thus a dollar of after-payroll tax
earnings is double-weighted in this specification. Since average earnings increase slightly with Jobs
First, the ρ = 0 treatment effect increases. Moreover, we know that except for very high quantiles,
where earnings fell, Jobs First either didn’t affect the earnings distribution or raised it; since higher
quantiles get relatively less weight when ρ > 0, the treatment effect rises relative to the α = 0 case
34

There is a large literature on consumption smoothing in the general population. With respect to people for whom
transfer payments are an important source of income, Gruber (2000) finds little crowd-out of AFDC payments to
women who transition into divorce, while Stephens (n.d.) finds that daily consumption is significantly sensitive to
receipt of Social Security payments. Both of these findings suggest that full consumption smoothing is too strong an
assumption.
35
Note that our use of inverse propensity score weights means our results are not directly comparable to those in
the final report. Also, unlike MDRC, we ignore discounting and inflation-adjustment.

30

for ρ ∈ {1/2, 1} and is unaffected for ρ = 2.
Up to this point, we have ignored the issue of Jobs First’s operational costs. Over the full fiveyear study period, Jobs First actually cost $2,252 per person more than AFDC to administer. This
added cost was due to additional expenditures on case management, education and training, other
employment-related and post-time limit support services, child care, and transportation services.
Moreover, as Table 4 shows, quarterly transfer payments were greater under Jobs First than AFDC,
by $42. How to account for these differences in administrative and operating costs is somewhat
tricky. It might be tempting to simply subtract some multiple of the per-quarter added costs from
SJ , but it is unclear how to do this when we are changing the curvature of the social welfare function
across parameterizations. Instead, we observe that the government could have retained AFDC and
simply made lump-sum transfers to all women in the study equal to 2252/20 + 42 = 154.60 per
quarter. We thus add this amount to each AFDC-group woman’s transfer income in each quarter,
noting that this provides a lower-bound on the impact of accounting for differential costs (since
there might be other better ways to spend the money).
The third and fourth rows of Table 5, in Panel B, report results that account for differences in
costs. Jobs First is now associated with significant social welfare reductions in all but the meanimpacts case in which earnings are double-weighted. In the inequality-averse cases with ρ ∈ {1, 2},
the reduction in social welfare is quite large in relative terms. For the ρ = 2 case, it is clear that this
is so because the $154.60 transfer for AFDC group women with zero income—but not for similarly
situated Jobs First women—dominates the rest of the distribution. But even for the ρ = 1/2 case,
accounting for costs makes a clear difference.
Table 6 replicates this analysis using values of earnings and transfers that have been averaged
over the entire 16-quarter period. These results are notable in two ways. First, with the exception
of the mean-impacts cases, the baseline levels of the social welfare function are larger than the
person-quarter baselines, though not always enormously so.36 For instance, when ρ = 1/2, α = 0,
and we ignore costs, baseline social welfare is 87.8 using person-quarters but 93.9 using averaged
income values. Thus, the social value of full consumption smoothing in this case is 6.9% of social
36

The mean-impacts cases differ slightly because a small number of women have no income data for the 16th
quarter after assignment (because these women entered the experiment at the very end of the intake period and were
followed for only 15 quarters). These women wind up being dropped from the averaged specifications, whereas only
their Q16 data are dropped from the person-quarter specifications.

31

welfare when no smoothing is possible. As we increase ρ and social welfare becomes more sensitive
to consumption fluctuations, the distinction between using person-quarters and averaged values
becomes more important. For the α = 0, ρ = 2 case, control group baseline social welfare is 94%
greater with full smoothing.
Availability of full smoothing also has a large effect on the evaluation of Jobs First. When full
smoothing is done and costs are ignored, Jobs First has a small positive effect on social welfare
even with ρ = 1, and essentially no impact when ρ = 2. When Jobs First costs are redistributed as
a lump sum to AFDC group members, we see negative effects of Jobs First only in all but the cases
that double-weight earnings and have ρ ∈ {0, 1/2}. We note that these effects are considerably
smaller than in the person-quarter analysis, though they are still statistically significant.
These results suggest that Jobs First-driven changes in income variability were substantial, at
least for women with lower average incomes. To investigate this question, we created the coefficient
of variation in total income over the full 16-quarter period for each woman in the sample. We
then computed (inverse propensity score-weighted) differences in this variable across treatment
status. For women in the Jobs First group, the mean coefficient of variation was 0.024 greater
than the AFDC group’s mean of 0.673, a difference that was not statistically significant. However,
this apparent similarity masks considerable heterogeneity across the sample. For AFDC women
with total, four-year income below the AFDC group’s median of $40,000, the baseline coefficient
of variation was 0.937; for Jobs First women with four-year income below $40,000, the coefficient
of variation was 0.119 greater than this (with a standard error of 0.038). Among women with
income above the AFDC group’s median, the coefficient of variation was only 0.385, with virtually
no difference by treatment group. These facts show that one thing Jobs First did do was greatly
increase dynamic income variability in the lower half of the income distribution. This effect will
clearly exacerbate the role of any liquidity constraints.
A natural remaining question is how the availability of the EITC affects our results. MDRC’s
public-use file includes a variable measuring imputed EITC takeup and amounts. Takeup is a
serious issue, since receiving the EITC requires filing a tax return. Indeed, MDRC’s three-year
survey found that among women with annual earnings below $5,000, fewer than 60% reported
filing a tax return for the previous year. These women are all in the phase-in range, so all would
be entitled to a refundable credit. By contrast, 93.5% of women with earnings above $15,000

32

filed, and most of these women would be in the phase-out range. For a mean-impact analysis,
estimating takeup and the amount of the credit may not be too worrisome. However, things are
more complicated with a nonlinear social welfare function, given the EITC’s own highly non-linear
structure. Nonetheless, we generated a version of Table 5 using this imputed EITC variable, and
the results are qualitatively very similar to those reported here.

6

Conclusion

This paper yields several important findings. First, mean impacts miss a great deal of treatment
effect heterogeneity. Our estimated quantile treatment effects demonstrate that systematic heterogeneity is the rule, not the exception, in evaluating the effects of Jobs First. Moreover, comparing
mean impacts for dropouts and nondropouts—a reasonable approach—fails entirely to uncover this
heterogeneity. In fact, the within-group treatment effect heterogeneity is as great as the heterogeneity using the pooled sample.
Second, the results are consistent with—and in some cases likely confirm—basic predictions of
labor supply theory concerning the expanded Jobs First disregard. Third, Jobs First’s impact on
transfer income appears to depend critically on whether time limits have yet taken effect. Before
time limits, Jobs First leads to considerable increases in transfer income; afterward, it leads to
considerable decreases. Fourth, for the bottom 40–50% of the income distribution (not necessarily
of particular people located there), Jobs First either has no impact on total income or reduces
it. At higher quantiles, this result is reversed. Using several parameterizations of a social welfare
function, we find that Jobs First may be beneficial or not, depending on inequality aversion and
accounting for Jobs First’s greater administrative and operating costs.
Taken as a whole, these findings paint a mixed picture of Jobs First. On the one hand, it does
not appear to have caused mass immiseration as some critics of recent welfare reforms would have
predicted.37 Moreover, there is clear evidence of sizable—compared to typical mean impacts—
earnings gains for at least some women. On the other hand, the Jobs First experience shows that
the law of unintended consequences has not been repealed. When sizable income gains occurred,
they appear to have come from in large part through increased transfer income—hardly a fulfillment
37

At least, if it did cause massive income reductions for some women, others must have had similarly sized gains.

33

of the stated PRWORA objective to “end the dependence of needy parents on government benefits
by promoting job preparation, work, and marriage” (U.S. House of Representatives Committee
on Ways and Means (2000)). Our results suggest that if a program like Jobs First is to end
dependence, it is unlikely to do so only through work-related gains: even the comparatively large
treatment effects on the earnings distribution we estimate here are far from large enough to make
most families self-sufficient.
One important implication of our results is that people with different social welfare functions in
mind can differ on whether Jobs First was a success. Those who place great weight on earnings and
are relatively unconcerned about inequality may reasonably conclude that the program worked well,
especially if they believe that substantial consumption smoothing is feasible. More inequality-averse
observers would conclude the opposite; the social welfare loss is especially great when consumption
smoothing is not feasible and inequality aversion is high.

34

References
Abadie, A., Angrist, J. D. & Imbens, G. (2002), ‘Instrumental variables estimates of the effect of
subsidized training on the quantiles of trainee earnings’, Econometrica 70(1), 91–117.
Angrist, J. & Dehejia, R. (2001), When is ATE enough? Risk aversion and inequality aversion in
evaluating training programs. Typescript.
Atkinson, A. B. (1970), ‘On the measurement of inequality’, Journal of Economic Theory 2, 244–
263.
Bennett, N., Lu, H.-H. & Song, Y. (2002), Welfare reform and changes in the economic well-being
of children, Working Paper 9399, NBER.
Besley, T. & Coate, S. (1998), ‘Workfare versus welfare: Incentive arguments for work requirements
in poverty-alleviation programs’, American Economic Review 82(1), 249–61.
Bitler, M. P., Gelbach, J. B. & Hoynes, H. W. (2003, (Papers and Proceedings)), ‘Some evidence
on race, welfare reform and household income’, American Economic Review 93(2), 293–8.
Blank, R. M. (2002), Evaluating welfare reform in the United States, Working Paper 8983, NBER.
Bloom, D., Kemple, J. J., Morris, P., Scrivener, S., Verma, N. & Hendra, R. (2000), The Family
Transition Program: Final Report on Florida’s Initial Time-Limited Welfare Program, Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, New York, NY.
Bloom, D. & Michalopoulos, C. (2001), How did welfare and work policies affect employment
and income: A synthesis of research, Working paper, Manpower Demonstration Research
Corporation.
Bloom, D., Scrivener, S., Michalopoulos, C., Morris, P., Hendra, R., Adams-Ciardullo, D. & Walter,
J. (2002), Jobs First: Final Report on Connecticut’s Welfare Reform Initiative, Manpower
Demonstration Research Corporation, New York, NY.
Cabrera, N. & Evans, V. J. (2000), ‘Welfare reform and its consequences: What questions are left
unanswered?’, Joint Center for Poverty Research Poverty Research News 4(6).
Chay, K., Hoynes, H. & Hyslop, D. (1999), ‘A non-experimental analysis of ’true’ state dependence
in monthly welfare participation sequences’, American Statistical Association, 1999 Proceedings of the Business and Economic Statistics Section pp. 9–17.
Dehejia, R. H. (Forthcoming), ‘Program evaluation as a decision problem’, Journal of Econometrics
.
Firpo, S. (2003), Efficient semiparametric estimation of quantile treatment effects. Typescript, UC
Berkeley Department of Economics.
Fraker, T., Moffitt, R. & Wolf, D. (1985), ‘Effective tax rates and guarantees in the AFDC program,
1967-1982’, Journal of Human Resources 20(2), 251–63.

35

Friedlander, D. & Robins, P. K. (1997), ‘The distributional impacts of social programs’, Evaluation
Review 21(5), 531–553.
Grogger, J. (Forthcoming), ‘The effect of time limits, the EITC, and other policy changes on welfare
use, work, and income among female-headed families’, Review of Economics and Statistics .
Grogger, J., Karoly, L. A. & Klerman, J. A. (2002), Consequences of welfare reform: A research
synthesis, Working Paper DRU-2676-DHHS, RAND.
Grogger, J. & Michalopoulos, C. (2003), ‘Welfare dynamics under time limits’, Journal of Political
Economy 111(3), 530–54.
Gruber, J. (2000), ‘Cash welfare as a consumption smoothing mechanism for divorced mothers’,
Journal of Public Economics 75, 157–82.
Heckman, J., Ichimura, H. & Todd, P. (1998), ‘Matching as an econometric evaluations estimator’,
Econometrica 64, 605–54.
Heckman, J. J. & Smith, J. A. (1995), ‘Assessing the case for social experiments’, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 9(2), 85–110.
Heckman, J. J., Smith, J. & Clements, N. (1997), ‘Making the most out of programme evaluations and social experiments: Accounting for heterogeneity in programme impacts’, Review of
Economic Studies 64, 487–535.
Hirano, K., Imbens, G. W. & Ridder, G. (2003), ‘Efficient estimation of average treatment effects
using the estimated propensity score’, Econometrica 71(4), 1161–1189.
Imbens, G. W. & Angrist, J. D. (1994), ‘Identification and estimation of local average treatment
effects’, Econometrica 62(2), 467 – 75.
McKinnish, T., Sanders, S. & Smith, J. (1999), ‘Estimates of effective guarantees and tax rates in
the AFDC program for the post-OBRA period’, Journal of Human Resources 34(2), 312–45.
Michalopoulos, C. & Schwartz, C. (2000), What works best for whom: Impacts of 20 welfare-towork programs by subgroup, Working paper, Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation,
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and U.S. Department of Education.
Moffitt, R. (1999), The effect of pre-PRWORA waivers on welfare caseloads and female earnings,
income and labor force behavior, in S. Danziger, ed., ‘Economic Conditions and Welfare Reform’, W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, MI, pp. 91–118.
Moffitt, R. (2002), Welfare programs and labor supply, Working Paper 9168, NBER.
Rosenbaum, P. & Rubin, D. (1983), ‘The central role of the propensity score in observational studies
for causal effects’, Biometrika 70, 41–55.
Schoeni, R. & Blank, R. (2003 (Papers and Proceedings)), ‘Changes in the distribution of child
well-being over the 1990s’, American Economic Review 93(2), 304–8.

36

Schoeni, R. F. & Blank, R. M. (2000), What has welfare reform accomplished? Impacts on welfare participation, employment, income, poverty, and family structure, Working Paper 7627,
NBER.
Stephens, M. (n.d.), ‘3rd of tha month: Do social security recipients smooth consumption between
checks?’, American Economic Review 93(1), 406–22.
U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Ways and Means (2000), Background Materials and
Data on Programs Within the Jurisdiction of the Committe on Ways and Means, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington.

Figure 1: Stylized Connecticut budget constraint under AFDC and Jobs First

Wage=$7
3000

2000

1000

0
400

300

200
Monthly work hours

100

0

Figure 2: Jobs First monthly first-spell hazard rate: AFDC baseline and Jobs First–AFDC treatment effects

Treatment effect on hazard

AFDC hazard
.2

.15
.1

.1

0
.05

−.1

Baseline AFDC hazard rate

JF−AFDC difference in first−spell hazard

.2

0
1

6

12

18

24
month

30

36

42

48

Monthly AFDC baseline and JF−AFDC difference in first−spell hazard

Figure 3: Monthly cash assistance receipt rates: AFDC baseline and Jobs First–AFDC treatment
effects

Treatment effect on WP rate

AFDC participation rate
.8

.7
.05
.6
0

.5

.4
−.05
.3
−.1

.2
0

6

12

18

24
month

30

36

42

48

Monthly CG baseline and JF−AFDC difference in participation rate

Baseline AFDC participation rate

Treatment effect on participation rate

.1

Figure 4: LOWESS regressions of quarterly transfers on quarterly earnings (unit of observation is
the person-quarter)

Dotted=Control, Solid=Treatment
Connecticut, quarters 1−7
2500

2000

2000
Expected transfers

Expected transfers

Dotted=Control, Solid=Treatment
Connecticut, quarters 1−7
2500

1500

1000

500

1500

1000

500

0

0
0

2000

4000

0

6000

1000

Quarterly earnings

(a) Full sample, quarters 1–7

3000

(b) Only person-quarters with
welfare income all 3 months,
quarters 1–7

Dotted=Control, Solid=Treatment
Connecticut, quarters 8−16

Dotted=Control, Solid=Treatment
Connecticut, quarters 8−16

2500

2500

2000

2000
Expected transfers

Expected transfers

2000
Quarterly earnings

1500

1000

500

1500

1000

500

0

0
0

2000

4000

6000

Quarterly earnings

(c) Full sample, quarters 8–16

0

1000

2000
Quarterly earnings

3000

(d) Only person-quarters with
welfare income all 3 months,
quarters 8–16

Figure 5: Jobs First inverse cdfs and QTE estimates for earnings distribution, quarters 1–7

10000
9000
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000

10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

90

Quarters 1−7

1000

Dotted lines⇒Control Group
Solid lines⇒Treatment Group

800
600
400
200
0
−200
−400
−600
10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

Quarters 1−7

90

Figure 6: Quantile treatment effects on the distribution of earnings
(weighting done by inverse-propensity score, horizontal dashed line is mean treatment effect)
Person-quarter is unit of obs

Averaged outcomes

1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

0

−200

−200

−400

−400

−600

−600
10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

10

90

Quarters 1−7

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; earnings averaged over Q1t7

90

Quarters 1−7

1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

0

−200

−200

−400
−400
−600
−600
10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

10

90

Quarters 8−16

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; earnings averaged over Q8t16

90

Quarters 8−16

1000
800
1000
600

800

400

600
400

200

200

0

0
−200

−200

−400
−400

−600

−600
10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

Quarters 1−16

90

10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; earnings averaged over Q1t16

Quarters 1−16

90

Figure 7: Quantile treatment effects on the distribution of transfers
(weighting done by inverse-propensity score, horizontal dashed line is mean treatment effect)
Person-quarter is unit of obs

Averaged outcomes

1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

0

−200

−200

−400

−400

−600

−600
10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

10

90

Quarters 1−7

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; transfers averaged over Q1t7

90

Quarters 1−7

1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

0

−200

−200

−400

−400

−600
−600
10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

10

90

Quarters 8−16

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; transfers averaged over Q8t16

90

Quarters 8−16

1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

0

−200

−200

−400

−400

−600

−600
10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

Quarters 1−16

90

10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; transfers averaged over Q1t16

Quarters 1−16

90

Figure 8: Quantile treatment effects on the distribution of income
(weighting done by inverse-propensity score, horizontal dashed line is mean treatment effect)
Person-quarter is unit of obs

Averaged outcomes

1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

0

−200

−200

−400

−400
−600

−600
10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

10

90

Quarters 1−7

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; total income averaged over Q1t7

90

Quarters 1−7

1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

0

−200

−200

−400

−400
−600

−600
10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

10

90

Quarters 8−16

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; total income averaged over Q8t16

90

Quarters 8−16

1000
800
1000
600
800
400

600

200

400

0

200
0

−200
−200
−400

−400

−600

−600
10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

Quarters 1−16

90

10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; total income averaged over Q1t16

Quarters 1−16

90

Nondropouts

Dropouts

Subgroup

earnings

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter; dropout

800
600
400
200
0
−200
−400
−600

600
400
200
0
−200
−400
−600

earnings

1000

−600

−400

800

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter; nondropout

10

−200

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1000

1000
800
600
400
200
0
−200
−400
−600

Earnings

transfers

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter; dropout

transfers

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter; nondropout

10

Transfers

−600

−400

−200

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1000
800
600
400
200
0
−200
−400
−600

income

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter; dropout

income

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter; nondropout

10

Income

Figure 9: Quantile treatment effects by dropout status, Quarters 1–7
(person-quarter is unit of analysis; weighting done by inverse-propensity score, horizontal dashed line is mean treatment effect)

Nondropouts

Dropouts

Subgroup

−600

−400

−200

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1000
800
600
400
200
0
−200
−400
−600

earnings

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter; dropout

earnings

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter; nondropout

10

Earnings

transfers

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter; dropout

0

−600

−400

−200

transfers

−600

−400

−200

0

200

400

200

600

800

1000

400

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter; nondropout

10

1000
800
600
400
200
0
−200
−400
−600

600

800

1000

−600

−400

−200

0

200

400

600

800

1000

Transfers

income

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter; dropout

income

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter; nondropout

10

Income

Figure 10: Quantile treatment effects by dropout status, Quarters 8–16
(person-quarter is unit of analysis; weighting done by inverse-propensity score, horizontal dashed line is mean treatment effect)

(Rarely enforced)
1st : adult removed from grant
until compliant
2nd : adult removed ≥ 3 months
3rd : adult removed ≥ 6 months
Months 1–3: $120+1/3
Months 4–12: $120
Months > 12: $90
•Asset limit $1000
•100-hour rule and work history
requirement for 2-parent families
•1-year transitional Medicaid

1st violation: 20% cut for 3
months
2nd violation: 35% cut for 3
months
3rd violation: grant cancelled for
3 months
All earned income disregarded
up to poverty line (policy also
applied to food stamps)
•Asset limit $3000
•Partial family cap (50%)
•2 years transitional Medicaid
•Child care assistance
•Child support pass-through

Sanctions

Earnings
Disregard

Other policies

Sources: Bloom et al. (2002).

Education/training, exempt if
child< 2

Mandatory work first, exempt if
child < 1

AFDC
None

Work
Requirements

Time limit

Table 1: Key differences in Jobs First and AFDC programs
Jobs First
21 months (6-month extension if
in compliance and non-transfer
income less than maximum
benefit)

0.669

0.362
0.368
0.207

0.654
0.332

0.350
0.583
0.063
2,396

Any AFDC previous year

Race/ethnicity
White

Black

Hispanic

Marital status
Never married

Div/wid/sep/living apart

Education
HS dropout

HS diploma/GED

More than HS diploma

N

2,407

0.058

0.604

0.334

0.327

0.661

0.216

0.371

0.348

0.638

0.542

765

0.249

0.377

0.374

0.343

0.444

0.131

0.367

0.450

1.000

0.387

National
Caseload

Note: National caseload statistics were constructed using all females aged 16–54 in the 1995 March CPS who had an own child in the household
and whose family was reported to have positive AFDC income for calendar year 1994. All national caseload statistics are computed using March
supplementary weights. Standard deviations omitted because all variables are binary.

0.502

Worked previous year

Applicant (flow) sample

Table 2: Means for Jobs First and the 1994 national caseload
Full sample
Jobs First
AFDC
0.376
0.407

2,396

N

0.575
(0.010)
2,396

Any food stamps

N

2,407

0.570
(0.010)

0.528
(0.010)

0.326
(0.010)

2,407

339
(6)

835
(16)

4,803

0.005
(0.014)

0.020
(0.014)

-0.026∗
(0.013)

4,803

13
(9)

56∗∗
(23)

-107∗∗∗
(41)

Difference

Note: Standard errors in parentheses.
∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively (significance indicators provided only for difference
estimates). For earnings, 8 quarters of pre-treatment data are used. For cash welfare and food stamps, only 7 quarters are available for all
observations.

0.548
(0.010)

Any cash welfare

0.300
(0.009)

352
(7)

Food stamps

Fraction of quarters with:
Any earnings

891
(16)

Cash welfare

Table 3: Mean pre-treatment earnings, cash welfare, and food stamps statistics
Jobs First
AFDC
Average quarterly level:
Earnings
679
786
(27)
(31)

2,381

N

0.626
(0.007)
2,381

Any Transfers

N

2,392

0.622
(0.007)

0.491
(0.008)

0.857
(0.005)

2,392

1,047
(17)

1,566
(43)

2,612
(40)

All quarters
AFDC

4,773

2,396

0.684
(0.009)

0.569
(0.010)

0.070∗∗∗
(0.011)
0.004
(0.010)

0.865
(0.007)

-0.005
(0.008)

2,396

1,552
(18)

42∗
(23)
4,773

1,195
(31)

2,747
(32)

Jobs First

93
(57)

135∗∗
(54)

Difference

2,407

0.644
(0.010)

0.486
(0.010)

0.862
(0.007)

2,407

1,335
(18)

1,116
(36)

2,451
(33)

Quarters 1–7
AFDC

2,381

0.495
(0.009)

0.040∗∗∗
(0.014)
4,803

0.593
(0.008)

0.809
(0.007)

2,381

0.083∗∗∗
(0.014)

0.003
(0.010)

4,803

727
(17)

2,022
(46)

79∗
(48)
217∗∗∗
(26)

2,748
(44)

Jobs First

296∗∗∗
(47)

Difference

2,392

0.519
(0.009)

0.528
(0.008)

0.820
(0.007)

2,392

824
(18)

1,914
(53)

2,738
(50)

4,773

-0.024∗
(0.012)

0.065∗∗∗
(0.012)

-0.010
(0.010)

4,773

-98∗∗∗
(25)

108
(70)

10
(66)

Quarters 8–16
AFDC
Difference

Note: Standard errors (in parentheses) do not account for variance due to estimated nature of propensity score. Propensity score estimated using a logit model for
treatment status. See text for covariates included in this model.
∗∗∗ ∗∗
, , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively (significance indicators provided only for impact estimates).

0.560
(0.007)

Any Earnings

0.852
(0.005)

1,088
(16)

Transfers

Fraction of quarters with:
Any Income

1,659
(37)

2,747
(36)

Earnings

Average quarterly level:
Income

Jobs First

Table 4: Mean outcomes and impacts, weighted by inverse propensity score

4,092
(24)

2,648
(12)

3,937
(24)

2,493
(12)

ρ=0

62
(32)

-27
(16)

216
(32)

127
(16)

∆S

112.4
(0.3)

94.2
(0.2)

106.3
(0.3)

-2.7
(0.5)

-4.4
(0.3)

3.4
(0.5)

2.0
(0.3)

ρ = 1/2
∆S

87.8
(0.2)

SA

7.69
(0.01)

7.44
(0.01)

6.25
(0.02)

5.98
(0.02)

SA

ρ=1

-1.44
(0.02)

-1.47
(0.02)

-0.00
(0.03)

-0.02
(0.03)

∆S

-0.00
(0.00)

-0.00
(0.00)

-14.24
(0.18)

-14.24
(0.18)

SA

ρ=2

Note: Statistics calculated using inverse propensity score weighting; standard errors not corrected for use of estimated weights.
SA is value of social welfare function for AFDC group; ∆S is social welfare function value for Jobs First group (SJ ) minus this value.
Earnings are adjusted downward 7.65 percent to adjust for payroll taxes; state and federal income taxes are not accounted for.

α = 0.9235

B. Accounting for costs
α=0

α = 0.9235

A. Ignoring costs
α=0

SA

Table 5: Social welfare impacts under alternative choices of SWF under assumption of no consumption smoothing (i.e.,
person-quarter is unit of analysis)

-14.76
(0.18)

-14.76
(0.18)

-0.52
(0.25)

-0.52
(0.25)

∆S

4,093
(75)

2,647
(37)

3,938
(75)

2,492
(37)

ρ=0

59
(100)

-27
(50)

213
(100)

128
(50)

∆S

118.3
(1.0)

97.9
(0.7)

114.8
(1.0)

0.2
(1.4)

-1.5
(1.0)

3.7
(1.5)

2.5
(1.0)

ρ = 1/2
∆S

93.9
(0.7)

SA

7.97
(0.02)

7.65
(0.02)

7.77
(0.03)

7.44
(0.03)

SA

ρ=1

-0.13
(0.04)

-0.16
(0.03)

0.07
(0.05)

0.05
(0.04)

∆S

-0.00
(0.00)

-0.00
(0.00)

-0.94
(0.20)

-0.94
(0.20)

SA

ρ=2

Note: Statistics calculated using inverse propensity score weighting; standard errors not corrected for use of estimated weights.
SA is value of social welfare function for AFDC group; ∆S is social welfare function value for Jobs First group (SJ ) minus this value.
Earnings are adjusted downward 7.65 percent to adjust for payroll taxes; state and federal income taxes are not accounted for.

α = 0.9235

B. Accounting for costs
α=0

α = 0.9235

A. Ignoring costs
α=0

SA

Table 6: Social welfare impacts under alternative choices of SWF under assumption of full consumption smoothing (i.e., income
is averaged over all 16 quarters)

-0.96
(0.20)

-0.96
(0.20)

-0.02
(0.28)

-0.02
(0.28)

∆S

Appendix Figure 1: Inverse CDFs for earnings distributions (person-quarter is unit of observation,
weighting done by inverse-propensity score, horizontal dashed line is mean treatment effect)
Person-quarter is unit of obs

Averaged outcomes

10000

10000

9000

9000

8000

8000

7000

7000

6000

6000

5000

5000

4000

4000

3000

3000

2000

2000

1000

1000

10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

10

90

Quarters 1−7

10000

9000

9000

8000

8000

7000

7000

6000

6000

5000

5000

4000

4000

3000

3000

2000

2000

1000

1000

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

90

Quarters 1−7

10000

10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; earnings averaged over Q1t7

10

90

Quarters 8−16

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; earnings averaged over Q8t16

90

Quarters 8−16

10000
9000
8000

10000

7000

9000

6000

8000
7000

5000

6000

4000

5000

3000

4000
3000

2000

55

1000

10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

Quarters 1−16

90

2000
1000
10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; earnings averaged over Q1t16

Quarters 1−16

90

Appendix Figure 2: Inverse CDFs for transfers distributions (person-quarter is unit of observation,
weighting done by inverse-propensity score, horizontal dashed line is mean treatment effect)
Person-quarter is unit of obs

Averaged outcomes

10000

10000

9000

9000

8000

8000

7000

7000

6000

6000

5000

5000

4000

4000

3000

3000

2000

2000

1000

1000

10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

10

90

Quarters 1−7

10000

9000

9000

8000

8000

7000

7000

6000

6000

5000

5000

4000

4000

3000

3000

2000

2000

1000

1000

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

10

90

Quarters 8−16

10000

9000

9000

8000

8000

7000

7000

6000

6000

5000

5000

4000

4000

3000

3000

2000

2000

56

1000

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

Quarters 1−16

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; transfers averaged over Q8t16

90

Quarters 8−16

10000

10

90

Quarters 1−7

10000

10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; transfers averaged over Q1t7

90

1000

10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; transfers averaged over Q1t16

Quarters 1−16

90

Appendix Figure 3: Inverse CDFs for income distributions (person-quarter is unit of observation,
weighting done by inverse-propensity score, horizontal dashed line is mean treatment effect)
Person-quarter is unit of obs

Averaged outcomes

10000

10000

9000

9000

8000

8000

7000

7000

6000

6000

5000

5000

4000

4000

3000

3000

2000

2000

1000

1000

10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

10

90

Quarters 1−7

10000

9000

9000

8000

8000

7000

7000

6000

6000

5000

5000

4000

4000

3000

3000

2000

2000

1000

1000

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

90

Quarters 1−7

10000

10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; total income averaged over Q1t7

10

90

Quarters 8−16

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; total income averaged over Q8t16

90

Quarters 8−16

10000
9000
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000

57

1000

10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; unit of obs is person−quarter

Quarters 1−16

90

10000
9000
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Weight: inverse p−score; total income averaged over Q1t16

Quarters 1−16

90

