NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MOVING AND HOUSING EXPENDITURE:
TRANSACTION COSTS AND DISEQUILIBRIUM

Steven

F. Vent!

David A. Wise

Working Paper No. 1012

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

November 1982

Assistant Professor of Economics, Dartmouth College and Stambaugh
Professor of Political Economy, J.F.K. School of Government,
Harvard University, respectively. This paper was prepared for the
SSRC/NBER Conference on Micro—Data and Public Economics, Oxford,
England, 27—30 June 1982. The work was supported by grant number
SES800T165 from the National Science Foundation. We are especially
grateful to Francois Bourguignon and Harvey Rosen for their corn—
ments on the paper and for serving as discussants of it, and to
Alan Auerbach and Jerry Hausman for their comments. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's project in Government Budget.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper
November 1982

#1012

Moving and Housing Expenditure:
Transaction Costs and Disequilibrium

ABSTRACT

The paper emphasizes initially the effects of moving transaction costs
on the potential effect of government rent subsidy programs. As a concomitant to this analysis, the paper reaffirms the low income elasticities of
housing expenditure among low-income renters found by others. Moving transaction costs are high on average among renters in our sample but vary widely
between geographic regions and evidently vary a great deal among families
as well. By our measure, transaction costs reflect monetary and especially
non-monetary gains and losses associated with moving. Moving transaction
costs in conjunction with low income elasticities make government lump-sum
transfers very ineffective in increasing housing expenditure among low-income
renters.

A dollar of unconstrained transfer payment would increase housing
expenditure by only 2 to 7 cents in the two cities in our data set. Minimum
rent plans, that make the transfer payment conditional on spending at least
a minimum amount on rent, have larger effects on average than unconstrained
transfers. Typical programs might increase rent by 10 to 30 cents per
dollar of transfer payment. But families who spend the least on rent are
also those least likely to benefit from the minimum rent programs. To obtain
payments under these plans, families who would otherwise spend less than the
minimum must surmount the transaction costs associated with moving and must
also reallocate income to favor housing in proportions that may be far from
their preferred allocations. Thus only a small proportion of families with
initial market rents below the minimum will ultimately participate in the
programs. And of the total payments to these families, 15 to 32 percent is
deadweight loss, according to our estimates. In addition, we find that
because moving transaction costs and income elasticities vary widely among
regions, the effects of any given government program are also likely to vary
greatly from one region to the other.
As a fortuitous benefit of the housing allowance demand experiment data
that we used, we were also able to check our model results against experimental results. The model predictions and the experimental results correspond
quite closely. The differences that are found can apparently be explained in
large part by the impact of self-selection on the estimated experimental
treatment effects. The self-determination of enrollment and the attrition
inherent in the estimated experimental effects seriously detract from the
potential benefits of experimental randomization. Therefore our model estimates may be more reliable than the experimental ones in this instance. Of
course this judgment depends in large part on the experiment having been done
so that we could check our model predictions against the experimental outcomes.
Steven F. Venti
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College

David A. Wise
J.F.K. School of Government
Harvard University

Hanover, NH 03755

Cambridge, MA 02138

(603) 646-2526

(617) 495-1178

MOVING AND HOUSING EXPENDITURE:
TRANSACTION COSTS AND DISEQUILIBRIUM
by
Steven F. Venti and David A. Wise

Better living conditions for low-income families is the collective

goal of many government programs. Better housing is the particular goal
of government-subsidized housing programs. These subsidies take two
general forms. The government may build housing and rent it to low-income
families at less than market prices or it may provide housing allowances

directly to low-income families. An allowance may be a percent of rent,
or it may be a lump sum payment not conditioned on rent. Still another
form of allowance is a lump-sum payment conditional on spending some

minimum amount on rent. Whatever the form of the allowance, the apparent
goal is that it will induce low-income families to live in better housing

than they would otherwise choose. Implicit in this goal is that more
expensive housing is also of higher quality. No matter what the inducement, however, for a family to significantly improve its housing almost

invariably requires moving from one location to another. This is likely
to involve a large transaction cost. A primary emphasis of our work is an
analysis of the magnitude of transaction costs and their implications
for the effects of government subsidy programs.
We shall concentrate our analysis on lump-sum transfer programs and

in particular the minimum rent plan. Both plans are sometimes called
"housing gap" schemes because the payment is thought of as making up the
difference between the cost of modest housing and the proportion of its

income that a family might be expected to devote to housing. The lump—

—2-

sum plans as well as percent of rent subsidy schemes were the subject of
the recent Experimental Housing Allowance Program and in particular the
demand component of the program, called the Housing Allowance Demand

Experiment) Indeed, a form of gap plan is currently being proposed by
the Administration.2
We shall see that this plan potentially involves substantial dead-

weight loss even without consideration of moving costs. To take advantage
of the subsidy, many families may have to devote a greater proportion of

their income to rent than they would otherwise choose. As a consequence
the marginal units of rental housing purchased by those who receive housing

payment subsidies is often valued at less than the payment. The transaction costs associated with moving reduce further the potential gain

from this plan relative to the gains that could be obtained with simple
unconstrained lump-sum transfers.
it is not, of course, logically necessary to allow explicitly for

moving to obtain meaningful estimates of housing expenditure. Moving, or
staying, is in some sense what takes place in the black box between one

expenditure level and another. Many questions can be addressed without
observing how expenditures are increased; that is, without monitoring

move and stay decisions explicitly. We simply realize that observed
changes in housing expenditure are due in large part to these decisions.

1. See, for example, Friedman and Weinberg [1980], l930b] and
Bradbury and Downs [1981].
2. The Administration proposal is to convert the section 8 housing
program to one like the minimum standards plan of the Housing Allowance
Demand Experiment. This is like the minimui rent plan except that the lumpsum payment is made only if the housing meets certain physical standards.

—3-

But because moving is a major and sometimes costly decision in its
own right, as well as bearing a close correspondence with housing expenditure, we are motivated to investigate more precisely the decision to

move or stay and its relation to expenditure. Analogous "enabling" mechanisms are associated with many other expenditure decisions. For example,
it may be necessary to change cars to spend substantially more for trans-

portation by car. The transaction costs associated with moving, however,
seem potentially to be exceptionally large. Therefore, adjustments in
housing expenditure to changes in family status--like income--may be relatively slow.

We shall base our estimates on data from the housing allowance
demand experiment, although not with the intent of analyzing the experi-

mental results. The experiment does provide, however, data on a random
sample of low-income families in two cities, Phoenix and Pittsburgh. For
our purposes, the important aspect of the experimental survey is its longi-

tudinal nature, Participants in the experimental survey were followed for
three years. In particular, we are able to observe changes in rent (moving)
between one period and the next.
Our plan is to estimate a model of housing expenditure jointly with

moving decisions. Then based on the parameter estimates of the model we
simulate the effects of lump sum and minimum rent housing subsidy plans.

The deadweight loss associated with the minimum rent plan is given partic-

ular attention. The basic idea of our model, as well as its statistical
implementation, is that families move if the advantaqes from moving out-

weigh the transaction costs associated with movina. Jointly with moving
we estimate a preferred rent function, with preferred rent only observed

-4-

if persons move (and then with a deviation due to "maximization" error).
It is based on the proposition that individuals have some preferred level

of housing expenditure. We start by thinking of a preferred level if
there were no transaction costs--like changing neighborhood--associated

with changing housing expenditure. Then we think of persons choosing to
move if the value gained by changing housing expenditure outweighs the

transaction costs associated with moving. We recognize that the adversity
to moving or the propensity to move may vary among individuals. To accommodate this possibility, we allow for a moving transaction costs parameter

that is random. The model and the estimation procedure are described in
Section I. Estimates are based on a rent function together with an associated utility function describing preferences over the allocation of

income between housing and other goods. It is the preference function
that permits an evaluation of the potential gain from moving.

We base initial estimates on the experimental controls, who were not
assigned to a treatment group but were surveyed over the course of the expe-

riment. But the experimental nature of the data allows us to check our
results in some respects. First, we can obtain analogous estimates based
on families in the minimum rent treatment group, who, unlike the controls,

faced discontinuous budget constraints. Because we would like to make predictions for persons facing this type of plan, we are motivated to check parameter estimates based on persons subject to this plan with the estimates

based on the control group. Second, we are able, using our control group
estimates, to make predictions of the effects of the treatment plans on
persons assigned to those plans and compare them with the observed ex-

perimental treatment effects. Although for

'-5-.

reasons to be explained below, this does not provide an unambiguous test of

our model, it does provide a substantial external check of its validity. The
parameter estimates are presented in Section II. Comparison of experimental
treatment effects with estimated treatment effects based on our model are

presented in Section III. The simulated effects of selected rent subsidy
programs together with deadweight loss calculations are shown in Section IV.
As a concomitant to estimation of rent jointly with moving, we are
also able to provide estimates that under certain assumptions reflect

preferred rent, given income and other family characteristics. This is
true to the extent that families choose a "desired" level of rent when

they move (albeit with error). In this sense, our estimates might be
given a "long run" or "permanent" interpretation. Desired rent would not
necessarily be observed at a point in time, not even on average, if the
disequilibrium created by the moving transaction. costs means that observed
rents are not optimal.

Our results may be summarized briefly. The average family in our
sample would forego $60 per month in income to avoid moving. The large
transaction costs associated with moving primarily reflect. nonmonetary

costs. Large average differences between the two cities in our sample
suggest that market and cultural factors may create very different barriers

to moving in different locations. We also estimate a rent disequilibrium
term, representing the deviation between rent when families are first

observed and the rent they would prefer given their incomes and other family

attributes, which may have changed since the observed rent was chosen. A
large disequilibrium value is associated with a greater likelihood of

moving. Finally we find low elasticities of rent with respect to income,
consistent with the finding of other investigators. And we find that

-6-

elasticities are quite different in the two locations in our sample.

The low income elasticities together with the transaction costs of
moving mean that the effect of income transfers on rent arid are very small

in general and the differences among cities suggest that the same program

could generate quite different effects in different locations. In particular, minimum rent plans that condition the transfer payment on meeting a

minimum rent requirement have a relatively small effect on families with
chosen market rents below the minimum, the families that the plan is most

intended to affect. The misallocation of resources associated with changing
the proportion of income devoted to housing, together with the moving trans-

action costs are such that most families will not increase rent enough to

receive the payment. Families who do move are likely to be those with low
transaction costs.

Our estimates are based on experimental control families. The
validity of the model is supported by a close correspondence between experimental treatment effects and predictions of these effects based on our model.

The major difference between our estimates and the experimental treatment
effects appears to be explained by the self-selection and attrition asso-

ciated with the experimental treatment group. Persons who knew that they
would not move to obtain transfer payments apparently were much less likely
to accept enrollment in the experiment when it was offered and were much
more likely to drop out over the course of the experiment.
Finally, 15 to 32 percent of payments to families who would otherwise
spend less than the minimum is deadweight loss.

In addition, to the extent

that the goal of transfer programs is to increase rent, they are in general

ineffective. Only about 2 to 7 percent of unconstrained transfer payments

to low income renters are used to increase rent. Rent increases under

— 7.

minimum rent programs range from 8 to 69 percent of payments, in our
selected simulations, depending on the specification of the plan and the
geographic location.

I. THE MODEL AND ESTIMATION

A. The General Idea
We shall motivate the idea by considering persons facing a minimum rent

subsidy. We will see that our approach is not at all peculiar to this particular plan, but that consideration of the budget constraint implied by

this plan helps to make the basic idea clear. The more formal presentation in the next section will take a more general approach and then explain
how it would be applied in the special case of the minimum rent plan.
We begin by considering the alternatives faced by several hypothet-

ical individuals. The preferences of each are represented by the indifference curves on one of the graphs of Figure 1.

In each of the graphs

the inner line (YY) is intended to represent an initial (l-- period)

budget constraint; and the broken solid line a subsequent (2! period)
constraint. In the second period, a payment P is received if at least
*
an amount R of income is devoted to rent. The two budget constraints
*

are drawn to coincide below the minimum rent requirement R

.

This

would

be logically true only if J period family income were equal to income
(excluding the subsidy payment P) in the second period.

The family represented in graph A of Figure 1 is presumed to spend
*
more than R on housing in the first period (at the tangency of VY and

the indifference curve labeled 1). If there were no costs associated
with moving, this family would presumably spend considerably more for

housing in the

period (the tangency of indifference curve 2 and the

-8-

Figure 1

Rent
Y+p

Rent

Y+P
V
Y

R2
R2

R1

R*

R*
2

R1

V
Other Expendi tures

V
Y+p
Other Expenditures

A

B

Rent

Rent

V+P

Y+p

V

V

21

1

R*

R1

V

Y+P

V

Other Expenditures
c

V+P

Other Expenditures
D

—9—

outer solid line). But the gain from moving is represented not by the

differences between 1 and 2, but by the difference between 2 and 2. The
family receives the payment P even if it doesn't move, The family must
presumably decide whether the gain to be had by increasing its rent from
R1 to R2, with a concomitant reduction in expenditures for other purposes,

outweighs the costs associated with moving. For this family, the only
benefit from moving is reallocation of expenditures among housing and other
goods and services.

The family represented in B receives the payment P only if it increases

its rent. If this family moves, it would presumably prefer to spend R2 for

housing. Its gain is represented by the difference between 1 and 2. By
moving, this family may benefit not only from a reallocation of expenditure,
but from an increase in total expenditures as well.
If a family values housing versus other goods according to the curve

1 in C, it would gain nothing by moving. If it were not for moving costs,
it presumably would be indifferent between spending R1 for housing out of

income V and spending R out of income V + P.
The greatest value attainable by the family represented in D is the

same in both periods. In each period preferred housing expenditure would
be R1. If the family were to spend enough on housing to obtain the payment P, it would be worse off, even without moving costs; as indicated by

the difference between values associated with curves 1 and 2. The gain
from increased housing expenditure would be offset by the reduction in
expenditure for other purposes.

These examples suggest that the likelihood that a family will move
when faced with the minimum rent subsidy depends on the relative value

that it attaches to housing versus other expenditures. Knowledge of this
tradeoff allows, and is necessary for, evaluation of the potential gain

-10-

from moving. But, there does not appear to be a simple relationship
between first period rent and the potential benefit from moving, although
it would seem that the greatest gains may be available to persons whose

initial

*

*

rent is below, but close to R

.

Persons who spend more than R

on housing in period 1 may have relatively little to gain by moving; and
*
persons who spend far less than R may have nothing to gain at all. The
formal approach will thus be to think of the probability of moving as a

function of the expected gain. Expected gain will in turn depend on
initial housing expenditure and the second period expenditure possibilities
given by the budget constraint.

It is important to keep in mind that persons may move for many reasons

that are unrelated to the subsidy. Indeed, these other reasons may dominate the effects of the payment P, or the possibility of obtaining it by

moving. Families may, for example, move because of increases or decreases
in income, other than subsidy payments; or because of changes in family

size. And, it is important to understand that although we can make the
probability of moving a function of observed family characteristics, there

are likely to be many reasons for moving that we cannot observe or quanti-

fy explicitly. A family may want to move to a better school district, or
it may have to move because its landlord stops renting. Or, the family
may simply be tired of living in the same place. There is likely to be
considerable randomness in moving, given observed family characteristics

and subsidy plans. Indeed, unobserved effects may dominate the effect of
changes in observed family characteristics or the effect of subsidy plans.

This possibility is supported by the observation that among persons in our
data set controls move almost as much as persons who receive subsidies.
Thus, in the formal model that follows we will not restrict our emphasis
only to the effect of subsidies; but we will account for them.

—11—

B. A Formal Stochastic Model of Moving.
The basic idea of our model is that persons move if the gain from

moving outweighs the transaction costs of the move. Although this idea
is quite general, the specific model that we use is conditioned to some

extent on the nature of the data we shall use. The most important aspect
of the data is that they pertain to individuals all of whom face the same

housing price schedule. They all face the same housing market. Thus
differences in housing expenditure among families in our sample are due
to differences among the families in 'taste' for housing and other random

components, not differences in the price of housing. Taste for housing is
presumed to vary among individuals because of differences in family attributes such as income and family size and possibly because of unmeasured
determinants of preferences for housing versus other goods as well.

We have in mind individuals who must decide how to allocate their budgets

between housing (rent) and other goods. One can think of housing and
other goods as measured in quality units which incorporate not only the
physical characteristics of the housing unit itself, but attributes such

as parks and distance to the central city as well. The question then is
how many units of housing to purchase. In this sense, more units of
housing may reflect a larger house, a more desirable neighborhood, easier
access to the central city, or other characteristics associated with a

particular housing choice)
1. Our data do include a subset of persons who face different housing
prices because of a percent of rent subsidy plan with the percent subsidy
varying among families. Although we could obtain estimates based on
this group, we have no analogous variation in market prices. In addition,
in practice our data pertain to two housing price schedules because families
in the sample live in one of two cities. We shall take account of differences between the cities either by using a single dichotomous variable to
distinguish them or by separate estimation for each city.

-12—

The outcome that we observe is expenditure for housing, R. Thus
the first condition for our specification is that it fit the data, that
the expenditure function fit the observed relationship between rent and

family characteristics. Although we shall rely also on an associated
°utility function, it is only the expenditure relationship that allows
us to make inferences about the parameters of the utility function. In
practice, the relationship between rent and income V is very closely

approximated by the functional form

R =

(1)

0Y

1.V
'5

where the proportion of income spent on rent is '50Y

, and

the income elas-

ticity of rent is 1 +

Because we observe only expenditure for housing, not its quantity or
quality separately, we shall think of preferences defined over the space
Associated with the

of rent R and expenditure on other goods Y - R.

expenditure function (1) is a preference function V given by
'5

'5

(2)

V(Y - R,R) = (V - R)

1-'5 y
0

0

y

(R)

Maximization of V with respect to R yields the rent expenditure function (1))

1. Measured in quality units of value 1, we could think of a utility
'5

'50(Z+Z2)

function, U(Z1,Z2) =

, that

is maximized subject

+ Z, = V. In this sense, V is obtained by substituting
to the constraint
the constraint into U. Mote also that V is a variant of a simple Cobb-Douglas
function. It differs from that one in a major respect, however; it is not
homothetic and thus does not imply constant budget shares, a property that
we know is rejected by the data. The data also are inconsistent with the
transposed Cobb-Douglas function represented by the Stone-Geary system
which also implies linear expansion paths but from a displaced origin.
The function V is a variant of the one used by Hausrnan and Wise [1980]
with which we shall make some further comparison below. We shall also see
that to make moving a function of the potential gain in utility we must
use the direct utility function; thus a specification without a closed
form direct utility function will not do in this case.

-13-

We specify 6, as a function of family attributes X and possibly
unmeasured attributes r, with

(3)

We also interpret equation (1) to be preferred rent, with observed rent
deviating from this optimum according to the random term c, so that
6

R =

(4)

60Y

1.Y + £

The maximization error may arise for example because it is not possible
to find just the right housing or because of incomplete information at the

time that rent decisions are made. The parameter 6. is taken to be the
same for all individuals, with random taste variation entering through
1

in 6o.

To incorporate moving, suppose that the value in period two associated
with period one housing expenditure is V12 =

V(Y2-R1,R1) and the value in

period two associated with optimal housing expenditure in period two,
when X or V may be different from their period one values, is V22 =

V(Y2-R2,R2).

If there were no transaction costs to moving, presumably the

family would move if

were greater than 1; or if mV22 —

mV12 were

greater than zero. We shall let the transaction costs of moving be reflected in a random factor M such that the ratio of the values of moving to

staying is given not by V22/V12 but by V22/(V1.M).

2

We let the gain from

1. A logical alternative would be to let 6 be random, but this complicates the evaluation of the moving probability, iven the specification of
our preference function V.
2. An alternative interpretation is to think of moving as incorporated
explicitly in the utility function with V(V-.R,R,M) = V(Y-R,R).M, where M
takes on a value presumably different from 1 if the choice doesn't involve
moving. Then V(Y2-R2,R2,M) =
V(Y2-R2,R2), if the choice does involve
mo vi n g.

-14-

moving be given by g, with the family moving between periods one and two if

g =

(5)

mV22

-

mV12

—

in

M > 0

with the probability of moving given by Pr[g >

0])

If we assumed a distribution for in M and if we knew o and ó.1, which
enter V22 and V12, we could indeed estimate (5) directly yielding an esti-

mate for the mean of in M and in theory, its variance as well. We describe
below, however, models that yield estimates of the parameters

and

along with the mean of the transactions cost parameter M. We begin with a
non-random, that is with i-

specification with

= 0. Thenwe shall allow

to be random. Finally, we extend the specification to allow estimation
for persons facing a minimum rent subsidy plan. We develop this last specification in the first instance to allow prediction of rent and moving under

1. An alternative approach is to think of transaction costs as
reflected in a discount of the value of other expenditures if one moves.
We might then have g =
lnV22(Y2-T-R2,R2)
1nV12(Y2-R19R1). This specification, however, makes the discount for moving independent of other
attributes like income. And it is difficult to allow I to be random
because of the non-linear specification of V. One could still, however,
specify a probit equation by including an additive random term v with
+ v. Still another alternative in this same spirit
g =
1nV22()

lnV12(.)

but that allows the transactions cost effect to vary with income is to set
—
g =
where A is the transaction costs

lnV22(A(Y2-R2),R2)

lnV12(V2—R1,R1),

effect, presumably less than 1. This specification leads to
6

g =

lnV22(Y2-R2,R2)

-

lnV12(Y2-R1,R1)

+

(l-60Y21)lnA,

which could be esti-

mated as a probit equation with the addition of a random term. This specification makes the other-expenditure-equivalent transaction. costs of
moving an increasing function of other expenditure. Our specification
assumes that the willingness to move is proportional to the gain in
utility; to be willing to move the proportional gain in utility must be
M, where M is presumed to be random across individuals.
We also could have used a continuous time hazard approach to model
moving, but it is not straightforward to elide this model with joint estimation of a rent function within the utility maximizing framework that
we have used.

-15-

this plan, but also to check our estimates for controls with those based
on families facing this subsidy plan.1

1. A Specification with 6o Non-Random.
6

•Y,

Recall that preferred rent is taken to be R =
function of individual attributes X.
is simply given by

= X6.

is non-random (i-

it

6

+ El

R1 =

= 0),

Observed rent in period one is then

6

(6)

with 6,. a

=

(X16)Y11.Y1

+

£1

where ci is the random deviation from preferred rent in period one. Preferred rent in period two is only observed for persons who move and then
only with error, so that

6

(7)

R2 =

60Y2

2 +

=
£2

(x26)Y2 .y2 +

where £2 is the deviation from optimum rent in period two. Note that 6 is
allowed to change between periods one and two with changes in the vector of

family attributes X, Note also that c. and £2 should not necessarily be
interpreted symmetrically.

In both periods c represents maximization errors that result from the

inability to find just the 1right" housing. In addition, c also reflects
deviations from optimal rent due to changes over time in X or Y.

In other

words, many first period families may be in disequilibrium because their
"preferred' housing level may have changed over time, but they have not

moved to adjust actual housing expenditures accordingly. We refer to this
component of El as disequilibrium error, with Cl =

+

e1

where

is the

1. The development follows closely the procedure outlined in Wise
[1977a, 1977b].

-16-

disequilibrium component and e1 is the maximization error.

In contrast,

we assume second period rent is, with the exception of the maximization

error, optimally chosen.'
As above, the family moves between periods one and two if the potential
gain from adjusting housing expenditure to reflect changes in family attributes outweighs the moving transaction costs, that is if

g =

mV22

—

mV12

-

in

M > 0

Suppose that in M is distributed normally with mean m and variance c.

(8)

in M N(m,c)

It is important to realize that while we refer to M as a transaction "cost"

and presume that its mean value is positive, it not only is likely to vary
among families, but is not necessarily positive for all families.2 It of
course includes the monetary cost of moving.

It also includes psychic costs

such as loss of friendships or changing schools. With this interpretation, it
is clear that given the family attributes that we measure, the preference comparisons that we make may exclude some of the benefits as well as some of the

costs of moving. For example, a family could move to take advantage of different schools, where the advantage perceived by the family may not be
reflected in rent.

1. Alternatively, this asymmetric treatment Of c. and , arises because
we observe R, for the entire sample--some of whom have moved ecently and
some not--anct thus the R1 that we observe is not necessarily at the preferred
level when we observe it. In contrast we only have information on R, for
families that move between periods, that is, for families that have adjusted
actual expenditures to "preferred" or optimal levels, according to our inter—
pretati on.

2. Note also that transaction "costs" are not measured in dollar units,
but we are able to convert our estimates to income equivalents.

-1 7-

To proceed, suppose that

is given. There are two possible outcomes

in the second period:

0),

1.

R2 is observed and the family moves (g >

2.

R2 is unobserved and the family doesn't move (g <

0).

That is, each family faces two alternatives: it can not move and continue
to spend R1, or it can move and spend

R2. Following this terminology, R2

is observed only if a family moves. Expenditure for rent in the second
period is still observed, of course, but we assume for the moment that it

is the "same" as rent in period 1.1 Given

and R2, the probabilities

of moving and not moving are given, respectively, by

Pr(g >

01R1,R2)

Pr(g <

01R1,R2)

=

(9)

where [.]

is

=

1

-

the standard normal distribution function.

Now consider the joint distribution of R1,R2, and g, denoted by the

density function h(R1,R2,g). It can be written as,

(10)

h(R1,R2,q) =

f(R1).f(R2R1)f(gR1,R2)

Consider the first possibility above; that is, that the family moves
and spends

for rent. The likelihood of this occurring is given by,

1. Or its equivalent after accounting for inflation. All rent and
income figures in our analysis are in period 2 dollars. There may be some
increase in expenditure due to upgrading of existing housing without moving,
but summary data suggest that this effect is small relative to rent changes
associated with moving.

-18-

(11) P1

f(R1)f(R2R1).Pr(g>OR1,R2) =

f(R1)f(R2IRi)

To find the probability of not moving, we need to consider the margin-

al density of 9; in particular, the probability that g <

0.

Because

is

not observed for non-movers, we need to find the probability that g < 0

for each possible value of R2, given R1, and "add them up." This can be
done by integrating out

from the joint density of

and g, given R1.

This is, of course, just a way of taking account of the fact that R2, the
desired level of second-period rent, is not observed for families who

don't move. The probability of not moving is then given by,

P2 =

f(R1)f f(R2R1)Pr(g

< 01R1,R2)dR2

(12)
1

=

f(R1)ff(R21R1)

1 -

dR2

R2

We assume throughout that M is distributed independently of

and £2.

1. Because V is a non-linear function of R, we cannot simplify this
expression further. Note also that R must here be formally restricted
to lie between 0 and V, because the lbgarithms of Y2-R2 show up in the
expression V22.

2. This means, for example, that a family's cultural ties to a community are independent of the sign of the maximization error e. Below we
also assume that cultural ties, etc. are independent of random preferences
for housing captured by the taste disturbance n. Although this latter
assumption seems more problematic to us, predictions presented below tend
to support it. In particular, we are able to predict well the housing
expenditures of members of the experimental treatment group who moved, even
though the treatment group was composed disproportionately of persons with
low moving costs, relative to members of the control group. We shall say
more about this in Section III.

In practice we have set

1.

=

=

0,

we also have allowed Cl and

are distributed

and

and independent of M.

normally with common variance
this model with

We assume that

In estimation of
to be correlated

according to the parameter p, That is, we allow individual-specific deter—
rninants of housing expenditure to be reflected in these disturbance terms.

(We shall assume below that these effects are captured in n.) More detailed
specification of the elements of equations (11) and (12) are provided in

Appendix A
If N1 persons move, and N2 dont, the log-likelihood function for
N1 + N2

= N

persons is given by

N2

N1

lnL =

(13)

E

lnP1 +

E

i=l

i=l

lnP2

where P1 and P2 are defined by equations (11) and (12). Maximization is
with respect to
parameter cS. ,

parameters

(the parameters in

=

X5), the income elasticity

the mean transaction cost parameter m, and the distribution
and

We turn next to a more realistic specification

with a random "taste parameter n.

2. With the Taste Parameter

Random.

A shortcoming of the above specification is the assumption that the
preferred level of rent is exactly determined by measured family attributes.

We now relax this assumption by letting

contain a random component (ri)

that captures unobservable determinants of housing preferences. If &.

is

random, then rents in periods one and two (if R2 is observed) are given by

-20-

=

. V1

R1

(14)

= (X1 +

+

+ Cl and

.

1+6

6

R2 = 60Y21Y2

+

1

+

C2 = (x26 + ).V2

where r is the random component

C2

of the taste parameter 6o.

In this case

preferred rent depends on the random 6 (through r) and so then does the

probability of moving. Thus in this case we must integrate over possible
values of c50.

The expressions for P1 (moving and observing R2) and P2 (not

moving) may be written as
P1 =

f(R1).f(R21R1).ff(601R1,R2).Pr[g

>

0160,R1,R2]d60

(15)
=

P2

f(R1)jf(R2IR1)ff(0jR1,R2)f1

-

Pr[g

>

OJ0R1,R2]Jd0dR2

R2

Further details are provided in Appendix A.
In this specification we treat r as a random individual specific

effect that does not change over time. And we now treat c.1 and

as

uncorrelated random deviations from optimum housing expenditure. That is,
we essentially assume a variance components specification with the distur1

bance term given by r1.Y.

3.

+

Ct instead

of the usual specification fl +

Estimation With the Minimum Rent Subsidy.

The models outlined above will allow us to use the observations on
experimental controls to estimate the parameters of the rent expenditure
function and the preference function, as well as the magnitude of trans..

action costs. These estimates can then be used to predict responses to
various subsidy schemes. In particular, a primary objective of our analy—

-21-

sis is to estimate the deadweight loss associated with minimum rent subsidy

schemes. But the housing allowance demand experiment included experimental
plans of this kind. Thus using these data we can also estimate our model
for persons who actually faced such a subsidy, in particular the discon-

tinuous budget constraint created by it. There are two reasons for obtaining estimates using these data, in addition to the estimates based on con-

trols. One is that setting up the estimation routine for this case facilitates the predictions and the calculation of deadweight loss under this

scheme. The other reason is that it allows us to check the parameter
estimates obtained for controls with those obtained for persons actually

facing this plan. As mentioned above, we will also compare the experimental
results with predictions based on our parameter estimates for controls. To
obtain estimates when the budget constraint is discontinuous we need to add

some additional concepts to those set forth above. The development here
with respect to the discontinuous budget constraint is similar to that set
forth in Hausman and Wise [1980], but that analysis used only data for a

single period (not taking account of R1) and did not treat moving. In
addition, the utility specification that we use is different from that used

by Hausman and Wise. As it turns out, our specification fits the data
better than the one used there.

We begin by considering the graph in Figure 2 that depicts the choices

faced by persons subject to a minimum rent subsidy. The solid discontintinuous straight line represents the budget constraint faced by a person
with income V.

It has negative slope 1 because any person in our sample can give

up a dollar in expenditure on other goods and obtain the same addition to
*
housing, measured in quality units. If the family spends at least R for

-22-

rent it receives the payment P.1 The dashed lines going in a northeasterly
direction from the origin represent the relationship between optimal rent
and income for persons with given values of

That is, they represent

cS.

the locus of tangencies between successively higher budget constraints and

R

Y+P
60 *

Y

*
R

R

—Ic—

V

— — 6r*
LI

Y+P

Y-R

Figure 2

the family of indifference curves distinguished by a particular value of
A person with

=

would choose to spend R* for rent when faced

with the budget constraint shown and would attain the utility level corresponding to the indifference curve also labelled

a person with taste parameter

R for rent with Y

-R

On the other hand,

would be indifferent between spending

for other goods and R for rent with V + P - R

1.
In practice, P depends on family income; it is highest for lowincome families and becomes zero if income is large enough.

-23-

for other goods, as indicated by the indifference curve labelled
Persons with cScI >

would prefer to spend more than R* and persons with
<

<

would prefer to spend less than R. Those with

would prefer to spend R
To describe the likelihood of an observed R, it is necessary to account
not only for these optimal choices but for the deviations from the optimum

as well. These are indicated by the c terms in our analysis above. Also
this description has dealt only with the discontinuous budget constraint.

Persons during the first period of our analysis faced a linear budget constraint like YY, with the discontinuous one faced only in the second period.

We also have said nothing about moving in this context. We shall proceed
by first describing the likelihood of R1 in period one and R2 in period

two if there were no transaction costs. Then we add again the presumption
that

will only be observed if the gain associated with shifting from

in period one to R2 in period two outweighs the transaction costs of moving.
Without the transaction costs, the likelihood l(R1,R2) of observing
housing expenditure R1 in period one and R2 in period two would be

R1 =

(16)

l(R1,R2)

=

Pr

R1 =

5Y

+

1+5i

+

*

*

C1,

1+s

R1 =

R2 = 60Y

Ci'

6o*<o<c

R2 =

R

+

6o<6o,

c2,

or

or
1+6

*

+ Cl,

+

R2 = 60(Y+P)

+ 62.

-24-

The three terms in this expression can be written respectively as

f(R1).f(R21R1).f f(601R1,R2)d60
*

(17)

f(R1 ).f(R21R1 ,R*).f f(61R )d60

1

f(R1).f(R2JR1).ff(60JR1R2)d60
60

The middle term is somewhat asymmetric with the other two because if
<
depend on

R* +
6,., R =
since

and the conditional density f(601•) does not

and c are assumed independent.2

Now we simply need to realize that

will only be observed if the

person moves. That is for any of the possible ways that R1 and R2 could
be observed as described in equation (18)., we must realize that each possi-

1. To find 6tr' we solve implicitly for the values of R and 6o* that
sustain the equality V(V+P,R*;60*) =

6
=

*

(Y+P-R

l-60(Y+P)
)

6

*
(R )
6

6

1-6

=

(Y-R)

(R)

60Y

60(Y+P)

1

=

The appropriate values of R and 60* must be determined at each iteration
of the maximum likelihood process, because 61 is a parameter determined
by the maximization and because P is allowed to enter the exponent in
evaluating V(Y+P,R*;60*), unlike the specification in Hausman and Wise
[1980].

2. Possibly it is clearer in this instance to use f(c2JR1) instead
of f(R21R1,R*).

-25-

bility without transaction costs would be observed only if, in addition, g

were greater than zero. If we let [] be shorthand for Pr[g >

OjcS0,R1,R2],

we can write the probability P1 of moving and observing R2 versus the probability P2 of not moving as

6o*
=

f(R1).f(R21R1).f

P1

f(60IR1,R2)[.]d60
*

+

*

(18)

P2 =

f(R1)Jf(R2JR1).Jf(60R1R2){1-{.J}d0dR2
*

+ f(R1)ff(R2JR1 ,R*).ff(6oIRl){l.[.])dodR2
R2

+

f(R1).jf(R2JR1)ff(60lR1,R2){l_[.J}d0dR2
R2

Again, some

further

details are provided in Appendix A.

-26-

II. PARAMETER ESTIMATES
Our parameter estimates are based on samples of low-income families in
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania (Pittsburgh) and Maricopa County, Arizona
(Phoenix) who were surveyed as part of the housing allowance demand experi-

ment. To be eligible for the experiment, family income was limited to
$12,750 in Phoenix and $9,150 in Pittsburgh.1 Only renters were included.
Families determined to be eligible for the experiment were randomly assigned

to a control group or to one of several experimental treatment groups. Then
the families were offered enrollment in the program. Those enrolled were
surveyed periodically from the Spring of 1973 to the Winter of 1977. Our
estimates pertain to data at the time of enrollment (period 1) and two years
later (period 2).

As mentioned above, most of our estimates are based on

the control group, but we have also obtained estimates based on the minimum
rent treatment group combined with the lump sum transfer group.

Parameter estimates for both cities combined are shown in Table 1. The
first four columns present alternative models for controls distinguished by

different specifications of the disturbance structure. The last column
shows estimates for the treatment group. The parameter estimates for controls
are not sensitive to the error specification. Thus we shall discuss first
the differences among the disturbance term specifications and then in discussing the remaining parameter estimates we shall refer only to those in
column four.

The first two specifications allow for no taste variation, that is r
is assumed equal to zero.

In this case, the maximization errors in the

two periods are allowed to be correlated. The correlation is about .16,

1 .
The difference apparently arises primarily because the cost of
"modal" housing is less in Pittsburgh than in Phoenix (see the footnote
to Table 4) and thus the income limit was lower in Pittsburgh.

-27-

Table

Parameter Estimates (and Asymptotic Standard Errors)

1.

Controls

a

Variable

(1)

-.747
(.026)

Income Effect,

(2)

-.750
(.027)

(3)

(4)

Minimum Rent and
Lump Sum
Treatment Group

.739

.696

(.027)

(.027)

(.039)

-.734

Determinants of
Constant

Family Size

Age 62 Years Plus

Non-white

Phoenix

Female Head

Education of
Head

Transaction costs (in m)

Variance of Rent a2
C

Variance of

0

.508

.479

.499

(.060)

(.062)

(.062)

(.063)

.593
(.075)

.025
(.006)

.026
(.006)

.026

.026

.014

(.006)

(.006)

(.008)

-.074
(.033)

-.067
(.034)

-.068
(.033)

-.064
(.034)

-.051
(.037)

-.115

—.117

-.114

—.115

-.112

(.024)

(.024)

(.025)

(.025)

(.031)

.173
(.020)

.173
(.021)

.164
(.021)

.164
(.021)

.107
(.026)

.088
(.021)

.088
(.021)

.089

.088

(.021)

(.022)

.104
(.023)

.020
(.003)

.021

.020

.020

(.003)

(.003)

(.004)

.138

.135

.142

.141

(.050)

(.050)

(.050)

(.050)

.170

.172

.134

.134

.127

(.006)

(.007)

(.009)

(.009)

(.008)

.016

.017
(.004)

.014
(.004)

,

Correlation of C'S, p

Disequilibrium First
Period,

.492

(.004)
C

.158
(.050)

.164

.013
(.004)

.116
(.056)

--

(.051)

-.037
(.027)

-.036
(.026)

-.052
(.033)

-28-

Table 1. Parameter Estimates (and Asymptotic Standard Errors)

Controls
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Minimum Rent and
Lump Sum
Treatment Group

655

655

655

655

527

-943.07

-941.94

-936.96

-935.90

-739.04

a

Variable

Sample Size
Log-Likelihood

a. Rent and income are measured in 100's.

-29-

suggesting that only about sixteen percent of the error variance in rent

could be accounted for by family-specific components of variance. The
second specification allows for a disequilibrium component of the firstperiod error term.

It is estimated to be negative, suggesting that on

average families were spending somewhat less than the rent that would have

been preferred if moving were costless. The next two specifications allow

for a family-specific taste parameter r. Consider column four. The variance of c is estimated to be .134 which yields a standard deviation of

$36.60 in dollar units. This may be compared with a mean rent of $126 in
period 2. The variance of n is estimated to be .017, corresponding to a
standard deviation of .13.

It may be compared to the estimated average

of .86. Recall that r appears
income allocated to rent is 60Y

= XS

in
'1
.

+

r,

where the proportion of

Again, the estimated first period

disequilibrium term is negative. We shall now consider the other parameter estimates in column four.
First, the transaction costs parameter is estimated to have a mean

of .141. This means that on average the gain from a reallocation of income
between housing and other things would have to provide a 14 percent increase

in utility to induce the average family to move. Another way to interpret
the estimate is that the average family would be indifferent between moving
and a $60 per month increase in income, the income equivalent of a 14 per-

cent change in utility. We shall see below that many treatment families
passed up payments of this size that were available had they increased
expenditure on housing.'

1. Allen, Fitts, and Glatt [1981] report that many experimental treatment families who did not increase rent enough to receive payments even
though they could have done so "and would have had at least $480 a year of
allowance dollars left over . . .

-30-

Next, the income effect

is estimated to be - .739.

This corresponds

to an elasticity of rent with respect to income of .26. This estimate is
within the range of estimates of other investigators based on microdata,

although on the low side) Our estimates pertain to renters and thus
might be expected to be relatively low.

In addition, our estimates pertain

to low-income families only. And among low-income families, those with
higher incomes who might be expected to spend more on housing may disproportionately be homeowners--and thus not in the sample--although we have

no evidence that this is true.2 Finally, our estimates pertain to only two
metropolitan areas and elasticities may vary substantially among geographic

areas.3 Indeed, we shall show below that the estimated values in our two
cities are very different. Other evidence is consistent with broad varia-

1. See Mayo [1981] for a survey of recent results. Estimates with a
correction for permanent versus transitory income are usually a bit higher
than those based on current income; most are in the range of 0.3 to 0.5
for renters. It is not clear, however, which concept is the most appropriate for predicting the effect of government transfer programs. We shall
address this issue in part by checking estimates based on our model with
the observed experimental transfer payment treatment effects. These, of
course, could not be considered permanent in the experimental context but
they were guaranteed for three years. Finally, our estimates of course
pertain to rents that families choose when they overcome moving transaction costs to change rent. Estimates for owners, and for renters based
on aggregate data are usually higher than ours. See for example de Leeuw
[1971], King [1980], and Rosen [1979].
2. Aaron [1981] reports that data from the Seattle-Denver Income
Maintenance Experiment indicate that 4.5 to 10.6 cents out of each assistance dollar goes for housing. These data pertain to both renters and
homeowners. Our estimates indicate that on average about 6 cents of each
additional dollar of income would go for housing.
3. Consistent with our results, however, are those from the supply
experiment component of the Experimental Housing Allowance Program, conducted in Brown County, Wisconsin (including Green Bay) and St. Joseph
County, Indiana (including South Bend). It was found in these locations
that providing allowances to all eligible families had almost no effect on
the housing market--prices in particular--simply because income elasticities were so low that the allowances created almost no increase in housing
demand.

-31—

tion

among individuals. For example, King 11980] estimated that price

elasticities varied widely among individuals, although his specification
did not allow for random income elasticities across individuals.

To check that our estimates are not due to a functional form misspecification, we have graphed in Figure 3 the predicted values of the pro-

portion of income spent on rent together with the observed values. For
completeness, we have also included in Figures 4 and 5 analogous graphs
for Pittsburgh and Phoenix separately, with the corresponding estimates to

be discussed below. The graphs shown pertain to rent in period 1.1

It

should be clear from the graphs that the predicted relationship virtually

matches the observed one. Indeed, even directions of movement in the
underlying shape of the relationship, that result from differences in the

X values that determine S, are picked up by the specification.
Finally, we consider briefly the coefficients on the variables that
determine
that

The average estimated value of

is .86. We estimated

is .115 lower for non-whites than for whites and .088 higher for

female-headed households. Possibly these latter families devote a greater
proportion of their income to housing because female heads are less likely

than male heads to be working and thus have smaller work expenses. Nonwhites may spend less than whites due to different preferences or because
of disporportionate constraints on housing purchase opportunities versus

opportunities for purchasing other goods. We also find that the more
educated devote more of their income to rent and that rent increases with

family size, as expected. Finally, we see that families devote a substantially greater proportion of their incomes to housing in Phoenix than in

1.
Comparable graphs for rent in period 2 conditional on moving have
the same appearance as those shown and are not presented here.

—32—

Pittsburgh;

is .164 higher in Phoenix. This observation, as well as

summary data, suggest that the relationship between income and rent may
be quite different in the two cities, possibly in more general ways than

can be captured by a single shift parameter. We present below more
detailed estimates of the differences.
But first we consider the estimates in the last column of Table 1.

These estimates are based on the experimental treatment group who faced
the discontinuous budget constraint created by the minimum rent plan.

(Actually about 20 percent of the group faced an unconstrained lump sum

transfer.) These estimates were obtained using the procedure outlined
in Section 1.3.3 above. We observe only that the estimates based on this
group are very close to those obtained using the control sample. For
example, the transaction costs parameter is about .12 for these data

versus .14 for the control group data, while the income elasticity (1 +

is

about .30 for the treatment group versus .26 for the control group.

This provides some evidence that our specification is robust against this

type of alteration in the budget constraint. Quite different results
could be obtained of course if our rent function and corresponding prefer-

ence function were incorrectly specified to a substantial degree. These
results also suggest that our model may predict well the changes in response
when families are faced with the non-linear budget constraint, as in the

treatment plan. We shall return below to additional external tests of the
model.

We now consider estimates for Pittsburgh and Phoenix separately, that

are presented in Table 2. The specification underlying these results is
the same as model 4 in Table 1. First we observe that the income elasticity
is much lower in Pittsburgh than in Phoenix--.13 versus .32. The graphs in

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

65
50

300
59

54

49

64

500
55

42

600
33

31

700

Predicted Versus Observed Values of
Rent Income, Pittsburgh and Phoenixa

400

3.

19

13

800
11

6

900

a.

3

—

11

1000

Monthly Income, $'s

The numbers below the income values represent the number of observations in the
corresponding
income interval. For example, there are 42 observations in the interval $175 to $225.

42

13

32

200

100

Figure

c.)

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0,6

11

19

32

200

29

13

300

23

16

400

30

28

500

21

14

600

10

9

700

Predicted Versus Observed Values of
Rent Income, Phoenixd

7

5

800

3

1

900

example,

observations in the interval $175 to $225.

0

Monthly Income,

The numbers below the income values represent the number of
observations in the corresponding
income interval. For
there are 32

a.

ioo

— —

Figure 4.

$'s
1000

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

36

37

300
36

Figure

33

400

5.

34

B

26

500
34

28

600
23

22

700

Predicted Versus Observed Values of
Rent
Income, Pittsburgha

12

8

800
8

5

900
3

9

1000

Monthly Income, $'s

The numbers below the income values represent the number of observations in the corresponding
income interval. For example, there are 10 observations in the interval $175 to $225.

a.

10

2

13

200

100

'4'.

o.6

U,

-36-

Figures 4 and 5 give a detailed picture of the relationships between income
and rent in the two cities and verify the accuracy of the general specifica-

tion for each city) Consistent with the differences in the income elasticities we observe large differences in the transaction costs Darameters;
the mean is not significantly different from zero

in Phoenix, while it is

.27 in Pittsburgh. Summary statistics show families are 30 percent more
likely to move in Phoenix than in Pittsburgh.

In addition, the estimated

disequilibrium parameter is relatively large and negative in Phoenix, sug—
testing that families there were on average spending $12 per month less on
rent than the preferred levels, while in Pittsburgh,

families were on

average spending $6 per month more than the preferred level. Other than
observing that these differences are consistent with summary statistics we
can only speculate about possible reasons for the differences. Based on
vacancy rates, the housing market was tighter in Pittsburgh than in Phoenix

during this period.2 Most minority families in the Pittsburgh sample were
Black while those in Phoenix were Mexican-American.

Possibly cultural

differences between the two groups lead to different rent patterns. For
whites or non-whites it may be that cultural attachment to local communities
is stronger in Pittsburgh than in Phoenix, and for many larger housing

expenditure would require leaving the community. There may also be differences between cities in the rates at which rents of occupied housing are
raised; such increases are usually found to be lower than when tenants change.

1. Cronin [1981] reports the elasticity estimates of several authors
based on these data. Most are not very different from ours. Those of
Cronin and of Hanushek and Quigley are quite close to ours. Our estimates
at least for Phoenix are slightly higher than those of these authors, possibly because our estimates presumably pertain to "preferred' rent levels.
2. During the experiment, the vacancy rate in Phoenix was more than
double the rate in Pittsburgh. (See Kennedy [1980], p. A-b.)

- 37-.

Table 2. Parameter Estimates (and Asymptotic Standard Errors
for Pittsburgh and Phoenix Separately)

Variable
Income Effect, 6
1

Phoenix

Pittsburgh

- .680

- .872

(.030)

(.047)

.684
(.078)

.425
(.105)

Determinants of
Constant

.024

.049

(.008)

(.012)

Age 62 Years Plus

-.172
(.046)

.074
(.060)

Non-White

-.142

-.101
(.040)

Family Size

(.034)

Female Head

.071

(.027)

Education of Head

Transactions Cost (in m)

Variance of Rent c2

Variance of0 6 2

.020

.030

(.004)

(.007)

—.026
(.076)

.267
(.067)

.116

.137

(.011)

(.015)

.013

.023
(.009)

(.005)

Disequilibrum First
Period,
Sample Size
Log-Likelihood

.094
(.040)

(.036)

.065
(.041)

276

380

-.124

-379.7

-530.8

- 38dollar cost of moving may also differ between the cities)
We also observe that rents are lower for older than younger persons

in Phoenix, but that this is not true in Pittsburgh. This seems consistent
with higher moving transaction costs in Pittsburgh than in Phoenix. The
other coefficients determining

are similar in the two cities.

III. PREDICTIONS AND COMPARISON WITH EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
To get an idea of the predictive validity of the model, we used our
estimates based on the control sample to predict the outcomes under the experimental minimum rent treatment plans for families who were assigned to the

treatment group. Our predictions together with the observed experimental
outcomes are shown in Table 3. We shall emphasize presently that this comparison does not provide an unambiguous test of the model, but first we point

to the primary features of the comparison. In both cities, the predicted
dollar rent figures are very close to the observed ones, both on average

and for subgroups (e.g., persons who move, personswho participate--R2 >

R*, and

persons whose period 1 rent was below R). Notice also that the difference
between the rent of movers and non-movers is much greater in Phoenix than in

Pittsburgh. This is observed in the experimental data and also is captured
by our model. This result of course is consistent with the differences in
the estimated disequilibrium terms in the two cities —$12 in Phoenix versus

+6 in Pittsburgh--as well as the lower income elasticity in Pittsburgh.2

1. Weinberg, Friedman, and Mayo [1981] report average "out-of-pocket
moving costs of $54.06 in Pittsburgh and $12.59 in Phoenix. They also
report a umean search time" of 95 days in Pittsburgh and 33 days in Phoenix,
based on baseline interviews.
In general, the experimental treatments had much less effect in
Pittsburgh than in Phoenix. Consistent with this finding and with our
estimate of much higher transaction costs in Pittsburgh, Straszheim
[1981] reports results of Kennedy and MacMillan indicating that while the
payment level was significantly related to participation for enrollees with
2.

R1 < R* in Phoenix it was not significant and indeed negatively related to
participation in Pittsburgh, based on coefficients in a logit model.

- 39-

Table 3. Predicted Versus Observed Experimental Outcoms
for the Minimum Rent Treatment Group, by City

Phoenix

Pittsburgh

Outcome
Observed

b
Predicted

Observed

Predicted

$120

118

$147

141

.41

.39

.65

.54

Rent-Movers

$124

121

$162

154

Rent—Nonmovers

$116

116

$120

125

.59

.53

.58

.50

$142

141

$176

179

Rent-Nonparticipants

$88

91

$107

102

Proportion Who MoveIRl<R*

.40

.40

.68

.55

Proportion Who MoveJR1>R

.42

.38

.58

.51

Proportion ParticipantslRl<R*

.32

.22

.40

.31

Proportion ParticipantsR1>R*

.89

.88

.96

.89

$110

106

$137

129

$131

131

$168

164

Rent-Average

Proportion Who Move

Proportion Who Participate
Rent—Participants

RentR1<R*
RentjR1>R

b

*
All rent outcomes pertain to period two. For example, RentIR1<R is
the average rent in period two unde the treatment program, given that initial
was less than the minimum R
rent

a.

b. Simulated results obtained first by using our estimated model based
on controls to predict the outcomes for each family in the experimental treatment group and then aggregating over the individual predictions. The procedure
is described in Appendix B.

-40-

The differences between the predicted and the observed outcomes are
primarily in the proportion of families that moves and in the proportion
*
that participates (have rents greater than R ). Note that many families

must move in order to qualify for the experimental payment. It seems apparent that a very likely explanation for the difference lies in the selection
procedure that generated the experimental and control samples.
First a random sample of families who were eligible for the experi-

ment--whose incomes controlling for family size were low enough--were

assigned randomly to the control group or to a treatment group. After
this assignment, those who were eligible were offered enrollment in the

experiment. Many did not enroll. Under this procedure, it is easy to see
that persons who thought that they would not benefit from the program, would
*
be least likely to enroll. In particular, families with rents below R and

who would probably have to move to receive the program subsidy would be less

likely to enroll. That is, persons who didn't want to move and thus wouldn't
participate would be less likely to enroll. Consistent with this observation is the finding that families were less likely to enroll in Pittsburgh

(where our estimated moving transactions cost is high). Also persons who
hadn't moved recently and presumably had a greater aversion to moving were

less likely to enroll. And very low-income families who would probably
have rents well below R* and thus likely not to want to increase their
rents enough to benefit from the experiment, were also less likely to enroll.

So were high income families whose program payments would be small.' In
general, it appears that those in the eligible treatment group who knew
they didn't want to move and thus would not benefit from the program were

1. See Straszheim [1981], p. 124 and 126.

-41

less likely to enroll. These factors are much less likely to have a systematic effect on enrollment in the control group since there is no payment
that is conditional on moving.
It is also important to realize that the experimental data Dertain
only to families who enrolled and were in the sample both at the time

of enrollment and two years later. Of families who enrolled in the
minimum rent plans, 36 percent had dropped out of the experiment two years

later. Among controls 37 percent dropped out) It is likely, however,
that dropping out was much more systematically related to moving--and thus
receipt of the program subsidy--among the treatment group than among the

control group. Thus persons who are unlikely to move are disproportionately
excluded from the treatment group but not from the control group. This would
lead to greater observed moving among persons who enrolled in the treatment
group and remained for two years.2
We are able to make at least one crude correction of the observed

experimental participation rate. Suppose that we consider all those eligible for enrollment as the relevant sample and assume that none of those who

would participate declined enrollment. Then the estimated participation rates
are .51 for Pittsburgh and .52 for Phoenix, very close to our predicted
participation rates.3
In short, it appears that our predictions match the experimental results

very closely and that where the two differ our estimates are quite possibly
more accurate population estimates than are the experimental estimates.

1. See Allen, Fitts, and Glatt [1981], p. 8.
2. Note that the fact that we are able to predict quite well the
rate of the treatment group movers tends to suggest that moving transaction
costs and taste for housing are not highly correlated, and thus the predictions tend to support the assumption that ii and M are independent.
3. These calculations are based on enrollment and participation rates
given in Straszheim [1981], p. 122.

-42-

IV. SIMULATIONS OF PROGRAM EFFECTS
To provide illustrative estimates of the deadweight loss associated
with minimum rent subsidy plans, we have simulated the effects on the

control group of two representative minimum rent plans and have calculated

the concomitant deadweight loss. For comparison, we have also presented
simulated effects under an unconstrained lump-sum transfer program. The
results are shown in Tables 4 through 6. Both plans base the transfer
payment P on family income and the cost of "modal' housing which varies

with family size and between the two cities. The first plan is relatively
generous. It provides a payment that makes up the difference between 1.2
times modal housing cost and 25 percent of income; and sets a relatively

low minimum rent, at .7 times the cost of modal housing. The second plan
only makes up the difference between 25 percent of income and .8 times the
cost of modal housing, and sets a higher minimum rent at .9 times the cost
of modal housing.

The plans are representative of those tested in the

experiment and are also similar to the types of plan that are the subject
of current discussion.
The primary effects of the plans are shown in Table 4, with no plan

at all taken as the base for comparison. In general, the effects of the
plans are very small in Pittsburgh but have modest effects in Phoenix)
In both cities the effect of the minimum rent plan is greater than the

effect of the lump-sum program. Under the more generous plan in Phoenix
average rent is 8 percent higher under minimum rent than under no plan

1.
In some cases, small effects in Pittsburgh are not apparent
because of rounding.

-43-

Table 4. Simulated Effects of Two Minimum Rent and Lump-Sum
a
Housing Subsidy Plans on Control Group, by City and Plan

Phoenix
Effect

Pittsburgh
Uncon-

Minimum strained
Program Rent
Lump-Sum
No

P =

Uncon-

Minimum strained
Program Rent
Lump-Sum
No

l,2(Modal Housing Cost)—0.25(Y)

R* = O.7(Modal Housing Cost)b

Average P Offered

--

$115

$115

--

$57

$57

Proportion Who

--

0.64

1.00

--

0.69

1.00

Proportion Who Move

0.51

0.56

0.51

0.39

0.39

0.39

Average Rent, R2

$136

$147

$143

$121

$124

$121

--

$101

$115

$52

$57

--

0.42

1.00

0.28

1.00

$98

$98

$98

$90

$90

$90

$111

$126

$119

$97

$102

$98

Partici pate

Average P to
Partici pants

Proportion Partici-

--

pating R1 <R*

Average R1 R1<R
Average R2!Rl<R*

P = O.8(Modal Housing Cost)-0.25(Y)
R* = 0.9(Modal Housing Cost)'
$48

--

$18

$18

0.43

1.00

--

0.40

1.00

0.51

0.53

0.51

0.39

0.39

0.39

$136

$147

$139

$121

$123

$121

$37

$48

$17

$18

--

0.29

1.00

--

0.17

1.00

Average R1JR <R

$110

$110

$110

$103

$103

$103

Average R21R1<R*

$121

$135

$125

$106

$110

$107

Average P Offered

--

$48

Proportion Who
Participate

--

Proportion Who Move

Rent, R2
Average P to
Average

Participants
Proportion ParticipatingR1<R*

--

*

a. Because of rounding, some entries may show no change across programs when
in fact the simulations indicate a small change.
b. Applies with minimum rent plan. The average modal housing cost is $189
in Phoenix and $147 in Pittsburgh.

-44-

and 5 percent higher under the lump-sum plan. There is essentially no
effect from the lump-sum plan in Pittsburgh but the minimum rent plan

increases rent by about 2.5 percent. Under the lump-sum plan of course,
every family gets a grant. We see also that the participation rate is
substantially higher in Phoenix than in Pittsburgh, reflecting the lower

transaction costs and higher income elasticities in Phoenix. Under the
minimum rent plans, the largest effect is on families with initial rent
R1 less than the minimum R*. For example, the effect in Phoenix under
the more generous plan is $15 or 13.6 percent (over no program) for this

group compared with $11 or 8 percent for all families. In Pittsburgh,

the increase is about 5 percent for families with R1<R. Further comparisons can be made by considering the numbers in the table.

Because families with R1<R* are presumably especially targeted under
the minimum rent plan, we present in Table 5, some additional calculations for those members of this group who participate in the program by
increasing rent R2 to at least R*.

In particular, there is a potential

deadweight loss associated with payments to this group and we present

estimates of its magnitude. For persons with R1>R*, the minimum rent
plan is equivalent to a lump-sum transfer scheme and there is no deadweight loss associated with the transfer.

The deadweight loss figures are calculated as follows. (1) First, we
calculate for each family the preference level reached under the minimum rent

plan and the associated payment P.1 (2) Then we calculate the preference

1. Note that our simulation procedure makes this outcome stochastic.
For example, our stochastic specification yields some families with attributes X who move and receive the payment P and others who don't. Some
details are provided in Appendix B.

-45-.

Table 5. Simulated Effects of the Minimum Rent Plans
on Control Group Families with R1<R* but

RR*, by City and Plan

Effect

Phoenix
P -

.2(Modal Housing Cost) -

1

Pittsburgh

0.25(Y)

R* = 0.7(Modal Housing COSt)a
0.24

0.10

$99

$89

Average R2

$171

$137

Average P

$140

$83

$21

$11

Proportion of All Eligibles
Average R1

Average OWL ($'s)

Average DWL÷P

0.13

0.13

EDWL+EP

0.15

0.16

P =

0.8(Modal Housing Cost) -

R* =

0 .25(Y)

0.9(Modal Housing COSt)a

Percent of All Eligibles

0.19

0.09

Average R1

$111

$98

Average R2

$203

$160

Average P

$71

$37

Average OWL ($'s)

$23

$11

Average DWL+P

0.29

0.35

EDWL-EP

0.32

0.31

a. Applies with minimum rent plan. The average modal housing cost is
$189 in Phoenix and $147 in Pittsburgh.

-46-

level that these families would obtain with lump-sum transfers equal to

these same P values. (3) Finally, we calculate the income P that could
have been subtracted from the levels of P in (2) to bring individuals to

the level of utility in (1)) The excess burden is taken to be P.
For families with R1<R*. we find that deadweight loss is about 15 percent of total payments under the more generous plan and more than 30

percent of payments under the less generous plan. The average payment is
approximately twice as high under the more generous plan in both cities,
but we can see from table 4 that relative to no plan the average rent

increase for persons with R1<R* is about the same under both plans. The
explanation for the increment, however, differs between the plans. We
shall detail the difference for Phoenix. Fewer families obtain payments
under the less generous plan, but those who do increase their rents much

more to obtain them. Persons who move and receive payments under the less
generous plan increase their rents over R1 by $92 on average while under

the more generous plan the average increase is only $72. This is because
*
the R value is higher under the less generous plan. However, only 29
percent of those with R1<R* receive payments under the less generous plan

while 42 percent of this group receive payments under the more generous
plan, as shown in Table 4.

In either case, the deadweight loss is relatively

low because most targeted families don't participate in the program. Many of
those who do would have moved even without the potential incentive provided

1. We have also calculated the income increases P that would have to
be added to the levels of P in (1) to bring individuals to the level of
utility in (2); the results were virtually the same in both methods.

-47-

by the plan.1 Those who move are most likely to be those with low moving
transaction costs, otherwise they would not move as we shall show by example

below. This means that the deadweight loss associated with the program
results largely from the non-optimal allocation of expenditures between
housing and other goods.

By considering an illustrative example, we can see that persons with
even average transaction costs would be unlikely to move only to receive

the payment. For this purpose we shall use the average estimates for the
two cities combined reported in column 4 of Table 1 and we shall make use

of the graph that is drawn to scale and shown in Figure 6. The figure depicts
the situation of a family with income slightly less than the sample average
that faces a minimum rent of $180, approximately equal to the less generous

plan value in Phoenix, and that faces a payment of $50. Suppose that this
family has the average

=

.86 and has initial rent R1 = $124.

If trans-

action costs were zero, this family would be better off moving and increasing

its rent by $56 and receiving the $50 payment (point B). But with moving
transaction costs equal to the average, the initial position is slightly

preferred to point B, as shown by the ratios below the graph. Families with
higher transaction costs would find the change even less desirable.2 If this
family were to receive a lump-sum grant of $50 it would maintain the same

rent of $124 and use the $50 to purchase other goods, point C. The alloca-

1. We can see this by noting that if we assumed no increase in spending
without a program, we would calculate the plan effect in the less generous
case for example as the average rent increase of participants ($92) times the
proportion who participate (.29), given $46.68. However, we can see from
Table 4 that the increase over no plan is only $14 ($l35-$121).

2. Another way to evaluate the effect of transaction costs is to
consider changes in the probability of moving with changes in the mean value
of M. With the estimated mean value the probability of moving from A to B
would be .544, while the probability would be .488 if the mean were zero.
Thus this increase in mean transaction costs reduces the probability of moving
by 10.3 percent.

-48-

Figure 6.

Illustration of the Effect of
Transactions Costs on
Program Participationa

450
400

180

127
124

S.,

400
V =

400

P = 50

*
R

= 180

Ii =

1.15

= .86

u(B)/U(A) =

1.12 >

U(B)/{U(A).MJ =

1

0.97

<

1

0.87 <

1

u(C)/U(A) =

1.15 >

1

U(D)/LJ(C) =

1.00 =

1

u(D)/[U(C)•MJ =

a. Only the utility rankings of budget allocations A through D are
unaffected by our choice of a utility index. However, for illustrative
purposes we have calculated utility levels using the functional form described above to determine whether the ratios of utilities are greater or
less than unity.

450

-49-

tion at C is essentially as good as point D and if to obtain D the family
has to surmount the moving transaction costs, C is much preferred to moving
to obtain the slight reallocation of expenditure as at point D.

To return to our main theme, we note that while the welfare gain to
eligibles under the lump-sum program is much higher than under the minimum
rent plan--the average payment is much higher--neither plan is in general

a very effective way of increasing housing expenditure, presumably an
important feature of the plans for those whose goal it is to increase such

expenditure. The relevant numbers are shown in Table 6. The lump-sum
plans increase rent by about 6 cents per dollar of payment in Phoenix and

only 2 cents in Pittsburgh. The more generous minimum rent plan leads to
a 17 cent increase per dollar of payment in Phoenix and 8 cents in Pitts-

burgh. The much lower payments under the less generous minimum rent plan
yield much larger rent increases per payment dollar—-68 cents and 41 cents

respectively in Phoenix and Pittsburgh. The reason that the more generous
plan is so costly in this sense is that a large share of payments go to
*
families who have initial rent above R and who don't increase rent much
when payments are received.
In short, the minimum rent plan discourages most eligibles with
<

R* from participating and receiving payments. Thus the excess burden

proportions are relatively low because most relevant eligibles receive no
payments at all.

In addition, persons who do move and receive payments

tend to be among those with the lowest transaction costs; otherwise they
wouldn't move.

V. CONCLUSIONS
We have set out to analyze the effects of moving transaction costs and

-50-

Simulated Average Payments and Rent
Increases by City and Plan

Table 6.

Phoenix
Effect

Minimum Unconstrained
Rent

P =
*
R

1

=

Lump-Sum

Pittsburgh

Minimum Unconstrained
Rent
Lump-Sum

.2(Modal Housing Cost) - 0.25(Y)

0.7(Modal Housing Cost)

Average Payment

$66

$115

$36

Average Rent Increase

$11

$7

$3

$1

Average Rent Increase
÷ Average Payment

0.17

0.06

0.08

0.02

$18

P =

$57

0.8(Modal Housing Cost) - 0.25(Y)

R* = 0.9(Modal Housing COS)a

Average Payment

$16

$48

$7

Average Rent Increase

$11

$3

$3

Average Rent Increase
Average Payment

0.68

0.07

0.41

0.02

a. Applies with minimum rent plan. The average modal housing cost is
$189 in Phoenix and $147 in Pittsburgh.
b. The actual simulated estimate is $0.40.

—51-

disequilibrium rent on the potential effect of government rent subsidy

programs. As a concomitant to our analysis, we have also reaffirmed the
low income elasticities with respect to housing expenditure among low-income

renters found by others. Moving transaction costs are high on average among
renters in our sample but vary widely between geographic regions and evi-

dently vary a great deal among families as well. By our measure, transaction costs reflect both monetary and non-monetary gains and losses asso-

ciated with moving that are not captured by measured changes in the value

of housing. Moving transaction costs in conjunction with low-income elasticities make government lump-sum transfers very ineffective in increasing

housing expenditure among low-income renters. A dollar of unconstrained
transfer payment would increase housing expenditure by only 2 to 7 cents

in the two cities in our data set. The minimum rent plans have larger
effects on average than unconstrained transfers. But families who spend
the least on rent are also those least likely to benefit from the minimum

rent programs. To obtain payments under these plans, families must surmount
the transaction costs associated with moving and must also reallocate income
to favor housing in proportions that may be far from their preferred allo-

cations. Thus only a small proportion of families with initial market rents
below the minimum will ultimately participate in the programs, even under

the more generous plans. Those who do tend to be those with low transaction costs who would move even without the program. And of the total
payments to these families, 15 to 32 percent is deadweight loss, according
to our estimates.
In addition, we find that because moving transaction costs apparently
vary widely among regions, the effects of any given government program are

-52-

also likely to vary greatly from one region to the other.

As a fortuitous benefit of the data that we used, we were also able

to check our model results against experimental results. Our model of
moving and housing expenditure seems to predict well the effects of experirnental housing programs. Using our model with parameter estimates
based on control families, we have simulated the effects of experimental

treatments in the housing allowance demand experiment. The model predictions and the experimental results correspond quite closely. The differences
that are found can apparently be explained in large part by the impact of

self-selection on the estimated experimental treatment effects. The selfdetermination of enrollment and the attrition inherent in the estimated
experimental effects seriously detract from the potential benefits of ex-

perimental randomization. Therefore predictions based on our model may be
more reliable than those based on the experimental results in this instance.

Of course this judgment depends in large part on the experiment having been
undertaken so that we could check our predictions against the experimental
outcomes.

A-i

Appendix A: Some Details of the Probability Expressions

We begin by rewriting the function g in the following form, where the
=

desired proportion of income devoted to housing is

cS0Y2

,

with

a

function of second-period family attributes X2,

g =

=

lnV22-lnV12-inM

(l—2).[in(Y2—R2)-ln(Y2-R1)]

+

2[lnR2—lnR1]

—

in

M

(Al)

/V R '

= 1nL2R2
\2 it
d +

Y,-R,
\
L

mM

'2'2/

\Rl

mM

-

62c

/R.,
,,ln(--

Then the probability that g > 0 given R1, R2 is

Pr[g >

(A2)

1. With

01R1,R2]

=

Pr[lnM

-

2c

<

d]

Non-Random

First consider the case with r = 0 as assumed in equations (ii) and (i2)

in section 11-B-i. In this case

(A3)

Pr[g >

0]

=

=

csl

Id +

2c
0m

where S (and thus

= (x2)Y2

and (A2) becomes

- m

1

is independent of R1 and R2. To evaluate equations

(11) and (12) we simply need, then, the conditional distribution of R2
given R1 which is normal with

A- 2

w

1+6

E(R2R1) = X26Y2

(A4)

1

+

1+6

—. (R1

-

X16.Y1

1), and

2

— 20 vir\2Drj\ —

%Ifb

(1)

C

0C

where w is the covariance between

2. With
If

and

Random
is random, the probability (A2) that g > 0 becomes

Pr[g >

(A5)

01R1,R2]

If we recall that both f(R1) and f(R21R1) are normal, then the relationships

necessary to detail the equations (15) are as follows: (note that these
relationships allow a covariance between

ri.1 and 2 (we) and allow C1

and

to be correlated (p). We then constrain the specification setting p
and

=

to

yield the primary specification discussed in the text.)

= 0

A-3

2Y2(1+Si)

=

(A6)

V(R1)

(A7)

V(R2) =

2
C

111

2 2(l+Si) +
Y

2

1

(A8)

Cov(R1,R2) =

where

(Ag)

(AlO)

ü)

n

+U)

w(Y1Y2)

C

2

=p

nn

1+6
E(R21R1) = x25.Y2

2

(A)

PCC
0

C

Cov(R1,R2)
V(R1)

1+51
R1-X15'Y1
(

Cov(R1 ,R2)2
V(R21R1) = V(R2) -

Var(R1)

(All)

E(501R1,R2) = X26
1+6

1+5

1V(R) -

+

V(R1)V(R2) - Cov(R1,R2)2

(1

]

-

)

/

+

V(R1)V(R2) -

V(601R1,R2)

1+5

'Cov(R1,R2)

Cov(R1,R2)

(R2

1+5

x2.v2 i)

=

(A12)

2215 v(R2)

4 2(1+6

1+61
1

V(R1) - 2wa(Y1Y2)

v(R1)V(R2) - Cov(R1,R2)2

Cov(R1 ,R2)

A-4

3. With the Minimum Rent Subsidy
Most of the elements necessary to detail the equations (19) are the same

as those shown in Section 2 above. The only additional elements are the
conditional mean and variance of (501R1) and the conditional mean and vari-

ance of (c2lR1). The latter terms derive from f(R2IR1,R*), as mentioned in
footnote 1 following equation (18). The relevant particulars are

1 +5

(A13)

Cov(50,R1) =

(A14)

E(60R1) =

XcS

1

+ Cov(0,R1) (R1 -

Var(R1)

(A15)

(Al6)

V(0IR1) =

E(2lR1) =

V(0)

—

Cov(0,R1 )2
v(R1

v (R1
2
aw

(A17)

V(c JR ) = a

—

-

______
1

X6Y1

1)

l+6.

X6Y

)

B-i

Appendix B: Simulation Procedure

To simulate the effects of a subsidy plan we suppose that the control
families represent a random sample of the families who would be subject to

the plan. Thus by averaging the predicted responses of these families, we
obtain the average effects of the plan. To give the general idea of our
procedure, suppose we begin with the first control observation, character-

ized by a vector of attributes X. The possible choices of a family with
these attributes are determined not only by the vector X, together with the
estimated parameters of our model, but by unobserved random components as
well.

An important determinant of the effects of subsidy schemes such as

housing gap plans is population heterogeneity. Individuals differ in their
tastes for housing, moving transaction costs, and the ability to obtain
housing at the desired level of rent. In our model , heterogeneous tastes

are captured in part by the different measured attributes of families. However, our estimates suggest that not all changes in rent and moving decisions can be completely explained by observed differences in family attributes.
The parameter estimates indicate that random variations in tastes (n),
maximization errors (c), and random transaction costs of moving (M) are also

important. Our simulation procedure is designed to reflect these random
determinants of choice.

Through our model, we have estimated the variance of n, the variance
of c, and the mean of M (with a variance of 1).

If we knew the particular

values of each of the random terms associated with the observation X, then
given our model the rental expenditure, moving, and participation decisions

resulting from a subsidy plan would be deterministic. Thus we randomly

B-2

choose the error terms from the appropriate distributions and then predict

the outcome for the observation X. Since we observe R1 to start, we choose
from the estimated distributions conditional on R1. We must choose values

of n, £2, and mM. They are drawn from the following independent normal
distributions, with all means and variances based on values estimated in
the model:

-

£2

N(E(ritR1),

Var(riIR1)

N(O, o)

lnM

N(m, 1)

Values of these disturbances together with X and the other estimated
parameters of the model completely specify the preference and rental
expenditure functions, and thus the moving and rent decisions.
To capture the possible range of responses for a family with observed
attributes X, we repeat the process several times for each control family.
Thus several simulated outcomes are obtained for each observation X.1

The procedure is repeated for each control observation. Average outcomes are obtained by averaging the simulated outcomes, using the total
number of simulations given by the number of controls (655) times the
number of repetitions for each.

In effect, the repetitions together with averaging are a way of
approximating integral expressions like those describing the probability

1. Our initial simulations were based on 100 repetitions for each
control family. Further experimentation with the procedure revealed that
10 repetitions were adequate (and computationally much less expensive),
given our rather large sample. Thus most simulations reported are based
on 10 repetitions for each of the 655 control families.

B-3

of outcomes under the minimum rent plan.
In summary, we emphasize that the important aspect of the simulations
is to capture random components of individual choices, in particular hetero—
geneous preferences among families with the same observed attributes.

REFERENCES

Aaron, Henry J., "Policy Implications: A Progress Report," in Bradbury and
Downs, Do Housing Allowances Work?, Brookings Institution, 1981.
Allen, Garland E., Jerry J. Fitts, and Evelyn S. Glatt, "The Experimental

Housing Allowance Program," in Bradbury and Downs, Do Housing Allowances
Work?, Brookings Institution, 1981.
Bradbury, Katharine L., and Anthony Downs, Do Housing Allowances Work?,
Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., 1981.
Cronin, Francis J., "Household Responsiveness to Unconstrained Housing

Allowances," in Raymond J. Struyk and Marc Bendick, Jr., Housing
Vouchers for the Poor, Urban Institute Press, Washington, D.C., 1981.
de Leeuw, Frank, "The Demand for Housing - A Review of the Cross-Section
Evidence," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 53, February 1971,
pp. 1-10.

Friedman, Joseph and Daniel H. Weinberg, Housing Consumption Under a

Constrained Income Transfer: Evidence from a Housing Gap Housing
Allowance, Abt Associates, Cambridge, MA, 1980a.
Friedman, Joseph and Daniel H. Weinberg, The Demand for Rental Housing:
Evidence from a Percent of Rent Housing Allowance, Abt Associates,
Cambridge, MA, June 1980b.

Hausman, Jerry A and David A. Wise, "Discontinuous Budget Constraints and

Estimation: The Demand for Housing," Review of Economic Studies,
Vol. XLVII, 1980, pp. 75-96.

Kennedy, Stephen D., Final Report of the Housing Allowance Demand
ment, Abt Associates, Cambridge, MA, June 1980.

King, Mervyn A., "An Econometric Model of Tenure Choice and the Demand for
Housing as a Joint Decision," Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 14,
1980, pp. 137-159.

Mayo, Stephen K., "Theory and Estimation in the Economics of Housing Demand,"
Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 10, 1980, pp. 95-116.

Rosen, Harvey S., "Housing Decisions and the U.S. Income Tax: An Econometric Analysis," Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 11, 1979, pp. 1-23.

Straszheim, Mahion, "Participation," in Bradbury and Downs, Do Housing
Allowances Work?, Brookings Institution, 1981.
Weinberg, Daniel H., Joseph Friedman, and Stephen K. Mayo, "Intraurban

Residential Mobility: The Role of Transaction Costs, Market Imperfections, and Household Disequilibrium," Journal of Urban Economics, Vol.
9, 1980, pp. 332-348.

Wise, David A.,, "Memorandum: Housing Demand, Discontinuous Budget Con—
straints, and Estimation," mimeograph, J.F.K. School of Government,
l977a.

Wise, David A., "Memorandum: Moving and the Housing Demand Experiment,"
Mimeograph, J.F.K. School of Government, 1977b.

