                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 THE TIMING OF BIRTHS:
                     IS THE HEALTH OF INFANTS COUNTER-CYCLICAL?

                                              Rajeev Dehejia
                                           Adriana Lleras-Muney

                                           Working Paper 10122
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w10122


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      November 2003




We are grateful to Orley Ashenfelter, Marianne Bertrand, Sherry Glied, Caroline Hoxby, Chang-Tai Hsieh,
Larry Katz, Alan Krueger, Phillip Levine, Diane Macunovich, Christina Paxson and Jane Waldfogel for many
valuable conversations and suggestions, and to seminar participants at Columbia, Princeton, Dartmouth, and
the NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments received. We are extremely grateful to Roland Fryer and
Steven Levitt for their generosity in providing us with results from their confidential California birth data and
to their excellent research assistant Michael Roh for patiently running our specifications. We also thank Anne
Case, for allowing us to use her state data, and Phillip Levine, for providing us with abortion data from the
CDC. We thank Alice Roberta Weimers for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Rajeev Dehejia and Adriana Lleras-Muney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Timing of Births: Is the Health of Infants Counter-Cyclical?
Rajeev Dehejia and Adriana Lleras-Muney
NBER Working Paper No. 10122
November 2003
JEL No. J13, J20, I12, E20

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper documents a counter-cyclical pattern in the health of children, and examines whether this
pattern is due to selection of mothers choosing to give birth or due to behavioral changes. We study
the relationship between the unemployment rate at the time of a baby’s conception and parental
characteristics (which we often refer to as quality), parental behaviors, and babies’ health. Using
national data from the Natality Files from 1975 onward, we find that babies conceived in times of
high unemployment have a reduced incidence of low and very low birth weight and a reduced rate
of neo-natal and post-neonatal mortality. These health improvements are attributable both to
selection (differences in the type of mothers that conceive during recessions) and to changes in
behavior during recessions. Black mothers tend to be higher quality (as measured by education and
marital status) in times of high unemployment, whereas the quality of white mothers either worsens
or does not improve. In the aggregate data, we find some evidence of improved behavior in times
of high unemployment, but not for all mothers (use of prenatal care increases for all mothers, but
smoking and drinking increase among white mothers). In order to separate out selection and
behavioral effects, we use a panel of mothers from California and compare our results to those from
the national aggregate data. For blacks, we find that selection drives our results, and that behavioral
effects are relatively small. For whites, we find evidence of negative selection, and consequently that
behavioral effects are larger than the joint behavior-plus-selection effect. Our findings are consistent
with evidence that blacks are credit constrained (and therefore opt out of fertility in times of high
unemployment).

Rajeev Dehejia                                         Department of Economics
Department of Economics and SIPA                       and Woodrow Wilson School
Columbia University                                    Princeton University
420 W. 118th Street, Room 1022                         320 Wallace Hall
New York, NY 10027                                     Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                               and NBER
rd247@columbia.edu                                     alleras@princeton.edu

Adriana Lleras-Muney
THE TIMING OF BIRTHS: IS THE HEALTH OF INFANTS COUNTER-

CYCLICAL?



1. Introduction

This paper documents a counter-cyclical pattern in the health of children, and examines

whether this pattern is due to selection of mothers choosing to give birth or due to

behavioral changes. We study the relationship between the unemployment rate at the time

of a baby’s conception and parental characteristics (which we often refer to as quality),

parental behaviors, and babies’ health. Using national data from the Natality Files from

1975 onward, we find that babies conceived in times of high unemployment have a

reduced incidence of low and very low birth weight and a reduced rate of neo-natal and

post-neonatal mortality. These health improvements are attributable both to selection

(differences in the type of mothers that conceive during recessions) and to changes in

behavior during recessions. Black mothers tend to be higher quality (as measured by

education and marital status) in times of high unemployment, whereas the quality of

white mothers either worsens or does not improve. In the aggregate data, we find some

evidence of improved behavior in times of high unemployment, but not for all mothers

(use of prenatal care increases for all mothers, but smoking and drinking increase among

white mothers). In order to separate out selection and behavioral effects, we use a panel

of mothers from California and compare our results to those from the national aggregate

data. For blacks, we find that selection drives our results, and that behavioral effects are

relatively small. For whites, we find evidence of negative selection, and consequently

that behavioral effects are larger than the joint behavior-plus-selection effect. Our
findings are consistent with evidence that blacks are credit constrained (and therefore opt

out of fertility in times of high unemployment).

        There is an extensive literature in demographics and economics that has

documented a pro-cyclical pattern in fertility, i.e., the number of children (Yule 1906,

Galbraith and Thomas 1941, Thomas 1941, Becker 1960, Silver 1965, and Ben-Porath

1973, to name but a few). Recent work by Ruhm (2000) has also documented a counter-

cyclical pattern in infant mortality. The two taken together suggest one of the phenomena

we explore in the paper, namely selective fertility decisions leading to a cyclical pattern

in child quality. At the same time, Ruhm (2000, 2002, and 2003) and Deaton and Paxon

(2001) note that health-related behavior and adult mortality are also counter-cyclical,

which suggests that behavioral improvements could also play a role in cyclical quality

variation. After documenting that there is cyclical variation in child quality, we will try to

distinguish between these two effects.

        The question we examine is important for many reasons. First, we are presenting

a new stylized fact. Although there is a literature on cyclical variation in fertility (cited

above), the labor market implications of variation in cohort size (e.g., Shimer 2000), and

cyclical patterns in adult health and health-related behavior (Deaton and Paxson 2000;

Ruhm 2000, 2003; Snyder and Evans 2002), the question of whether there is cyclical

variation in the quality of birth cohorts has not been studied. Second, our results suggest

that some of the previously documented declines in infant mortality during recessions

(Ruhm 2000, Chay and Greenstone 2003) maybe be due to selection. Third, our results

provide corroborative evidence on the extent of credit constraints in the U.S. economy. If

mothers were not credit constrained, we would not expect to find significant selection




                                               2
effects on child quality from changes in current unemployment. Likewise, the relative

strength of these effects for blacks versus whites and married versus single mothers

corroborate the view that credit constraints have important effects on individual behavior

in the U.S. economy (see also Jappelli 1990). Fourth, a large literature examines the

effect of postpartum household income and maternal employment on children’s health

and cognitive outcomes (see inter alia Shea 2000, Paxson and Waldfogel 2002, and

Waldfogel, Han, and Brooks Gun 2002). We take the question back one step, and ask

whether the rate of unemployment at the time of a child’s conception has an impact on

subsequent outcomes. Fifth, we provide a test of the Becker (1960) theory of fertility. We

corroborate the role of unemployment in selective fertility decisions and document that

there are important income and substitution effects that affect fertility. As such, our work

is complementary to Gruber, Levine, and Staiger (1997), Angrist and Evans (1999),

Donahue and Levitt (2001), and Pop-Eleches (2002), who examine the role and

implications of abortion in selective fertility decisions. Finally, our work adds to the

understanding of the effects of business cycles on individual behavior and points to

important variations in children’s health and mothers’ use of prenatal care that could have

policy implications, for example regarding the use of prenatal care among working

women.

       The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we provide a theoretical

framework to motivate our empirical work. In Section 3, we describe the data. Section 4

presents the results from the Natality Files. Section 5 presents additional corroborative

evidence. Section 6 concludes.




                                             3
2. Theoretical Framework

Becker’s (1960) seminal paper provides a framework within which to analyze the

relationship between fertility and cyclical fluctuations in employment. Becker’s key

contribution is to place fertility decisions within the framework of standard price theory.

In his original article, Becker discusses the implications of thinking about children as

durable goods. In the context of the present study, we focus on two elements of this

framework, income effects and substitution effects, and examine the implications for our

empirical analysis in terms of selection and behavioral effects. By income effects we

refer to changes in income when wages are held constant, whereas by substitution effects

we refer to changes in wages, when income is held constant. We use the term credit

constraints very generally to refer to households’ inability to smooth consumption and

income over time.



2.1 Income Effects

In the Becker theory, in the absence of credit constraints, fertility decisions are based on

permanent, rather than transitory, income. The fertility literature, both prior to and

subsequent to Becker, has instead examined the effect of short-term fluctuations –

typically the unemployment rate. Becker (1960) justifies the focus on short-term

fluctuations by appealing to credit constraints. Child bearing entails large, lumpy

expenditures (including medical care and child-care paraphernalia), and much of this

expenditure cannot be inter-temporally substituted. Losing a job (or facing an increased

probability of unemployment) could lead individuals who are credit constrained to

postpone childbearing, and even in the absence of credit constraints could have the same




                                              4
effect for individuals whose expected duration of unemployment is long relative to their

wealth (see for example Ben-Porath 1973). In other words, in Becker’s theory, transitory

shocks to income should have no impact on household’s fertility decisions unless they are

credit constrained, or unless these shocks are perceived as signaling permanent changes

in the household’s income.

       A question that is of central interest to our analysis is which sub-groups are most

likely to be affected by the business cycle. Hoynes (1999) demonstrates that blacks are

more strongly affected by the business cycle than whites (i.e. they experience greater

cyclical fluctuations). Jappelli (1990) documents that blacks are also more likely to be

credit constrained. He also shows that the probability of being credit constrained is higher

for unmarried individuals.



(A) Selection effects

We anticipate that, during times of high unemployment, credit constrained mothers will

choose not to have babies, whereas the fertility decisions of mothers who are not credit

constrained will not be affected. Since individuals who are credit constrained are also

likely to have fewer resources to devote to their own and their children’s health, selection

implies a counter-cyclical pattern in the quality of children.



(B) Behavioral Effects

Income effects due to the business cycle are likely to have behavioral effects in addition

to selection effects. The overall effect of these transitory income shocks on health is

ambiguous. When unemployment is high, negative income effects would lead to a lower




                                              5
consumption of luxury goods, which could plausibly include health-damaging goods such

as cigarettes and alcohol. Lower income, however, might also reduce consumption of

goods beneficial to health (such as health club memberships and nutritious diets). The

work by Ruhm (2002, 2003) suggests that on average individuals are more likely to cut

down on unhealthy behaviors during recessions, generating a counter-cyclical pattern in

health.



2.2 Substitution Effects

The production of children is a time-intensive activity. It entails not only the time cost of

pregnancy, but more generally the time associated with health-related activities. An

implication of Becker’s (1965) theory of time allocation is that, if individuals have

flexibility and the ability to time pregnancies, they would choose to bear children when

the wage rate is transitorily low (see also Ben-Porath 1973). Thus, households would

respond to unemployment or to an increased probability of unemployment (that they

expected to be transitory) by choosing to bear children. Substitution effects are likely to

be dominant, relative to income effects, for married women, since household total income

is less likely to fall among married women .1



(A) Selection Effects

Individuals who experience strong pro-cyclical declines in wages with the business cycle

will tend to substitute into child bearing during a downturn. To the extent that lower

quality women are choosing to have children, we anticipate a decline in average quality


1
 Note that this substitution effect can generate a cyclical pattern in the quality of births that is unrelated to
credit constraints.


                                                        6
along this margin. But the opposite could also be true, that is we could observe high

quality women choosing to have children in times of unemployment. The magnitude of

this response depends on the elasticity of fertility with respect to wages. We have no a

priori knowledge about whether high or low quality women have greater elasticities.



(B) Behavioral Effects

As we mentioned above, health-related activities are time-intensive, and as such we

would expect individuals who face a transitory decline in wages to substitute into these

activities. Health-related activities that benefit babies include both mother’s own health

(see Ruhm 2000 for evidence on adult health) and prenatal care. We examine the latter

outcome in our results below.



       To summarize, in response to an increase to the unemployment rate, we expect:

(a) mothers who are credit constrained to delay fertility, thereby increasing the average

quality of mothers and babies; (b) mothers whose wages fall to have babies (with an

uncertain effect on quality); (c) all mothers to increase time-intensive health behaviors,

such as exercise and use of prenatal care, most of which appear to be health improving;

and (d) decreases in consumption of all normal goods (uncertain effect on health/quality

depending on the type of good). Overall, the effect of unemployment on average

children’s health of these multiple effects depends on the relative magnitudes of income

and substitution effects. These magnitudes in turn depend on: the magnitude of the

correlation between mother characteristics and children’s health; the magnitude of the




                                             7
effect of maternal behavior on children’s health; and the magnitude of women’s fertility

responses to unemployment.



3. Data Description and Econometric Specification

3.1 Unemployment: Data and Interpretation

We exploit variation across states and within states over time in unemployment rates. Our

primary measure of unemployment is the state-by-year unemployment rate published by

the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Figure 1 graphs the unemployment rate, and shows that

there is considerable variation between and within states.

       The unemployment rate is a widely publicized measure of the business cycle, and

as such should capture not only the probability of individual job loss but also the effect of

economic uncertainty more generally. Also note that given the aggregate nature of these

data, we cannot distinguish between the effects of own employment and spouse (or

household) unemployment.

       Measurement error in the unemployment rate is an important concern. Both the

number of individuals unemployed and the labor force are subject to measurement error.

Thus, we also consider an alternative measure of employment, the employment-to-

population ratio.



3.2 Natality Files

We use the Vital Statistics Natality records from 1975 to 1999, covering every birth in

the U.S. Birth certificates contain information on parents’ characteristics including age,

marital status, and education, mother’s behavior during pregnancy (such as prenatal care




                                             8
information, and information about smoking and drinking) and child health outcomes

including birth weight and the 5-minute Apgar score.2 The sample includes all births to

mothers ages 18 and older. We aggregate these data into cells defined by state of

residence of the mother, year of conception, race and gender of the baby.

        A few data quality issues are worth mentioning. Although all states were

reporting by 1975, some states were only reporting 50% of births. It was not until 1985

that all states reported 100% of births (see Appendix A for more details). We weight our

regressions using the number of births in each state to account for this differential

sampling size and also because there are very few black births in some states.3

        Most importantly, we use the date of the last menstrual period to determine the

date of conception. Some states did not report this information in the early years of the

panel. We therefore drop these observations.

        A key variable, marital status, is imputed for most years (and is missing in some

years for some states). Marital status was inferred by state by comparing the last names of

the mother and the father, as reported by the mother. The codebooks indicate that this

imputation method resulted in implausible marital rates for some states. Therefore, results

using this variable must be taken with caution.

        Both mother’s education and the 5-minute Apgar score are missing in some states

for the some years. Some (but not all) states report smoking and drinking after 1989.

Appendix A documents variable availability for each state and year. Our regressions do




2
  The Apgar score is a 10-point scale that is used to assess the health of newborns based on five criteria
(appearance, pulse, grimace, activity, and respiration) that are rated between 0 and 2. A low Apgar score
has been found to be a good predictor of subsequent infant mortality. See Almond, Chay, and Lee (2002).
3
  Our results are not particularly sensitive to using weights.


                                                    9
not hold the sample constant: we use all of the observations available for any given

specification.

         We also use restricted access birth certificate data from California during the

years 1990-2000, which contain enough information to identify mothers who have had

more than one birth. The California birth certificate data is identical in nature to the

national birth certificate data, except for the additional information it contains that allows

us to convert it into a panel of mothers. There is also some information that the state of

California does not collect and that is therefore not available in the California panel, such

as drinking and smoking (again see Appendix A for details).4



3.4 Other data

We use infant mortality data provided by the Center for Disease Control (CDC). Abortion

data come from both the Alan Guttmacher Institute and the CDC. The Guttmacher

Institute data is believed to be more accurate but it does not break down abortions by

race, which the CDC does. Note that these data do not exist for every year in our panel.

         We calculate birth rates using counts from the Natality Files and population

estimates provided by the Bureau of the Census online. Data on state demographics and

government transfers are described in Besley and Case (2003). WIC benefits were

obtained from the U.S. Department of Agriculture.

         Finally, we use country-level panel data from the World Bank Indicators

(available online). It contains information on infant mortality rates, birth rates, and



4
 Because of confidentiality requirements, we do not have direct access to this data. We report the results of
specifications that were run for us by Roland Fryer and Steven Levitt, to whom we are very grateful for
their assistance. See Fryer and Levitt (2003) for additional details regarding this data.


                                                     10
unemployment rates from 1980 to 2000 for all countries for which the data could be

obtained.



3.5 Specification

We consider the following reduced-form specification:

             Yst = b0 + b1*(unemployment rate)st + Tt + Ss + b2s (Ss*year) + est,          (1)

where Yst refers to outcomes (such as mothers’ characteristics, child outcomes, or use of

prenatal care) for children conceived at time t, unemployment rate refers to the state-and-

year specific rate of unemployment, Ss and Tt refer to state and year fixed effects, and

Ss*year refers to a state-specific time trend. In some specifications we add additional

state-year controls. We use the number of births as weights, and present robust standard

errors, which correct for heteroskedasticity (including clustering at the state level).

       Can the effect of unemployment in this specification be considered causal?

Endogeneity is not the primary concern, since mothers’ fertility decisions do not have an

immediate and direct effect on the statewide unemployment rate at the time of

conception, but it could be a concern if women leave their jobs in anticipation of future

pregnancy. We address this concern by using the unemployment rate one year prior to

conception as an instrument. Another concern is that the unemployment rate might

capture the effect of a coincident shock or omitted variable. Our use of state and year

fixed effects, and of state-specific trends, addresses some of these concerns. Our

instrumental variables specification also addresses, to some extent, the concern of

omitted variable bias, but more directly we add a range of time-varying controls to the

specification.




                                             11
       Finally, we use the same specification for individual data and allow for mother

fixed effects to examine the distinction between selection effects and behavioral effects.



4. Results

4.1 Introductory Results: Birth Rates and Abortion

We begin by examining the effect of unemployment on birth rates and abortion,

replicating and extending previous results and laying the groundwork for our subsequent

investigation of child quality.

       Table 2 examines the effect of unemployment on birthrates. From previous

studies (cited in Section 1), we anticipate a counter-cyclical relationship and, from our

discussion in Section 2, that the effect should be larger for blacks than whites. Columns

(1) and (2) confirm this. For whites and blacks, we find a negative relationship,

significant at the one percent level, but the magnitude of the effect is larger for blacks

than whites (a one standard deviation, that is 2 percent, increase in unemployment leads

to a reduction of 12.2 percent of a standard deviation of the birthrate for blacks,

compared to 9.2 percent for whites). The inclusion of state-specific trends, in columns (3)

and (4), reduces the size and significance of the effect, but not the relative magnitudes.

More directly, in columns (5) and (6), we show that the proportion of black babies born

declines as unemployment increases. Depending on the specification, the magnitude of

the effect ranges from 1.2 to 0.8 percent; both effects are significant at standard levels.

       Abortion is another dimension of selective fertility, which we examine in Table 3

using data from the Guttmacher Institute and the CDC (the former is regarded as more

accurate, but is not broken down by race). The results are very sensitive to the




                                             12
specification we choose and to the data we employ. Even though in principle abortion is

very interesting, we place little emphasis on our abortion results due to the lack of

robustness of these results.5 Taken together Tables 2 and 3 provide circumstantial

evidence for increased selectivity in fertility decisions during times of higher

unemployment (fewer births, more abortions), and a stronger effect for blacks. The

implication of this observation, and the central thesis of this paper, is that there should

accordingly be quality differences in mothers and babies.



4.2 Mother Quality, Child Health, and Prenatal Care

Tables 4a and 4b present our main results. For mother characteristics, childbirth

outcomes, prenatal care, and smoking and drinking behavior during pregnancy we match

outcomes to unemployment in the year of conception of the child. For mortality

outcomes, we match to unemployment in the year of mortality (although results are

similar when matching to one-year lagged unemployment).

         In Table 4a, using the full sample, we find that increased unemployment results in

a significant decreases in the incidence of low and very low birth weight and in infant

mortality. Our discussion in Section 2 however, suggests that results should differ for

blacks and whites—whites presumably are less subject to income effects and possibly

more likely to substitute into childbearing during a downturn. The epidemiological

literature also suggests that there may be significant racial differences in health. In the


5
 For example, in columns (1) to (3), for the full population and whites and blacks separately, we find that
abortions per live birth increase with unemployment, although the effect is significant only for blacks. It
should be noted that these results are sensitive to the specification. For example, when we examine
abortions per woman, in columns (4) to (6), we find a negative effect of unemployment using the
Guttmacher data, but find a positive effect for the CDC data, significant for blacks at the one percent level.
(This issue is unresolved in the literature; see also Blank, George, and London 1996 and Levine 1997.) We
discuss columns (7) to (10) of Table 3 in Section 5.


                                                     13
next rows, we split the sample by race. Once we split by race, we continue to find

reduced low and very low birth weight for both races, but the effects are significant only

for blacks. And we still observe significant decreases in post-neonatal mortality for both

whites and blacks.

       In Table 4b, we examine a range of mothers’ characteristics and behaviors during

pregnancy. Note that changes in indicators of behavior may reflect both selection and

behavior changes. We find quality improvements for whites in terms of mother’s age and

father’s education, but not for mother’s education, although this effect is not significant.

For blacks, instead, we find a much stronger and more uniform set of results: increased

mother’s and father’s education, and older mothers.

       On the other hand, for behavioral indicators for both black and whites, we find a

significant increase in the use of prenatal care, a reduction in the proportion of mothers

with less than five prenatal care visits, and an increase in mothers who use prenatal care

in the first trimester (with almost all effects significant at the one percent level). The

same is not true when we look at smoking and drinking, indicators for which we observe

a sharp difference between blacks and whites. For the former group there is a reduction in

these two activities (significant for drinking), and for the latter an increase in both

activities (significant for smoking). Overall, our results point to a positive (counter-

cyclical) quality selection for black mothers along all observable dimensions. For white

mothers, the results are more mixed: we do find significant improvements in use of

prenatal care but education and risky behaviors appear to worsen when unemployment

increases.




                                              14
       Consequently, for blacks, evidence of improved birth weight and other behaviors

shown in Table 4a is consistent with both a selection effect and substitution into health-

improving behavior. For whites, the results are different. The statistically significant

effects shown in Table 4a point to improved quality, but the smoking effect shown in

Table 4b (and a negative, albeit insignificant, average education effect in Table 4a) point

to reduced quality. To the extent that there is a negative selection effect along some

dimensions, the results suggest that improvements for whites in health outcomes in Table

4a must be due to behavioral improvements. We confirm these speculations in Section 5.



4.3 Specification Checks

There are several factors that could confound our interpretation of the results in Table 4.

Among these are the simultaneity of unemployment and outcome measures, omitted

variable bias, and mis-measurement of the unemployment rate. We address each in turn.

       We address the concern of simultaneity in two ways. First, it should be noted that

the unemployment rate is matched by the year of conception of the child, whereas the

mother and child quality outcomes are measured at birth. Unless a significant number of

women exit employment in anticipation of future pregnancy, simultaneity should not be a

concern. Second, we nonetheless instrument for the unemployment rate using lagged

unemployment, which also addresses in part concerns of omitted variable bias. These

estimates would suffer from simultaneity bias only if shocks to unemployment were

correlated with shocks to fertility decisions and outcomes one to two years in the future;

omitted variable bias is addressed to the extent that lagged unemployment is uncorrelated

with the omitted variable in the next period. In Panel A of Table 5, we see that our result




                                             15
for very low birth weight among whites is highly significant in the new specification, but

otherwise the results are similar in sign, significance, and magnitude.

         Another source of concern is measurement error. The unemployment rate is

potentially subject to measurement error in both its numerator (unemployment) and

denominator (the labor force). Thus, we consider an alternative measure of employment,

namely the employment-to-population ratio. Because the employment-to-population ratio

measures employment rather than unemployment, we anticipate a pro-cyclical

relationship. In Panel B, we note that our results are nearly identical in direction (hence

reversed in sign) to our results in Table 4. As the employment-to-population ratio

increases (or as unemployment decreases) average mothers’ quality declines for whites

and blacks (with the exception of education for whites), and health quality deteriorates.

Indeed, in this alternative specification, our results for health quality among whites babies

are now statistically significant.6 Finally, additional estimates (Appendix B) suggest that

our results are also fairly robust to the inclusion of additional covariates (such as

government transfers and WIC benefits), so omitted variables bias does not appear to be a

major concern.



4.4 Results by Marital Status

In Table 6, we present our main results broken down by marital status. This specification

serves as a further robustness check, and provides additional insight into the results from

Table 4. For married white mothers, we find significant evidence of reduced quality:

6
  Another source of concern is omitted variable bias. Our results are robust to including a wide range of
additional controls, such as including the age distribution of the population, average WIC benefits,
percentage of the population on Medicaid, the abortion rate, and real government per capita government
transfers. Many of the additional variables are significant. For unemployment our results remain highly
robust in sign, significance, and magnitude.


                                                    16
average education decreases, and there is a significant increase in very low birth weight

and a reduction in the 5-minute Apgar score. In light of our discussion in Section 2,

substitution effects are likely to be stronger relative to income effects among married

mothers. Since selection leads to reduced quality for married whites, the increased use of

prenatal care (for two of our three measures) implies improvements in health-related

behavior among married whites. For single whites, our results are similar, but weaker.

Average education falls, but age increases, as does use of prenatal care. And, there are no

significant effects on health measures.

       Among blacks, with the exception of average father’s education, our results point

to uniformly improved quality for both single and unmarried mothers. However, we note

that many of the effects are larger for single mothers, as would be expected if these

mothers are in fact more credit constrained. Indeed, our results suggest that

improvements in birth weight among blacks are driven by increases among single black

mothers.



5. Corroborative Evidence and Interpreting the Results

In this section we present additional results that corroborate our findings on child quality

and that provide additional interpretation.



5.1 Education and Fertility

A notable feature of our results in the previous section is the difference between blacks

and whites in terms of selection, mainly shown by the average education effect (the

smoking and drinking effects confound selection and behavior). We explore this finding




                                              17
further in Table 7, where we examine the proportion of births that take place within four

education categories (high school dropout, high school, some college, and college plus),

by race. Reduced average education among white mothers is driven by an increased

proportion of births among high school and high school dropout mothers, and a decrease

in the proportion of births among mothers with more than high school education. In

contrast, among blacks we find the opposite profile, although none of the effects appear

to be significant: there is a decrease in the share of black babies born to mothers with a

high school degree or less, an increase in the share of those born to mothers with some

college, and finally an (unexpected) decrease among college-plus mothers (but the

decrease is much smaller in magnitude than the decline for high school dropouts).



5.2 Education and Abortion

Another dimension along which selection effects can operate is abortion. In Table 3,

columns (7) to (10) we examine whether the effect of unemployment on abortion varies

with the proportion of mothers with more than high school education. In columns (7) and

(8), for the abortion rate, we note that for both whites and blacks a higher level of

education is associated with more abortions. Though not statistically significant, it is

notable that the unemployment-education interaction is positive for whites and negative

for blacks. For abortions per live birth, columns (9) and (10), we find that the interaction

effect is negative for both whites and blacks, but much larger in magnitude for blacks.

Given the limited number of observations, it is not surprising that these results are not

statistically significant, but they do provide some corroboration of our finding in Section




                                             18
4 that education quality increases among black mothers, but decreases among white

mothers.



5.3 Unemployment Effects and Credit Constraints

As discussed in Section 2, credit constraints provide a rationale for why current

unemployment could affect fertility decisions. The fact that that our results are stronger

for blacks than whites, and for single mothers than for married mothers, provides

circumstantial evidence of this, since we know that blacks and single mothers are more

likely to be credit constrained than whites and married mothers. In this section, we

provide additional evidence in favor of this view.

         In particular, if the unemployment effect were due to credit constraints, then we

would predict that the magnitude of the effect should be smaller in states with a lower

level of credit constraints. We use state per capita transfers as a proxy for credit

constraints, with the view that state transfers offset, to some extent, individual credit

constraints.7 We rank states according to their level of transfers (by regressing state per

capita transfers on state and year fixed effects and labeling states with above-median state

dummies as high-transfer states), and then interact the high-transfer dummy with the

unemployment rate.

         The results are presented in Table 8. With few exceptions, the direct effect of

unemployment and the unemployment-high-transfer interaction have opposite signs,

corroborating the credit constraint interpretation of our results. It is also striking that the

transfer effect is significant mainly for whites. One possible interpretation is that whites


7
 We are not interested in the effect of transfers per se or of any particular transfer, but instead use the
generosity of a state’s transfers as a proxy for the level of credit constraints that households face.


                                                      19
are able to use transfers as a buffer in times of high unemployment, whereas blacks are

either unable to access transfers or more like are already accessing transfers in times of

low unemployment and not able to further extend their benefits when unemployment is

high.

        Overall, we interpret the results in this section from births, abortions and transfers

as suggesting that less educated black women have relatively fewer babies during

recessions, possibly because they are credit constrained. On the other hand the results

suggest that less educated white mothers have relatively more babies during recessions,

possibly due to substitution effects that are stronger than the effects of credit constraints.



6. Extensions

6.1 Nature vs. Nurture: An Examination Using California’s Linked Birth Certificate

Records

An open question thus far is whether counter-cyclical quality improvements are due to

behavioral changes or purely to selection. For whites, the evidence suggests that behavior

may play a role, given that we observe significant decreases in mortality in spite of

evidence of a reduction in average mother quality (namely, education). For blacks

however, all health improvements could be due to pure selection.

        In order to examine this question more closely we use individual level data from

California’s Birth Certificate records. Using restricted versions of the yearly data, it is

possible to construct a panel of mothers from 1990 to 2000, and link mother’s county of

residence with county level unemployment rates in the year of conception. Using this

data we can test the nature versus nurture hypothesis by comparing cross-sectional




                                              20
estimates of the effect of unemployment with estimates that include mother fixed effects.

If the protective effect of unemployment on children’s health persists after the inclusion

of mother fixed effects, we can conclude that part of the health benefits associated with

recessions are due to the change in behavior associated with a recession, rather than with

just a change in the type of women that gave birth.

       In Table 9a, we begin by estimating regressions that are identical to those we

estimate at the state/year level, including all mothers in the California data, to check

whether the results in the California data mirror the national results presented above. We

compare the estimates from California to the main national estimates in Table 4. A priori,

there are several reasons why the magnitudes of the effects could differ: the effects of

unemployment could be smaller for California mothers (for example, there could be

fewer credit constraints in California relative to other states); the effects of changes in

county-level unemployment could be different from the effects of changes in state-level

unemployment (for example, changes at the state level could be better predictors of

changes in permanent income); there is possibly more measurement error in these local

unemployment rates; and finally, the California data cover a later period (when again

credit constraints could be smaller). We observe improvements in birth weight of similar

or larger magnitude to the national numbers, but they are statistically significant only for

white mothers when county specific trends are included. Prenatal care use significantly

improves among all California mothers, but the magnitude of the effects is much smaller

than at the national level. We conclude that the results using the California sample are

qualitatively similar to those we obtain in the national sample.




                                              21
       In Table 9b we estimate cross-sectional estimates but now we restrict the sample

to mothers who are observed at least twice in the California birth certificate data. We

consider this sample to examine whether the effects of unemployment are different for

mothers with multiple births. The evidence in Panel A of Table 9b suggests that the effect

of the unemployment rate is similar for black mothers observed once and for those

observed twice, but again the magnitudes of the effects are somewhat different. Among

white mothers, however, there is evidence of negative selection effects in the birth weight

outcomes which we did not observe in the national sample: we find that increases in

unemployment raise the probability of having a low or very low birth weight infant even

though we still observe, as in the national sample, that use of prenatal care improves.

       In Panel B of Table 9b we present the results using the multiple birth sample now

including mother fixed effects. The effects of unemployment therefore are estimated from

changes overtime within mothers, rather than across mothers as in panel A. Comparing

results from panel A and panel B, we find that for whites (once we control for selection,

that is once we add fixed effects) the negative effect of unemployment on birth outcomes

becomes much smaller, but the effects on prenatal care use increase. These results imply

that among white mothers behavior improves in times of high unemployment but

negative selection also increases, so that the net effect on infant health depends on the

relative magnitude of these two effects. By extension, at the national level, it would

therefore seem that the positive effect of behavioral changes is larger than the negative

effect of selection, so that health outcomes improve.

       Among blacks we find that the magnitude of the effect of unemployment on

health outcomes and prenatal care use falls once we include mother fixed effects. This is




                                             22
consistent with positive selection. Because all coefficients are insignificant when fixed

effects are included, we cannot rule out that among black mothers in California, all health

improvements associated with increased unemployment are due to selection. However,

we must keep in mind that the sample of black mothers is much smaller in California than

at the national level, especially once we restrict our attention to mothers observed twice.

So these results would suggest that at the national level improvements in health outcomes

among black babies are likely due to selection but possibly also due to better mother

behavior.



6.2 How General Are Our Findings? Results Using Cross-Country Data

Finally, we conclude by examining whether results similar to those we have found for the

United States exist for other countries. In Table 10, we examine the relationship between

unemployment and the birth and infant mortality rates across a panel of countries (using

data from the World Bank Development Indicators database). In columns (1) to (4), we

find a negative and statistically significant relationship between both contemporaneous

and lagged unemployment and the birth and mortality rates. Given the size of the data

set, and the scope of the present study, it is difficult to control for many additional factors

that could confound our interpretation of the unemployment effect. However, in columns

(5) and (6) we show that even controlling for birthrates, which might capture country-

specific, time-varying improvements in health and living standards, the unemployment

effect remains significant. Interestingly, note that the coefficient on birth rates is positive

and significant. Taken at face value, this correlation is consistent with the evidence

presented for blacks in the United States, namely that when more babies are born, they




                                              23
tend to be less healthy on average. Finally, in columns (7) and (8) we show that the adult

death rate is not significantly associated with unemployment, thereby plausibly ruling out

general improvements in healthcare as a confounding factor in the previous columns.

       There are several important problems that exist with these preliminary cross-

country results, and addressing these concerns, we feel, is beyond the scope of the present

paper. Nonetheless, we note that the results we obtain using this cross-country panel data

are consistent with our findings from the United States.



6. Conclusion

In this paper we have examined whether the business cycle induces a cycle in the quality

of children. Within the Becker fertility framework, we argue that women who are credit

constrained or more generally experience an income effect due to changes in current

unemployment are both more likely to opt out of fertility in times of high unemployment

and to produce less-healthy children. This effect implies a counter-cyclical pattern in

child quality. On the other hand, because of time substitution effects, women whose

wages fall are more likely to opt into fertility when the value of their time is low. If this

effect differs across socio-economic status groups, then the substitution effect will also

lead to a pattern in the quality of babies, although the direction of this effect will depend

on which groups are more sensitive to the substitution effect over the business cycle.

Recessions also affect individual behavior. In particular, changes in income and wages

affect mothers’ use of health-related goods and services.

       Using the Natality Files, we find evidence for these effects. Along the dimension

of selection, we find that less educated single black mothers are less likely to have babies




                                              24
during recessions, raising the average health of black babies, and that less educated white

mothers are more likely to have babies during recessions, leading to reduced average

quality among whites. This result is consistent with evidence that blacks are more likely

to be credit constrained than whites. Consequently, among blacks we observe income

effects, and among whites (for whom the income effect is weak) we observe substitution

effects.

           We find that, when unemployment is high, neonatal and post-neonatal mortality

decline, and all mothers tend to increase their use of prenatal care. We also find evidence

of decreases in risky behavior, such as drinking and smoking, among blacks but increases

in these activities among whites. Because of the aggregate nature of these results, our

effects on behavior-outcomes capture both selection and pure behavioral changes. In

particular, among blacks, since there is improved quality, both selection and behavior

lead to improved behavior-related outcomes. On the other hand, among whites negative

selection offsets behavioral improvements. Our results from a panel of California

mothers allow us to parse out these two effects. For blacks, we find that selection drives

our results, and that behavioral effects are relatively small. For whites, we find evidence

of negative selection, and consequently that behavioral effects are larger than the joint

behavior-plus-selection effect. We also show that our results are robust to a wide range of

specifications and controls, and finally we provide evidence suggesting that these

relationships seem to hold for cross-country data.

           Our results are interesting for several reasons. First, our main finding – a cyclical

pattern in the quality of babies – is a new stylized fact for the fertility and health

literatures. Second, our results lead to a reevaluation of some of the previously




                                                25
documented improvements in child health during downturns. For blacks, we show that all

of these improvements are plausibly due to selection, whereas for whites, because of

negative selection, the pure behavioral effects are even larger than suggested by the

aggregate data. Third, our results lend support to the Becker fertility framework.

Although many papers have been written regarding fertility decisions by women within

the context of the legalization (or prohibition) of abortion, we provide strong evidence

that women also engage in selective fertility decisions on the margin of economic

uncertainty and the business cycle. Fourth, our results provide an important qualification

for a large literature that has used variation between birth cohorts to analyze a range of

labor market phenomena (for example, cohort size and wages). We have shown that

cohorts vary not only in size, but also in quality, and that this variation is systematically

related to the business cycle.

       What are the policy implications of our findings? First, these results suggest that,

as in Jappelli (1990), there are significant credit constraints within the U.S. economy,

especially for blacks. Furthermore these credit constraints results in sub-optimal fertility

decisions since women’s fertility choices would differ in the absence of these constraints.

Second, our findings with respect to behavioral changes induced by unemployment also

raise interesting issues. Given that women’s health behavior improves with higher

unemployment rates and that incomes are lower, it would seem that the opportunity cost

of time is an important consideration in these behavioral changes. If, as many have

suggested, improving birth outcomes should be a policy target, then our results suggest

that policies attenuating the effect of taking time off work to attend prenatal care, and to

attend to health more generally, are particularly important.




                                              26
       A number of issues remain open. One interesting question in light of our findings

in this paper is whether inter-state migration might contribute to our results (for example

if more educated mothers are more likely to migrate from high to low unemployment

states). Provisional findings using the 2000 Census in fact suggest that migration does not

explain away our results, but this is an interesting and important issue worthy of further

study. Another important extension is to examine whether the selection and behavioral

effects we have documented affect longer-term outcomes. These are avenues for future

research.




                                            27
Bibliography

Angrist, Joshua, and William Evans, “Schooling and Labor-Market Consequences of the
1970 State Abortion Reforms,” Research in Labor Economics, Solomon Polachek and
John Robst (eds.), Vol. 18, pp. 75-114, 1999.

Becker, Gary, “An Economic Analysis of Fertility,” in Demographic and Economic
Change in Developed Countries, National Bureau of Economic Research Series, Number
11, Princeton University Press, 1960.

Ben-Porath, Yoram, “Short Term Fluctuations in Fertility and Economic Activity in
Israel,” Demography, Volume 10, Issue 2, May 1973.

T. Besley and A. Case, “Political Institutions and Policy Choices: Evidence from the
United States,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 41, pp. 7-73, March 2003.

Blank, Rebecca, Christine George, and Rebecca London, “State Abortion Rates: The
Impact Of Policies, Providers, Politics, Demographics And Economic Environment,”
Journal of Health Economics, Vol.15, pp.513-553, 1996.

Chay, Kenneth, and Michael Greenstone. “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant
Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a
Recession,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118, pp. 1121-1167, 2003.

Douglas Almond , Kenneth Chay, and David Lee, “Does Low Birth Weight Matter?
Evidence from the U.S. Population of Twin Births,” University of California, Berkeley,
Center for Labor Economics, Working Paper Number 53, 2002.

Deaton, Angus and Christina Paxson, “Mortality, income, and income inequality over
time in Britain and the US,” National Bureau Of Economic Research Working Paper
Number 8523, October 2001.

Fiscella, K., “Does Prenatal Care Improve Birth Outcomes: A Critical Review,”
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Vol. 85, Number 3, pp. 468-479, 1995.

Fryer, Roland, and Steven Levitt, “The Causes and Consequences of Distinctively Black
Names,” Working Paper, 2003.

Galbraith, Virginia L. and Dorothy S. Thomas, “Birth Rates and the Interwar Business
Cycles,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, Volume 36, Issue 216,
December 1941.

Gruber, Jonathan, Philip Levine and Douglas Staiger, “Abortion Legalization and child
living circumstances: who is the marginal child?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Volume 114, Number 1, pp. 263-291, 1999.




                                           28
Hoynes, Hillary, “The Employment, Earnings, and Income of Less Skilled Workers Over
the Business Cycle,” National Bureau Of Economic Research Working Paper Number
7188, June 1999.

Jappelli, Tullio, “Who is Credit Constrained in the U.S. Economy?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Volume 105, Number 1, pp. 219-234, 1990.

Levine, Philip, “The Impact of Social policy and economic activity throughout the
fertility decision tree,” National Bureau Of Economic Research Working Paper Number
9021, June 2002.

Paxson, Christina, and Jane Waldfogel, “Work, Welfare, and Child Maltreatment,”
Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 20, pp. 435-474, 2002.

Ruhm, Christopher, “Are Recessions Good For Your Health?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 115, Number 2, pp. 617-50, 2000.

Ruhm, Christopher, “Good Times Make You Sick”, Journal of Health Economics, Vol.
24, No. 4, pp. 637-658, July 2003.

Ruhm, Christopher, "Healthy Living In Hard Times", National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper Number 9468, February 2003.

Ruhm, Christopher and William E. Black, “Does Drinking Really Decrease in Bad
Times?” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 21, No. 4, pp. 659-678, July 2002.

Shea, John, “Does Parents’ Money Matter?” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 77, pp.
155-184, 2002.

Shimer, Robert, “The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate labor Market,”
Princeton University Mimeo, August 2000

Silver, Morris, “Births, Marriages, and the Business Cycles in the Unites States, Journal
of Political Economy, Volume 73, Issue 3, June 1965.

Snyder, Stephen, and William Evans, “The Impact of Income on Mortality: Evidence
from the Social Security Notch,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
Number 9197, September 2002.

Thomas, Dorothy S., Social and Economic Aspects of Swedish Population Movements,
1750-1933, New York, Macmillan Co., 1941.

Waldfogel, Jane, Wen-Jui Han, and Jeanne Brooks-Gun, “The Effects of Early Maternal
Employment on Child Cognitive Development,” Demography, Volume 39, pp. 369-392,
2002.




                                           29
Welch, Finis, “Effects of Cohort Size on Earnings: The Baby Boom Babies’ Financial
Bust,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 87, pp. S65-97, 1979.

Welch, Finis, “The Quality of Education and Cohort Variations in Black-White Earnings
Differentials: Reply,” American Economic Review, Vol. 70, pp. 192-195, 1980.

Yule, G. Udny, “On the Changes of Marriage and Birth Rates and England and Wales
During the Past Half Century; With an Inquiry as to Their Probable Causes,” Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society, vol.69, 1906




                                          30
                                                            Appendix A
                       Year started Educational Date last normal                                                           Drinking   Smoking
                          100%      attainment of menstrual period Prenatal care Legitimacy status.    5-minute Apgar        while      while
State                   reporting      parents     began (LMP)      information    Marital status            score         pregnant   pregnant
Alabama                   1976          1976-          1976-           1976-           1975-                 1978-          1989-      1989-
Alaska                    1977          1975-          1975-           1978-           1975-                 1978-          1989-      1989-
Arizona                   1985          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1978-          1989-      1989-
Arkansas                  1980          1978-          1978-           1978-           1975-                 1978-          1989-      1989-
California                1985       1978, 1989-       1975-           1975-           1989-          reported only 1978    Never      Never
Colorado                  1973          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1978-          1989-      1989-
Connecticut               1979          1975-          1982-           1975-           1989-                 1982-          1989-      1989-
Delaware                  1985          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1989-          1989-      1989-
District of Columbia      1985          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1978-           1989-      1989-
Florida                   1972          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1979-          1989-      1989-
Georgia                   1985          1975-          1975-           1975-           1980-                 1980-          1989-      1989-
Hawaii                    1979          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1978-          1989-      1989-
Idaho                     1977          1978-          1978-           1978-           1978-                 1978-          1989-      1989-
Illinois                  1974          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1979-          1989-      1989-
Indiana                   1978          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1978-          1989-      1999-
Iowa                      1974          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1978-          1989-      1989-
Kansas                    1974          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1978-          1989-      1989-
Kentucky                  1976          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1978-          1989-      1989-
Louisiana                 1975          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1982-          1990-      1990-
Maine                     1972          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1978-          1989-      1989-
Maryland                  1975          1975-          1975-           1975-           1989-                 1979-          1989-      1989-
Massachusetts             1977          1975-          1976-           1976-           1978-                 1978-           1989-      1989-
Michigan                  1973          1975-          1975-           1975-     1975-1977, 1989-            1978-          1989-      1989-
Minnesota                 1976          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1982-           1989-      1989-
Mississippi               1979          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1978-           1989-     1989-
Missouri                  1972          1975-          1975-           1975-           1975-                 1978-          1989-      1989-


                                                                   31
                                                    Appendix A continued

                 Year started   Educational Date last normal                                                         Drinking    Smoking
                 100%           attainment of menstrual period Prenatal care Legitimacy status--   5-minute Apgar    while         while
State            reporting         parents*   began (LMP)       information Marital status              score        pregnant    pregnant
Montana              1974           1975-          1975-           1975-            1988-               1978-            1989-    1989-
Nebraska             1974           1975-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1978-            1990-    1990-
Nevada               1976           1975-          1975-           1975-            1989-               1978-            1989-    1989-
New Hampshire        1972           1975-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1978-            1989-    1989-
New Jersey           1979           1975-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1978-            1989-    1989-
New Mexico           1985           1980-          1985-           1980-            1980-               1980-            1989-    1989-
New York             1973           1975-          1975-           1975-            1989-               1978-            1995-    1995-
North Carolina       1975           1975-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1978-            1989-    1989-
North Dakota         1985           1975-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1978-            1989-    1989-
Ohio                 1977           1975-          1975-           1975-            1989-               1978-            1989-    1989-
Oklahoma             1975           1975-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1991-            1991-    1991-
Oregon               1974           1975-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1978-            1989-    1989-
Pennsylvania         1979           1976-          1978-           1978-            1975-               1978-            1989-    1989-
Rhode Island         1972           1975-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1978-            1989-    1989-
South Carolina       1974           1975-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1978-            1989-    1989-
South Dakota         1980           1975-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1978-            Never    Never
Tennessee            1975           1975-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1978-            1989-    1989-
Texas                1976           1989-          1980-           1975-      1975-1976, 1989-      never reported       1989-     1989-
Utah                 1978           1975-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1978-            1989-    1989-
Vermont              1972           1975-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1978-            1989-    1989-
Virginia             1975           1975-          1978-           1978-            1975-               1978-            1989-     1989-
Washington           1978           1992-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1980-            1989-    1989-
West Virginia        1976           1975-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1978-            1989-     1989-
Wisconsin            1975           1975-          1978-           1975-            1975-               1978-            1989-    1989-
Wyoming              1979           1975-          1975-           1975-            1975-               1978-            1989-    1989-


                                                               32
                                              Appendix B: Effect of Unemployment by Race, 1976-1996: Specification checks
                                  (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)            (5)              (6)                (7)              (8)              (9)              (10)                 (11)
Dependent variable              Average         % moms         Average           Average        % married      % born below          % born            % with        Average no.       % < than 5       % prenatal care
                                mother's        less high     mother's age       father’s                       2500 grams         below 1500       Apgar score      of prenatal      prenatal care     in first trimester
                               education         school                         education                                             grams         5 and below       care visits        visits
White mothers
unemployment rate               -0.004*          0.002**        0.020***           -0.008        -0.0001          0.000001            -0.00003        0.00006*          0.282**         -0.015***             -0.001
                                (0.002)          (0.001)         (0.002)          (0.008)        (0.000)          (0.00006)          (0.00004)        (0.00003)         (0.138)           (0.005)            (0.000)
% of population age >65          -0.575         1.905***       -6.064***        -28.616***         0.049        -0.10658***         -0.02342*           0.02612      220.987***        -13.420***           0.546***
                                (1.099)          (0.617)         (1.149)          (6.161)        (0.117)          (0.02526)          (0.01199)        (0.01922)        (84.586)           (3.428)            (0.182)
% of population age 5-17         0.000         -0.001***          0.000          0.006***          0.000          0.00002*         0.00002***          0.00000         -0.058**         0.004***              0.000
                                (0.001)          (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.002)        (0.000)          (0.00001)          (0.00001)        (0.00001)         (0.026)           (0.001)            (0.000)
Average WIC benefits              0.262           -0.032          -0.310         -5.556**       -0.105***          -0.00505            0.00163          0.00241        21.445**            -0.288             0.024
                                (0.189)          (0.055)         (0.254)          (2.791)        (0.034)          (0.00409)          (0.00309)        (0.00292)         (8.622)           (0.297)            (0.033)
% on Medicaid                    0.098          -0.111**          0.229            -0.685        0.048**         -0.01066**        -0.00749***      -0.00711***       -17.808**          0.537**            0.190***
                                (0.135)          (0.048)         (0.175)          (0.614)        (0.023)          (0.00512)          (0.00213)        (0.00223)         (7.435)           (0.250)            (0.027)
Abortion Rate                  -0.008***        0.002***       -0.006***            0.004         -0.000           -0.00001        -0.00005***          0.00002        -0.124**            -0.004          -0.002***
                                (0.002)          (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.005)        (0.000)          (0.00003)          (0.00002)        (0.00002)         (0.063)           (0.003)            (0.000)
Real govt pymts to             -0.151***        0.064***       -0.124***         -0.419**         -0.009         0.00266**          0.00139**          -0.00067          0.219          -0.191***          -0.021***
individuals per cap,            (0.054)          (0.017)         (0.046)          (0.178)        (0.006)          (0.00130)          (0.00058)        (0.00080)         (1.438)           (0.067)            (0.008)
$1982
Black mothers
unemployment rate               0.015***       -0.002***        0.038***        0.016***         -0.001**       -0.00049***         -0.00011*          -0.00007        0.257***         -0.010***          0.003***
                                 (0.002)         (0.001)         (0.003)          (0.005)         (0.000)         (0.00015)         (0.00007)         (0.00023)         (0.096)           (0.003)            (0.001)
% of population age >65           -1.246           0.141          1.759          -7.126**           0.145          -0.03758          0.04610           -0.23202        128.118*        -10.213***           1.175***
                                 (1.012)         (0.357)         (1.810)          (3.599)         (0.181)         (0.08616)         (0.03521)         (0.30226)        (66.372)           (2.478)            (0.371)
% of population age 5-17       -0.002***         -0.000*          0.001            0.001           -0.000          0.00006         0.00006***           0.00001          -0.023          0.004***          -0.001***
                                 (0.001)         (0.000)         (0.001)          (0.002)         (0.000)         (0.00005)         (0.00002)         (0.00006)         (0.024)           (0.001)            (0.000)
Average WIC benefits               0.207          -0.034          -0.329           -1.086       -0.096***           0.02024          0.00762            0.00803        17.826**            0.089              0.057
                                 (0.134)         (0.032)         (0.367)          (1.706)         (0.033)         (0.01464)         (0.00684)         (0.01104)         (7.565)           (0.140)            (0.053)
% on Medicaid                    0.297*           -0.021       -0.796***           0.168           0.021        -0.04381***        -0.01300**       -0.02578***       -28.177***         0.544***            0.101*
                                 (0.154)         (0.038)         (0.297)          (0.502)         (0.033)         (0.01411)         (0.00616)         (0.00986)         (7.640)           (0.203)            (0.055)
Abortion Rate                     -0.002          -0.000         0.003*            -0.001          -0.000        0.00023***          0.00004           -0.00022          -0.012          -0.004**             0.000
                                 (0.002)         (0.000)         (0.002)          (0.004)         (0.000)         (0.00008)         (0.00004)         (0.00024)         (0.052)           (0.002)            (0.000)
Real govt pymts to             -0.208***        0.061***       -0.233***        -0.562***       -0.055***        0.01621***        0.00524***           0.01168          -0.776            -0.043          -0.060***
individuals per cap,             (0.039)         (0.010)         (0.087)          (0.131)         (0.010)         (0.00391)         (0.00166)         (0.01227)         (1.415)           (0.049)            (0.015)
$1982


     Notes: Data from the Natality Files are aggregated to the state, year, and race level, for states and years as listed in Appendix A. The unemployment rate is calculated at the state-year level and matched
     to the Natality Files by the year of conception of the baby. Data for average WIC benefits, population on Medicaid, the abortion rate, and real government transfers per capita are interpolated for missing
     years. Data on additional controls: population (available for all years), average WIC benefits (available for all years), percentage on Medicaid (available 1980 onward, extrapolated to 1976) abortion rate
     (available 1978-1982, 1984, 1985, 1987, 1988, 1991, 1992, 1996, interpolated to other years), and real government transfers (available all years). Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Regressions
     include state and year fixed effects and state-specific trends. They are weighted by the number of births in the state. Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
     significant at 1%




                                                                                                          33
                                                                                                                     Figure 1
                           Alabama                        Alaska                   Arizona                Arkansas               California           Colorado                Connecticut            Delaware
                    18




                    2.2

                           District of Columbia           Florida                  Georgia                Hawaii                 Idaho                Illinois                Indiana                Iowa
                    18




                    2.2

                           Kansas                         Kentucky                 Louisiana              Maine                  Maryland             Massachusetts           Michigan               Minnesota
                    18
Unemployment rate




                    2.2

                           Mississippi                    Missouri                 Montana                Nebraska               Nevada               New Hampshire           New Jersey             New Mexico
                    18




                    2.2

                           New York                       North Carolina           North Dakota           Ohio                   Oklahoma             Oregon                  Pennsylvania           Rhode Island
                    18




                    2.2

                           South Carolina                 South Dakota             Tennessee              Texas                  Utah                 Vermont                 Virginia               Washington
                    18




                    2.2
                                                                                                         1975           1999    1975          1999   1975             1999   1975            1999   1975            1999
                           West Virginia                  Wisconsin                Wyoming
                    18




                    2.2
                          1975                    1999   1975              1999   1975            1999




                                                                                                                           Year
                                                                      Unemployment rate by state, 1975-1999

                                                                                                                        34
                       Table 1: Summary Statistics for Aggregate Natality Data

Sample                                                                    All                          White                          Black
                                                                                                  Mean     Std. Dev.             Mean     Std. Dev.
Unemployment rate (state and year)                                                                6.58       1.97                6.69       1.96
Infant mortality                                                                                  826         190                1850        955
Neonatal mortality                                                                                533         146                1150        681
Post-neonatal mortality                                                                           293          81                 699        622
Abortion rate per 1000 women (Guttmacher)                         22.62          12.14
Abortion per live birth (CDC)                                                                      0.42          1.37             1.73      11.28
Birth rate                                                                                        0.014         0.0033           0.019      0.005
Percent of black babies                                           0.144          0.153
Year of conception                                                                              1987.64           6.39          1987.71     6.34
White mom=1                                                       0.84           0.36
Female infant=1                                                                                    0.49           0.50            0.49       0.50
Young=1 if mom less than 30 years old                                                              0.75           0.43            0.82       0.38
First child=1                                                                                      0.34           0.47            0.26       0.44
Mother's age                                                                                      26.84          4.24            25.25      4.30
Mother's education                                                                                12.75          0.86            12.31      0.55
% moms less than high school                                                                       0.18           0.10            0.23       0.09
Father’s education                                                                                13.21          0.50            12.84      0.57
% moms married                                                                                     0.86           0.07            0.48       0.18
% born below 2500 grams                                                                            0.06           0.01            0.13       0.02
% born below 1500 grams                                                                            0.01          0.002            0.03       0.01
5 minute Apgar score                                                                               9.00           0.17            8.88       0.26
% with Apgar score 5 and below                                                                     0.01           0.01            0.02       0.03
Number of prenatal care visits                                                                    11.19          3.33             9.92       3.07
% with fewer than 5 prenatal                                                                       0.10           0.20            0.17       0.15
% had prenatal care in first trimester                                                             0.82           0.06            0.66       0.09
Unemployment rate (state and year)                                                                 6.58           1.97            6.69       1.96
% covered by Medicaid (state and year)                                                             5.81           2.06           11.84       4.79
Smoked any time during pregnancy*                                                                 0.148          0.066           0.115      0.070
Drank any time during pregnancy*                                                                  0.013          0.015           0.019      0.017
         Notes: Data aggregated by state, year of conception, gender of baby, young status of mother and whether infant is first baby.
         Number of observations in cell used as weights.
         *These variables are only calculated from 1989-1999 since the information only started being collected by states in 1989




                                                                          35
                                         Table 2: Effect of Unemployment on Birthrate and Percent Black
                                                         (1)                           (2)                       (3)                       (4)                     (5)                      (6)
    Dependent variable                             White birthrate               Black birthrate           White birthrate          Black birthrate          % black babies           % black babies
    unemployment rate                               -0.0006***                    -0.0011***                  -0.0002                   -0.0005                -0.0006**               -0.0009***
                                                     (0.0002)                       (0.0003)                 (0.0003)                  (0.0003)                 (0.0003)                (0.0003)
    % sd effect of one sd u-rate ∆                     -9.2%                         -12.2%                    -3.1%                     -5.5%                   -0.8%                    -1.2%

    State fixed effects                                     x                            x                          x                        x                        x                       x
    Year fixed effects                                      x                            x                          x                        x                        x                       x
    State-specific trend                                                                                            x                        x                                                x
    Weights                                                                                                        x                        x                                                x
    Observations                                          1253                         1253                       1253                     1253                     1253                    1253
    R-squared                                             0.58                         0.55                       0.77                     0.79                     1.00                    1.00
Notes: Birth rate data are by state, year, and race. White (black) birthrate=number of births divided by white (black) population by state and year. Percent black babies is the ratio of black births to total
births by state and year. Births are matched to unemployment rates by state and year of conception. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%




                                                                                                     36
                                               Table 3: Effect of Unemployment on Abortion, 1979-1998

                                  (1)                (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)                                  (6)              (7)             (8)              (9)             (10)
Sample                            All               White     Black        All      White                                Black            White           Black             White           Black
Dependent                      Abortion            Abortio Abortion Abortion Abortio                                     Abor-            Abor-           Abor-             Abor-           Abor-
variable                     rate per live          n rate   rate per   per fertile  n per                              tion per         tion per        tion per         tion rate       tion rate
                                 birth             per live live birth   woman      fertile                              fertile          fertile         fertile          per live        per live
                                                    birth                           woman                               woman            woman           woman              birth           birth
Data source                  Guttmacher             CDC       CDC      Guttmacher CDC                                     CDC              CDC             CDC              CDC

Unemployment                       0.040              0.031         0.078**           -0.413***           0.0002         0.004**          -0.0002           0.026           0.045           0.255*
rate
                                  (0.036)            (0.025)        (0.032)            (0.112)           (0.0003)        (0.002)         (0.0006)          (0.018)         (0.031)          (0.153)
% sd effect of
                                   7.9%               5.3%             6%               -6.8%              2.1%             1%               --               --               --              --
one sd u-rate ∆

More than high                                                                                                                            0.0391            0.892           -2.851          10.253
school
                                                                                                                                         (0.0358)          (0.651)         (3.345)          (6.722)

Unemployment                                                                                                                              0.0022           -0.112           -0.080          -0.922
rate x more than
high school
                                                                                                                                         (0.0024)          (0.086)         (0.123)          (0.692)

Observations                       612                173             173                612               173             173              170             170              170              170
R-squared                          0.42               0.98            0.98               0.97              0.99            0.97             0.99            0.96             0.98             0.97


Notes: Unemployment is at the state-year level and matched to state-year abortion data. Abortion data from the Alan Guttmacher Institute are by state and year for 1978-82, 1984-88, 1991, 1992, and
1996. Data from the Centers for Disease Control are Robust standard errors are by state, year, and race for 1975-77, 1980-81, and 1989-99. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Regressions
include state and year fixed effects, and state-specific trends. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                  37
                                        Table 4a: Effect of Unemployment on Children’s health outcomes

                                                                              (1)                   (2)                 (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)
                         Dependent variable                            % born below          % born below           % with            Infant          Neo-natal           Post
                                                                        2500 grams            1500 grams             Apgar           mortality        mortality         neonatal
                                                                                                                    score 5            rate             rate            mortality
                                                                                                                   and below                                              rate
                         All mothers
                         unemployment rate                               -0.00016**            -0.00007*            -0.00001         -5.744**            -1.815        -3.932***
                                                                          (0.00006)            (0.00003)           (0.00004)          (2.684)           (2.038)         (1.190)
                         % sd effect of one sd u-rate ∆                    -1.92%                -3.07%              -0.62%            1.3%               0.6%            1.6%


                         White mothers
                         unemployment rate                                -0.00005               -0.00005           0.00004          -3.287**            -0.639        -2.652***
                                                                          (0.00006)             (0.00003)          (0.00003)          (1.660)           (1.259)         (0.947)
                         % sd effect of one sd u-rate ∆                    -1.06%                 -4.01%             2.95%            -3.46%            -0.88%           -6.55%

                         Black mothers
                         unemployment rate                              -0.00078***           -0.00020***           -0.00016        -15.300**            -6.330        -8.968***
                                                                         (0.00016)             (0.00006)           (0.00029)         (6.113)            (5.145)         (2.955)
                         % sd effect of one sd u-rate ∆                    -3.58%                -2.06%              -2.11%           -3.20%            -1.86%           -2.88%


Notes: Data from the Natality Files are aggregated to the state, year, and race level, for states and years as listed in Appendix A. The unemployment rate is calculated at the state-year level and matched
to the Natality Files by the year of conception of the baby and to mortality data by the year of child mortality. Child mortality data are by state and year for 1979-1998. Infant morality rates are computed
as the number of infant that die within a year of birth as a fraction of live births *1000, and likewise for neo-natal mortality (the number of infant that die within 28 days) and post-neonatal mortality
(number of infant that die between 28 days and a year of birth). All regressions include state and year fixed effects and state-specific trends. They are weighted by the number of births in the state.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                     38
             Table 4b: Effect of Unemployment on Mother Characteristics and behaviors by Race, 1976-1998

                            (1)                (2)              (3)                 (4)             (5)                (6)                 (7)                 (8)                 (9)                (10)
Dependent                 Average           % moms            Average            Average             %               Average            % < than 5         % prenatal            Smoked              Drank
variable                  mother's          less high         mother's           father’s          married            no. of             prenatal          care in first          during             during
                         education           school             age             education                            prenatal           care visits         trimester           pregnancy          pregnancy
                                                                                                                    care visits


White mothers
unemployment               -0.001             0.001           0.022***           0.012***           0.0001          0.31507***         -0.01421***            0.00050           0.00345**            0.00135
rate                       (0.003)           (0.001)           (0.002)            (0.002)          (0.0003)          (0.07728)          (0.00295)            (0.00110)          (0.00147)           (0.00139)
% sd effect of
one sd u-rate ∆            -0.42%             3.47%             3.62%             4.92%              0.30%             27.2%               -29.1%               1.9%               16.4%               16.4%

Black mothers
unemployment             0.018***          -0.003***          0.041***           0.027***          -0.0052          0.25844***         -0.01017***          0.00427***            -0.00018         -0.00136***
rate                      (0.002)           (0.001)            (0.003)            (0.003)          (0.0004)          (0.05615)          (0.00188)            (0.00125)           (0.00100)          (0.00042)
% sd effect of
one sd in u-rate           8.09%             -6.88%             8.70%             9.65%             -5.74%             20.8%               -19.2%               9.7%               -0.5%              -12.6%


  Notes: Data from the Natality Files are aggregated to the state, year, and race level, for states and years as listed in Appendix A. The unemployment rate is calculated at the state-year level and matched
  to the Natality Files by the year of conception of the baby. Regressions include state and year fixed effects and state-specific trends. They are weighted by the number of births in the state. Robust
  standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                       39
                                                    Table 5: Effect of Unemployment by Race, 1976-1996
                                                                     Specification checks
                          (1)              (2)            (3)              (4)             (5)                 (6)                (7)                (8)              (9)            (10)            (11)
Dependent               Average         % moms          Average         Average         % married         % born below       % born below          % with           Average        % < than           %
variable                mother's        less high       mother's        father’s                           2500 grams         1500 grams           Apgar             no. of           5            prenatal
                       education         school           age          education                                                                 score 5 and        prenatal       prenatal         care in
                                                                                                                                                   below           care visits       care            first
                                                                                                                                                                                    visits        trimester
Panel A: Instrument: Lagged unemployment rate
White
mothers
unemployment         0.001       0.000     0.032***                    0.013***           0.0001           -0.00014*         -0.00017***           0.00002          0.295**          -0.009       0.002***
rate                (0.004)    (0.001)      (0.003)                     (0.003)          (0.0004)          (0.00007)           (0.00004)          (0.00004)         (0.142)         (0.006)        (0.001)
Black
mothers
unemployment      0.022***    -0.002***    0.046***                    0.027***         -0.002***         -0.00109***        -0.00037***           -0.00026         0.242**        -0.008**       0.006***
rate                (0.003)    (0.001)      (0.004)                     (0.004)          (0.001)            (0.00019)          (0.00008)          (0.00034)         (0.097)         (0.004)        (0.001)
Panel B: Effect of Employment to population ratio
White
mothers
emp. pop. ratio      0.164       -0.115    -1.48***                    -1.067***           0.038           0.00976*           0.00773***          -0.00763         -30.899**         0.780       -0.142***
                    (0.217)     (0.090)     (0.202)                     (0.190)           (0.027)          (0.00533)           (0.00268)          (0.00536)         (14.320)        (0.588)        (0.038)
Black
mothers
emp. pop. ratio    -1.27***   0.174***     -2.16***                    -1.953***         0.132***         0.08068***          0.02487***           0.01523        -29.701***         0.462       -0.368***
                    (0.221)     (0.060)     (0.327)                     (0.343)           (0.036)          (0.01561)           (0.00604)          (0.01071)        (10.971)         (0.410)        (0.064)

Notes: Data from the Natality Files are aggregated to the state, year, and race level, for states and years as listed in Appendix A. The unemployment rate is calculated at the state-year level and matched
to the Natality Files by the year of conception of the baby. The employment-to-population ratio is at the state-year level for 1976-1998. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Regressions include
state and year fixed effects and state-specific trends. They are weighted by the number of births in the state. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                     40
                                 Table 6: Effect of Unemployment by Race and Marital Status, 1976-1998
                                     (1)              (2)            (3)                 (4)                (5)               (6)               (7)               (8)             (9)               (10)
 Dependent variable                Average         % moms         Average             Average          % born below         % born         % with Apgar       Average no.      % < than 5       % prenatal
                                   mother's        less high     mother's age         father’s          2500 grams        below 1500        score 5 and       of prenatal     prenatal care     care in first
                                  education         school                           education                               grams            below            care visits       visits          trimester
 White married mothers
 unemployment rate              -0.006***        0.001***         0.014***          0.00002             -0.00002          0.005***         0.00012***         0.024***         0.0004**        0.001***
                                 (0.002)         (0.0003)          (0.003)         (0.00007)           (0.00003)           (0.002)          (0.00004)          (0.004)         (0.0002)        (0.0004)

 White single mothers
 unemployment rate                -0.008*        0.002***         0.036***          0.00004             0.00010              -0.002          0.00010          0.024***          -0.001          0.001**
                                  (0.004)         (0.001)          (0.005)         (0.00016)           (0.00006)            (0.003)         (0.00009)          (0.005)         (0.0003)         (0.001)

 Black married mothers
 unemployment rate               0.006**          -0.000          0.045***          -0.00015            -0.00004             0.004           0.00021          0.025***          0.001*         0.003***
                                 (0.003)          (0.000)          (0.005)         (0.00018)           (0.00010)            (0.005)         (0.00022)          (0.009)         (0.0004)         (0.001)

 Black single mothers
 unemployment rate               0.023***        -0.002***          0.003         -0.00053**          -0.0005***             -0.005          -0.00020         0.068***         -0.002**        0.007***
                                  (0.004)         (0.0005)         (0.005)         (0.00021)           (0.0002)             (0.006)         (0.00042)          (0.012)          (0.001)         (0.001)

Notes: Data from the Natality Files are aggregated to the state, year, race, and marital status level, for states and years as listed in Appendix A. The unemployment rate is calculated at the state-year
level and matched to the Natality Files by the year of conception of the baby. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Regressions include state and year fixed effects and state-specific trends. They are
weighted by the number of births in the state. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                     41
Table 7: Proportion of Births by Education Categories and Race

                     (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)
  Education      High school     High      Some college   College plus
  category         dropout      school

  Whites

  Unemployment   0.0006***     0.0003**    -0.0005***     -0.0004***
  rate            (0.0002)     (0.0001)      (0.0001)      (0.0002)

  Blacks

  Unemployment    -0.0002      -0.00005      0.00005       -0.000001
  rate            (0.0003)     (0.00065)    (0.00054)      (0.00036)




                                42
                                                  Table 8: Effect of Transfers on the Quality Effect, 1976-1998

                         (1)                (2)              (3)                (4)                (5)                  (6)                (7)                 (8)                (9)             (10)              (11)
Dependent              Average           % moms            Average           Average            % married             % born             % born              % with            Average         % < than              %
variable               mother's          less high         mother's          father’s                                 below            below 1500             Apgar             no. of         5 prenatal         prenatal
                      education           school             age            education                                  2500               grams              score 5           prenatal        care visits         care in
                                                                                                                      grams                                 and below            care                               first
                                                                                                                                                                                visits                           trimester
White moms
unemployment          -0.009***             0.002          0.018***          0.013***             -0.001*            0.00008             0.00003              0.00002           0.465**          -0.016*          0.00003
rate                   (0.003)             (0.002)          (0.003)           (0.003)            (0.0005)           (0.00007)           (0.00003)            (0.00003)          (0.190)          (0.008)          (0.001)
High transfer         0.012***             -0.002          0.008***           -0.002             0.002***          -0.00024***         -0.00014***            0.00004          -0.299**           0.005            0.001
state*urate
                        (0.004)            (0.001)          (0.003)           (0.003)             (0.001)            (0.00007)           (0.00004)           (0.00004)          (0.129)          (0.006)              (0.001)

Black moms
unemployment           0.019***          -0.003***         0.037***          0.028***             -0.0002          -0.00082***         -0.00023***            0.00006          0.377***         -0.010**          0.005***
rate                    (0.003)           (0.001)           (0.004)           (0.004)             (0.0004)          (0.00018)           (0.00007)            (0.00013)          (0.123)          (0.005)           (0.001)
High transfer           -0.002             0.0004           0.007*             -0.002              -0.001            0.00008             0.00008              -0.00041         -0.242**           0.000           -0.002**
state*urate
                        (0.002)            (0.001)          (0.004)           (0.004)             (0.001)            (0.00020)           (0.00008)           (0.00048)          (0.095)          (0.003)              (0.001)

                Notes: Data from the Natality Files are aggregated to the state, year, and race level, for states and years as listed in Appendix A. The unemployment rate is calculated at the state-year level
                and matched to the Natality Files by the year of conception of the baby. High transfer states are identified by regressing per capita state transfers on state and year fixed effects, where states
                with an above-median state dummy in this regression are identified as high-transfer states. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Regressions include state and year fixed effects and
                state-specific trends. They are weighted by the number of births in the state. Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                           43
      Table 9a: Effect of Unemployment on Birth Weight and Prenatal Care,
                              California, 1990-2000

                                               (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)                   (5)
   Dependent variable                      born below         born below           Average             < than 5              prenatal
                                           2500 grams         1500 grams            no. of           prenatal care         care in first
                                                                                   prenatal             visits              trimester
                                                                                  care visits

   White mothers
   unemployment rate                         0.00041             0.00004           0.0348***            -0.00005            0.0025***
                                            (0.00037)           (0.00016)           (0.0066)            (0.00027)           (0.00060)
   % sd effect of one sd u-rate
   ∆                                           0.34%              0.07%              1.69%               -0.06%                1.44%

   Add county specific trend
   unemployment rate                       -0.00095**            0.00018           0.025***            -0.00063 *            0.002***
                                            (4.7e-04)           (1.9e-04)           (0.008)             (3.6e-04)            (7.6e-04)

   Black mothers
   unemployment rate                         -0.0020            -0.00076            0.0369*             -0.00045              0.00069
                                             (0.0014)           (0.00071)           (0.0202)            (0.0011)              (0.0019)
   % sd effect of one sd in u-
   rate                                       -1.65%             -1.42%              1.79%               -0.54%                0.40%

   Add county specific trend
   unemployment rate                         -0.00095           -0.000084            -0.004             -0.002**               0.001
                                              (0.002)            (9.0e-04)           (0.026)             (0.001)              (0.002)
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Individual level data from the California Birth Certificate Files from 1990 to 2000. The
unemployment rate is calculated at the county-year level and matched by year of conception of the baby. Regressions include county and year
fixed effects, and state-specific trends where specified.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                     44
      Table 9b: Effect of Unemployment on Birth Weight and Prenatal Care,
                  California, 1990-2000, Multiple Births sample
                                                   (1)               (2)                  (3)                  (4)                 (5)
   Dependent variable                             born           born below           Average no.            < than 5           prenatal
                                                 below           1500 grams           of prenatal            prenatal            care in
                                                 2500                                  care visits          care visits           first
                                                 grams                                                                         trimester

   NO FIXED EFFECTS
   White mothers
   unemployment rate                            0.0011*           -5.33e-07            0.0286***              0.00022           0.0013
                                               (0.00058)          (0.00024)             (0.0096)             (0.00039)         (0.00084)
   % sd effect of one sd u-rate ∆                0.91%              0.00%                1.39%                 0.26%             0.75%

   Add county specific trend
   unemployment rate                           0.002***             1.6e-04             0.034***              -7.7e-04            0.001
                                               (7.2e-04)           (2.9e-04)             (0.012)             (5.1e-04)           (0.001)

   Black mothers
   unemployment rate                            -0.0034            -0.0015               0.0532*             -0.0016             0.0036
                                                (0.0022)           (0.0011)              (0.0296)            (0.0017)           (0.0028)
   % sd effect of one sd in u-rate               -2.80%             -2.81%                2.59%               -1.92%             2.07%

   Add county specific trend
   unemployment rate                             -0.004            -0.002**               0.033             -0.005***             0.006
                                                 (0.003)            (0.001)              (0.038)             (0.002)             (0.004)

   MOTHER FIXED
   EFFECTS
   White mothers(a)
   unemployment rate                            0.00054            -0.00033            0.0328***             -0.00016            0.0016
                                               (0.00063)           (0.00027)            (0.0114)             (0.00051)          (0.0010)
   % sd effect of one sd u-rate ∆                0.45%              -0.61%               1.59%                -0.19%             0.90%

   Add county specific trend
   unemployment rate                             0.001              -1.9e-04              0.022             -0.002***           0.002**
                                               (8.3e-04)           (3.5e-04)             (0.015)             (6.7e-04)          (0.001)

   Black mothers
   unemployment rate                            -0.00022           0.00047                0.0112             -5.64e-06           0.0024
                                                (0.0025)           (0.0013)              (0.0355)             (0.0022)          (0.0035)
   % sd effect of one sd in u-rate               -0.18%             0.87%                 0.54%                -0.01%            1.39%

   Add county specific trend
   unemployment rate                             4.5e-04            8.1e-04              -0.009               -0.003              0.003
                                                 (0.003)            (0.002)              (0.043)              (0.003)            (0.004)
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Individual level data from the California Birth Certificate Files from 1990 to 2000. The
unemployment rate is calculated at the county-year level and matched by year of conception of the baby. Regressions include county and year
fixed effects, and state-specific trends where specified.
(a) These results with both mother fixed effects and county specific trends are based on a 80% random sample of mothers with multiple births
because of computational constraints. This is true only for the sample of white moms.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                      45
Table 10: The effect of unemployment on infant health outcomes: Country level panel 1980-1999

                                        (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)
     Dependent variable              Birth rate      Birth rate         Infant           Infant           Infant          Infant         Death rate      Death rate
                                     (per 1,000      (per 1,000       mortality        mortality        mortality       mortality        (per 1,000      (per 1,000
                                      people)         people)          rate (per        rate (per        rate (per       rate (per        people)         people)
                                                                      1,000 live       1,000 live       1,000 live      1,000 live
                                                                        births)          births)          births)         births)


     Unemployment, total             -0.059***                        -0.152***                         -0.089**                            0.005
     (% of total labor force)          (0.018)                          (0.045)                          (0.041)                           (0.007)
     Mean 8.41, s.d. 5.78
     Lagged unemployment                             -0.070***                         -0.157***                        -0.094***                           -0.008
                                                      (0.019)                           (0.041)                          (0.039)                           (0.007)
     Birth rate, crude                                                                                  1.071***        0.889***
     (per 1,000 people)                                                                                  (0.076)         (0.070)

     Mean                             17.678                            19.152                                                             8.5013
     (s.d.)                           (7.907)                           (9.785)                                                            (0.573)
     Observations                      1037              919             1037             919              1037             919             1037             919
     R squared                          0.97             0.97             0.97            0.98             0.98             0.98             0.96            0.97

Notes: Variables are computed at the country-year level for an unbalanced panel of 118 countries. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Regressions include country and year fixed
effects. Data: World Development Indicators (WDI) collected by the World Bank, available online at: http://www.worldbank.org.




                                                                                    46
