NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BEHAVIORAL DECISION-MAKING:
AN APPLICATION TO THE SETTING OF
MAGAZINE SUBSCRIPTION PRICES
Fiona Scott Morton
Sharon Oster
Working Paper 10120
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10120
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2003

We thank participants in the Yale Applied Micro lunch for helpful comments. Christopher Kirkman and John
Oster provided valuable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Fiona Scott Morton and Sharon Oster. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Behavioral Decision-Making: An Application to the Setting of Magazine Subscription Prices

Fiona Scott Morton and Sharon Oster
NBER Working Paper No. 10120
November 2003
JEL No. L1, L2
ABSTRACT
Using data from American magazines, we explore the relationship between subscription discounts
and magazine characteristics. We focus in particular on those magazine features that might lead
time-inconsistent consumers to wish to engage in commitment behavior. We find that for magazines
whose payoff is in the future and/or that are meritorious for other reasons, subscription discounts
are lower all else equal. This finding suggests that publishers may be able to set subscription prices
in order to extract rents from consumers' willingness to tie their own hands in terms of their future
reading.
Fiona Scott Morton
Yale School of Management
55 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
fiona.scottmorton@yale.edu
Sharon Oster
Yale School of Management
55 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520
sharon.oster@yale.edu

Recent work in behavioral economics argues that consumers have time-inconsistent
preferences. If a desired behavior or product has upfront costs and delayed benefits, at the
moment of action/purchase, the consumer will procrastinate because she weights the
current costs too highly. Thus the future self and the current self may not share the same
view about optimal consumption choices at a particular moment in time. Classic examples
include the current self expecting that the future self will exercise, or save for retirement.
(Della Vigna and Malmandier, 2002; Caplin and Leahy, 2001). When the future arrives, the
person has a tendency to feel the action at hand is costly to undertake, and does not engage
in the behavior she rationally wanted to engage in the day before. In some cases, consumers
may be naïve and not realize that their future self will act differently than their current self
wishes it would. In other cases, consumers may be “sophisticated” (O’Donoghue and Rabin,
1999) in that they are aware the future self will not behave optimally from the present self’s
point of view. The self-control problem leads these sophisticated consumers to take actions
in the present to alter the consumption patterns they adopt in the future. (O’Donoghue and
Rabin, 1999, 2000; Laibson, 1997). For example, a consumer might join a health club or
arrange for automatic direct deposit into a retirement account. Read et al (1999) run an
experiment allowing for pre-commitment to video rentals. They show that consumers who
select movie titles several days in advance choose more “highbrow” films than consumers
choosing a movie for immediate viewing. These examples and experiments illustrate one
important feature of the behavioral model, namely when the current self anticipates that the
future self may go astray, that present self may try to tie the hands of the self- to -come.
While this characterization of behavior certainly resonates with many of us, empirical
work testing the behavioral model in real markets have been few, with the notable exception

3

of DellaVigna and Malmandier (2002) and several papers in the marketing literature (e.g.
Wertenbroch (1998)). This paper applies a simple behavioral model of consumer decisionmaking to help explain pricing in the magazine industry. In particular, we are interested in
the question of whether there is any evidence that the pricing structure adopted by
publishers reflects the behavioral strategies of consumers trying to alter their own reading
patterns. For example, do consumers “over-pay” for a subscription to the New York Review of
Books to try to induce increased future reading?
The magazine market provides an exceptionally rich setting in which to explore the
behavioral model. Most magazines are offered at both single newsstand price and at
subscription rates, providing all issues of the magazine for a fixed future time period at a
single fee. The existence of these two price forms means that the potential consumer can
either make a simultaneous purchase/read decision or, by buying a subscription, can
purchase now, for delivery and reading in the future. The availability of the subscription
form clearly would allow a consumer to influence the behavior of his or her future self since
it is a mechanism by which the future self is offered an issue at zero marginal cost. In this
way, the magazine market is similar to the health club market explored by Della Vigna and
Malmandier (2002).
At the same time, magazines are themselves quite heterogeneous along quality
dimensions that are likely to influence the level of preference inconsistency over time. Some
magazines — for example the New York Review of Books or Foreign Policy -- may be ones for
which a current self wishes to induce future consumption, while other magazines — perhaps
the National Enquirer or Star– may instead be ones for which time inconsistency is not an
issue. We consider several reasons why a consumer might want to read particular magazines.
It may be an investment good in the sense of Della Vigna and Malmandier (2002) with a

4

payoff in the future, as opposed to enjoyment consumed concurrently with reading the
magazine. A magazine may be seen as “meritorious” but perhaps not particularly enjoyable
and thus be potentially subject to self-control issues. Though we distinguish between these
magazine features in the abstract, in practice they are likely to be positively correlated across
magazines. Our empirical strategy is to measure several magazine features that fit with the
theory and show that the general result is present regardless of which is used.
Our experiment ties the behavioral literature to the field of Industrial Organization
quite explicitly. If publishers recognize differences across magazines in these behavioral
characteristics, one would expect them to set higher subscription prices relative to newsstand
prices for investment good/meritorious magazines, those with a high level of consumer time
inconsistency. Subscriptions to these magazines — because they are offering consumers a
chance to tie their own hands via a subscription — require a lower discount than
subscriptions to less “worthy” magazines to induce purchase of the subscription. The
product heterogeneity in this market allows us to look across magazines to see whether or
not the expected level of consumer time inconsistency is connected to differences in pricing
structures, in particular the extent of a subscription discount.
One of the advantages of the magazine market over the health club market studied
by DellaVigna and Malmandier is that, in the case of magazines, not only do we observe
both newsstand and subscription prices, but both pricing forms are commonly used. Indeed,
most of us buy magazines both via subscription and via newsstand purchase. However, our
analysis does not rely on the same individual purchasing different magazines using different
modes; our theory also holds if some types of consumers purchase subscriptions and others
purchase from the newsstand. Secondly, there are many magazines on the market, all with

5

different investment good characteristics and different prices, yet all comparable in the
newsstand versus subscription “products” that they offer.
Using a data set of almost three hundred U.S. magazines, we find strong evidence of
higher subscription prices relative to newsstand prices for magazines for which timeinconsistency is likely to be an issue. Our results suggest that publishers are taking into
account the desire of consumers to influence their own future reading patterns by charging
higher subscription rates for more investment-type magazines than they can charge for pure
consumption-type goods. Increasing our measure of “investment-ness” one standard
deviation raises the ratio of subscription fees to newsstand prices by 4% on average.
Alternatively, moving from a genre that’s a non-investment genre to one that has investment
characteristics increases the ratio of subscription to newsstand prices by about 12%.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a simple model of
subscription discounts, including a behavioral component. Section 3 describes the data we
have collected on magazine prices and characteristics. In Section 4 we describe our results,
and Section 5 concludes.
2.

A Simple Model
There are several papers in the literature that focus on the pricing structure of

magazines, particularly on the existence of subscriptions. (Glazer and Hassin, 1982;
Gabszwewicz and Sonnac, 1999). In order to account for the co-existence of subscriptions
and single newsstand prices, it is necessary to introduce some heterogeneity in consumers.
The previous literature introduces heterogeneity in two forms. First, consumers vary in the
shape of their willingness-to-pay curve as a function of number of issues. In this case,
subscription-pricing looks like bundling, and single, relatively high newsstand prices are
offered to consumers with relatively steep demand curves while those with relatively flatter

6

demand curves buy the bundle via subscription. Alternatively, or in addition, consumers may
vary in the transactions costs they face in purchasing single issues, perhaps because of their
location. Consumers in isolated towns may have higher costs of finding a particular
magazine, for example. In this case, publishers can capture part of the benefits of serving
high transactions costs consumers via subscriptions.
Consider a situation in which a magazine offers consumer j the choice of a
subscription providing n issues of magazine i at a fee Si, or a single issue at a price pi.
Following the prior literature, we recognize that for any consumer to purchase the
subscription, it must be true that
1.

Si< pinij+cij

Where nij is the number of issues the jth consumer wishes to purchase at price pi and cij are
the costs of acquiring magazines of type i for consumer j. Clearly from the point of view of
the publisher, there are a range of possible combinations of newsstand prices and
subscription prices that satisfy equation 1, and the publishers’ task is to choose the optimal
profit-maximizing combination conditional on the distribution of consumers and conditions
involving production costs. Glazer and Haskin (1982) and Gabszwewicz and Sonnac, (1999)
examine the properties of the equilibrium under some simple assumptions about demand
and costs.
In the prior work in the literature, the number of issues of a given magazine that
consumers wish to purchase is fixed ex ante for the individual. In particular, the individual
consumer takes as given his or her optimal consumption level of the magazine and then,
given the subscription rates, newsstand prices, and transactions costs, decides whether to
buy the magazine at all and, if so, whether to subscribe or buy at the newsstand. Suppose
alternatively, and in the spirit of the behavioral literature, that individuals have some

7

preferences about how many issues of a particular magazine they would like themselves to
read in the future. One way to motivate this preference is by reference to the literature on
time-inconsistent preferences. In particular, suppose that individuals have time-inconsistent
preferences for immediate gratification in the spirit of Laibson (1997) or O’Donoghue and
Rabin(2000), a characterization sometimes referred to as the “self-control” problem.
Suppose further that individuals recognize these self-control problems, and act as
behaviorally-sophisticated consumers in their purchases. In the current context, for a
meritorious or investment-type magazine, some subset of consumers recognizes that their
future self would under-consume issues from the perspective of their current self lookingforward. One way to capture this self-control problem is to posit that there exists an nij* (as
in equation 1 above) representing the number of issues the consumer at time t would like
him or herself to buy and read at time t+1, and that for a meritorious or investment-type
magazine, nij*>nij. , for all pi.. In other words, the consumer will pay more for a subscription
to a meritorious magazine today than he or she expects it will be worth in the future to his or
her future self. But the current self finds it to be worth the price now in the expectation that
the subscription purchase will induce incremental future reading and self-improvement. In
some sense, the current self is buying both a flow of magazines and an enhanced chance of
self-improvement. All else equal, publishers of these meritorious magazines should be able
to extract the incremental consumer surplus associated with this self-improvement demand
via higher subscription rates relative to the newsstand prices. Indeed, in this model it is even
possible for the subscription rate to exceed the full newsstand price of all issues, even absent
any costs of transactions. This can be seen in the formal constraint below (2). It is the same
as in equation 1, plus an additional term which is the net surplus the consumer gains on each
of the additional magazines that she consumes due to having the subscription.

8

2.

Si< pinij+cij+(nij*- nij)(υij-pi)

Where υ is the value of any individual issue of magazine i to consumer j.
However, publishers are setting price for a total population of consumers, not all of
whom are time-inconsistent and sophisticated. In the literature (O’Donoghue and Rabin
1999, 2000), there are two other types of consumers, naïve and rational. Both of these types
believe that they will read the optimal (larger) number of magazines in the future. The
rational types are correct, and their decision is represented by equation 1. The naïve types
systematically under-consume but fail to notice that they are doing so. Being sure they will
consume the correct number of issues at the time of the purchase decision, they place the
same value on the subscription as the rational consumers. Returning to the publisher’s
problem, it appears that unless a very large majority of consumers are sophisticated, equation
1 will bind and determine subscription prices; a magazine’s “investment good” nature will be
irrelevant. However, in the magazine industry, advertising is a critical source of revenue and
gives magazines an incentive to increase circulation. Thus subscription discounts are typically
substantial, well below the binding constraint of equation 1. Publishers may therefore have
the ability to charge higher subscription prices when their consumer base contains more
sophisticated consumers without hitting the constraint for the naïve/rational consumers.
In the discussion thus far, we have focused on the case of the meritorious magazine
that the consumer would like to commit to read. The model can also represent the case of a
consumer who would like to commit not to read a particular magazine; in this case n* will
be less than n. However, we do not know of a market institution that can help the consumer
with this problem by raising the effective marginal cost above the newsstand price. The best
the consumer can do is avoid the lower marginal costs associated with a subscription, or only
purchase a subscription if its price is appropriately low. In the empirical work we will try to

9

capture the difference between n and n* - including its sign - and relate it to the subscription
price.
In the motivation up to this point, higher subscription rates are induced by a desire
of sophisticated consumers to increase their own consumption of investment-type
magazines. There is an alternative, related, way of looking at this problem that in our case
yields similar results. As we indicated earlier, in deciding to subscribe to a magazine, the
consumer makes an estimate of expected future use. Suppose some naïve consumers are
systematically biased, in the sense that they over-estimate how much they will wish to
purchase meritorious magazines and how little they will wish to indulge in junk reading.
Referring back to equation 1, under these circumstances consumers will be systematically
over-estimating the number of magazines they wish to purchase: nij*>nij.. Under conditions
where consumers imagine themselves to be “better” than they are, we will find similar results
in terms of the subscription discount, this time driven by the naïve segment of the market.
Consumers will be willing to pay higher-than-ex post-desirable subscription prices, not
because they are trying to influence future behavior but because they systematically overestimate how many magazines in the subscription they will read. The implied price per issue
read that such a consumer calculates is systematically too low compared to actual behavior.
Under these conditions, it is also possible for publishers to extract higher subscription prices
as they capture the “imaginary” consumer surplus. Note in this case, however, absent some
transactions costs, the subscription discount will never be negative since consumers will
never imagine themselves to read more issues than exist.
Either of these two, quite simple, representations of behavioral decision making
suggest that publishers of meritorious and/or investment type magazines can exploit the
desire of consumers to either be better or believe themselves to be better by charging a high

10

subscription rate relative to the newsstand price. Note that the key feature of either model is
that publishers can extract the incremental consumer surplus associated with either the
desire to tie one’s hands or a consumer’s lack of self-awareness only in setting the forwardlooking subscription price for meritorious magazines, not the spot price. In the next section
we describe the data we use to test this hypothesis.

3.

The Data
In order to test whether or not subscription rates for magazines can be in part

explained by either of these simple behavioral stories, we collected data on almost 300
magazines published within the US. The principal sources of our data on magazine prices
and circulation were ABC, the Audit Bureau of Circulation and the MRI, Mediamark
Research Inc. Both are standard sources for work on magazine pricing (Koschat and Putsis,
2002). ABC collects data on readership and pricing from magazines, audits them for
accuracy and then sells access to the audited data on their web site. The variables collected
from ABC in the fall of 2002 form the core of the dataset. MRI is a standard source for
demographic information on magazine readership. In the case of a few magazines,
subscriptions appeared to require membership (e.g. Audubon, American Legion, VFW
Magazine). We also found one magazine, Mass Transit, that, while it has a subscription and
cover price, is mostly given away to people who work in the industry.1 These were eliminated
from the sample.
The magazines in the sample vary considerably in terms of the use of subscription
sales. The mean percent of magazines sold on subscription was .81, with a range between .05
and 1. Note, of course, the percent of magazines sold on subscription overstates the number
1

Circulation 20,500 of which 400 are paid and the rest free. (Conversation with Cignus Publications
9/8/03.)

11

of unique readers in a given year who are subscribers, given that subscribers by definition
buy all issues of a magazine. Magazines with low use of subscriptions include many in the
categories of weddings, gossip, women’s general interest, and youth.
In addition to the ABC and MRI sources, we obtained some of the variables used
from the magazines themselves. Using research funds and donations from friends, we
assembled a magazine collection of 118 physical copies. The remaining magazines in the
sample were examined either at major public libraries, large news carriers, or on web sites.
Appendix A contains a listing of the magazines in the data set; the range of magazines is
quite large, including large circulation, well known magazines like Time and Business Week
as well as more esoteric magazines like Quilter’s Digest and Gun Dogs.
Specification and Variable Construction
Recall that a sophisticated consumer will purchase a subscription if
Si< pinij+cij+(nij*- nij)(υij-pi)
Magazines can be scaled by creating a characteristic αi≡Σj (nij/nij*) that is an average across
all consumers for a particular magazine. It is then straightforward to show that the constraint
on the ratio of the subscription price per issue to the newsstand price decreases in αi. In
other words, as the number of desired issues diverges from the number of issues that will
actually be consumed (absent a subscription), the subscription price can increase and the
sophisticated consumer will still purchase it. The empirical specification we use therefore
relates the subscription discount to measures of α for each magazine, while controlling for
other features of the magazine that we think may have an impact on subscription ratios.

The empirical question in the paper centers on the size of the subscription discount.
We do not want to use the absolute level of subscription price in our analysis because
12

magazines differ greatly in this characteristic. Rather, we use the ratio of the subscription
price per issue and the newsstand, or cover, price. In practice, many magazines have multiple
subscription rates, depending both on duration of the subscription and on special offers. In
this paper, we use a one-year regular subscription rate, as identified in the ABC data. The
dependent variable in the regression Subratio is defined as the subscription rate divided by
the annualized newsstand price. Thus, a higher Subratio denotes a lower discount rate. In the
data, Subratio varies from 0.16 to 1.25.
As we suggested in the last section, the economics literature on subscription pricing
suggests two sources of variation in subscription price discounts: variation in the
heterogeneity in the consumer willingness to pay function and variation in the transactions
costs of newsstand purchase. We use several measures to capture these effects.
To proxy the transactions costs of acquiring particular magazines, we construct a
variable called Available. We sent research assistants to six cities across the US: New York
City, Boise, Chicago, LA, Tulsa, and Houston. In each city, the research assistant noted
whether the magazines were available at the largest public library and at a randomly chosen
newsstand. The index runs from 0-12, with a mean of 4.7; the higher the index, the lower
transactions costs of newsstand purchase. A second measure of magazine availability is the
circulation level. All else equal, large circulation magazines will be available in more places.
(As we will argue shortly , there is an offsetting effect on subscription prices from large
circulation on the cost side.) The mean of circulation is 855,910, with a standard deviation of
1,472,923. Because of the large range of the circulation variable, we use ln(circulation) in the
specification as well to capture non-linearities.
Measuring the underlying heterogeneity of the potential buying population is more
difficult. Here, we look at several features of magazines. NumberOfIssues is the number of

13

issues of the magazine published in a given year, with a range from 4 to 52. For magazines
with numerous issues all on the same topic, inducing purchase of all issues would be
expected to require a deeper discount. Modifying this effect is the variable NumIssues*Change,
which is the number of issues interacted with an indicator variable for whether the genre
experiences a change in content regularly. We somewhat arbitrarily decided that these genres
are news magazines, sports magazines, gossip magazines, magazines about technology, trade
magazines, and general business magazines, comprising 21% of the total sample. We judged
that the material in, for example, hobby, religion, and women’s and men’s general interest
magazines was more static. For magazines with ample new content, we would expect less
need for discounting as the number of issues rise, as those issues are less substitutable one
for another.
As we noted earlier, magazines often have introductory offers for subscriptions as
well as standard subscription rates. In cases in which publishers believe their magazines to be
especially prone to habit-formation, low introductory rates, followed by higher subscription
rates may be a preferred strategy. We take the ratio of the introductory offer to the regular
offer, Intro, as a measure of how habit-forming publishers believe their magazine to be. If
this effect is important, low levels of Intro (deep introductory discounts) will be associated
with high levels of regular subscriptions relative to newsstand prices. The introductory offer
was taken from either the paper insert in the physical magazine, or the rate offered on the
website.
In addition to the demand variables just described, there is a small trade literature
that suggests that publishers of low circulation magazines may offer subscription discounts
to improve product run planning. (Round and Bentick, 1997). The idea is that more
subscriptions generate more certainty about the correct production level. As the circulation

14

of the magazine grows, demand from newsstands becomes smoother, and the benefit to
having subscription sales for creating smooth demand falls somewhat. This literature
provides a second interpretation of the coefficient on the circulation variable that is the
opposite sign from the availability effect.. To the extent that the constructed variable
Availability already completely captures the effect of transactions costs, we would expect this
production smoothing effect to dominate and subscription prices relative to newsstand
prices to rise with circulation.
An additional supply –side effect arises due to the two revenue streams, sales and
advertising, that magazines can earn. The publisher has an incentive to increase circulation
by lowering the price of a subscription relative to newsstand price because this distributes
more magazines (even if they are unread) and thus boosts the value of ads in the magazine.
We include the cost of a full page ad, Adrate, in the specification. It is calculated by taking
ABC’s full-page advertising cost measure and dividing by circulation to get a per reader cost.2
As Adrate increases, publishers have more incentive to lower relative subscription prices to
raise circulation.
We turn now to the variables of most interest, those capturing the magazine
characteristics relevant to the behavioral distinctions we have made. Constructing such a
variable is clearly very difficult; a magazine that seems like consumption to an economist—
say The Economist, may feel like investment to a small businessman. In this work, we have
relied on three separate indices of magazine character.
Our first variable, Expert, is used to distinguish between magazines by many libraries.
In distinguishing popular magazines from more serious or scholarly magazines, librarians ask
whether the credentials of the author of the feature articles are provided, either in the header
2

We do not have data on the number of pages or ad pages in a magazine and so cannot precisely calculate
marginal ad revenue from one more sale.

15

of the article or in a footnote. For our measure, the listed credentials must be relevant to the
subject at hand, and not simply biographical. For example, in a quilting magazine an expert
footnote would read “Mary Smith has won three national prizes for her quilts,” as compared
to “Mary Smith lives in Connecticut with her husband and three children.” This measure
seems quite close to what behavioral economists might think of as an investment feature: if
readers expect to learn from an article, they may well want to know the credentials of the
source. Expert is an indicator variable, with one denoting the presence of expert content. It
was generated by a research assistant who examined each magazine and applied the criteria
described.
A second measure of magazine type is its genre. ABC provides extremely specific
genres (e.g. “Golf” “Auto general interest: consumer” “fashion”) We combined these into
more meaningful larger groups (e.g. hobbies, autos, women’s) until we were left with 25
genres (listed in the appendix). During this process, we separated out magazines that
appeared to be geared for members of specific professions. This genre we called “trade.” In
addition, separately from genre, ABC describes a magazine as a trade or consumer
publication. Almost all the business magazines are included in the “trade” definition, which
we did not like for two reasons. First, it makes the category quite large, and second, many
people read general business magazines as recreation or to plan for retirement, etc. So, we
added only the non-business titles from the ABC trade category to our existing trade
category (there was substantial overlap between the two groups). The other genres we
thought ex ante should be investment goods or be meritorious are Religion and Intellectual. All
three of these genres are included in the final specification. All three are again indicator
variables taking the value one if the magazine is designed for a particular career, (government
worker, early childhood education, journalism for example), is about religion/spirituality

16

(Theology Today, US Catholic, Yoga Journal), or is a magazine of ideas (Foreign Policy, Scientific
American). In our sample, 32% of the magazines have Expert content, 5% are Trade
magazines, 4% are religious magazines, and 10% are intellectual magazines.
The third and fourth variables used, Pride and FutureGain, were constructed from
survey results of expert readers. Three Yale PhD students in the English Department, two
women and one man, were trained by the authors and then asked to inspect all 300
magazines on the list and answer the following two questions:

1.

2.

Do you think the typical reader of this magazine is proud of his or her
readership? That is, does the typical reader think better of him or herself
by virtue of being a reader of this magazine? We are concerned with
whether the typical reader is likely to be proud and not with the source or
legitimacy of that pride. Please mark a 2 for very proud, 1 for somewhat
proud and 0 otherwise.
Some magazines can be thought of as pleasures of the moment, while
others teach us something important for the future. Consider for each
magazine how much of the value of reading that magazine comes now
versus in the future. Please rate the magazine as a 1 if all or most of the
benefit of the magazine comes at the point of reading, up to a rating of 5
if virtually all of the benefits come in the future.

The second question is intended to get at the issue of impatience or time-inconsistency,
while the first question speaks more to the over-optimistic, self-satisfied consumer model.
We selected male and female readers to avoid any gender bias associated with rating different
genres. In fact the three ratings were relatively highly correlated with each other, at a level of
above 0.5 for all but two combinations of readers and ratings.3 In the empirical work, the
ratings of the three readers were combined to form our rating variable.
Pride is thus the sum of answers to question 1 and varies from 0 to 6 . The
combined rating variables have a mean of 2.6 for question 1, with a standard deviation of
3

Reader 3 had a correlation of .34 and .45 with readers 1 and 2 respectively on question 1 (pride).

17

1.7. FutureGain varies from 3 to 14, with a mean of 7 and a standard deviation of 2.4. Pride
and FutureGain are positively correlated within a reader, as one might expect.4
Table 1 provides a list of magazines in the upper and lower tails of the rating
distribution using the combined reader variables. Gossip and pornography magazines (e.g.
Cosmopolitan, Playboy, People) are at the bottom of both scales - with principal benefits coming
in the form of current pleasure and little pride of readership. National Geographic and Diver
magazine are both pleasant to read yet contain content that is meritorious or useful in the
future, so they are rated in the middle of both scales. The New York Review of Books, Kiplingers,
and The Nation, all are rated quite high on both scales. On the other hand, there are clearly
some magazines that are high on one level and not on the other. Art and Antiques for
example, is rated high on the Pride scale, but only medium on FutureGain scale.
Clearly Pride and FutureGain suffer from the same defects as all subjective rating
measures. The reasonably high correlation across readers was comforting, however.5 In
addition, the three measures of investment/merit used in this paper are all positively
correlated: Pride and FutureGain, have correlations of 0.29 and 0.27 respectively with Expert.
The means of the dependent and independent variables used are provided in Table 1
along with the data sources for each variable. Appendix A provides the full list of magazines
used with their two ratings given.

4. Results: Does Magazine Quality Matter?
4.1 Basic Results

4

The correlations are .53, .66, and .72 for readers one, two, and three.
The authors also rated the magazines and found their ratings correlated well (above .6) with the PhD
student results.
5

18

The basic results in this paper are contained in Table 3 below. We include each
behavioral variable separately in the four columns of the table. The non-behavioral
variables all behave as we expect. Subscription prices relative to newsstand prices are
relatively less (i.e. coefficient signs are negative) for magazines that are readily available,
have small introductory discounts, have a large number of annual issues especially if their
content does not change frequently, and charge high advertising prices. We combine the
effects of both circulation variables and find that large circulation magazines, all else
equal, offer lower discounts as the production-smoothing theory predicts.
Turn now to the behavioral variables. In all specifications, the behavioral variables
are right-signed and all are significant at the five percent level or better. In particular, the
behavioral effects have relatively large economic impact. In column one, having Expert content
increases relative subscription rates by 0.053, which is a 9.5% increase at the mean of 0.553.
Examining column 2, we see that subscription rates are highest for trade (career-oriented)
magazines (.14), then the religious magazines (.13), then intellectual (.07), and all are positive
relative to the remaining omitted genres. In the case of Pride rating in column 3, if each of the
readers moved the magazine up one standard deviation on the “pride” scale, the subscription
rate would rise by 0.0334 or 6%. In column 4, FutureGain has similar effects; one standard
deviation higher on the FutureGain scale leads to an increase of 4.2% in the subscription ratio
evaluated at the mean.

Some Alternative Explanations
One objection to the interpretation of the results provided thus far is that the
behavioral variables may themselves be proxying for various demographic variables that
might influence subscription rates. For example, suppose high-income people purchase

19

meritorious magazines and high-income people have a lower response (smaller elasticity) to
subscription discounts. While we have no a priori reason to expect this relationship, it is
possible to let the data speak to the issue. For approximately two-thirds of the magazines in
the data set, we have information and the median income of the readership. (Unfortunately
we do not have any information about the educational level of readers.) In Table 4, we use
this sample to examine whether the effect of the behavioral variables disappears when we
include demographic controls.
The first columns of Table 4 repeats the specifications in Table 3 with the smaller
sample for comparability. We focus on our subjective ratings measures as we feel these
variables most closely test the hypothesis of interest. Notice that the magnitudes of the
coefficients on Pride and FutureGain fall by about 20% and their significance levels drop
compared to the results with the full sample. The final columns of Table 4 show that median
income level of the readers does not appear to explain subscription discounting. In addition,
the unconditional correlation between income and subratio is not significantly different from
zero. We conclude that income is not driving the relationship between magazine
characteristics and subscription pricing. We do find that median income of a magazine’s
readers is unconditionally correlated with the magazine’s Expert, Pride, and FutureGain ratings.
We also include the percentage of readers who are female (PctFem) in the regression,
and note that this variable does have an effect on subratio. The more female readers a
magazine has, the higher the subscription rate is relative to the newsstand price. It may be
that women readers are more avid magazine readers than men on average and are therefore
more willing to pay for subscriptions. More importantly from our perspective, including
these demographic variables does not substantially alter the effect of Pride and FutureGain;
statistical significance remains, and the magnitude of FutureGain increases slightly.

20

Note that in general, we should not be surprised to find that demographic
characteristics of readers are associated with their patience or self-awareness, and therefore
possibly with subscription price for the reasons we outline above. Neither income nor
percent female reader appears to be a demographic that neatly captures impatience, and
therefore neither substitutes for our behavioral measures. However, in principle, if one had
better demographics, one could perhaps find a measure that would work in this way.
The fact that the percent female appears to affect subscription discounting led us to
think further about the role of gender in this market. Previous work in economics suggests
that in both experimental settings and in real world investment settings, there may be gender
differences in personality traits that are relevant to commitment-type behavior. Barber and
Odeon (2001) , for example find that men are more prone to over-confidence in stock
market investments than are women. In an experimental setting, Chaudhuri and
Gangadharan (2003) find that women are less trusting than men. We find the question of
whether there are any differences in the tendencies of men versus women to try to commit
themselves to be very interesting. We explore whether commitment to better magazinereading through subscriptions varies by gender below.
Using the smaller data set for which demographic information is available , we
created two interaction terms, PctFem*FutureGain and PctFem*Pride, interacting our two
rating measures with percent female. Table 5 reports the results. In both specifications, the
coefficient on the interaction term is negative and significant. The coefficient is large enough
that, when evaluated at the mean of the percent female variable, it wipes out a large part of
the effect of the behavioral variables.
It is interesting to speculate on the source of the gender difference we observe. There
is a prior literature in the psychology area that suggests that women may have lower needs to

21

engage in hand-tying behavior. In particular, there are a number of studies indicating that
women have what psychologists call enhanced inhibitory abilities; that is, they are better able to
control their own impulses. (For a review and an evolutionary interpretation of this literature,
see Bjorland and Kipp, 1996). Evolutionary psychologists have argued for a link between the
need for parental investments in children and the development of an enhanced ability to delay
gratification in women. In the economics literature of development, there is also evidence of
differential parental investment by women. (Duflo, 2003). Alternatively, it may be that women
are more naïve about their own need for self-control.
In the context of our analysis, the gender difference suggests that publishers will be
less able to charge high subscription rates for meritorious women’s magazines than for
comparable men’s magazines because women are less likely to pay for this commitment
device.

5. Conclusions
While theories associated with behavioral economics have attracted considerable
attention from economists the last few years, there has been very little work that tries to take
these theories to traditional issues in Industrial Organization. In this paper, we apply the
insights of the behavioral model to a traditional industrial organization problem: the setting
of prices. Our results suggest that magazine publishers appear to be setting subscription
prices to take advantage of time-inconsistency on the part of consumers. Magazines for
which consumers might have a time-consistency problem and meritorious magazines have a
higher ratio of subscription to newsstand prices than other magazines.

22

References
Barber,Brad and Terrance Odean, (2001) “Boys will be boys: Over confidence and
common stock investments.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 116(1). 261-292.
Bjorklund David and Katherine Kipp, (1996) “Parental investment theory and
gender differences in the evolution of inhibition mechanisms,” Psychological Bulletin. 120(2).
163-88.
Caplin, Andrew and John Leahy (2000) “The Social discount rate.” NBER Working
Paper 7983.
Chaudhuri, Sarbajit and Lata Gangadharan (2003) “Gender differences in trust and
reciprocity,” Working paper.
Della Vigna, Stefano and Ulrike Malmandier (2002) “Overestimating Self-control: Evidence
from the Health Club Industry,” mimeo, UC Berkeley
Duflo, Esther, (2003) “Grandmothers and granddaughters :old age pensions and
intra-household allocation in South Africa.” World Bank Economic Review 17(1). 1-25.
Gabszewicz, Jean and Nathalie Sonnac,1999.” Subscription as a price discrimination device,”
Louvain Economic Review. 65(4), 421-433
Glazer, Ami and R. Hussin,1982. “On the economics of subscriptions,” European Economic
Review 19(2) , 343-365.
Koschat, Martin and William Putsis, 2002. ”Audience characteristics and bundling: a hedonic
analysis of magazine advertising rates,” J. of Marketing Research 39(3) 262-273
Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden Eggs and hyperbolic discounting,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112 (2), 443-477.
O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin, 1999. “Doing it now or later,” American Economic
Review 89(1), 103-124
-------------, 2000 The Economics of Immediate Gratification, Journal of Behavioral DecisionMaking 13:2:233-50
Read, Daniel, George Loewenstein, Shobana Kalyanaraman (1999) “Mixing Virtue and Vice:
Combining the Immediacy Effect and the Diversification Heuristic” Journal of
Behavior Decision Making: 12: 257-273.
Round, David and Teresita Bentick, 1997. “Magazine subscription discounts in Australia,
Review of Industrial Organization:12:555-577.
Wertenbroch, Klaus,1998. “Consumption self-control by rationing purchase quantities of
virtue and vice,” Marketing Science 17(4) , 317-337.
23

Table 1: A Sample of Magazine Ratings
Pride=0
Penthouse
Playboy
Easy riders
Movieline
National Enquirer
National Examiner
People
Premiere
Soap Opera Digest
Soap Opera Weekly
Star
Starlog
TV Guide
True Story
US Weekly
Cat Fancy
Traier Life
Details
Maxim
ESPN Magazine
Cosmopolitan
In Style
Marie Claire
Amazing
Spiderman
Cosmo Girl!
Realms of Fantasy
Teen
Teen People

Pride=6
Art and Antiques
Art and Auction
Barron’s
Business Week
Forbes
Fortune
Harvard Business
Review
Kiplingers

FutureGain=3
Penthouse
Playboy
The Rolling Stone
Spin
Vibe
The Source
Entertainment
Weekly
Interview

The New Yorker
E-The
Environmental
Magazine
Architectural
Digest

Movieline
National Enquirer

American Heritage
Foreign Policy
NY Review of
Books
Smithsonian
Economist
The Nation
Faith & Family
Reform Judaism

National Examiner
People
Premiere
Soap Opera Digest

FutureGain>12
Forbes
Fortune
HBR
Kiplingers
Astronomy
Worth
Money
New York Review
of Books
The Nation
Venture Reporter
E-The
Environmental
Magazine
Red Herring
American History
Inc

Soap Opera Weekly
Star
Starlog
Ttrue Story
US Weekly
Advocate
Details
Maxim
Jet
ESPN
Amazing
Spiderman
Mad
Realms of Fantasy
Teen People

24

Table 2: Summary statistics and sources
Variable
Name

Mean

Std Dev

Min

Max

Source

Number of observations=298
Subratio
Circulation
Ln(circulation)
Available

.553
855910
12.7
4.74

.200
1472923
1.46
2.84

.163
7600
8.94
0

1.24
1.6E7
16.56
12

ABC
ABC
ABC
Research assistant

Number of issues
Number of issues *
change content
Intro subscription/
regular subscription
Ad rate
Pride Rating
FutureGain Rating
Expert
Trade
Religious
Intellectual

14.6
4.47

12.6
11.67

4
0

52
52

ABC
ABC & authors

.821

.278

.219

2.84

Research assistant

.060
2.60
7.02
.322
.050
.040
.097

.100
1.67
2.42
.468
.219
.197
.297

0
0
3
0
0
0
0

1.57
6
14
1
1
1
1

ABC
Reader rating
Reader rating
Reader rating
ABC & authors
ABC
ABC

Demographic
PctFemale
Median Income

Mean

Std Dev

Min

Max

Observations

source

.505
65152

.288
24501

0
25984

1
202800

N=210
N=194

MRI
MRI

25

Table 3: Regression Results
Dependent Variable: One year subscription rate/ (newsstand price*number
of annual issues)
Variable

(1)
Expert
4.22E-08**
(9.25E-09)

(2)
Genre
3.76E-08**
(9.14E-09)

(3)
Pride
4.09E-08**
(9.17E-09)

(4)
FutureGain
4.19E-08**
(9.26E-09)

-0.53**
(.011)
-.012**
(.004)
-.0055**
(.0010)

-.043**
(.011)
-.012**
(.004)
-.0060**
(.0010)

-.047**
(.011)
-.014**
(.004)
-.0056**
(.0010)

-.052**
(.011)
-.013**
(.004)
-.0056**
(.0010)

.0023**
(.0011)
-.160**
(.037)
-.247**
(.107)
……..

.0022
(.0011)
-.145**
(.036)
-.278**
(.108)
……..

.0020
(.0011)
-.144**
(.037)
-.275**
(.109)
…..

Trade

.0021
(.0011)
-.140**
(.037)
-.276**
(.109)
.054**
(.022)
…………

………

…..

Religious

……….

………..

….

Intellectual

………

…….

…

Pride

……….

.136**
(.047)
.130**
(.051)
.072**
(.035)
……….

….

FutureGain

………..

……….

.020**
(.006)
….

Constant

1.44**
(.139)
298

1.33**
(.140)
298

1.34**
(.144)
298

.0096**
(.0043)
1.38**
(.147)
298

.273

.295

.282

.270

Circulation
Ln(Circ)
Available
Number of
issues
No. issues
interaction
Intro offer
Ad rate
Expert

No
observations
Adj R2

** significant at the .05 level or better
Standard errors in parentheses

26

Table 4: Adding Demographics using a Subset of the Sample
Dependent Variable: One year subscription rate/ (newsstand price*number
of annual issues)
Variable
Circulation

FutureGain

(1)
3.23E-08**
(9.82E-09)
-.027
(.017)
-.011**
(.005)
-.005**
(.001)
.0022
(.0012)
-.205**
(.042)
-.216
(.116)
.015**
(.008)
…..

% female reader

…..

.0073
(.0049)
…..

Median income

…..

…..

Constant

1.10**
(.226)
194/.222

1.10**
(.232)
194/.215

Ln(Circ)
Available
Number of issues
Number of issues
:interaction
Intro offer
Ad rate
Pride

(2)
3.28E-08**
(9.86E-09)
-.029
(.017)
-.010**
(.005)
-.005**
(.001)
.002
(.001)
-.203**
(.042)
-.212
(.116)
……

No. observations/
Adj R2
** indicates significance at the .05 level or better
Standard errors in parentheses.

(3)
3.38E-08**
(9.32E-09)
-.046**
(.017)
-.008
(.005)
-.005**
(.001)
.002**
(.001)
-.192**
(.040)
-.259**
(.110)
.016**
(.008)
……
.205**
(.041)
2.53E-07
(5.10E-07)
1.19**
(.233)
194/.308

(4)
3.45E-08**
(9.30E-09)
-.048**
(.017)
-.0075
(.0047)
-.004**
(.001)
.002**
(.001)
-.190**
(.040)
-.251**
(.109)
…..
.012**
(.005)
.219**
(.042)
2.25E-07
(5.08E-07)
.553**
(.062)
194/.312

Table 4b: Correlations between income, subratio, and ratings
Income

Subratio
.084
p=.238

Pride
.434
p=.000

FutureGain
.387
p=.000

Expert
.212
p=.003

27

Table 5: Testing for Gender Differences in Commitment Behavior
Dependent Variable: One year subscription rate/ (newsstand price*number
of annual issues)

Variable
Circulation
Ln(Circ)
Available
Number of issues
Number of issues:interaction
Intro offer
Ad rate
Pride
FutureGain
Percent female reader
Female*Pride
Female*FutureGain
Constant
No. Obs/ Adj. R2

(1)
3.33E-08**
(9.46E-09)
-.037**
(.016)
-.011**
(.004)
-.005**
(.001)
.0017
(.0011)
-.181**
(.041)
-.200
(.112)
.055**
(.015)
….
.318**
(.069)
-.076**
(.028)
….
1.05**
(.213)
210/.282

(2)
3.48E-08**
(9.48E-09)
-.042**
(.016)
-.010**
(.005)
-.005**
(.001)
.0017
(.0011)
-.184**
(.041)
-.193
(.112)
….
.031**
(.009)
.455**
(.128)
…..
-.043**
(.019)
1.00**
(.220)
210/.278

** indicates signficance at the .05 level or better
Standard errors in parentheses.

28

