                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  THE PRICE IS (ALMOST) RIGHT

                                           Randolph B. Cohen
                                            Christopher Polk
                                           Tuomo Vuolteenaho

                                          Working Paper 10131
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10131


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      December 2003




An earlier draft of this paper was circulated under the title “Does Risk or Mispricing Explain the Cross-
section of Stock Prices?” Some of the ideas in this paper were first presented as Section V of the paper titled
“The Value Spread” at the NBER 2000 Summer Institute. We would like to thank Ken French for providing
us with some of the data used in this study. We are grateful to Gregor Andrade, John Campbell, John
Cochrane, Josh Coval, Kent Daniel (discussant), Eugene Fama, Wayne Ferson (discussant), Kenneth French,
John Heaton, Matti Keloharju, Owen Lamont, Rafael LaPorta, Andre Perold, Antti Petäjistö, Vesa Puttonen,
William Schwert, Jay Shanken, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, and Sheridan Titman (discussant) for their
comments and suggestions. We would also like to thank seminar participants at the American Finance
Association 2003 meeting, Chicago Quantitative Alliance Spring 2002 meeting, European Finance
Association 2002 meeting, Harvard University Economics Department, Helsinki School of Economics and
Business Administration, Kellogg School of Management (Northwestern), NBER Asset Pricing Program
Meeting, Simon School (Rochester), Stanford Graduate School of Business, Texas Finance Festival, and Tuck
School (Dartmouth). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Randolph B. Cohen, Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Price Is (Almost) Right
Randolph B. Cohen, Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho
NBER Working Paper No. 10131
December 2003
JEL No. G120, G140

                                            ABSTRACT

Most previous research tests market efficiency and asset pricing models using average abnormal

trading profits on dynamic trading strategies, and typically rejects the joint hypothesis. In contrast,

we measure the ability of a simple risk model and the efficient-market hypothesis to explain the

level of stock prices. First, we find that cash-flow betas (measured by regressing firms' earnings on

the market's earnings) explain the prices of value and growth stocks well, with a plausible premium.

Second, we use a present-value model to decompose the cross-sectional variance of firms' price-to-

book ratios into two components due to risk-adjusted fundamental value and mispricing. When we

allow the discount rates to vary with cash-flow betas, the variance share of mispricing is negligible.

Randolph B. Cohen
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
rcohen@hbs.edu

Christopher Polk
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
c-polk@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Tuomo Vuolteenaho
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 312
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138-3001
and NBER
t_vuolteenaho@harvard.edu
       Most previous research uses average abnormal trading profits on dynamic trading strategies to test

market efficiency and asset pricing models. The joint hypothesis of the capital asset pricing model (CAPM)

and market efficiency is typically rejected by these tests. The economic significance of these rejections is

usually evaluated based on Sharpe ratios (average return over return standard deviation) of zero-investment

strategies that do not expose the investor to systematic risks. The discovery of economically high Sharpe

ratios has lead many to reject the CAPM and efficient-market hypothesis (EMH) as a good approximate

description of the stock market.1

       We argue that asset pricing models and market efficiency should be evaluated by their ability to

explain stock-price levels, not by their ability to explain the average returns on frequently-rebalanced

dynamic trading strategies.        The price-level criterion is superior to the Sharpe-ratio criterion for the

following reasons. First, although available Sharpe ratios are clearly the main object of interest to a

professional money manager, the level of price is more relevant to most other economic decision makers.

For example, a corporate manager making a large long-term investment decision cannot engage in a dynamic

trading strategy of investing or divesting a small fraction every month, depending on stock-market

conditions. Thus, if the price is approximately “right,” the impact of the stock market to his/her investment

decisions is also likely to be consistent with market efficiency, and the high available Sharpe ratios only an

interesting side show.

       Second, tests of market efficiency that are based on trading profits typically use high-frequency return

covariances or betas to adjust for risk. Although such a practice is consistent with jointly testing a sharp null



       1
           Fama (1970, 1991) surveys the empirical literature on testing market efficiency. Daniel, Hirshleifer, and
Subrahmanyam (1998) survey the recent evidence on trading strategies that would have produced abnormal profits and
high Sharpe ratios. Hansen and Jagannathan (1991) show that in a frictionless rational-expectations model, available
Sharpe ratios are related to the variability of marginal utility. MacKinlay (1995) argues that the Sharpe ratios of some
trading strategies, if taken at face value, are too large to be explained by a rational multifactor model. Shleifer (2000, p.
8) characterizes the impact of this evidence on the views of finance academicians: “We have learned a lot, and what we
think now is quite a bit different from what we thought we knew in 1978. Among the many changes of views, the
increased skepticism about market efficiency stands out.”
hypothesis of an asset pricing model and market efficiency, it is less appropriate for measuring the impact of

mispricing on average returns or prices. If markets are even slightly inefficient, mispricing may contaminate

not only average returns but also measures of risk, as argued by Brainard, Shapiro, and Shoven (1991). The

price-level tests we advocate connect stock prices to covariances or betas of cash flows. Regressing prices

on cash-flow betas is a cleaner way to measure a model’s explanatory power than regressing average returns

on return betas, because the cash-flow betas are less affected by mispricing.

      We test empirically the ability of the CAPM and EMH to explain the stock-price levels of low-price-

to-book “value” stocks and high-price-to-book “growth” stocks. Our empirical tests concentrate on price-to-

book-sorted portfolios for the following reasons. First, the average returns generated by value-minus-growth

strategies (that buy value and short growth stocks) cannot be explained by CAPM betas measured from high-

frequency returns (Rosenberg, Reid, and Lanstein, 1985; Fama and French, 1992; and others). Furthermore,

the pricing errors are highly economically significant when the Sharpe-ratio criterion is used as the metric of

economic significance (MacKinlay, 1995).          Second, Fama and French (1995) and Cohen, Polk, and

Vuolteenaho (2002) show that a firm’s price-to-book ratio is a persistent variable that forecasts the returns

on the firm’s stock far in the future and that the return predictability related to price-to-book ratios has a

large price-level effect. Thus, price-to-book-sorted portfolios have the potential of being significantly

mispriced by the price-level criterion as well.

      Our empirical results suggest that mispricing relative to the CAPM is not an important factor in

determining the prices of value and growth stocks. Cash-flow betas (measured by regressing a firm’s

profitability on the market’s profitability) essentially explain the prices of and long-horizon returns on price-

to-book-sorted portfolios, with a premium that is high but not implausible (8-12 percent per annum).

Furthermore, the premium on cash-flow beta remains high when we include beta-sorted or size-sorted

portfolios in the set of test assets, suggesting that the cash-flow beta is not merely proxying for the price-to-

book characteristic.

      In addition to traditional regressions of prices and long-horizon average returns on betas, we specify a

stochastic-discount-factor present-value model that links firms’ current price-to-book ratios to expected

future cash flows and to covariances of future cash flows with the stochastic discount factor. If we restrict

discount rates to be constant across firms, our present-value model allocates more than 25 percent of the

cross-sectional price-to-book variance to mispricing.       However, if we allow the discount rates to vary as


                                                        2
predicted by the CAPM and measure risk as cash-flow covariances, the variance share of mispricing is

reduced to near zero. The share of mispricing is reduced because our present-value model detects more

systematic risk in value firms’ future cash flows than in growth firms’.

      Previous results by Fama and French (1992, 1993, 1996), Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994),

and others suggest that value stocks have lower, not higher, CAPM betas than growth stocks. We thus

expect the above seemingly contradictory results obtained with our cash-flow-beta regressions and

stochastic-discount-factor methodology to be treated with healthy skepticism. To reconcile our results with

those in the previous literature, we examine the long-run and short-run behavior of the average returns on

and stock-return betas of price-to-book-sorted portfolios.

      We form ten equal-weight portfolios by combining the same-rank value-weight deciles from N

different sorts on t-1 to t-N price-to-book ratios. Much as in event studies that use the calendar-time

methodology, these portfolios approximate the N-year investor experience of investing in value and growth

stocks, and can be used as test assets in standard Black-Jensen-Scholes (1972) or Gibbons-Ross-Shanken

(1989) time-series asset-pricing tests. Consistent with the results of Fama and French (1992, 1993, 1996)

and Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994), we find that growth stocks have higher CAPM betas than

value stocks during the first year after portfolio formation. Because the betas of these portfolios are

negatively related to their expected returns, the CAPM fails to explain the returns of value and growth stocks

during the first year subsequent to portfolio formation.

      Our novel finding is that value stocks’ betas sharply increase and growth stocks’ betas sharply

decrease after portfolio formation. Within five years from portfolio formation, value stocks’ (three lowest

price-to-book deciles) betas have increased to approximately 1.07 and growth stocks’ (three highest price-to-

book deciles) betas have declined to approximately 0.94. Our tests detect continuation of this trend for

fifteen years after the sort. Thus, the lower long-run risk of growth stocks that is detected from cash flows

by our ROE regressions and present-value model can also be detected from long-horizon stock returns.

      Are these changes in betas sufficient to explain the substantial long-run return spread, as our present-

value model suggests? An answer from a return-based asset-pricing test is yes. Consistent with our present-

value model’s results, the CAPM (with betas measured from stock returns over a long horizon) explains an

awe-inspiring 70 percent of the substantial variation in average returns at the fifteen-year investment

horizon. Furthermore, this R2 is obtained with a reasonable beta premium estimate of 9.4 percent per year.


                                                       3
       Although we do not confine ourselves to any specific model, there are a number of economic models

that would predict that the investors’ marginal utility is strongly negatively related to news about aggregate

cash flows. For example, Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2003) build on our empirical findings and propose a

version of Merton’s (1973) intertemporal asset pricing model that links expected returns to return

covariances with market-wide cash-flow news. In their model, controlling for the cash-flow beta, stock

return beta has an extremely small risk price.

       Our finding that the CAPM in conjunction with market efficiency provides a good approximate

description of the level of stock prices has important implications.          For example, our results justify

corporations’ current use of the CAPM in capital budgeting, documented by Graham and Harvey (2001), as

most long-term investment decisions depend upon the level of net present value instead of near-term

expected returns. Similarly, the higher long-run risk of value stocks also explains why low-priced value

stocks are not immediately acquired by healthier companies, or bought out by a sophisticated buy-and-hold

investor, such as Berkshire Hathaway or an LBO fund.

       These findings also rationalize an apparent contradiction in MBA curriculums: Investment courses

teach that beta is dead, and then corporate finance classes proceed to use the CAPM in firm or project

valuation. Our price-level results justify this distinction – the CAPM fails to explain the one-period expected

returns on some dynamic trading strategies but gets stock prices and expected long-term returns

approximately right. Researchers should likewise resentence beta from death row to probation in those

analyses where firms’ stock prices (rather than returns on trading strategies) are the objects of interest.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the data. Section II links

cash-flow betas to price-to-book ratios. Section III uses a present-value formula to test the CAPM’s ability

to explain the cross-section of price-to-book ratios. Section IV presents portfolio-return evidence. Section V

examines the robustness of our results to including risk-sorted portfolios in the set of test assets. Section VI

concludes.


                                                   I.    Data
       The basic U.S. data come from the merger of three databases. The first one of these, the Center for

Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) monthly stock file, contains monthly prices, shares outstanding,

dividends, and returns for NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks. The second database, the COMPUSTAT



                                                        4
annual research file, contains the relevant accounting information for most publicly traded U.S. stocks. The

COMPUSTAT accounting information is supplemented by the third database, Moody’s book equity

information collected by Davis, Fama, and French (2000).2 The basic merged data cover the period 1928-

2000. In the merged data set, the panel contains 208,804 firm-years. Table I Panel A shows descriptive

statistics of the data.

       Detailed data definitions are the following. Book equity is defined as stockholders’ equity, plus

balance sheet deferred taxes (COMPUSTAT data item 74) and investment tax credit (data item 208) (if

available), plus post-retirement benefit liabilities (data item 330) (if available) minus the book value of

preferred stock. Depending on availability, we use redemption (data item 56), liquidation (data item 10), or

par value (data item 130) (in that order) for the book value of preferred stock. We calculate stockholders’

equity used in the above formula as follows. We prefer the stockholders’ equity number reported by

Moody’s, or COMPUSTAT (data item 216). If neither one is available, we measure stockholders’ equity as

the book value of common equity (data item 60) plus the par value of preferred stock. (Note that the

preferred stock is added at this stage because it is later subtracted in the book equity formula.) If common

equity is not available, we compute stockholders’ equity as the book value of assets (data item 6) minus total

liabilities (data item 181), all from COMPUSTAT.

       The price-to-book ratio used to form portfolios in May of year t is book common equity for the fiscal

year ending in calendar year t-1, divided by market equity at the end of May of year t. We require the firm

to have a valid past price-to-book ratio. Moreover, in order to eliminate likely data errors, we discard those

firms with price-to-book ratios less than 0.01 and greater than 100. When using COMPUSTAT as our

source of accounting information, we require that the firm must be on COMPUSTAT for two years. This

requirement alleviates most of the potential survivor bias due to COMPUSTAT backfilling data. After

imposing these data requirements, the cumulative number of firms sorted into portfolios is 165,945. The

annual panel spans the period 1928-1999; note that in our timing convention, the 1928 data is computed by

using book values from the end of 1927 and returns through May 1929.



       2
           We thank Kenneth French for providing us with the data.




                                                           5
          After portfolio formation, we follow the portfolios for fifteen years while holding the portfolio

definitions constant.        Because we perform a new sort every year, our final annual data set is three

dimensional: the number of portfolios formed in each sort times the number of years we follow the portfolios

times the time dimension of our panel.

          Missing data are treated as follows. If a stock was included in a portfolio but its book equity is

temporarily unavailable at the end of some future year t, we assume that the firm’s book-to-market ratio has

not changed from t-1 and compute the book-equity proxy from the last period’s book-to-market and this

period’s market equity. We treat negative or zero book-equity values as missing. We then use this book-

equity figure in computing clean-surplus earnings. We follow standard practice and substitute zeros for

CRSP missing returns, as long as the firm is not delisted. For market equity, we use the latest available

figure.

          We deal with delisting firms as follows. First, we compute the stock return, profitability, and the exit

price-to-book ratio for the firm at the end of its delisting year. We use delisting data, when available on the

CRSP tapes, in computing the stock returns and the exit market value. In some cases, CRSP records

delisting prices several months after the security ceases trading and thus after a period of missing returns. In

these cases, we calculate the total return from the last available price to the delisting price and pro-rate this

return over the intervening months. If a firm is delisted but the delisting return is missing, we investigate the

reason for disappearance. If the delisting is performance-related, we assume a -30 percent delisting return.3

Otherwise, we assume a zero delisting return.

          Second, we take the delisting market value of the firm and invest it in another firm that was originally

sorted into the same portfolio as the disappearing firm. Among the firms in the same portfolio, we pick the

one that has a current price-to-book ratio closest to the exit price-to-book ratio of the disappearing firm.




          3
              The delisting-return assumptions follow Shumway’s (1997) results. Shumway tracks a sample of firms whose
delisting returns are missing from CRSP and finds that performance-related delistings are associated with a significant
negative return, on average approximately -30 percent. This assumption is unimportant to our final results, however.




                                                             6
         Table I Panel B shows averages of selected variables for the price-to-book-sorted decile portfolios.

Firms with low price-to-book ratios have on average higher subsequent stock returns than firms with high

price-to-book ratios (Rosenberg, Reid, and Lanstein, 1985; Fama and French, 1992; and others). For a five-

year buy-and-hold strategy, the 10-1 difference in average cumulative return is approximately 70 percent.

Simultaneously, differences in firms’ price-to-book ratios are also related to differences in future average

growth. High-price-to-book firms grow faster and are persistently more profitable than low-price-to-book

firms.


                                 II. Do cash-flow betas explain stock-price levels?
         Previous research finds that CAPM betas have essentially no explanatory power with respect to

average returns generated by annually rebalanced value-minus-growth strategies, if betas are measured from

high-frequency stock returns. In this section, we measure CAPM betas from firms’ cash flows and find that

these cash-flow betas largely explain the prices of and long-run average returns on value and growth stocks.

         We define the cash-flow beta as the regression coefficient of a firm’s discounted log ROE on the

market portfolio’s discounted log ROE:
                  N −1                                                 N −1
                  ∑ ρ j log(1 + ROEk ,t + j , j +1 ) = β kCF,0 + β kCF,1 ∑ ρ j log(1 + ROEM ,t + j ) + ε k ,t + N −1   (1)
                  j =0                                                 j =0


Above, ROE denotes the ratio of clean-surplus earnings ( X t = BEt − BEt −1 + Dtgross ) to beginning-of-the-
period book equity ( BEt −1 ), with subscript k corresponding to the firm or portfolio under scrutiny and
subscript M to the market portfolio. The second subscript refers to the year of observation and the third to
the number of years from the sort. Dtgross is gross dividends computed from the difference between CRSP
returns and returns excluding dividends. ρ is a constant related to one minus the average dividend yield.
We set ρ to 0.95 in our regressions.
         This measure of cash-flow risk can be motivated with the price-to-book decomposition used by
Vuolteenaho (2001) and Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2002). This decomposition shows that, to a very
close approximation,
                                ME t −1  ∞ j                           ∞
                           log          = ∑ ρ log(1 + ROE t + j ) − ∑ ρ j log(1 + Rt + j ) .                       (2)
                                BE t −1  j =0                         j =0


Above, ME / BE denotes the price-to-book ratio and R the (net) return on a firm’s stock.




                                                                   7
        Over an infinite horizon, the unexpected realizations of the first (ROE) term are equal to the
unexpected realizations of the second (stock-return) term for every sample path. Thus measuring the risk
from either infinite-horizon discounted log returns or profitabilities will necessarily yield the same result.
However, if the sums in (2) are evaluated over a finite horizon, the covariances of the first and second term
with a risk factor may be different. Furthermore, if the stock market is potentially inefficient, mispricing
may contaminate not only the average returns but also short-horizon return covariances. (Alternatively,
expected-return variation due to omitted risk factors may have a large impact on high-frequency return
covariances and de-link the cash-flow and stock-return covariances.) Thus, measuring CAPM risks from the
cash-flow term of (2) instead of the return term may result in a cleaner risk measure.
        Table II Panel A measures the cash-flow betas for ten price-to-book-sorted portfolios. The columns
two to eleven correspond to price-to-book-sorted portfolios and rows to selected horizons N.              The
regressions are estimated from overlapping observations using OLS. We use Newey-West (1987) standard-
error formulas, which correct for the cross-sectional and time dependence of the residuals, with N leads and
lags.
        The first row of Table II Panel A shows the one-year cash-flow betas of value and growth stocks
immediately after the sort. Apart from the highest price-to-book decile, the cash-flow betas of the stocks in
our sample line up nicely with their price-to-book ratios: The second-highest price-to-book decile has a cash-
flow beta of 0.85 and the lowest price-to-book decile a cash-flow beta of 1.35. The highest price-to-book
decile has a cash-flow beta of 1.00, which is slightly higher than expected.
        Moving down the rows of Table II Panel A and increasing the horizon to five years further
strengthens the results. The highest price-to-book portfolio now has the lowest cash-flow beta and the
lowest price-to-book portfolio the highest cash-flow beta for all horizons from two to fifteen years. The
differences are economically significant: Five-year cash-flow beta of the extreme decile of growth stocks is
0.67 and that of the extreme decile of value stocks is 1.68. The mean reversion and noise in covariances
attenuates this difference in betas at the ten and fifteen-year horizons, but the spread remains economically
significant (0.90 vs. 1.47 and 0.94 vs. 1.21, respectively).
        Columns twelve and thirteen of Table II Panel A show the cash-flow betas of “high-minus-low”
portfolios. Column twelve shows the difference in cash-flow betas between the highest and lowest price-to-
book deciles, and column twelve between top three and bottom three. The difference in cash-flow betas is


                                                        8
statistically significant for both differences at all horizons, except for the one-ten difference at the one-year
horizon. Thus there is statistical evidence of value stocks’ cash-flow betas being higher than growth stocks’.
       Note that when measuring the cash-flow betas of price-to-book-sorted portfolios, our definition of
cash-flow beta is likely to result in an upward bias for growth and a downward bias for value stocks. This is
because the book-equity data are contaminated with measurement error that affects the ROE levels, and the
sort disproportionately selects negative-measurement-error firms to the high-price-to-book portfolio and
positive-measurement-error firms to the low-price-to-book portfolio. In the ROE formula, value stocks’
earnings are divided by an artificially high number and growth stocks’ by an artificially low number, scaling
the covariances against our finding reported in Table II Panel A.
       To show that the cash-flows of value stocks are unarguably riskier than those of growth stocks, Table
II Panel B shows cash-flow betas measured using beta definitions proposed in previous research. (We only
show the results for the five-year horizon, at which our preferred definition is most successful, to save
space.) Our general conclusion from the tests using alternative cash-flow-beta definitions is that our results
are robust to variations in the cash-flow-beta definition.
       Row one of Table II Panel B shows cash-flow betas measured as in formula (1), except using ROE in
place of log(1 + ROE ) . Not surprisingly, the spread in cash-flow betas remains strong and statistically
significant.

       Rows two to four use cash-flow-beta measures similar to those suggested by Ball and Brown (1969)

and Beaver, Kettler, and Scholes (1970). These measures normalize earnings by lagged market value instead

of book value:
                         N −1         X k ,t + j , j +1                        N −1        X M ,t + j
                  (a)    ∑ ρ j ME                                 , 0 + β k ,1 ∑ ρ
                                                            = β kCF       CF       j
                                                                                        ME M ,t + j −1
                                                                                                         + ε k ,t + N −1
                         j =0              k ,t + j −1, j                      j =0
                         N −1                                              N −1
                         ∑ ρ j X k ,t + j , j +1                           ∑ ρ j X M ,t + j
                         j =0                                               j =0
                  (b)                                 = β kCF
                                                            , 0 + β k ,1
                                                                    CF
                                                                                                + ε k ,t + N −1                     (3)
                                ME k ,t −1,0                                   ME M ,t −1
                         X k ,t + N −1, j + N − X k ,t −1,0                           X M ,t + N −1 − X M ,t −1
                  (c )                                           = β kCF
                                                                       , 0 + β k ,1
                                                                               CF
                                                                                                                  + ε k ,t + N −1
                                    ME k ,t −1, 0                                           ME M ,t −1

Definition (a) in equation (3) is similar to our discounted ROE formula, except that earnings are normalized

by market value instead of book value. Definition (b) normalizes the discounted N-year sum of earnings

with the market value at the time of portfolio formation. Definition (c) proxies for cash-flows with the N-



                                                                           9
year change in annual earnings and normalizes with the market value at the time of portfolio formation. If

the market is efficient, these measures in equation (3) have the advantage of normalizing with a

measurement-error-free value metric, market capitalization, thus avoiding the bias resulting from the use of

error-ridden book values. However, they do have the disadvantage of containing market values, and thus

may be influenced by mispricing. Empirically, rows two to four show that these measures induce a large

spread in value and growth stocks betas, and this spread is consistent with value stocks’ cash flows being

much riskier than those of growth stocks.

      Our final cash-flow beta measure is motivated by Campbell and Shiller’s (1988) dividend-growth

model. This beta measure is generated by regressing the portfolio’s discounted N-year sum of log dividend

growth rates ( ∆d ) on the market’s:
                            N −1                                       N −1
                            ∑ ρ j ∆d k ,t + j , j +1 = β kCF,0 + β kCF,1 ∑ ρ j ∆d M ,t + j + ε k ,t + N −1      (4)
                            j =0                                        j =0


To mitigate potential outlier problems (some portfolios occasionally pay zero or near-zero dividends), we

censor the log dividend growth rates to the interval [log(1 / 5), log(5)] . The beta measure in equation (4) has

the advantage of being directly related to the cash flows to investors, but the disadvantages of being

dependent on largely arbitrary dividend policies of firms. Furthermore, since gross dividends are never

negative, for low values of N this risk measure is likely to be a poor one for both extreme growth stocks

(high growth companies that currently need external financing) and extreme value stocks (distress

companies that currently cannot afford to pay dividends). Empirically, row five of Table II Panel B shows

that this risk measure induces a slightly smaller but still economically significant spread in cash-flow betas.

      Columns fourteen to sixteen of Table II Panel A measure how well the cash-flow betas defined in

equation (1) explain the prices of value and growth stocks. The dependent variable in the pricing regressions

is the average N-period discounted stock return and the independent variable the estimated cash-flow beta:
                                        1         N −1                   
                                              Eˆ  ∑ ρ j Rk ,t + j , j +1  = λ 0 + λ1 βˆ1CF
                                                                                          ,k + u k ,            (5)
                                   ∑ j =0
                                      N −1
                                          ρ j
                                                 
                                                  j = 0                  
                                                                          

where Ê denotes the sample mean and βˆ1CF
                                        , k the estimated cash-flow beta. The dependent variable of (5)

can be motivated as a price-level measure. Reorganizing (2) and taking conditional expectation yields:

                                           ∞                                 ∞
            − log ME t −1 + log BE t −1 + ∑ ρ j E t −1 log(1 + ROEt + j ) = ∑ ρ j E t −1 log(1 + Rt + j ) .   (6)
                                         j =0                             j =0




                                                                  10
The expected discounted long-horizon return equals the negative of log price (the first term) plus log book

value adjusted for the expected cash-flow growth (second term). The dependent variable of regression (5)

differs from this price-level metric due to the finite horizon and choice between log and simple returns. In

                                                              ∑ j =0 ρ j to annual-return units.
                                                                 N −1
addition, the dependent variable of (5) is normalized by                                           We use thirty

instead of ten price-to-book-sorted portfolios as test assets in columns fourteen to sixteen, because the finer

sort increases the statistical power of our tests that account for the estimation uncertainty due to the first-

stage regressions.

      The cross-sectional regression R2s of average discounted long-horizon returns on cash-flow betas

stays over 50 percent for all horizons beyond one year. At the five-year horizon, which roughly corresponds

to the frequency of the business cycle, the regression R2 is over 75 percent.

      Are these impressive R2 obtained with implausible premia? In Table II Panel A, the estimated

intercepts of the regression range from 2.7 to 10.9 percent and slopes from 4.8 to 12.2 percent. (The premia

are statistically significant for horizons ranging from three to fifteen years.) One way to judge whether the

premium on cash-flow beta is reasonable is to recognize that λ0 should equal the (nominal) risk-free rate

and λ1 the average discounted net return on the market portfolio less the risk-free rate. The predicted λ0

and λ1 are thus approximately 4 percent and 9.5 percent, which are close to unrestricted estimates of the

premia. If we restrict the premia to the values predicted by the Sharpe-Lintner CAPM (in sample means of

the risk-free rate, λ0 = 0.04 , and market premium, λ1 = 0.095 ), the R2s of the cross-sectional regressions

remain high (from 25 to 55 percent for horizons ranging from two to fifteen years).


                                 III. Evidence from a present-value model
      In this section, we use a formal present-value model to measure the relative importance of risk and
mispricing to the cross-section of price-to-book ratios from a 1928-1999 panel of U.S. firms. Our tests
demonstrate that CAPM risk explains a substantial majority of the component of the dispersion in price-to-
book ratios related to predictable variation in returns, while the share of mispricing is small and statistically
insignificant. The market risk factor is especially successful when we measure good and bad states of the
world based on the market portfolio’s cash flows. Our results suggest that mispricing relative to the CAPM
is not an important factor in determining a firm’s valuation multiple and consequently the level of a firm’s
stock price.



                                                       11
       Our test is based on a variant of the present-value formula. We specify a stochastic-discount-factor
present-value model that links firms’ current price-to-book ratios to expected future cash flows and to
covariances of future cash flows with the stochastic discount factor. If we restrict discount rates to be
constant across firms, our decomposition allocates more than 25 percent of the cross-sectional price-to-book
variance to mispricing. However, if we allow the discount rates to vary as predicted by the CAPM, the
variance share of mispricing is reduced to 20 percent in tests that use the market portfolio’s stock return as
the risk factor and to –0.1 percent in tests that use the market portfolio’s cash flows as the factor. The
present-value model is a success in pricing value and growth stocks because it detects more market risk in
value firms’ future cash flows than in growth firms’.

A.   Stochastic-discount-factor present-value framework
       Our approach is based on the stochastic-discount-factor framework that enables us to easily study the
pricing of risk and the impact of risk on the level of the stock prices. Ultimately, this framework leads to a
cross-sectional variance decomposition of price-to-book ratios. We allocate the price-to-book variance to
predictable variation in three components: (1) a risk-adjusted present value of N-period cash flows; (2) a
risk-adjusted present value of the N-period-ahead terminal value (capturing the effects beyond the N-period
horizon); and (3) a pricing-error component (as assigned by a particular economic model).
       A stochastic-discount-factor present-value model equates the stock price to the stochastically
discounted value of the asset’s payoffs. Consider buying a stock and selling it ex dividend a year from now.
The stochastic-discount-factor formula equates the purchase price with the expectation of the product of the
sale price plus dividend and the one-period discount factor:

                                                                        Q 
                                     Pk ,t −1 = E t −1 ( Pk ,t + Dk ,t ) t  ,                            (7)
                                                                        Qt −1 

where P is the stock price, D dividends, and Q the cumulative stochastic discount factor. Subscripts k and
t are indices to assets and time, respectively. We denote the one-period stochastic discount factor by

Qt Qt −1 and normalize the initial value Q0 to one. Our notation differs slightly from that in the previous

literature: Cochrane (2001, p. 8) denotes the same one-period stochastic discount factor by mt and Duffie
(1996, p.29) by π t π t −1 .
       In general, if the law of one price holds, we can find at least one random variable Qt Qt −1 such that
(7) holds in population (or in sample) if we make Qt Qt −1 a function of population (or sample) moments


                                                         12
and random asset payoffs. However, it is important to note that if we specify Qt Qt −1 based on an
economic model, (7) need not hold even in population if the chosen economic model is not true. To capture
the fact that an economic model and its implied stochastic discount factor are just models, we add a pricing-
error term to (7):

                                                         Q                             Q                    Q 
             Pk ,t −1 = E t −1 ( Pk ,t + Dk ,t + ε k ,t ) t  = E t −1 ( Pk ,t + Dk ,t ) t  + E t −1  ε k ,t t                                        (8)
                                                         Qt −1                         Qt −1                Qt −1 

In (8), ε t Qt Qt −1 denotes the realized pricing error, and E t −1 (ε t Qt Qt −1 ) the (conditional) average pricing
error, or simply pricing error. Economic models of equilibrium prices, since they imply a stochastic discount
factor Qt Qt −1 , are “false” if any E t −1 (ε t Qt Qt −1 ) is nonzero.
       To measure the price-level impact of pricing errors, we iterate (8) forward N periods and use the law
of iterated expectations to link the stock price to long-horizon sequences of stochastic discount factors and
dividends:
                                       N −1                                                                                  N −1
                                       ∑ Et −1 (Qt + j Dk ,t + j ) + Q          E t −1 (Qt + N −1 Pk ,t + N −1 ) +           ∑ Et −1 (Qt + j ε k ,t + j ).
                                1                                       1                                             1
     ME k ,t −1 = Pk ,t −1 =                                                                                                                                 (9)
                               Qt −1   j =0                              t −1                                        Qt −1   j =0


To relate the quantities in (9) to a firm, we equate P to the market value of equity ( ME ) and D to

dividends net of equity issues. The implicit assumption here is that the investor follows a strategy of holding

the entire equity-capital stock of the firm and participating in all equity issues and share repurchases.

       Suppose that the model (7) is true, and the pricing error in equation (8) is always zero. Clearly,

equation (9) is derived from (8), and therefore cannot provide any new restrictions that are not implied by

(8). However, the real advance in moving from (8) to (9) comes from better diagnosing the model’s failure

if the model is not true, i.e., pricing errors are nonzero. This is because equation (9) relates prices to long-

horizon sequences of stochastic discount factors and dividends, instead of to the one-period-ahead stochastic

discount factor and future price (which itself is potentially affected by pricing errors). Equation (9) provides

a price-level mispricing metric, (1 / Qt −1 )∑ j =0 E t −1 (Qt + j ε k ,t + j ) , a diagnostic that is perhaps more
                                                                 N −1



interpretable than the one-period pricing error of (2).

       Since we are interested in the cross-section of firms, working with a dividend-based model is

inconvenient.        Therefore, we make an innocuous substitution: We use the clean-surplus relation

BEt = BEt −1 + X t − Dt , where BE is book equity and X clean-surplus earnings, to transform the

dividend-discount model to an empirically more convenient abnormal-earnings valuation model:


                                                                            13
                                                  1          N −1                               Qt + j −1                       
                  ME k ,t −1 = BE k ,t −1 +
                                                 Qt −1
                                                             ∑ Et −1 Qt + j  X k ,t + j −                   − 1 BE k ,t + j −1  
                                                                                                                   
                                                             j =0                              Qt + j                          

                             +
                                  1
                                 Qt −1
                                                 [
                                       E t −1 Qt + N −1 ( ME k ,t + N −1 − BE k ,t + N −1 )           ]                                     (10)

                                         N −1
                                         ∑ Et −1 (Qt + j ε k ,t + j )
                                  1
                             +
                                 Qt −1    j =0


(Feltham and Ohlson (1999) and Ang and Liu (2001) derive similar risk-adjusted abnormal-earnings models

and investigate the models’ properties in more detail.) Since we do not iterate (10) to infinity and since we

define earnings such that it satisfies the clean-surplus relation by construction, the substitution of earnings

and book values is truly innocuous and does not transform our paper from a finance paper to an accounting

paper as a byproduct.

       We define the quantity in brackets in first line of equation (10) as “abnormal earnings,” A :
                                                                       Q         
                                                     Ak ,t ≡ X k ,t −  t −1 − 1 BE k ,t −1                                              (11)
                                                                        Qt       

Equation (11) defines abnormal earnings as (clean-surplus) accounting earnings less a state-dependent

charge for the amount of book equity employed in producing those earnings. Intuitively, the addition of risk

to the basic abnormal-earnings formula of Edwards and Bell (1961) and Ohlson (1995) recognizes the fact

that the cost of capital varies across states of the economy.

       Our empirical tests require stationary variables; however, stock prices are clearly nonstationary. To

achieve stationarity, price needs to be normalized by some variable that is cointegrated with price. Dividing

both sides of (11) by book equity ( BE t −1 ) yields a model for the price-to-book ratio:
                         ME k ,t −1                      N −1
                                                         ∑ Et −1 (Qt + j Ak ,t + j                    )
                                                  1
                                      =1+                                                BE k ,t −1
                         BE k ,t −1              Qt −1       j =0


                                      +
                                           1
                                          Qt −1
                                                              [
                                                E t −1 Qt + N −1 ( ME k ,t + N −1 − BE k ,t + N −1 ) BE k ,t −1                ]            (12)

                                                      N −1
                                                      ∑ Et −1 (Qt + j ε k ,t + j                  )
                                           1
                                      +                                              BE k ,t −1
                                          Qt −1       j =0


For finite N, the terms of (12) can plausibly be assumed to be stationary. In addition to the above-mentioned

desirable statistical property, the terms of the normalized equation (12) also have economically intuitive

interpretations. The first term of (12) is a unit constant, defining the base case of market equity trading at the

value of book equity. The second term discounts the firms' future abnormal earnings over the explicit


                                                                           14
forecasting period of N years, adjusting for risk: A firm’s stock deserves to trade above its book value, if the

firm’s profitability exceeds the risk-adjusted cost of capital.4 The third term is a terminal-value term, which

takes the value zero if the market value and book value are expected to fully converge within the explicit

forecasting period. If full convergence is not achieved, the terminal value captures the effect of all future

abnormal earnings and pricing errors. Finally, the fourth term captures the contribution of N-period

cumulative pricing error to a firm’s price-to-book ratio.

       Equation (12) serves as the basis of our cross-sectional variance decomposition. Following Cochrane

(1991,1992), we multiply both sides of (6) by ME k ,t −1 BE k ,t −1 − E ( ME / BE ) , where E ( ME / BE ) denotes

the average price-to-book ratio (over time and stocks), so that ME k ,t −1 BE k ,t −1 − E ( ME / BE ) is simply the

demeaned price-to-book ratio.               Taking unconditional expectations of the result yields a variance

decomposition:

                           ME k ,t −1         N −1 Q        A            ME k ,t −1 
                       var             = cov  ∑  t + j × k ,t + j ,                  
                           BE                 j =0  Qt −1 BE k ,t −1  BE k ,t −1 
                              k ,t −1 


                                                 Q          ME k ,t + N −1 − BE k ,t + N −1  ME k ,t −1 
                                          + cov  t + N −1 ×                                 ,                (13)
                                                   Q                    BE                    BE
                                                 t −1                     k ,t −1                      
                                                                                                   k ,t −1 


                                                 N −1 Qt + j    ε k ,t + j  ME k ,t −1 
                                          + cov  ∑            ×            ,            
                                                 j =0  Qt −1 BE k ,t −1  BE k ,t −1 

Price-to-book ratios can vary more if price-to-book covaries strongly with future risk-adjusted abnormal

earnings and/or pricing errors, or if the convergence of price and book value is slow.

       Dividing both sides by the variance of price-to-book ratios gives the relative variance decomposition

in terms of three predictive regression coefficients:




       4
           Because E(xy) = E(x)E(y) + cov(x,y), abnormal earnings are more valuable if they covary positively with the
stochastic discount factor (holding the expected levels constant).




                                                                  15
                                                      1 = β ′ + β ′′ + β ′′′
                                                               present value of cumulative
                                                      6N4  - period abnormal earnigns
                                                               4474448
                                                       N −1 Q              Ak ,t + j      ME k ,t −1
                         = regression coefficient of ∑ 
                                                                  t+ j
                                                                       ×                on
                                                             
                                                       j = 0  Qt −1       BE k ,t −1     BE k ,t −1
                                               644terminal44value  47   after N periods
                                                                          444448
                                                                                                                  (14)
                                               Qt + N −1 ME k ,t + N −1 − BE k ,t + N −1            ME k ,t −1
                   + regression coefficient of            ×                                  on
                                                 Qt −1                    BE k ,t −1                 BE k ,t −1
                                                                present value of cumulative
                                                            N - period pricing error
                                                      64       4474448
                                                      N −1  Q              ε k ,t + j     ME k ,t −1
                          + regression coefficient of ∑ 
                                                                 t+ j
                                                                       ×                on
                                                            
                                                      j = 0  Qt −1        BE k ,t −1     BE k ,t −1

The three regression coefficients in equation (14) can be interpreted as a percentage variance decomposition

of firms’ price-to-book ratios. The price-to-book ratio must predict at least some of the following three

components: Risk-adjusted present value of cumulative N-period abnormal earnings and/or the risk-adjusted

terminal value and/or the risk-adjusted present-value of cumulative N-period pricing errors. We account for

100 percent of the variance: Since the three components sum up to the t-1 price-to-book ratio, the regression

coefficients also sum up to one.

       To make the variance decomposition (14) operational, we also need a model of priced risk, a

stochastic discount factor. We estimate the variance decomposition with three simple candidate discount

factors. The first discount factor is simply a constant δ , which we use as the benchmark case. Because we

specify the stochastic discount factors and their parameters in real terms, but our asset data are nominal, we

also multiply our real discount factors by the ratio of price levels, π t −1 π t . The nominal “constant”

discount factor is thus a random variable δπ t −1 / π t .

       The second discount factor is a linear function of the excess return on a value-weight portfolio of all

stocks (RMRF):
                                        Qt / Qt −1 = (γ 0 + γ 1 RMRFt ) × π t −1 π t                              (15)

We dub this discount-factor model the “stock-return CAPM.” The logic behind the second discount factor is

the hope that priced risk is captured by a single factor prescribed by the Sharpe-Lintner-Black CAPM, in

which the stochastic discount factor is a linear function of the return on the portfolio of aggregate wealth (the

market portfolio). Although the CAPM is a very simple model and thus probably a naïve description of

reality, it has two important advantages over its competitors: First, it has only two parameters, increasing the



                                                                16
statistical power that is at a premium in our long-horizon regressions (14). Second, because the CAPM was

proposed before the relation between price-to-book ratios and average returns was discovered in the

academic literature, the CAPM is largely immune to the problem termed “model-mining” bias by Fama

(1991).

      Our third discount factor model is also motivated by the CAPM, but gets closer to the spirit of robust

measurement of risks if stock-return covariances are potential contaminated with mispricing. Our third risk

factor is a linear function of the market portfolio’s log ROE:
                                      Qt / Qt −1 = [ g 0 + g1 log(1 + ROE Mreal,t )] × π t −1 π t ,                           (16)

where ROE Mreal,t is the aggregate real clean-surplus earnings of all stocks divided by the aggregate beginning-

of-the-period real book equity. If g1 is negative as most asset-pricing theories would predict, the discount

factor penalizes stocks whose profitability covaries with market-wide profitability. We dub this discount

factor the “cash-flow CAPM.”

B.   Estimation strategy and empirical results
      Our estimation procedure has two integrated steps. The regressions (14) assume that the stochastic-

discount-factor realizations are known and can be used to construct the dependent variables of the

regressions. Thus, the first necessary step is to pick the parameter values for the stochastic discount factor to

be used in computation of the stochastic-discount-factor realizations. The second step estimates the relative

variance decomposition (14) by running the three regressions. We implement both stages simultaneously

using Hansen’s (1982) generalized method of moments (GMM) so that the standard errors of the second-step

regressions take into account the estimation uncertainty due to the first stage.

          The stochastic-discount-factor parameters contained in vector b ( δ in the case of the constant

discount rate model and γ 0 , γ 1 , g 0 , and g1 in the case of the CAPM) are estimated by matching the

following set of moments:
                                 Q(b) t        
           0 = E  (1 + Rrf ,t )           − 1
                                 Q(b) t −1     
                               Q (b) t 
           0 = E  RMRFt                                                                                                    (17)
                              Q(b) t −1 
                 ME k ,t −1      N −1 Q (b)
                                               t + j A(b) k ,t + j    Q (b) t + N −1 ME k ,t + N −1 − BE k ,t + N −1 
           0 = E             −1− ∑                                 −              ×                                , ∀k
                                                                    
                 BE k ,t −1     j = 0  Q (b) t −1 BE k ,t −1        Q (b) t −1               BE k ,t −1           



                                                                      17
We omit the first moment condition when estimating the constant-discount-factor model, because it would

be unrealistic to ask the same constant discount factor to fit the average returns on stocks and Treasury bills.

The first and second moment conditions help in picking the stochastic-discount-factor parameters by asking

the model to price the one-period (nominally) risk-free return and one-period excess return on the market

portfolio, respectively. The remaining moment conditions in (17) are restrictions on average price-to-book

ratios relative to the present value of subsequent abnormal earnings and terminal values of the test assets,

derived from (12) by assuming that the stochastic-discount-factor model is true and the average pricing

errors are zero.

       We use two stages in our GMM procedure. In the first stage, we use an identity matrix as the

weighting matrix. This weighting matrix is likely to produce sensible but imprecise first-stage parameter

estimates. We then collect the moment errors u t and compute a Newey-West (1987) estimate of the long-

run moment-error covariance matrix, Ŝ NW . We set the number of lags and leads in the Newey-West

formula to the length of the explicit forecast horizon, N . In the second stage, we use
                                                                                      −1
                                        Sˆ NW 1,1      0        L         0      
                                                                                 
                                        0           Sˆ NW 1,1           0        
                                  W2 ≡                                                                   (18)
                                             M                   O       M
                                                                                 
                                        0             0        L Sˆ NW max,max 

as the GMM weighting matrix, where max is the number of moment conditions in the system. Our

weighting matrix W2 recognizes the heteroskedasticity of the moment errors and places more weight on

low-variance moments, but does not adjust the weighting to accommodate the (often spurious) correlation

structure of the moment errors.

       Although using Sˆ NW
                         −1
                            as the second-stage weighting matrix leads to an asymptotically efficient

estimator (given the chosen moments), the finite-sample performance of this weighting matrix is often poor.

Since our moment-error matrix has a low time dimension, a high cross-sectional dimension, and significant

autocorrelation, using the asymptotically optimal weighting matrix Sˆ NW
                                                                      −1
                                                                         would be a recipe for disaster,

especially for long forecast horizons. The peril in using Sˆ NW
                                                             −1
                                                                in small samples stems from the matrix

inverse being a highly nonlinear function of the estimated correlations. Small estimation errors in the off-

diagonal elements of Ŝ NW may unexpectedly result in enormous errors in Sˆ NW
                                                                            −1
                                                                               . For a detailed discussion

on the selection of a robust weighting matrix in asset-pricing applications, see Cochrane (2001, p.210-219).



                                                            18
Because we use W2 instead of Sˆ NW
                                −1
                                   as the weighting matrix, we compute the sampling covariance matrix of

the estimated parameters using the formulas modified by Cochrane (2001, p. 212) for the case of a

prespecified weighting matrix.

       Each year we create ten value-weight portfolios of stocks by sorting on price-to-book and track the

subsequent dividends, book values, and market values of these portfolios for fifteen years subsequent to the

portfolio formation (or until the end of the sample, whichever comes first.) All data for these portfolios are

annual and in nominal terms. We use this 10-by-15-by-60 data panel as our sample. Our factor data, RMRF,

are the same as used by Davis, Fama, and French (2000).

       We compute the clean-surplus earnings on the stocks in these portfolios using a formula

X t = BE t − BE t −1 + Dtnet , where D net is net dividends, i.e., gross dividends D gross (from CRSP) less equity
offerings plus share repurchase. We use an implied figure for year t equity offerings less share repurchases:
                                         MEt = (1 + Rt ) MEt −1 + Dtgross                                    (19)

The adjustment is not essential, however: Using gross instead of net dividends in the clean-surplus formula

will yield very similar results.

       Table III shows the parameter estimates for the constant-discount-rate model and the two versions of

the CAPM. As listed in column one, each row in Table III corresponds to a specific horizon N of equation

(17); for example, row three picks the parameters to match the average price-to-book ratio with the value of

three-year cumulative abnormal earnings plus the terminal value after the three-year horizon.

       The second column of Table III shows the parameter estimates of the constant-discount-rate model.

The estimated real constant discount rate, δˆ , lies between 0.91 and 0.93, depending on the estimation

horizon. The third and fourth columns of Table III report the parameter estimates of the stock-return CAPM

stochastic discount factor. The intercept, γˆ0 , ranges from 1.02 to 1.08 and the slope, γˆ1 , from -0.90 to -

1.42, depending on the horizon. The negative coefficient on RMRF is consistent with the theory: An asset is

risky if it covaries negatively with the stochastic discount factor.

       The fifth and sixth columns show the implications of the estimated stock-return CAPM parameters for

the risk-free rate and the market premium, which may be more interesting than the parameter estimates per

se. To evaluate whether particular parameter values of the CAPM-based stochastic discount factor are

reasonable, we solve for the implied average risk-free rate and market premium. The average one-period

risk-free (in real terms) bond price is simply the expectation of the real stochastic discount factor,


                                                        19
γ 0 + γ 1 E ( RMRF ) . The real risk-free rate that corresponds to this average price, 1 /[γ 0 + γ 1 E ( RMRF )] − 1 ,
can be compared to historical bond-market data to judge its plausibility. Given the second moment of the

excess market return, our parameters also imply the average market premium:
                                      0 = E [RMRF × (γ 0 + γ 1 RMRF )] ⇒
                                                          E ( RMRF 2 )                                           (20)
                                      E ( RMRF ) = −γ 1
                                                               γ0

We add two moment conditions to the system that measure the average excess return and average squared

excess return on the market portfolio:
                                              0 = E ( RMRF − µ1 )
                                                                                                                 (21)
                                              0 = E ( RMRF 2 − µ 2 )

Adding these moment conditions allows us to compute the point estimates and standard errors of the average

risk-free rate and market premium implied by the stock-return CAPM stochastic discount factor.

      The estimated average real risk-free one-period bond prices range from 0.94 to 0.95; these bond prices

correspond to (net) real risk-free rates from 6 to 5 percent. Although these estimates are higher than the

realized real returns on one-year T-bills over our sample period, Siegel (1999) argues that values within this

range may be reasonable estimates of the ex-ante expected real risk-free rate.                The market-premium

estimates are also reasonable, ranging from 7 to 10 percent. Although these estimates are high compared to

the predictions of most economic models as well as compared to the dividend-yield-based estimates of Fama

and French (2002), they are close to the sample means.

      The cash-flow CAPM’s estimated parameters are shown in columns seven and eight of Table III.

Consistent with the theory, the slopes on the market’s ROE are negative and statistically significant.

      Our tests assume that the market premium does not covary systematically with betas, ruling out the

conditional CAPM. Instead of testing a conditional CAPM specification, we measure the price-level impact

of the static CAPM’s pricing errors. The approach of this paper is thus distinct from those of Jagannathan

and Wang (1996), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), and Santos and Veronesi (2001) who argue that conditional

versions of the CAPM help explain the cross-section of one-period expected returns (instead of prices or

price-to-book ratios). Our results, of course, do not contradict those of the above authors.

      The cross-sectional variance decomposition (14) is simultaneously estimated from another set of

independent moment conditions. Since these additional regression moment conditions are exactly identified



                                                          20
as a separate group, adding them to the system does not alter the point estimates of stochastic-discount-factor

parameters identified from the other moment conditions.

      We mold (14) to our exact regression specification as follows. First, we include time dummies in the

pooled regressions, effectively running the regressions with cross-sectionally demeaned data. This allows us

to focus on the cross-sectional variation in firms’ price-to-book ratios.                                      Second, we deflate both the

dependent and explanatory variables with the particular portfolio’s average price-to-book ratio.                                      This

weighting practice can be seen as a simplified version of generalized least squares (GLS). The regression

residuals of (14) are much more variable for high-price-to-book portfolios than for low-price-to-book

portfolios in our data, which is a natural consequence of high-price-to-book portfolios’ data being divided by

very low book-equity numbers. By placing less emphasis on data points with more variable errors, our

weighting scheme acts much like GLS.

       We set up the weighted least squares (WLS) regressions as:
                                          ˆ
                                    N −1 Q            ˆ        
                               1        t + j × Ak ,t + j  = β ′ × 1 ME k ,t −1 + ∆ ′ × 1 DT + e ′
                               wk
                                  ∑  Qˆ             BE k ,t −1 
                                                                      WLS
                                                                           wk BE k ,t −1
                                                                                             WLS
                                                                                                  wk
                                                                                                       t    t
                                  j =0
                                        t −1                   
               1 Qˆ t + N −1     ME k ,t + N −1 − BE k ,t + N −1           1 ME k ,t −1           1
                  ×            ×                                      ′′ ×
                                                                  = β WLS                    ′′ ×
                                                                                         + ∆ WLS     DTt + et′′                       (22)
               wk   Qˆ t −1                 BE k ,t −1                     wk BE k ,t −1          wk

                               1          ˆ
                                    N −1 Q               εˆ k ,t + j                     1 ME k ,t −1            1
                                    ∑  Qˆ
                                               t+ j
                                                      ×                        ′′′ ×
                                                                           = β WLS                            ′′′ ×
                                                                                                          + ∆ WLS      DTt + et′′′
                               wk                         BE k ,t −1                       wk BE k ,t −1           wk
                                    j =0
                                              t −1                  

        ′
where β WLS                                                             ′′ is the variance share of the
            is the variance share of risk-adjusted abnormal earnings, β WLS
                  ′′′ is the variance share of pricing error, and β WLS
terminal value, β WLS                                               ′ + β WLS
                                                                          ′′ + β WLS
                                                                                 ′′′ = 1 . As noted before,

the weights,
                                                                           1   T      ME k , j
                                                               wk ≡
                                                                           T
                                                                               ∑ BE              ,                                    (23)
                                                                               j =1       k, j


are the time-series averages of each portfolios price-to-book ratios.                                     DT is a matrix of time dummies
                                           ′ , ∆ WLS
(subsuming the regression constant), and ∆ WLS   ′′ , and ∆ WLS
                                                            ′′′ are dummy coefficients which we

subsequently ignore. The stochastic-discount-factor realizations in the above formulas are computed using

the parameter estimates of Table III.

      Table IV shows the results from the WLS regressions with time dummies (equation (22)). As in

Table III, each row of Table IV corresponds to the horizon indicated in the first column. Columns 2-4 of the



                                                                               21
table show the price-to-book variance decomposition for the constant-discount-factor model. Moving down

column two of the tables, the variance share of cash flows increases from 6.6 percent at the one-year horizon

to 37.7 percent at the fifteen-year horizon. The mispricing component of the constant-discount-factor model

also grows as the regressions’ horizon lengthens. Moving down column four of Table IV, the variance share

of mispricing increases from 3.2 at the one-year horizon to 26.9 percent at the fifteen-year horizon.

Summarizing the results, the constant-discount-rate model allocates about 40 percent of the cross-sectional

price-to-book variance to variation in present value of future fifteen-year cash flows, about 35 percent to

variation in fifteen-year terminal values, and about 25 percent to mispricing.

      Columns 5-7 of Table IV show the price-to-book variance decomposition for the stock-return CAPM.

Column 5 shows that the variance share of cash flows increases from 6.7 percent at the one-year horizon to

42.3 at the fifteen-year horizon. The variance shares for the cash-flow CAPM are in columns 8-10. The

variance share of cash flows in column eight increases from 5.0 percent at the one-year horizon to 52.0

percent at the fifteen-year horizon.

      Remarkably, the variance share of the risk-adjusted present value of cash flows is much higher for

both the stock-return and cash-flow CAPM specifications than for the constant-discount-rate model. In

words, the CAPM values the long-run cash flows of growth stocks at a higher multiple than value stocks’,

because value stocks’ long-run ability to generate cash flows covaries more strongly with the stock return

and ROE on the market portfolio than growth stocks’.

      The mispricing share of stock-return CAPM is shown in column 7 of Table IV. Consistent with the

previous research by Fama and French (1992, 1993, and 1996) and Davis, Fama, and French (2000), at the

one-year horizon the stock-return CAPM cannot price portfolios sorted on price-to-book ratios. At the

fifteen-year horizon, however, the stock-return CAPM allocates 20.1 percent of the variance to mispricing,

which is less than for the constant discount rate model.

      The punch line (or column) of our paper is column ten of Table IV. The cash-flow CAPM is our most

successful specification. At the fifteen-year horizon, the cash-flow CAPM allocates only -0.1 percent of the

price-to-book variance to mispricing. We interpret this variance share as economically and statistically

insignificant. Remarkably, introducing the market portfolio’s cash flow as a risk factor will move the

component considered mispricing by the constant-discount-rate model to the risk-adjusted present value of

cash flows, not to terminal value. We find it comforting that our results identify systematic risk in the cash


                                                      22
flows of value stocks rather than in the fifteen-year terminal value as the former are unambiguously

interpretable as covariance due to cash flows, not mispricing.5

       Our results that cash-flow betas explain price levels is related results by Bansal, Dittmar, and

Lundblad (2002). In contemporaneous research, Bansal et al. measure risks from dividend growth rates and

find that a version of the consumption-based asset pricing model performs well in explaining average returns

to a number of dynamic trading strategies. While their paper and ours share the idea of measuring risks from

cash flows, our paper focuses on buy-and-hold strategies with constant portfolio definitions and our results

are thus easier to relate to the level of the stock price.

        Figure 1 graphs the variance shares from Table IV’s stock-return CAPM specification as a function

of the horizon. The lightly colored area in the bottom represents the variance share of risk-adjusted cash

flows, the white area in the middle the share of terminal value, and the dark area in the top the share of

pricing error; all relative to the stock-return CAPM. For comparison purposes, the variance shares from the

constant-discount-rate model are plotted with bold dashed lines. After the first year, the variance share of

stock-return CAPM mispricing is always less than that of the constant-discount-rate model. Consistent with

the above-cited results in the previous literature, there is a visible pricing-error component at the one-year

horizon. This is what one would expect knowing that immediately after the sort value stocks’ returns

actually have lower CAPM betas than growth stocks’ returns. However, increasing the horizon beyond one

year does not increase the variance share of mispricing as much as for the constant-discount-rate model.

       Figure 2 plots a similar variance-share graph for the cash-flow CAPM. For most horizons, the pricing

error is negatively related to the price-to-book ratios, that is, value stocks appear slightly overpriced relative

to growth stocks.        At the fifteen-year horizon, the mispricing share ends at almost exactly zero.

Approximately fifteen percentage points of the improvement over the constant-discount-rate model at the




       5
           Our cross-sectional result that the CAPM works well for the level of prices may be related to Daniel and
Marshall’s (1997). They document that the consumption-based habit model of Constantinides (1990) is able to match
the mean and the variance of the observed equity premium, capture time variation in the equity premium, and can better
match the observed risk-free rate when using long-horizon return and consumption data.




                                                             23
fifteen-year horizon comes from the cash-flow component. Although value stocks continue to earn higher

returns than growth stocks for the entire fifteen-year horizon, the cash-flow CAPM justifies these expected

returns first by the riskiness of the terminal value in the shorter-horizon regressions and later by the riskiness

of cash flows in the longer-horizon regressions.

       Our variance-decomposition results suggest that the CAPM provides a high-R2 explanation of the

levels of stock prices for value and growth stocks. Although the abnormal returns on a strategy of sorting

stocks into price-to-book deciles, buying value stocks and shorting growth stocks, and turning the portfolio

over every year cannot be explained by the stock-return CAPM, the cash-flow version of the model gets the

levels of stock prices almost exactly “right.”


                                    IV. Evidence from portfolio returns
       In this section, we present more traditional evidence from portfolio returns and confirm our results

using simple portfolio trading rules, monthly returns, and bootstrapped confidence levels. The portfolio-

return evidence complements the above cash-flow-based results for the following reasons. First, the cash

flows are measured annually, while our portfolio-return tests use monthly stock returns. Second, statistical

inference in the previous tests relies on asymptotic Newey-West (1987) standard errors, while our return

tests use more reliable bootstrap methods. Third, the portfolio-return tests allow us to establish a direct link

to the previous literature on the performance of value-minus-growth strategies.

       We first sort stocks into price-to-book deciles. Every year, we run fifteen different sorts: Deciles

sorted on year-t-1 price-to-book ratios, deciles sorted on year-t-2 price-to-book ratios,…, and deciles sorted

on year-t-15 price-to-book ratios. As a result, we have 715 months of returns on 150 portfolios for the

period 6/1941-12/2000 (the maximum period for which our data made it possible to compute returns for the

portfolios formed by sorting on the year-t-15 price-to-book ratios).

       We compute our measure of risk by regressing the monthly returns on the resulting 150 portfolios

(fifteen different horizons by ten price-to-book categories) on the contemporaneous and lagged market

returns.   We then sum up the regression coefficients into what we call “total beta,” in contrast to

“contemporaneous beta,” i.e., beta estimated without the lagged market returns in the regression. The logic

underlying the inclusion of lagged returns is the following. We argue that the betas measured based on only

contemporaneous monthly returns may be misleading for a number of reasons. If some price-to-book deciles



                                                       24
systematically contain illiquid securities, the measured monthly returns may be asynchronous, and some

portfolios’ returns disproportionately so.         In addition, relatively short-horizon effects such as tax-loss

harvesting by individual investors, window dressing by institutional investors, and/or delayed reaction to

information for stocks that are not extensively covered by analysts may garble the relevant long-run relations

in contemporaneous monthly returns. The impact of asynchronous price reaction on beta estimates has been

studied by Scholes and Williams (1977) and Dimson (1979) who propose simple techniques to measure

market betas by utilizing summed betas from regressions of returns on both contemporaneous and lagged

market returns. We follow their suggestion when measuring betas, and include up to eleven lags in our

regressions.6

       Figure 3 shows the evolution of the CAPM beta of a value-minus-growth portfolio as a function of

years from the sort. The dependent variables in the regressions are an equal-weight portfolio of the three

value-weight lowest-price-to-book deciles (marked with a solid line and triangles) and an equal-weight

portfolio of the three value-weight highest-price-to-book deciles (marked with just a solid line). The upper-

left plot is produced with no lagged market returns in the regressions, the upper-right with one lag, the

lower-left with five lags, and the lower-right with eleven lags.

       Figure 3 clearly illustrates how the long-horizon risks of value and growth stocks are very different

from the risks at short horizons. Focusing on the contemporaneous betas in the upper-left plot, growth

stocks have much higher contemporaneous betas than value stocks immediately after the sort. However, as

time passes from the sort, the risk of value stocks increases while the risk of growth stocks decreases.

Between the years five and ten, contemporaneous betas cross and value stocks reach their permanently high

and growth stocks their permanently low contemporaneous betas. The time pattern in total betas is very

similar, but the total betas of growth stocks are much lower than their contemporaneous betas at all horizons,

and the crossing takes place much earlier. Across specifications, value stocks have statistically significantly



       6
           Kothari, Shanken, and Sloan (1995) as well as Handa, Kothari, and Wasley (1993) show that the CAPM
performs better when betas are measured using annual instead of monthly returns. Their focus is in explaining short-
horizon expected returns, differentiating our tests from theirs.




                                                             25
higher betas than growth stocks fifteen years after the sort: t-statistics of the difference in total betas are 4.9,

5.0, 4.6, and 2.8 for regressions with zero, one, five and eleven lags, respectively. Thus, we conclude that

the long-run permanent level of CAPM beta is significantly higher for value stocks than for growth stocks, a

difference as large as 0.2 for these portfolios (and larger for the extreme deciles one and ten).

       To verify that the surprising crossing pattern in Figure 3 is not an artifact of the time trend in value

and growth stocks’ betas, in Table V we estimate a parametric specification for the betas:
                                L                   L
           Ri ,t − Rrf ,t = α i + ∑ β 0,l × RMRFt −l + ∑ β1,l × TRENDt × RMRFt −l
                               l =0                l =0
                         L                                 L
                                                                                                               (24)
                      + ∑ β 2,l × YEARSi × RMRFt −l + ∑ β 3,l × YEARSi × TRENDt × RMRFt −l + ε i ,t
                        l =0                              l =0



Above, TREND is a linear time trend in centuries (month index divided by 1200), normalized to zero in the

middle of the sample. YEARS is the number of years from the sort divided by one hundred; or more

informatively the number of lags we used in firms’ price-to-book ratios when sorting the portfolios into

deciles, divided by one hundred. Table V reports the sums of coefficients (i.e., total betas) for the value,

growth and difference portfolios as a function of L (the number of monthly lags). The results suggest that

even after controlling for the time trend, growth stocks’ betas decline and value stocks’ betas increase after

the sort. Based on the coefficient of the interaction term, these patterns appear to be especially strong in the

later years of the sample.

       The above results show that value stocks do have higher long-run betas than growth stocks. The task

remains to show that the magnitude of this difference in long-run betas is large enough to justify the

magnitude of the long-run stock returns, which we take up below.

       We examine N-year holding-period strategies based on return series computed from the 150 portfolios

used in the beta tests. We define the N-year decile M as a portfolio strategy that invests equally in N

portfolios: Decile M sorted on year-t-1 price-to-book ratios, decile M sorted on year-t-2 price-to-book

ratios,…, and decile M sorted on year-t-N price-to-book ratios. For example, a two-year holding-period

strategy for the highest price-to-book portfolio (two-year decile ten) invests half in stocks that are the highest

price-to-book stocks in the beginning of the return period and half in stocks that were the highest price-to-

book stocks a year ago. We extend these “holding periods” out to fifteen years. As a consequence, the

fifteen-year decile portfolios approximate a buy-and-hold investor’s experience and allow us to examine




                                                          26
long-horizon effects at a higher frequency and with more reliable statistical tools than in the price-level

variance-decomposition tests.

       For all of the statistics we report in Table VI, we also report standard errors (reported inside

parentheses) as well as p-values (estimated using a bootstrap technique and reported inside braces). The

bootstrap procedure proceeds as follows. First, we repeat the regression of the 150 portfolios on the market

return and eleven lags setting the coefficient on the constant to zero. We preserve the 12-by-1 beta vector

and the 715-by-150 error matrix. We demean the error matrix using the time-series mean of each column of

errors, since under the null the mean error from the regression is zero. We then begin 10,000 bootstrap

iterations. At each iteration we produce a random design matrix by sampling 715 rows from the original

715-by-12 design matrix of market returns. We separately randomly sample 715 rows from the demeaned

error matrix. All sampling is done with replacement. We produce a new dependent-variable matrix using

the newly selected design and error matrices in conjunction with the beta estimate (Y = X×beta + errors).

Finally, we regress the new dependent-variable matrix on the new design matrix to get a draw of the

intercept vector and corresponding GRS statistic (Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989)) and other statistics

under the null. Then, we compute the percentiles of our point estimates in our sample of 10,000 bootstrap

iterations.

       The second column of Table VI reports the GRS statistic of CAPM tests of the ten portfolios at

different horizons, along with the asymptotic and bootstrap probability values. For the sake of brevity, we

only report results for one, two, three, five, ten, and 15-year deciles. The first row reports the well-known

result that the CAPM cannot price returns over the next year on portfolios formed by sorting on the most

recent price-to-book ratio. The GRS statistic is 1.9182, which rejects the null hypothesis that the one-year

deciles’ intercepts are jointly zero at about five-percent level of significance. This pattern holds true and

strengthens over holding periods up to five years. However, for ten-year and fifteen-year holding period

returns (ten-year and fifteen-year deciles), we are unable to reject the hypothesis that the CAPM can price

the returns on the price-to-book deciles. Moreover, the CAPM alphas are no longer positively correlated

with the price-to-book ratios.

       The significance of the holding period for alphas is further illustrated in Figure 4. The top panel of

Figure 4 shows the evolution of mean excess returns. The price-to-book pattern in mean returns is strong




                                                     27
even at the fifteen-year holding period. In the alphas displayed in the bottom panel, however, the pattern has

disappeared almost completely.

       A simple back-of-the-envelope calculation demonstrates the economic importance of CAPM risk

adjustment. Concentrating on deciles one and ten at the fifteen year horizon (not reported in Table VI) , the

price level impact of the difference in expected returns is approximately 44 percent (ignoring compounding

and using the formula 12×15×(0.99%-0.75%).) Not adjusting for risk (or assuming that the risk is equal)

would lead to a conclusion that the highest-price-to-book decile is overpriced by almost by a factor of two

relative to the lowest-price-to-book decile. However, adjusting returns with their total CAPM betas leads to

a very different conclusion: The price level impact of the difference in alphas is a statistically insignificant

14 percent (12×15×(0.0820%-0.0018%)).) The economic significance of the difference between 14 and 44

percent mispricing is enormous.

       The next two columns analyze similar value-minus-growth long-short portfolios in more detail. We

report the mean return and alpha of a strategy that goes long the top three value-weight portfolios (low price-

to-book) and shorts the bottom three value-weights portfolios (high price-to-book) with equal weights. Thus

at the one-year horizon, the strategy is quite similar to Fama and French’s (1993) HML, except that there is

no size stratification. As Fama and French show, in the year following portfolio formation, all of the average

return can be attributed to mispricing vis-à-vis the CAPM. This fact is true even for the strategy that buys

value and sells growth and holds the positions for three years. For the three-year holding portfolio, the mean

and CAPM alpha are both 0.0037, measured in fractions per month. In a statistical test not reported in the

table, we cannot reject the null that the ratio of alpha to mean is 1.0 at the five-percent level of significance.

       However, as the holding period grows beyond three years, the CAPM explains more and more of the

average return differential. At the ten-year horizon, the long-short portfolio generates an average return of

0.0025. Approximately one-third of this return is justified by the CAPM, as the alpha is only 17 basis points

per month. For the fifteen-year holding period strategy, the alpha is only eight basis points, though the mean

return is still an economically important 18 basis points and marginally statistically significantly different

from zero. We argue that the risk of the fifteen-year holding period strategy approximates the risk relevant

for price levels. In a statistical test not reported, we are unable to reject the hypothesis that the ratio of alpha

to mean is zero at the five-percent level of significance. This result confirms the findings of the previous

sections.


                                                        28
      Recall that, for a given horizon, we have ten price-to-book-sorted portfolio returns each month. The

remaining columns in Table VI report results from a regression of the average return on the ten portfolios on

the total beta of these portfolios. Column five reports the intercept ( λ0 ) from this regression; column six

reports the coefficient on total beta ( λ1 ), and column seven has the (unadjusted) R2.

      As in Fama and MacBeth (1973), under the null that the CAPM is true, the intercept from a regression

of mean excess returns on betas is an estimate of the excess return on the riskless (zero-beta) portfolio. The

regression slope is an estimate of the market premium (premium for an additional unit of beta). Column five

shows that the results for short holding periods are inconsistent with the Sharpe-Lintner CAPM. The zero-

beta premium estimated is negative; for the two- and three-year holding-period portfolios we can reject the

hypothesis that the CAPM is true and the zero-beta premium is zero. For the fifteen-year holding period, in

contrast, the point estimate is about zero, consistent with the Sharpe-Lintner CAPM.

      Column six shows estimates of the market premium. For short holding periods, the slope has a wrong

sign and/or small magnitude. For intermediate holding periods (3-10 years) the estimated λ1 is far higher

than the historical market premium, often over 20 percent per annum. The hypothesis that the estimate

equals the market premium is strongly rejected for holding periods from three to ten years (p-value in

column six). This is because the value portfolios substantially outperform the growth portfolios, but there is

only small difference in the portfolio betas, so a large beta premium is necessary to explain differences in

average returns. The fifteen-year horizon portfolios, on the other hand, imply a market premium estimate of

79 basis points, quite similar to the historical market premium. We are unable to reject the null that the

alphas are zero and therefore the hypothesis that the beta premium is equal to the historical average excess

return on the market.

      Column seven of Table VI shows the R2 from the regression of means on betas. For short holding

periods, betas explain virtually none of the difference in mean excess returns. For the longest-horizon

portfolio, however, the R2 is 70.31 percent; we manifestly fail to reject the null that the R2 is equal to 100

percent, with a bootstrap p-value of 0.4474.


                                          V.   Risk-sorted portfolios
      We also sort firms into portfolios on firm size and stock-return beta. The firm-size sort is analogous

to the market-to-book sort, except the sort variable is the market value of equity. When we sort on the



                                                       29
estimated stock-return beta, we first construct the sort variable by running firm-by-firm OLS regressions of

firms’ monthly stock return on the CRSP value-weight index return. We use up to five years of data and

require at least 36 valid monthly observations for each firm.

       The logic behind including beta-sorted and size-sorted portfolios as test assets is the following. The

evidence presented in the main body of the paper shows that there is a monotonically decreasing relationship

between price-to-book ratios and cash-flow betas and long-run stock-return betas. Previous research shows

that the relationship between price-to-book ratios and average returns is also monotonically decreasing.

Thus, given this evidence, it is not surprising that the cash-flow betas explain average returns well.

       To subject the model to a tougher test, we adapt the idea of Daniel and Titman (1996) and include

beta-sorted and size-sorted portfolios in the test-asset sets. Portfolios sorted on stock-return beta and firm

size show variation in cash-flow betas which is independent from their price-to-book ratios. If the risk

loading (instead of the book-to-market characteristic) determines the average return, the inclusion of these

risk-sorted portfolios should not significantly decrease the premium on cash-flow beta.

       While there exists an extensive literature on estimating and forecasting firms’ stock-return betas, the

prediction of cash-flow betas is mostly an uncharted territory. Sorts on firms’ or industries’ past five-year

cash-flow betas do not induce any pattern in post-formation cash-flow betas. When we sort stocks on size,

the difference between the top three and bottom three deciles’ cash-flow betas is statistically significant at

the five-percent level for horizons from two to fifteen years. When we sort stocks on estimated stock-return

betas, the difference between the top three and bottom three deciles’ cash-flow betas is marginally

statistically significant for the one-year horizon (t-statistic 1.85) but insignificant for horizons from two to

fifteen years.

       Of course, because the second-stage regression uses estimated betas, it is subject to the errors-in-

variables bias. The magnitude of the errors-in-variables bias depends on both the variance of the beta-

estimation error and the cross-sectional variance of true betas across portfolios. The lower the estimation-

error variance and higher the cross-sectional variance of true betas (i.e., higher the signal-to-noise ratio), the

lower the downward bias in the slope coefficient and R2 of the second-stage regression. Because the price-to-

book-sorted portfolios exhibit more spread in estimated cash-flow betas than the risk-sorted portfolios, it is

reasonable to conjecture that including the risk-sorted portfolios as test assets will lower the cross-sectional

variance of the true betas and thus lower the signal-to-noise ratio. Therefore, even if the pricing model has a


                                                       30
true R2 of 100 percent when explaining population means, we would expect the estimated second-stage slope

and R2 to decline slightly as we add the risk-sorted portfolios to the set of test assets.

          Table VII measures whether the cash-flow betas can simultaneously explain the prices of value and

growth stocks and portfolios sorted on risk proxies. The dependent variable in the pricing regressions is the

average N-period discounted stock return and the independent variable the estimated cash-flow beta, as in

Table II. We use two test-asset sets: First, thirty price-to-book-sorted portfolios and thirty portfolios sorted

on OLS-stock-return betas and, second, thirty price-to-book-sorted and thirty size-sorted portfolios.

Columns two to seven of Table VII show premia and R2 estimated from these alternative asset sets. Adding

the stock-return-beta-sorted portfolios to the test assets lowers the beta premium estimate, but only slightly.

For example, at the five-year horizon, price-to-book-sorted portfolios indicate a beta premium of 8.6 percent

(Table II), and adding beta-sorted portfolios lowers the estimate to 6.9 percent (Table VII).7 Replacing the

beta-sorted portfolios with size-sorted portfolios yields a closer beta-premium estimate of 7.5 percent.

Additionally, the high R2s in Table II are robust to addition of risk-sorted portfolios: R2s of the cross-

sectional regressions remain high (from 23 to 63 percent for horizons from two to fifteen years). Taking into

account the increased attenuation bias due to lower signal-to-noise ratio, we thus conclude that our finding

that cash-flow betas explain the level of stock prices well is robust to including risk-sorted portfolios as test

assets.

          We also checked the robustness of the variance-decomposition results to the inclusion of risk-sorted

portfolios as test assets. Table VIII shows the variance decompositions estimated from two asset sets: Ten

portfolios sorted on stock-return betas and ten portfolios sorted on price-to-book ratios (Panel A) and ten

portfolios sorted on size and ten portfolios sorted on price-to-book ratios (Panel B). Consistent with the

results obtained from price-to-book-sorted portfolios alone, the pricing-error component is largest for the




          7
              When estimating the cash-flow betas of beta-sorted and ME/BE-sorted portfolios, we use the maximum
number of data points available for each portfolio return series (1933-1999 for beta-sorted and 1928-1999 for price-to-
book sorted portoflios). When computing the moment-error covariance matrix used in the GMM standard-error
formulas, we only use the period for which the return data are available for all portfolios.




                                                            31
constant-discount-rate model and smallest for the cash-flow CAPM. Furthermore, the cash-flow CAPM’s

pricing-error variance fraction is statistically insignificantly different from zero.

         Finally, we also repeated the tests on monthly stock returns with the alternative test-asset sets and

report the results in Table IX. As evident from the table, these tests essentially break the stock-return-based

model. Adding beta-sorted portfolios has a particularly devastating effect on the beta premium and cross-

sectional R2 in the first four columns of Table IX: The fifteen-year-horizon beta premium (0.79 percent per

month) obtained in Table VI drops to one sixth its previous value in column four of Table IX (0.12 percent

month). To summarize our results, by including risk-sorted portfolios in the analysis we are unable to break

models that link cash-flow betas to price levels but are “successful” in breaking models that use stock-return

betas.


                                                 VI. Conclusions
         The goal of this paper is to evaluate the relative importance of risk and mispricing to the cross-

sectional variation in firms’ stock prices. Our approach differs from the previous cross-sectional research in

two important ways.

         First, unlike most previous cross-sectional studies, we follow Summers (1986) and concentrate on the

level of the price instead of trading profits. We argue that focusing on the level of the price has important

advantages. A common definition of market efficiency states that stock prices reflect information to the

point that the marginal benefits of acquiring information and trading on it do not exceed the marginal costs

(Jensen (1978)). One problem in testing market efficiency is that what constitutes a reasonable level of

information and transaction costs is ambiguous. The interpretation of before-cost trading profits on high-

turnover investment strategies can crucially depend on the assumed level of costs. On the contrary, the

price-level criterion advocated by us is largely immune to this concern. Evaluating market efficiency at the

price level is analogous to evaluating trading profits on a simple strategy of buying or short-selling a stock

once and holding the position forever. Thus, the price-level criterion is clearly less sensitive to assumptions

about reasonable trading and information costs.

         Similarly, the price-level criterion is interesting to an investor who, for some reason, is constrained to

a long holding period. For example, the level of price is the appropriate measure for a host of economically




                                                         32
important decisions including firms’ real investment decisions as well as merger and acquisition activity –

endeavors essentially requiring buy-and-hold behavior.

      Second, following Brainard, Shapiro, and Shoven (1991) we measure risk by covariances of cash-

flow fundamentals instead of covariances of stock returns. If the objective is to test the joint hypothesis of

market efficiency and an asset pricing model being literally true, a valid test of this joint hypothesis

examines the relation between first and second moments of high-frequency stock returns. However, if the

objective is to measure how well the joint hypothesis predicts stock prices, tests relying solely on the

properties of stock returns are handicapped by the following disadvantage. Market inefficiencies (and/or

mispecification of the risk model) can affect not only average returns but also return covariances, and this

problem is likely to be more severe the higher the frequency of the returns. The price-level tests we advocate

connect stock prices to covariances or betas of cash flows. Regressing prices on cash-flow betas is a cleaner

way to measure a model’s explanatory power than regressing average returns on return betas, because the

cash-flow betas are less affected by mispricing.

      We test empirically the ability of the CAPM to explain value and growth stocks’ prices. Our

empirical results suggest that mispricing relative to the CAPM is not an important factor in determining the

prices of value and growth stocks. Cash-flow betas (measured by regressing firms’ log ROEs on the

market’s log ROE) essentially explain the prices of and long-horizon returns on price-to-book-sorted

portfolios, with a premium consistent with the theory.

      In addition to traditional regressions of prices and long-horizon average returns on betas, we specify a

stochastic-discount-factor present-value model that links firms’ current price-to-book ratios to expected

future cash flows and to covariances of future cash flows with the stochastic discount factor. Ultimately, this

present-value framework leads us to a cross-sectional variance decomposition of price-to-book ratios. We

allocate the price-to-book variance to predictable variation in three components: The risk-adjusted present

value of cash flows, the terminal value (capturing the effects beyond our fifteen-year horizon), and a pricing-

error component (as assigned by a particular economic model).

      We examine pricing errors relative to three discount-factor models, a constant discount factor and two

implementations of the CAPM discount factor. If we restrict discount rates to be constant across firms, our

decomposition allocates about 27 percent of the cross-sectional price-to-book variance to mispricing.

However, if we allow discount rates to vary as predicted by the CAPM, the variance share of mispricing is


                                                      33
reduced to –0.1 percent. The CAPM is a success at the price level because the present-value model detects

more market risk in value firms’ long-term cash flows than in growth firms’.

      We confirm and extend these findings with tests on stock returns. When we sort stocks on price-to-

book ratios, immediately after the sort the low-price-to-book portfolios have lower CAPM betas than the

high-price-to-book portfolios. However, this lower risk of value stocks is entirely temporary: As time since

the sort increases, the beta of the value-stock portfolio increases while the beta of the growth-stock portfolio

decreases. Within ten to fifteen years, the betas of these portfolios have reached their long-run permanent

levels, and the long-run CAPM betas of value stocks are much higher that those of growth stocks. If an

investor has a fifteen-year buy-and-hold investment horizon, value and growth portfolios’ average returns

line up closely with their CAPM betas.

      Of course, the CAPM cannot explain the abnormal performance of an annually rebalanced value-

minus-growth strategy. That strategy will have a high return and low stock-return beta, irrespective of what

happens to those stocks after they are sold (or bought back on the short side). However, the long-run betas

are crucial when diagnosing the economic significance of the value-minus-growth anomaly. We argue that,

for many purposes, the joint hypothesis of the CAPM and market efficiency approximates the pricing of

value and growth stocks well.

      Our results may validate what beforehand might have been seen as a common but inappropriate use of

CAPM-based hurdle rates by firms, given the empirical evidence on the CAPM’s inability to explain one-

period expected returns. For example, Graham and Harvey (2001) state: “It is very interesting that CFOs

pay very little attention to risk factors based on momentum and book-to-market value.” Our empirical

results, like the theoretical results by Stein (1996), support the use of the CAPM in capital budgeting, as long

as the betas are measured from cash flows or long-term stock returns. Unlike Stein’s, however, our results

also suggest that once a project is undertaken, the stock market values it approximately “right,” i.e.,

consistently with the model’s present-value calculation.

      Shleifer and Vishny (2001) model merger and acquisition decisions and suggest that these

transactions are motivated by acquirers/targets being overpriced/underpriced.         Their model makes the

implicit assumption that deviations from fundamental values are economically significant. Our findings

suggest that high-book-to-market “fallen angels” within industries are not necessarily obvious takeover

targets based on their valuations alone, because the average take-over premium and other transaction costs


                                                      34
are an order of magnitude higher than the mispricing we detect (Bradley, 1980). At minimum, our results

suggest that empirical tests of this valuation motive should carefully estimate the risk-adjusted price-level

impact of any return predictability assumed to be due to market inefficiencies.

      Our evidence is directly relevant to the interpretation of Baker and Wurgler’s (2002) empirical

evidence on equity issues. Based on their finding that the historical sequence of past book-to-market ratios

forecasts the capital structure far into the future, Baker and Wurgler argue that a firm’s long-run capital

structure is determined by the sequence of opportunistic equity-issuance and share-repurchase decisions.

Our finding that firms’ book-to-market ratios are associated with only modest levels of relative mispricing

suggests that the benefits from this timing activity are small. If the benefits are small, the costs of deviating

from the “optimal” capital structure must also be small, and the optimal capital structure must be well

approximated by the Modigiliani-Miller (1958) irrelevancy principle.




                                                       35
                                 Appendix: Additional robustness checks

A.   Post-1938 period
      In unreported tests, we also examine a shorter 1938-1999 sample in tests that interpret price-to-book

ratios on a ratio scale (e.g., regressions on the price-to-book ratios), consisting of 159,537 firm-years. The

logic behind this choice of periods is based on the pre-1938 level of disclosure regulation. Before the

Securities Exchange Act of 1934, there was essentially no regulation to ensure the flow of accurate and

systematic accounting information. Among other things, the act prescribes specific annual and periodic

reporting and record-keeping requirements for publicly-traded companies. The companies required to file

reports with the SEC must also "make and keep books, records, and accounts, which, in reasonable detail,

accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and disposition of the assets of the issuer.” In addition, the

legislation introduces the concept of “an independent public or certified accountant” to certify financial

statements and imposes statutory liabilities on accountants. Clearly, interpreting the book-equity predating

the act on the same ratio scale as more recent data would be unrealistic.

      Merino and Mayper (1999) provide statistics on the enforcement of the 1934 Securities Exchange

Act. The SEC began 279 proceedings in the first ten years of the enforcement of the 1934 act, and 272 of

those proceedings were begun in the 1933-37 period and only seven in the subsequent five-year period. This

decline in proceedings may signal increasing compliance by registrants or declining interest by the SEC in

regulatory enforcement. We believe the former cause was the driving force behind the reduced number of

new proceedings. In our opinion, it is reasonable to characterize the 1934-1937 period as an initial

enforcement period, after which reporting conventions have converged to their steady states.

      The results for the 1938-1999 subperiod are available by request. The cash-flow-beta regressions

estimated from the 1938-1999 subsample are similar to those obtained from the full sample. The main

difference is that in the shorter subsample, the spread in cash-flow betas is stronger immediately after the

sort but weaker at fifteen-year horizon than in the full sample. The main difference between the 1928-1999

and 1938-1999 variance-decomposition results is that the stock-return CAPM does slightly better at the

fifteen-year horizon in the shorter subsample.




                                                      36
B.   OLS variance decomposition
      We also estimated the regression equation (14) with OLS. Although common sense dictates some

weighting scheme similar to ours, due to their simplicity we also present the estimated OLS regressions,

specified exactly as in equation (14). The OLS results are generally consistent with the WLS results. Our

main conclusions are also robust to omitting the time dummies from the WLS specification and thereby

allowing the time-series variation to affect the parameter estimates, as well as to reasonable alterations of the

WLS weighting scheme.

      The results from the simple OLS regressions (equation (14)) are available by request. As the horizon

increases, the variance share of cash flows increases from 2.1 percent at the one-year horizon to 12.4 percent

at the fifteen-year horizon. The mispricing component of the constant-discount-factor model also grows as

the regressions’ horizon lengthens: The variance share of mispricing increases from 4.4 percent at the one-

year horizon to 48.7 percent at the fifteen-year horizon.

      The difference between the constant-discount-rate results in WLS and OLS specifications at the

fifteen-year horizon is due to the time dummies. From the empirical results by Vuolteenaho (2001) we know

that the time-series variation in the aggregate book-to-market ratio is almost exclusively due to expected-

return effects. Time dummies in Table IV suck up this aggregate time-series variation and the remaining

cross-sectional variation is mostly due to cash-flow effects, as documented by Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho

(2002).

      For the OLS variance decomposition and the stock-return CAPM, the variance share of cash flows

increases from 0.9 percent at the one-year horizon to 25.9 percent at the fifteen-year horizon.             The

mispricing share of stock-return CAPM also increases: At the fifteen-year horizon, the stock-return CAPM

allocates 28.8 percent to mispricing, which is less than for the constant discount rate model. The cash-flow

CAPM is our most successful specification in OLS regressions as well. At fifteen-year horizon, the cash-

flow CAPM allocates 7.7 percent in OLS regressions to mispricing.




                                                       37
                                                References
Ang, A., and J. Liu, 2001, A generalized earnings model for stock valuation, Review of Accounting Studies

          6, 397-425.

Baker, M., and J. Wurgler, 2002, Market timing and capital structure, Forthcoming in the Journal of Finance

          57.

Ball, R. and B. Brown, 1969, Portfolios theory and accounting, Journal of Accounting Research 7, 300-323.

Bansal, R., R. F. Dittmar, and C. T. Lundblad, 2002, Consumption, dividends, and the cross-section of

          equity returns, unpublished working paper, Duke University.

Beaver, W., P. Kettler, and M. Scholes, 1970, The association between market determined and accounting

          determined risk measures, Accounting Review 45, 654-682.

Black, F., M. C. Jensen, and M. Scholes, 1972, The capital asset pricing model: Some empirical tests, in

          Michael Jensen ed.: Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets, New York: Praeger.

Bradley, M., 1980, Interfirm tender offers and the market for corporate control, Journal of Business 53, 345-

          376.

Brainard, William C., Matthew D. Shapiro, and John Shoven, 1991, Fundamental value and market value, in

          William C. Brainard, William D. Nordhaus, and Harold W. Watts eds.: Money, Macroeconomics,

          and Economic Policy: Essays in Honor of James Tobin, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Brav, A., 2000, Inference in long-horizon event studies: A Bayesian approach with application to initial

          public offerings, Journal of Finance 55, 1979-2016.

Campbell, John Y., and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2003, Bad beta, good beta, unpublished working paper.

Cochrane, John H., 1991, Volatility tests and efficient markets: review essay, Journal of Monetary

          Economics, 463-485.

Cochrane, J. H., 1992. Explaining the variance of price-dividend ratios, Review of Financial Studies 5, 243-

          280.

Cochrane, J. H., 2001, Asset Pricing, Princeton University Press.

Cohen, R. B., C. K. Polk, and T. Vuolteenaho, 2002, The value spread, forthcoming in the Journal of

          Finance.
Constantinides, G. M., 1990, Habit formation: a resolution of the equity premium puzzle.” Journal of

          Political Economy, 519-543.

Daniel, K. D., D. Hirshleifer, and A. Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor psychology and securities market

          under- and overreactions, Journal of Finance 53, 1839-1885.

Daniel, K. and D. Marshall, 1997, Equity-premium and risk-free-rate puzzles at long horizons,

          Macroeconomic Dynamics Vol. 1 (2). p 452-84.

Daniel, K. and S. Titman, 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of cross-sectional variation in stock returns,

          Journal of Finance 52, 1-33.

Davis, J. L., E. F. Fama, and K. R. French, 2000. Characteristics, covariances, and average returns: 1929 to

          1997, Journal of Finance, 55, 389-406.

Dimson, E., 1979, Risk measurement when shares are subject to infrequent trading, Journal of Financial

          Economics 7, 197-226.

Duffie, D., 1996, Dynamic Asset Pricing Theory, Princeton University Press.

Edwards, E. O. and P. W. Bell, 1961, The Theory and Measurement of Business Income, University of

          California Press.

Fama, E.F., 1970, Efficient capital markets, Journal of Finance 25, 383-417

Fama, E. F., 1991, Efficient capital markets: II, Journal of Finance 46, 1575-1617.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1992. The cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of Finance 47,

          427-465.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds, Journal of

          Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1995, Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and returns, Journal of

          Finance 50, 131-155.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1996, Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies, Journal of Finance

          51, 55-84.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 2002, The equity premium, Journal of Finance 57.

Fama, E. F. and J. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: empirical tests, Journal of Political

          Economy 81, 607-636.
Feltham, G. A. and J. A. Ohlson, 1999, Residual earnings valuation with risk and stochastic interest rates,

          Accounting Review 74, 2-23.

Gibbons, M., Ross, S, and Shanken, J., 1989. A test of the efficiency of a given portfolio, Econometrica 57,

          1121-1152.

Graham, J. R and C. Harvey, 2001, The theory and practice of corporate finance: evidence from the field,

          Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187-243.

Handa, P., S. P. Kothari, and C. Wasley, Sensitivity of multivariate tests of the capital asset pricing model to

          the return measurement interval, Journal of Finance 48, 1543-1551.

Hansen, L. P., 1982, Large sample properties of generalized methods of moments estimators, Econometrica

          50, 1029-1054.

Hansen, L. P. and R. Jagannathan, 1999, Implications of security market data for models of dynamic

          economies.” Journal of Political Economy 99, 225-62.

Jagannathan, R. and Z. Wang, 1996, The conditional CAPM and the cross-section of expected returns,

          Journal of Finance 51, 3-53.

Jensen, M.C., 1978, Some anomalous evidence regarding market efficiency,” Journal of Financial

          Economics 6.

Kothari, S. P., J. Shanken, and R. G. Sloan, 1995, Another look at the cross-section of expected stock

          returns, Journal of Finance 50, 185-224.

Lakonishok, J., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny, 1994, Contrarian investment, extrapolation, and risk, Journal

          of Finance 49, 1541-1578.

Lettau, M. and S. Ludvigson, 2001, Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: a cross-sectional test when risk premia are

          time-varying, Journal of Political Economy 109, 1238-1287.

MacKinlay, A.C., 1995, Multifactor models do not explain deviations from the Capital Asset Pricing

          Models. Journal of Financial Economics 38.

Merino, B. and A. Mayper, 1999, The rhetoric and reality of American dream: Securities legislation and the

          accounting profession in the 1930s, working paper, University of North Texas.

Merton, Robert C., 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Econometrica 41, 867 – 87.

Modigliani, F., and M. H. Miller, 1958, The cost of capital, corporation finance, and the theory of

          investment, American Economic Review 48, 655-669.
Newey, W. and K. West, 1987, A simple positive semi-definite heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation

          consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703-708.

Ohlson, J. A., 1995, Earnings, book values, and dividends in equity valuation, Contemporary Accounting

          Research 11, 661-87.

Rosenberg, B., K. Reid, and R. Lanstein, 1985, Persuasive evidence of market inefficiency, Journal of

          Portfolio Management 11, 9-17.

Santos, J. and P. Veronesi, 2001, Labor income and predictable stock returns, CRSP working paper,

          University of Chicago.

Scholes, M. and J. Williams, 1977, Estimating betas from nonsyncronous data, Journal of Financial

          Economics 5, 309-327.

Shleifer, A., 2000, Inefficient Markets : An Introduction to Behavioral Finance, Oxford University Press.

Shleifer, A. and R.W. Vishny, 2001, Stock market driven acquisitions, NBER working paper 8439.

Shumway, T, G., 1997, The delisting bias in CRSP data, Journal of Finance 52, 327-340.

Siegel, J., 1999, The shrinking equity premium, Journal of Portfolio Management 26, 10-17.

Stein, J. C., 1996, Rational capital budgeting in an irrational world, Journal of Business 69, 429-455.

Summers, L., 1986, Does the stock market rationally reflect fundamental values?, Journal of Finance 44,

          1115-1153.

Vuolteenaho, T., 2001, Understanding the aggregate book-to-market ratio and its implications to current

          equity-premium expectations, working paper, Harvard University Department of Economics.

Vuolteenaho, T., 2002, What drives firm-level returns?, Journal of Finance 57, 233-264.
                                             Table I: Descriptive statistics
       Panel A reports descriptive statistics of the raw data. ME is market value of equity, BE book
value of equity, and D dividends. Data are annual, except monthly net stock returns, and in nominal
terms. The sample period is 1928-2000 (208,804 firm-years).
       Panel B reports descriptive statistics for price-to-book-sorted decile portfolios. The portfolios are
formed by sorting stocks each year on MEt-1 / BEt-1 and then following each sort for fifteen years.
“Annual stock return” is the average one-year net stock return immediately after the sort. “5-year stock
return” is the average cumulative five-year net stock return to buying the portfolios and holding them for
five years after the sort. “15-year stock return” is the average cumulative net fifteen-year stock return to
buying the portfolios and holding them for fifteen years after the sort. (BEt+n - BEt-1) / BEt-1 is the average
n-year growth in the buy-and-hold portfolios’ book values of equity. All quantities are nominal.

Panel A: Descriptive statistics of the raw data
                                             Standard     5th        25th                         75th       95th
         Variable              Mean                                                   Median
                                             deviation percentile percentile                   percentile percentile
   Monthly stock return        0.012           0.175      -0.211         -0.063       0.000      0.070           0.258
    Annual stock return        0.155           0.709      -0.613         -0.198       0.063      0.360           1.147
      MEt-1 / BEt-1            2.884           5.917      0.393          0.836        1.417      2.664           9.147
       Dt-1 / MEt-1            0.022           0.069      0.000          0.000        0.007      0.036           0.077
  (MEt - MEt-1) / MEt-1        0.200           1.136      -0.606         -0.201       0.054      0.369           1.320
   (BEt - BEt-1) / BEt-1       0.204           1.749      -0.441         0.000        0.081      0.185           0.853



Panel B: Means of selected variables for price-to-book-sorted portfolios
                              High                                                                                 Low
         Variable                        2         3       4         5            6     7       8         9
                             ME/BE                                                                                ME/BE
       MEt-1 / BEt-1         6.219     3.201      2.221   1.721    1.399     1.169     0.973   0.807     0.638     0.409
        MEt / BEt            5.306     3.080      2.131   1.716    1.410     1.181     1.009   0.845     0.693     0.475
      MEt+4 / BEt+4          4.033     2.792      1.957   1.629    1.436     1.215     1.055   0.923     0.831     0.648
     MEt+14 / BEt+14         3.002     2.339      1.715   1.588    1.398     1.302     1.155   1.140     1.063     0.914
   Annual stock return       0.125     0.148      0.125   0.135    0.143     0.146     0.178   0.175     0.215     0.217
    5-year stock return      0.738     0.871      0.771   0.861    0.908     0.989     1.051   1.087     1.379     1.419
   15-year stock return      4.397     5.154      4.563   5.228    5.553      5.92     6.148   6.563     7.004     6.700
 (BEt+1 - BEt-1) / BEt-1     0.244     0.127      0.116   0.088    0.078     0.067     0.053   0.045     0.026    -0.019
 (BEt+4 - BEt-1) / BEt-1     0.857     0.504      0.431   0.380    0.333     0.299     0.257   0.216     0.164     0.041
 (BEt+14 - BEt-1) / BEt-1    3.829     2.499      2.186   2.013    1.793     1.731     1.555   1.412     1.191     0.839
                                                      Table II: Cash-flow betas
       The table reports the estimated cash-flow betas for value and growth stocks and the regression
coefficients and the R2 of the regression of the expected-return component of price on cash-flow betas for
different sets of portfolios. The sample period is 1928-1999.
       Panel A column one shows the horizon N. Panel A columns 2-11 report the estimated cash-flow
betas of price-to-book sorted decile portfolios. The cash-flow betas are the slopes of the following
regressions:
       N −1                                                N −1
       ∑ ρ j log(1 + ROEk ,t + j , j +1 ) = β k ,0 + β k ,1 ∑ ρ j log(1 + ROEM ,t + j ) + ε k ,t + N −1 ,
       j =0                                                j =0

where k denotes the decile portfolio, M the market portfolio, and ROE a portfolio’s aggregate clean-
surplus earnings divided by the beginning-of-the-year aggregate book equity. ρ is a constant equal to
0.95. Panel A column twelve reports the cash-flow beta of decile one minus that of decile ten. Panel A
column thirteen reports the cash-flow beta of average of deciles one, two, and three minus that of the
average of deciles eight, nine, and ten.
      Panel A columns 14-16 show the intercept, slope and R2 of a cross-sectional regression of the
expected-return component of price on cash-flow betas:
           1        N −1                   
                 ˆ ∑ ρ j R                              ˆ
                 E          k ,t + j , j +1  = λ 0 + λ1 β 1, k + u k ,
       ∑ j =0 ρ  j =0
          N −1 j
                                            
where Rk,t,j is the year t simple (net) return on decile portfolio k during the jth year from the sort and βˆ1,k
the estimated cash-flow beta. Ê denotes the sample mean. Panel A columns 14-16 use thirty price-to-
book sorted portfolios as test assets.
       Panel B column one shows the alternative cash-flow definitions used in computing cash-flow betas
at the five-year horizon. X is earnings, ME market value of equity, and ∆d log dividend growth rate.
Panel B columns 2-11 correspond to price-to-book-sorted portfolios. Panel B column twelve reports the
cash-flow beta of decile one minus that of decile ten. Panel B column thirteen reports the cash-flow beta
of average of deciles one, two, and three minus that of the average of deciles eight, nine, and ten.
       All regressions are estimated with OLS. GMM standard errors computed using the Newey-West
formula with N leads and lags (which account for both the estimation uncertainty of the cash-flow betas
and for the cross-sectional and time-series correlation of the error terms) are reported in parentheses.
Panel A: Cash-flow betas and premia

       High                                                                          Low             (1,2,3) -
N                      2               3    4      5      6      7      8      9             1-10                λ0      λ1      R2 %
      ME/BE                                                                         ME/BE            (8,9,10)

        1.00 0.85 0.72 1.13 1.03 1.07 1.08 1.02 1.28 1.35                                    -0.35     -0.36 0.109 0.048
1                                                                                                                            18.78
       (0.58) (0.37) (0.25) (0.83) (0.36) (0.31) (0.43) (0.42) (0.52) (0.41)                (0.33)    (0.12) (0.059) (0.036)
        0.79 0.93 0.80 1.05 1.00 1.08 1.14 1.20 1.29 1.42                                    -0.62     -0.46 0.069 0.088
2                                                                                                                            51.53
       (0.59) (0.36) (0.13) (0.50) (0.16) (0.12) (0.31) (0.33) (0.39) (0.42)                (0.33)    (0.12) (0.085) (0.072)
        0.73 0.90 0.90 0.89 1.11 1.05 1.04 1.28 1.42 1.50                                    -0.76     -0.55 0.056 0.103
3                                                                                                                            65.25
       (0.54) (0.32) (0.10) (0.17) (0.24) (0.10) (0.22) (0.36) (0.38) (0.45)                (0.31)    (0.10) (0.053) (0.050)
        0.67 0.86 0.95 1.04 1.00 0.99 1.03 1.20 1.39 1.68                                    -1.01     -0.60 0.077 0.086
5                                                                                                                            75.80
       (0.41) (0.28) (0.11) (0.19) (0.13) (0.12) (0.15) (0.26) (0.35) (0.34)                (0.18)    (0.08) (0.046) (0.042)
        0.90 0.90 0.99 1.04 1.05 1.09 1.03 1.18 1.24 1.47                                    -0.59     -0.38 0.037 0.113
10                                                                                                                           73.74
       (0.26) (0.17) (0.09) (0.10) (0.17) (0.10) (0.12) (0.17) (0.20) (0.35)                (0.19)    (0.12) (0.052) (0.051)
        0.94 0.96 1.02 1.05 1.10 1.14 1.06 1.10 1.17 1.21                                    -0.31     -0.21 0.027 0.122
15                                                                                                                           56.03
       (0.15) (0.16) (0.14) (0.09) (0.12) (0.07) (0.17) (0.17) (0.11) (0.18)                (0.13)    (0.09) (0.042) (0.039)




Panel B: Alternative cash-flow definitions

    Alternative cash-flow                   High                                                             Low               (1,2,3) -
                                                    2      3      4      5      6      7     8        9               1-10
      definition (N = 5)                   ME/BE                                                            ME/BE              (8,9,10)
     N −1
                                            0.72 0.91 0.94 0.95 0.96 0.97 0.98 1.12 1.28 1.51                          -0.80     -0.45
     ∑ ρ j ROE k ,t + j , j +1             (0.52) (0.31) (0.12) (0.25) (0.14) (0.12) (0.14) (0.25) (0.32) (0.29)      (0.22)    (0.10)
     j =0
     N −1          X k ,t + j , j +1        0.35 0.65 0.92 1.17 1.26 1.63 1.93 2.97 4.15 11.26 -10.91 -5.49
     ∑ ρ j ME                              (0.31) (0.31) (0.17) (0.16) (0.28) (0.69) (1.01) (2.26) (3.26) (10.76) (4.24) (2.15)
     j =0               k ,t + j −1, j


     ∑ j =0 ρ j X k ,t + j , j +1
            N −1
                                            0.48 0.71 0.95 1.12 1.23 1.41 1.52 2.05 3.20 7.91                          -7.44     -3.68
              ME k ,t −1,0                 (0.19) (0.19) (0.18) (0.14) (0.19) (0.36) (0.44) (1.27) (2.20) (9.31)      (3.63)    (1.68)
X k ,t + N −1, j + N − X k ,t −1, 0         0.21 0.66 1.46 1.61 0.24 1.83 2.74 5.50 2.38 2.64                          -2.43     -2.73
              ME k ,t −1,0                 (0.19) (0.08) (0.52) (0.28) (0.61) (0.60) (1.24) (2.69) (0.60) (1.65)      (0.57)    (0.22)
      N −1
                                            0.79 0.90 0.96 1.03 1.34 1.44 1.14 1.44 1.39 1.28                          -0.49     -0.49
      ∑ ρ j ∆d k ,t + j , j +1             (0.19) (0.13) (0.10) (0.13) (0.28) (0.46) (0.31) (0.88) (0.77) (0.91)      (0.41)    (0.33)
      j =0
                          Table III: Estimated parameters of stochastic discount factors
        This table reports the estimated parameters of three stochastic-discount-factor models. The first
model, Qt / Qt −1 = δπ t −1 / π t , is a constant real discount factor, δ , times the ratio of price levels, π t −1 / π t .
The parameter estimates with standard errors for the constant-discount-rate model are reported in second
column of the table.
        The second model is the stock-return CAPM: Qt / Qt −1 = (γ 0 + γ 1 RMRFt )π t −1 / π t . This stochastic
discount factor is a linear function of the excess stock return on the value-weight market portfolio
(γ 0 + γ 1 RMRFt ) times the ratio of price levels. The third and fourth columns report the parameter
estimates with standard errors.
        The fifth and sixth columns show some implications of the stock-return CAPM parameter
estimates. The fifth column shows the implied average price of a real risk-free one-period discount bond,
and the sixth column the implied average RMRF. These implied statistics are computed by adding two
additional moment conditions (one for mean RMRF and another for mean squared RMRF) to the system
and using the formulas γ 0 + γ 1 E ( RMRF ) and − γ 1 var(RMRF ) /[γ 0 + γ 1 E ( RMRF )] .
        The seventh and eight columns show the parameter estimates of the third model, the cash-flow
CAPM: Qt / Qt −1 = [ g 0 + g1 log(1 + ROE Mreal,t )]π t −1 / π t , where ROE Mreal,t is the market portfolio’s aggregate
real clean-surplus earnings for year t divided by the beginning of the year t aggregate real book equity.
        The parameters are estimated using GMM based on the following moment conditions:
           1    T                  Q (b)            
(1) 0 =
           T
               ∑  (1 + Rrf ,t ) Q(b) t         − 1
               t =1                      t −1       
           1    T               Q(b) 
(2) 0 =
           T
               ∑  RMRFt Q(b) t         
               t =1                t −1 


           1    T    ME k ,t −1                  Q(b) t + N −1 ME k ,t + N −1 − BE k ,t + N −1 
                                       N −1  Q (b)
                                                    t + j A(b) k ,t + j
(3) 0 =
           T
               ∑ BE             − 1 − ∑  Q(b) BE
                                                 −
                                                     Q(b) t −1
                                                                ×
                                                                            BE k ,t −1
                                                                                                 
                    
               t =1    k ,t −1        j =0       t −1      k ,t −1                            
The moment condition (1) is omitted from the system used to estimate the constant-discount-rate model.
Above, Rrf is the net nominally risk-free interest rate, ME is market value of equity, A abnormal
earnings, BE book equity, and Q the cumulative stochastic discount factor. Subscripts k and t are
indices to portfolios and time, respectively. b denotes the generic stochastic-discount-factor parameter
vector. The first column of the table reports N , the horizon used in the price-to-book restrictions.
       The portfolios used as test assets in the price-to-book moment conditions are formed by sorting
stocks into ten value-weight portfolios based on their price-to-book ratios. After sorting, we follow the
market and book values as well as abnormal earnings for the portfolios up to fifteen years after portfolio
formation. The sample period is 1928-1999 and all data and parameters are in annual terms.
       GMM standard errors computed using the Newey-West formula with N leads and lags, which
account for both the estimation uncertainty of the cash-flow betas and for the cross-sectional and time-
series correlation of the error terms, are reported in parentheses.
               Constant        Stock-return CAPM          Implications of stock-return       Cash-flow CAPM
Horizon:
           discount rate:   stochastic discount factor:      CAPM’s parameters:          stochastic discount factor:
                                                            E 1           E (RMRF )
   N            δˆ              γˆ0            γˆ1            1+ Rrf , real                   ĝ 0          ĝ1

              0.9193          1.0703         -1.3327         0.9436            0.0898      2.0984        -17.0091
   1
             (0.0189)        (0.0765)       (0.5917)        (0.0241)          (0.0289)    (0.4428)       (5.7880)
              0.9177          1.0766         -1.4156         0.9448            0.0952      1.5819         -9.5922
   2
             (0.0167)        (0.0805)       (0.6623)        (0.0191)          (0.0295)    (0.2551)       (3.6484)
              0.9178          1.0714         -1.3485         0.9472            0.0919      1.8591        -13.7438
   3
             (0.0159)        (0.0782)       (0.6577)        (0.0153)          (0.0296)    (0.3991)       (5.6569)
              0.9171          1.0500         -1.1680         0.9455            0.0825      1.5401         -9.0116
   5
             (0.0135)        (0.0612)       (0.5270)        (0.0126)          (0.0278)    (0.2871)       (4.2850)
              0.9237          1.0309         -1.0251         0.9360            0.0794      1.9781        -15.1786
   10
             (0.0141)        (0.0564)       (0.5668)        (0.0149)          (0.0296)    (0.3181)       (4.1686)
              0.9272          1.0167         -0.9020         0.9355            0.0746      1.2956         -5.1805
   15
             (0.0131)        (0.0493)       (0.5091)        (0.0163)          (0.0336)    (0.1954)       (2.8265)
                     Table IV: Cross-sectional WLS variance decomposition of price-to-book ratios
       This table reports three sets of variance-decomposition regressions. The variance-decomposition
regressions are estimated by separately regressing the three components of the price-to-book ratios on the
price-to-book ratios and time dummies:
               1 N −1 Qˆ t + j    Aˆ k ,t + j           1 ME k ,t −1           1
                  ∑              ×
              wk j =0  Qˆ t −1 BE k ,t −1 
                                                       ′ ×
                                                   = β WLS
                                                            wk BE k ,t −1
                                                                              ′ ×
                                                                          + ∆ WLS
                                                                                   wk
                                                                                      DTt + e k′ ,t + N −1
                                                
       ˆ
  1 Qt + N −1 ME k ,t + N −1 − BE k ,t + N −1               1 ME k ,t −1           1
    ×         ×                                        ′′ ×
                                                   = β WLS                    ′′ ×
                                                                          + ∆ WLS     DTt + e k′′,t + N −1
 wk     Qˆ
         t −1
                         BE k ,t −1                         wk BE k ,t −1          wk

                1            ˆ
                      N −1  Q              εˆk ,t + j                1 ME k ,t −1            1
                      ∑  Qˆ
                                 t+ j
                                        ×                       ′′′ ×
                                                            = β WLS                       ′′′ ×
                                                                                      + ∆ WLS      DTt + e k′′′,t + N −1
                wk       BE k ,t −1                                    wk BE k ,t −1           wk
                  t −1j =0
                                    
Above, ME is the market value of equity, Â estimated abnormal earnings, BE book equity, DT matrix
of time dummies, Q̂ cumulative stochastic discount factor, and εˆ estimated realized pricing error.
wk = (1 / T )∑t =1 ( ME k ,t −1 / BE k ,t −1 ) . Q̂ and εˆ are computed using the parameter estimates from Table
                 t


III. Subscripts k and t are indices to portfolios and time, respectively.
       The first column of the table shows N , the horizon used in computing the dependent variables of
the regressions. The columns 2-4 show the WLS regression coefficients for the dependent variables
constructed using the constant discount factor. The columns 5-7 show the results for the stock-return
CAPM, Qˆ t / Qˆ t −1 = (γˆ 0 + γˆ1 RMRFt )π t −1 / π t , where RMRF is the excess return on the value-weight
market portfolio.               Columns 8-10 show the results for the cash-flow CAPM,
Qt / Qt −1 = [ g 0 + g1 log(1 + ROE Mreal,t )]π t −1 / π t , where ROE Mreal,t is the market portfolio’s real ROE.
       The portfolios used as test assets are formed by sorting stocks into ten value-weight portfolios
based on the price-to-book ratios and cover the period 1928-1999. After sorting, we follow the market
and book values as well as abnormal earnings for the portfolios up to fifteen years after the portfolio
formation. Standard errors (in parentheses) account for both the estimation uncertainty of the stochastic-
discount-factor parameters and for the cross-sectional and time-series correlation of the errors.

         Constant real discount factor                             Stock-return CAPM:                              Cash-flow CAPM:
         β′         β ′′          β ′′′                         β′         β ′′       β ′′′                 β′          β ′′      β ′′′
 N      Cash          Terminal Mispricing                     Cash         Terminal Mispricing            Cash        Terminal Mispricing
        flows          value                                  flows         value                         flows        value
        0.066            0.902               0.032             0.067          0.880         0.053         0.050         1.061         -0.111
  1
       (0.009)          (0.023)             (0.019)           (0.010)        (0.020)       (0.018)       (0.027)       (0.097)       (0.080)
        0.119            0.824               0.057             0.125          0.844         0.031         0.112         0.937         -0.049
  2
       (0.016)          (0.044)             (0.035)           (0.018)        (0.037)       (0.031)       (0.027)       (0.056)       (0.047)
        0.159            0.780               0.061             0.173          0.808         0.019         0.146         0.994         -0.141
  3
       (0.023)          (0.067)             (0.051)           (0.027)        (0.056)       (0.046)       (0.038)       (0.119)       (0.103)
        0.224            0.659               0.117             0.231          0.712         0.057         0.231         0.857         -0.088
  5
       (0.025)          (0.074)             (0.062)           (0.028)        (0.074)       (0.067)       (0.039)       (0.102)       (0.092)
        0.313            0.493               0.194             0.335          0.569         0.096         0.446         0.693         -0.139
 10
       (0.035)          (0.116)             (0.099)           (0.036)        (0.141)       (0.121)       (0.086)       (0.192)       (0.247)
        0.377            0.354               0.269             0.423          0.376         0.201         0.520         0.480         -0.001
 15
       (0.049)          (0.091)             (0.059)           (0.056)        (0.075)       (0.062)       (0.131)       (0.103)       (0.121)
                                            Table V: Parametric model of beta evolution
        This table shows an estimated parametric specification for betas:
                             L                       L
Ri ,t − Rrf ,t = α i + ∑ β 0,l × RMRFt −l + ∑ β 1,l × TRENDt × RMRFt −l
                            l =0                    l =0
                      L                                      L
               + ∑ β 2,l × YEARSi × RMRFt −l + ∑ β 3,l × YEARSi × TRENDt × RMRFt −l + ε i ,t
                     l =0                                   l =0
TREND is a linear time trend in centuries (month index divided by 1200), normalized to zero in the
middle of the sample. YEARS is the number of years from the sort divided by one hundred, or more
accurately the number of lags we used in firms’ price-to-book ratios when sorting the portfolios into
deciles divided by one hundred. RMRF is the excess return on the market portfolio. L is the number of
monthly RMRF lags included in the regressions. The table reports the sums of coefficients for value,
growth and value-minus-growth portfolios:
               L                      L                             L                                    L
b(intercept) = ∑ β 0,l , b(trend) = ∑ β 1,l , b(years from sort) = ∑ β 2,l , b(years from sort × trend) = ∑ β 3,l
              l =0                   l =0                          l =0                                 l =0
       The dependent variables are constructed as follows. We first sort stocks into price-to-book deciles.
Every year, we run fifteen different sorts: Deciles sorted on year-t-1 price-to-book ratios, deciles sorted
on year-t-2 price-to-book ratios,…, and deciles sorted on year-t-15 price-to-book ratios. As a result, we
have 715 months of returns on 150 portfolios for the period 6/1941-12/2000 (the maximum period for
which our data made it possible to compute the fifteen-years-from-the-sort portfolio). The dependent
variables in the regressions are an equal-weight portfolio of the three value-weight lowest-price-to-book
deciles (Panel A), an equal-weight portfolio of the three value-weight highest-price-to-book deciles
(Panel B), and the difference of the two (Panel C).
Panel A:                                       Value
            Lags of RMRF (L):   0       1        2        5       11
b(intercept)                    1.03    1.03     1.04     1.04    1.01
standard error                  0.02    0.02     0.03     0.04    0.05
t-statistic                    62.79   46.28    38.65    28.11   19.06
b(trend)                       -1.01   -1.08    -1.19    -0.95   -0.96
standard error                  0.09    0.13     0.15     0.20    0.26
t-statistic                   -10.76   -8.62    -8.00    -4.77   -3.74
b(time from sort)               0.50    0.55     0.56     0.79    0.78
standard error                  0.11    0.14     0.17     0.24    0.34
t-statistic                     4.68    3.80     3.24     3.28    2.26
b(time from sort * trend)       1.51    2.60     3.01     3.03    3.86
standard error                  0.61    0.81     0.96     1.29    1.66
t-statistic                     2.49    3.21     3.15     2.35    2.33

Panel B:                                       Growth
            Lags of RMRF (L):   0       1         2       5       11
b(intercept)                    1.05    1.05      1.04    1.01    0.99
standard error                  0.01    0.01      0.01    0.02    0.03
t-statistic                   115.82   85.30    69.91    49.43   33.71
b(trend)                        0.28    0.38      0.48    0.55    0.68
standard error                  0.05    0.07      0.08    0.11    0.14
t-statistic                     5.38    5.47      5.92    4.97    4.83
b(time from sort)              -0.62   -0.79     -0.80   -0.69   -0.54
standard error                  0.07    0.09      0.11    0.15    0.22
t-statistic                    -9.22   -8.66     -7.23   -4.52   -2.47
b(time from sort * trend)      -1.63   -2.01     -2.28   -2.14   -1.07
standard error                  0.39    0.52      0.61    0.82    1.05
t-statistic                    -4.21   -3.89     -3.75   -2.60   -1.02

Panel C:                         Difference (value minus growth)
            Lags of RMRF (L):   0       1        2      5      11
b(intercept)                   -0.02 -0.02       0.01   0.03    0.02
standard error                  0.02    0.03     0.04   0.05    0.07
t-statistic                    -0.93 -0.57       0.18   0.63    0.34
b(trend)                       -1.29 -1.46 -1.67 -1.50 -1.64
standard error                  0.13    0.17     0.20   0.27    0.34
t-statistic                   -10.22 -8.67 -8.40 -5.58 -4.75
b(time from sort)               1.12    1.34     1.36   1.48    1.31
standard error                  0.14    0.18     0.22   0.31    0.44
t-statistic                     8.27    7.30     6.15   4.83    3.01
b(time from sort * trend)       3.13    4.61     5.30   5.17    4.93
standard error                  0.77    1.03     1.22   1.65    2.11
t-statistic                     4.05    4.46     4.34   3.14    2.34
                                         Table VI: Calendar-time portfolio returns
       This table reports stock-return-based tests for different investment horizons. We first sort stocks
into price-to-book deciles and then calculate the value-weight monthly returns on each decile over the
next fifteen years (without re-sorting the stocks). We define the N-year decile M as a portfolio strategy
that invests equally in N portfolios: Decile M sorted on year-t-1 price-to-book ratios, decile M sorted on
year-t-2 price-to-book ratios,…, and decile M sorted on year-t-N price-to-book ratios. We extend the
“holding periods” (i.e., N) out to fifteen years. The final sample has 715 months of returns on 150
portfolios for the period 6/1941-12/2000.
       Column two reports the GRS statistic testing the intercepts in regressions of the monthly excess
returns on these ten N-year deciles on the excess market stock return and eleven lags of the excess market
stock return. Column three reports the mean of a strategy that goes long the top three decile portfolios
(low price-to-book) and shorts the bottom three decile portfolios (high price-to-book). Column four
reports the alpha in regressions of this portfolio on the excess market return and eleven lags. Columns
five and six report the intercept and coefficient of a cross-sectional regression of the average returns on
the ten N-year decile portfolios on the total betas of those portfolios. We construct total betas by
summing the individual partial betas on the excess market return and eleven lags of the excess market
return. Column seven reports the (unadjusted) R2 from that cross-sectional regression.
       Standard errors are in parentheses except in column two where we report the probability value
associated with the GRS statistic in brackets. We provide bootstrapped probability values in braces under
the null hypothesis that the Sharpe-Lintner CAPM is true except in column three where the null
hypothesis is a mean return on the value-minus-growth portfolio of zero.

                       GRS                    µ                    α                    λ0                   λ1                 R2 %
             N      [asympt. pval.]    (asympt std. err.)   (asympt std. err.)   (asympt std. err.)   (asympt std. err.)   (asympt std. err.)
                   {bootstrap pval.}   {bootstrap pval.}    {bootstrap pval.}    {bootstrap pval.}    {bootstrap pval.}    {bootstrap pval.}
                      1.9182              0.0037               0.0042                0.0091              -0.0007                0.08
             1       [0.0399]            [0.0011]             [0.0013]             [0.0087]             [0.0088]               [2.19]
                     {0.0524}            {0.0015}             {0.0014}             {0.0397}             {0.0525}             {0.0117}
                      2.3707              0.0040               0.0042                0.0052               0.0034                1.44
             2       [0.0092]            [0.0010]             [0.0012]             [0.0099]             [0.0099]              [10.03]
                     {0.0122}            {0.0009}             {0.0004}             {0.2007}             {0.3112}             {0.0302}
                      2.2770              0.0037               0.0037               -0.0017               0.0103               15.52
             3       [0.0126]            [0.0010]             [0.0011]             [0.0086]             [0.0085]              [28.13]
                     {0.0127}            {0.0015}             {0.0014}             {0.5235}             {0.3153}             {0.0839}
                      2.4368              0.0034               0.0031               -0.0066               0.0151               44.07
             5       [0.0074]            [0.0010]             [0.0011]             [0.0061]             [0.0060]              [32.47]
                     {0.0095}            {0.0025}             {0.0036}             {0.0609}             {0.0241}             {0.1568}
                      1.2411              0.0025               0.0017               -0.0031               0.0113               67.36
             10      [0.2609]            [0.0009]             [0.0010]             [0.0028]             [0.0028]              [19.66]
                     {0.2727}            {0.0316}             {0.0972}             {0.2866}             {0.1869}             {0.3307}
                      1.1113              0.0018               0.0008                0.0003               0.0079               70.31
             15      [0.3507]            [0.0009]             [0.0010]             [0.0018]             [0.0018]              [16.53]
                     {0.3699}            {0.1436}             {0.3808}             {0.8005}             {0.6476}             {0.4474}
               Table VII: Premium on cash-flow beta estimated from alternative test assets
       The table reports the regression coefficients and the R2 of the regression of the expected-return
component of price on cash-flow betas for different sets of portfolios. Columns 2-4 use thirty price-to-
book-sorted portfolios and thirty portfolios sorted on five-year OLS stock-return betas. Columns 5-7 use
thirty price-to-book-sorted portfolios and thirty size-sorted portfolios. Betas are estimated from the full
1928-1999 sample, except for the beta-sorted portfolios, for which the cash-flow beta estimation period is
1933-1999. Footnotes in Table II apply.

                          30 ME/BE-sorted portfolios and   30 ME/BE-sorted portfolios and
                             30 beta-sorted portfolios        30 size-sorted portfolios
                      N      λ0        λ1          R2 %       λ0         λ1         R2 %
                           0.130      0.024                 0.139      0.029
                      1                          12.10                            5.15
                          (0.028)    (0.013)               (0.041)    (0.017)
                           0.113      0.042                 0.086      0.079
                      2                          27.77                            39.10
                          (0.023)    (0.017)               (0.044)    (0.038)
                           0.101      0.057                 0.078      0.087
                      3                          36.65                            51.65
                          (0.019)    (0.019)               (0.031)    (0.036)
                           0.090      0.069                 0.094      0.075
                      5                          54.09                            62.54
                          (0.022)    (0.022)               (0.029)    (0.031)
                           0.079      0.073                 0.079      0.076
                     10                          51.21                            60.40
                          (0.018)    (0.018)               (0.034)    (0.036)
                           0.104      0.047                 0.073      0.081
                     15                          23.17                            51.49
                          (0.020)    (0.021)               (0.031)    (0.036)
                            Table VIII: Present-value tests with alternative test assets
       The table reports the WLS variance decompositions for different sets of portfolios. Panel A uses
ten price-to-book-sorted portfolios and ten portfolios sorted on five-year OLS stock-return betas (period
1933-1999). Panel B uses thirty price-to-book-sorted portfolios and thirty size-sorted portfolios (period
1928-1999). Footnotes in Table IV apply.

Panel A: Ten ME/BE-sorted portfolios and ten beta-sorted portfolios

            Constant discount factor            Stock-return CAPM:                 Cash-flow CAPM:
         β′           β ′′         β ′′′   β′           β ′′       β ′′′     β′           β ′′        β ′′′
 N
      Cash flows Term. value Mispricing Cash flows Term. value Mispricing Cash flows Term. value Mispricing
        0.057       0.924         0.019   0.057        0.899      0.044     0.054       0.960       -0.014
 1
       (0.009)     (0.025)       (0.019) (0.009)      (0.019)    (0.017)   (0.011)     (0.029)     (0.023)
        0.105       0.859         0.037   0.106        0.866      0.028     0.100       0.923       -0.023
 2
       (0.015)     (0.044)       (0.033) (0.015)      (0.028)    (0.020)   (0.021)     (0.045)     (0.035)
        0.143       0.810         0.047   0.146        0.821      0.034     0.141       0.867       -0.008
 3
       (0.019)     (0.058)       (0.044) (0.019)      (0.043)    (0.032)   (0.024)     (0.049)     (0.035)
        0.207       0.691         0.103   0.209        0.696      0.096     0.213       0.759        0.028
 5
       (0.024)     (0.062)       (0.052) (0.031)      (0.106)    (0.098)   (0.030)     (0.042)     (0.035)
        0.301       0.516         0.183   0.321        0.542      0.138     0.343       0.591        0.066
 10
       (0.031)     (0.088)       (0.076) (0.025)      (0.101)    (0.091)   (0.047)     (0.103)     (0.093)
        0.371       0.379         0.250   0.431        0.401      0.169     0.486       0.439        0.075
 15
       (0.045)     (0.059)       (0.043) (0.032)      (0.053)    (0.053)   (0.093)     (0.069)     (0.086)


Panel B: Ten ME/BE-sorted portfolios and ten size-sorted portfolios

            Constant discount factor            Stock-return CAPM:                 Cash-flow CAPM:
         β′           β ′′         β ′′′   β′           β ′′       β ′′′     β′           β ′′       β ′′′
 N
      Cash flows Term. value Mispricing Cash flows Term. value Mispricing Cash flows Term. value Mispricing
        0.076       0.886         0.038   0.076        0.863      0.062     0.075       0.913       0.012
 1
       (0.009)     (0.021)       (0.017) (0.009)      (0.017)    (0.015)   (0.010)     (0.019)     (0.016)
        0.141       0.790         0.068   0.145        0.800      0.056     0.141       0.844       0.016
 2
       (0.018)     (0.042)       (0.032) (0.019)      (0.036)    (0.027)   (0.021)     (0.041)     (0.035)
        0.196       0.718         0.085   0.205        0.735      0.059     0.194       0.793       0.013
 3
       (0.024)     (0.059)       (0.048) (0.029)      (0.049)    (0.040)   (0.027)     (0.058)     (0.048)
        0.277       0.588         0.135   0.284        0.610      0.106     0.280       0.694       0.027
 5
       (0.035)     (0.061)       (0.061) (0.038)      (0.055)    (0.060)   (0.047)     (0.069)     (0.062)
        0.400       0.396         0.203   0.400        0.435      0.166     0.503       0.470       0.026
 10
       (0.057)     (0.055)       (0.083) (0.050)      (0.081)    (0.104)   (0.088)     (0.065)     (0.127)
        0.397       0.328         0.275   0.418        0.392      0.191     0.445       0.393       0.163
 15
       (0.061)     (0.062)       (0.030) (0.064)      (0.076)    (0.086)   (0.103)     (0.063)     (0.108)
                          Table IX: Calendar-time portfolio-return tests with alternative test assets
       This table reports stock-return-based tests for different investment horizons and for different test-
asset sets. We first sort stocks into deciles (based on ME/BE, size, or estimated stock-return beta) and
then calculate the value-weight monthly returns on each decile over the next fifteen years (without re-
sorting the stocks). We define the N-year decile M as a portfolio strategy that invests equally in N
portfolios: Decile M sorted on year-t-1 characteristic, decile M sorted on year-t-2 characteristic,…, and
decile M sorted on year-t-N characteristic. We extend the “holding periods” (i.e., N) out to fifteen years.
The final sample has 655 months of returns on 300 portfolios in each panel (450 in total) for the period
6/1946-12/2000.
       The GRS column reports the GRS-statistic testing the intercepts in regressions of the monthly
excess returns on these ten N-year deciles on the excess market stock return and eleven lags of the excess
market stock return. Columns λ0 and λ1 report the intercept and coefficient of a cross-sectional
regression of the average returns on the total betas of the portfolios. We construct total betas by summing
the individual partial betas on the excess market return and eleven lags of the excess market return.
Column labeled R 2 reports the (unadjusted) regression R2 from that cross-sectional regression.
       Standard errors are in parentheses except in the GRS column where we report the probability value
associated with the GRS statistic in brackets. We provide bootstrapped probability values in braces under
the null hypothesis that the Sharpe-Lintner CAPM is true.

                          Ten ME/BE-sorted portfolios                                                       Ten ME/BE-sorted portfolios
                          and ten beta-sorted portfolios                                                    and ten size-sorted portfolios
          GRS                    λ0                  λ1                 R2 %                GRS                    λ0                  λ1                R2 %
  N    [asympt. pval.]     (asympt std. err.) (asympt std. err.)   (asympt std. err.)    [asympt. pval.]     (asympt std. err.) (asympt std. err.) (asympt std. err.)
      {bootstrap pval.}    {bootstrap pval.} {bootstrap pval.}     {bootstrap pval.}    {bootstrap pval.}    {bootstrap pval.} {bootstrap pval.} {bootstrap pval.}

         2.1064               0.0079             -0.0007                1.97               2.2459               0.0049              0.0033              17.56
  1     [0.0034]             [0.0011]            [0.0011]              [4.25]             [0.0015]             [0.0019]            [0.0017]            [18.58]
        {0.0042}             {0.0000}            {0.0102}            {0.0058}             {0.0023}             {0.1971}            {0.2621}           {0.0315}
         2.4469               0.0076             -0.0003                0.43               2.3783               0.0051              0.0033              19.05
  2     [0.0005]             [0.0012]            [0.0012]              [2.04]             [0.0007]             [0.0018]            [0.0016]            [16.30]
        {0.0005}             {0.0003}            {0.0149}            {0.0027}             {0.0006}             {0.1797}            {0.2747}           {0.0330}
         2.3381               0.0070              0.0004                0.53               2.0603               0.0055              0.0029              18.30
  3     [0.0009]             [0.0012]            [0.0013]              [2.46]             [0.0043]             [0.0017]            [0.0015]            [12.53]
        {0.0007}             {0.0010}            {0.0292}            {0.0035}             {0.0053}             {0.1448}            {0.2368}           {0.0318}
         2.5985               0.0060              0.0015                6.99               2.1726               0.0059              0.0025              15.40
  5     [0.0002]             [0.0013]            [0.0013]              [9.08]             [0.0023]             [0.0016]            [0.0014]             [8.54]
        {0.0001}             {0.0041}            {0.0692}            {0.0095}             {0.0030}             {0.1271}            {0.2162}           {0.0344}
         2.4672               0.0055              0.0019               19.83               1.3470               0.0061              0.0021              16.49
 10     [0.0004]             [0.0009]            [0.0009]             [15.85]             [0.1419]             [0.0012]            [0.0011]            [12.43]
        {0.0007}             {0.0096}            {0.0927}            {0.0188}             {0.1499}             {0.1289}            {0.1926}           {0.0519}
         1.9251               0.0061              0.0012               18.21               1.1788               0.0065              0.0016              19.17
 15     [0.0091]             [0.0006]            [0.0006]             [18.31]             [0.2657]             [0.0009]            [0.0008]            [12.56]
        {0.0095}             {0.0144}            {0.0825}            {0.0299}             {0.2711}             {0.3036}            {0.3266}           {0.1851}
                         Figure 1: Variance shares for the stock-return CAPM
        This figure graphs the variance shares from Table IV columns 5-7 as a function of the horizon N.
The lightly colored area in the bottom represents the variance share of risk-adjusted cash flows, the white
area in the middle the share of the terminal value, and the dark area in the top the share of pricing errors;
all relative to the stock-return CAPM. The thin dashed lines denote +/- one-standard-error bounds. For
comparison purposes, the variance shares from the constant-discount-rate model (Table IV columns 2-4)
are plotted with bold dashed lines.
        The portfolios used as test assets are formed by sorting stocks into ten value-weight portfolios
based on their price-to-book ratios. After sorting, we follow the market and book values as well as
abnormal earnings for the portfolios up to fifteen years after the portfolio formation. The sample period
is 1928-1999 and all data are annual.

                           Figure 2: Variance shares for the cash-flow CAPM
       This figure graphs the variance shares from Table IV columns 8-10 as a function of the horizon N.
The lightly colored area in the bottom represents the variance share of risk-adjusted cash flows, the white
area in the middle the share of the terminal value, and the dark area in the top the share of pricing errors;
all relative to the cash-flow CAPM. The thin dashed lines denote +/- one-standard-error bounds. For
comparison purposes, the variance shares from the constant-discount-rate model (Table IV columns 2-4)
are plotted with bold dashed lines.
       The portfolios used as test assets are formed by sorting stocks into ten value-weight portfolios
based on their price-to-book ratios. After sorting, we follow the market and book values as well as
abnormal earnings for the portfolios up to fifteen years after the portfolio formation. The sample period
is 1928-1999 and all data are annual.

                       Figure 3: Evolution of the CAPM beta after portfolio formation
       This figure shows the evolution of the total CAPM beta for value and growth stocks after portfolio
formation. We first sort stocks into price-to-book deciles. Every year, we run fifteen different sorts:
Deciles sorted on year-t-1 price-to-book ratios, deciles sorted on year-t-2 price-to-book ratios,…, and
deciles sorted on year-t-15 price-to-book ratios. As a result, we have 715 months of returns on 150
portfolios for the period 6/1941-12/2000 (the maximum period for which our data made it possible to
compute the fifteen-years-from-the-sort portfolio).
       We compute our measure of risk by regressing the monthly returns on the portfolios on the
contemporaneous and lagged market returns. We then sum the regression coefficients for each dependent
variable to obtain what we call “total beta.” The upper-left plot is produced with no lagged market
returns in the regressions, the upper-right with one lag, the lower-left with five lags, and the lower-right
with eleven lags. The dependent variables in the regressions are an equal-weight portfolio of the three
value-weight lowest-price-to-book deciles and an equal-weight portfolio of the three value-weight
highest-price-to-book deciles. The total beta of value stocks is plotted with a solid line and triangles and
the total beta of growth stocks with just a solid line. The dashed lines show one-standard-error bounds.

                   Figure 4: Mean excess returns and alphas for different holding periods
       This figure shows annualized average excess returns (top graph) and alphas (bottom graph) on
deciles for up to N-year holding period. We first sort stocks into price-to-book deciles. Every year, we
run fifteen different sorts: Deciles sorted on year-t-1 price-to-book ratios, deciles sorted on year-t-2 price-
to-book ratios,…, and deciles sorted on year-t-15 price-to-book ratios. As a result, we have 715 months
of returns on 150 portfolios for the period 6/1941-12/2000. We define the N-year decile M as a portfolio
strategy that invests equally in N portfolios: Decile M sorted on year-t-1 price-to-book ratios, decile M
sorted on year-t-2 price-to-book ratios,…, and decile M sorted on year-t-N price-to-book ratios. The
height of the column corresponds to 1200 times the mean excess return in the top graph and to 1200 times
the intercept of a regression of the monthly excess returns on the contemporaneous excess market return
and eleven lags of the excess market return in the bottom graph.
                                            Figure 1: Variance shares for the stock-return CAPM




                                   1
Fraction of (weighted) variance




                                  0.8




                                  0.6




                                  0.4




                                  0.2




                                   0
                                        0     2.5         5               7.5                10   12.5   15
                                                              Years from portfolio formation
                                            Figure 2: Variance shares for the cash-flow CAPM




                                   1
Fraction of (weighted) variance




                                  0.8




                                  0.6




                                  0.4




                                  0.2




                                   0
                                        0   2.5         5               7.5                10   12.5   15
                                                            Years from portfolio formation
                                         Figure 3: Evolution of CAPM beta after portfolio formation
                                            0 lags of RMRF                                                                 1 lag of RMRF
                                                                                                        1.1
                           1.06
Beta of value and growth




                                                                            Beta of value and growth
                           1.04
                                                                                                       1.05
                           1.02
                             1                                                                           1
                           0.98
                           0.96                                                                        0.95

                           0.94
                                  0         5               10         15                                     0         5               10         15
                                      Year after portfolio formation                                              Year after portfolio formation

                                            5 lags of RMRF                                                              11 lags of RMRF

                                                                                                       1.15
Beta of value and growth




                                                                            Beta of value and growth




                           1.15
                                                                                                        1.1
                            1.1
                                                                                                       1.05
                           1.05
                                                                                                         1
                             1
                                                                                                       0.95
                           0.95
                                                                                                        0.9
                            0.9
                                                                                                       0.85
                                  0         5               10         15                                     0         5               10         15
                                      Year after portfolio formation                                              Year after portfolio formation
Figure 4: Mean excess returns and alphas for different holding periods
                        p.a. % mean return


                                             13

                                             11

                                              9

                                              7
                                              1
                                                  3
                                                      5
                                                          7
                                                              9                           Lo
                                                               11                5   43
                                                                 13
                                                                   15   Hi   876
           Holding period in years
                                                                                          Price−to−book decile




                                              4
                        p.a. % alpha




                                              2
                                              0
                                             −2
                                              1
                                                  3
                                                      5
                                                          7
                                                              9                           Lo
                                                               11                5   43
                                                                 13
                                                                   15   Hi   876
           Holding period in years
                                                                                          Price−to−book decile
