                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          KLEPTOCRACY AND DIVIDE-AND-RULE:
                              A MODEL OF PERSONAL RULE

                                           Daron Acemoglu
                                          James A. Robinson
                                            Thierry Verdier

                                        Working Paper 10136
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10136


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2003




Paper presented as the Marshall Lecture at the European Economic Association’s Annual meetings in
Stockholm, August, 24th, 2003. We thank Silje Aslaksen for pointing out an algebraic mistake in the first
version and Alexander Debs for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Daron Acemoglu, James A. Robinson, and Thierry Verdier. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Kleptocracy and Divide-and-Rule: A Model of Personal Rule
Daron Acemoglu, James A. Robinson, and Thierry Verdier
NBER Working Paper No. 10136
December 2003
JEL No. O12, H00

                                           ABSTRACT

Many developing countries have suffered under the personal rule of "kleptocrats", who implement

highly inefficient economic policies, expropriate the wealth of their citizens, and use the proceeds

for their own glorification or consumption. We argue that the success of kleptocrats rests, in part,

on their ability to use a "divide-and-rule" strategy, made possible by weaknesses in the institutions

in these societies. Members of society need to cooperate in order to depose a kleptocrat, yet such

cooperation may be defused by imposing punitive rates of taxation on any citizen who proposes such

a move, and redistributing the benefits to those who need to agree to it. Thus the collective action

problem can be intensified by threats which remain off the equilibrium path. In equilibrium, all are

exploited and no one challenges the kleptocrat. Kleptocratic policies are more likely when foreign

aid and rents from natural resources provide rulers with substantial resources to buy off opponents;

when opposition groups are shortsighted; when the average productivity in the economy is low; and

when there is greater inequality between producer groups (because more productive groups are more

difficult to buy off).

Daron Acemoglu                                        Thierry Verdier
MIT                                                   DELTA-ENS
Department of Economics, E52-380                      48 Boulevard Jourdan
50 Memorial Drive                                     Paris 75014
Cambridge, MA 02142                                   France
and NBER                                              tv@java.ens.fr
daron@mit.edu

James A. Robinson
Department of Political Science
and Department of Economics
University of California at Berkeley
210 Barrows Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
jamesar@socrates.berkeley.edu
                                        1   Introduction

Many countries in Africa and the Caribbean suﬀer under "kleptocratic" regimes, where
the state is controlled and run for the benefit of an individual, or a small group, who use
their power to transfer a large fraction of society’s resources to themselves. Examples of
kleptocratic regimes include the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Zaire) under Mobutu
Sese Seko, the Dominican Republic under Rafael Trujillo, Haiti under the Duvaliers,
Nicaragua under the Somozas, Uganda under Idi Amin, Liberia under Charles Taylor,
and the Philippines under Ferdinand Marcos. In all these cases, kleptocratic regimes
appear to have been disastrous for economic performance and caused the impoverishment
of the citizens.
       A study of the political economy of such regimes must depart from the standard
presumptions of most research in economics and political science, which assume that
rulers make choices within "strongly-institutionalized polities".1 In these polities, formal
political institutions, such as the constitution, the structure of the legislature, or electoral
rules, place constraints on the behavior of politicians and political elites, and directly
influence political outcomes. In contrast, kleptocracy emerges in "weakly-institutionalized
polities," where formal institutions neither place significant restrictions on politicians’
actions nor make them accountable to citizens.
       While the academic study of strongly-institutionalized polities is well advanced (e.g.
Shepsle and Weingast, 1995, Cox, 1997, Persson and Tabellini, 2000, 2003), there are
few studies, and less of a consensus, on the nature of weakly-institutionalized polities.
What determines corruption, rent extraction and bad policies when institutions are weak?
Indeed, the qualitative nature of politics appears to diﬀer markedly between strongly and
weakly-institutionalized polities: when institutions are strong, citizens punish politicians
by voting them out of power; when institutions are weak, politicians punish citizens who
fail to support them. When institutions are strong, politicians vie for the support and
endorsement of interest groups; when institutions are weak, politicians create and control
interest groups. When institutions are strong, citizens demand rights; when institutions
are weak, citizens beg for favors.
       The research program proposed in this paper is a systematic study of policymaking
in weakly-institutionalized societies, and ultimately, a study of the process via which
   1
    We owe this terminology and the distinction between strongly- and weakly-institutionalized polities
to Robert Powell.


                                                  1
strongly-institutionalized societies emerge (see North and Weingast, 1989, for a classic
account of such a process). To take a first step in this program, we construct a model to
study kleptocratic politics. Perhaps the most puzzling feature of kleptocracies, illustrated
by the examples from the Congo, the Dominican Republic, Nicaragua or Haiti, is their
longevity, despite the disastrous policies pursued by the rulers.2 This longevity is made
even more paradoxical by the fact that such regimes apparently lacked a political base
(a core constituency) that supported them. Despite the absence of formal institutional
mechanisms for deposing unpopular rulers, constraints on the behavior of rulers exist even
in weakly-institutionalized societies (e.g., the threat of revolution, or competition from
other strongmen). Why do, then, the heavily-taxed producers or the poverty-stricken
citizens not replace the kleptocrat? Why do they rarely form an eﬀective opposition
constraining the kleptocrat? How can a regime that apparently benefits nobody outside
of the narrowest of cliques survive? Our basic answer is that this is because the absence
of strong institutions allows rulers to adopt political strategies which are highly eﬀective
at defusing any opposition to their regime.
       The seminal book by Robert Bates, Markets and States in Tropical Africa, provides
many clues towards an answer. Bates described the web of ineﬃcient transfers and policies
in eﬀect in many parts of Africa, but most notably in Ghana and Zambia, and suggested
the following logic: many of these ineﬃcient policies are in place to transfer resources
from the population to the ruling groups, while at the same time ensuring their political
survival. In particular, the nexus of ineﬃcient policies appeared to be useful for creating
an environment where any group that became politically mobilized against the rulers
could be punished, while those that remained loyal were rewarded. With this logic, the
Ghanaian government heavily taxed cocoa producers, while at the same time subsidizing
their inputs of seeds and fertilizers. The subsidies could be allocated selectively as a
potential reward for not attempting to change the status quo. Similarly, the exchange
rate was kept overvalued because then the government could allocate or withhold valuable
rations of foreign exchange in order to guarantee support.
       In this paper, we suggest a generalization of this reasoning, which we dub the "divide-
and-rule" strategy. Divide-and-rule is a method used by kleptocrats to maintain power in
weakly-institutionalized polities while simultaneously pursuing policies costly to society.
The logic of the divide-and-rule strategy is to enable a ruler to bribe politically pivotal
   2
     Despite the appealing intuition, perhaps derived from many political analyses of strongly-
institutionalized societies, that rulers who reduce the utility of citizens ought to be replaced, this appears
not to be the case in weakly-institutionalized societies. Many kleptocrats rule for long periods, Mobutu
for 32 years, Trujillo for 31, and the Somozas for 42 years.


                                                      2
groups oﬀ the equilibrium path, ensuring that he can remain in power against challenges.
To remove a ruler from power requires the cooperation of distinct social groups which
is made diﬃcult by the collective action problem (Olson, 1965). By providing selective
incentives and punishments, the divide-and-rule strategy exploits the fragility of social
cooperation: when faced with the threat of being ousted, the kleptocratic ruler intensifies
the collective action problem and destroys the coalition against him by bribing the pivotal
groups.
       More explicitly, we consider a dynamic game between the ruler and two producer
groups. The kleptocratic ruler taxes production and uses the ensuing tax revenue, the
rents from natural resources and potential foreign aid from outside donors for his own
consumption. The two producer groups, if they can cooperate, can remove the ruler from
power and establish democracy (a regime more favorable to their interests). We model
this cooperation as follows: one of the two groups (the "proposer") makes a proposal to
remove the ruler from power, and if the other group (the "proposed") agrees, the ruler is
removed and democracy is established. The ruler-friendly political institutions, however,
imply that before the proposed group responds to the proposal, the ruler can make a
counteroﬀer. This counteroﬀer enables him to use a divide-and-rule strategy: following
a challenge, the ruler uses all his resources and the tax revenues to bribe the proposed
group (and compensate them for future higher taxes if they turn down the proposal and
keep the ruler in power). If he can do so successfully, he can fight oﬀ the challenge,
and anticipating this, no group will challenge the ruler. Therefore, the divide-and-rule
strategy remains oﬀ the equilibrium path, and its anticipation implies that the ruler can
follow highly distortionary (kleptocratic) policies without being challenged. Not only is
the kleptocrat able to stay in power, but the threat of divide-and-rule implies that there
will be no challenges to remove him from power along the equilibrium path.3
       In addition to providing an answer to the question of how kleptocratic regimes sur-
vive and formalizing the idea of divide-and-rule, the model also implies a number of
interesting comparative static results. These results stem not from varying the formal
political institutions, but from diﬀerences in the feasibility of divide-and-rule depends
on the socio-economic environment. In particular, they follow directly from the logic of
divide-and-rule: kleptocracy survives if, oﬀ the equilibrium path, it can successfully bribe
the pivotal group. Consequently, kleptocracy is more likely: (a) when producer groups
   3
    We conjecture that these results extend to an environment with uncertainty, where, along the lines
of the analysis in Green and Porter (1984) and Abreu, Pearce and Stacchetti (1990), punishment will
sometimes occur along the equilibrium path. Obviously, most of the examples in the case study literature
feature situations where divide-and-rule is actually observed in practice.


                                                   3
or their political representatives are more shortsighted, because they put less weight on
future returns under democracy; (b) when there is more foreign aid to the ruler, which
he can use to bribe pivotal groups; (c) when there are greater natural resource rents that
can be used to bribe pivotal groups;4 (d) when average productivity in the economy is low
(loosely speaking, because this makes natural resource rents and funds from foreign aid
more eﬀective instruments to bribe the pivotal group);5 (e) when there is less inequality
between producer groups. This is because the main challenge to the ruler comes from the
more productive group, which has more to gain from democracy. If inequality increases,
it becomes more diﬃcult for the ruler to sustain his kleptocratic policies.
       These comparative static results are useful in thinking about the experiences of a
number of African and Caribbean countries. First, kleptocratic regimes seem to be more
common in natural-resource-rich countries such as the Congo, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and
Nigeria, which is consistent with our result that, as long as producer groups are not too
patient, greater natural resource rents facilitate kleptocracy. For example, Ross (2001)
shows that, other things equal, the presence of oil increases the probability that a country
will be a dictatorship.6
       Second, many accounts of the worst kleptocracies also illustrate how the ruler was
able to use foreign aid (as well as rents from natural resources) to stay in power and fight
oﬀ challenges. The case of Mobutu, which we discuss in the next section, is especially
pertinent here. This negative role of foreign aid on equilibrium policies might also explain
the common finding in the empirical growth literature that foreign aid seems to have little
positive eﬀect on the rate of economic growth in less developed countries, and in fact, it
might even have a negative eﬀect on non-democracies (e.g., Burnside and Dollar, 2000,
Easterly, Levine and Roodman, 2003). In addition there is a large amount of anecdotal
evidence (e.g., Dollar and Pritchett, 1998, Brautigam, 2000, Easterly, 2001, van der Walle,
   4
     However, this result requires producer groups not to be too patient. Otherwise, the prospect of
obtaining some of those natural resource rents in the future, once the ruler is deposed, may make it
suﬃciently attractive to oust the ruler, making kleptocratic policies harder to sustain.
   5
     However, as with the comparative static with respect to natural resource rents, the eﬀect of average
productivity on policies depends on the discount rate of the citizens: if citizens are very impatient, greater
average productivity may make kleptocracy more likely.
   6
     Moreover, the case study evidence also suggests that whether or not resources are a curse depends
crucially on institutions (see Ross, 1999, for a survey). Similarly, Moene, Mehlum and Torvik (2001)
show that the negative eﬀects of resources pointed out by Sachs and Warner (1995) are conditional on
institutions–only countries with poor institutions, specifically weak constraints on the executive, suﬀer
a resource curse. In our model this follows from the fact that once political institutions do not constrain
rulers, natural resources help to facilitate divide-and-rule (in this context, see also Robinson, Torvik and
Verdier, 2002, for a related argument that when institutions are weak, resource booms are a curse because
they intensify incentives for regimes to use ineﬃcient forms of redistribution to stay in power).



                                                      4
2001), and some tentative econometric evidence (Knack, 2000) that foreign aid leads to
worse governance.
       The comparative static result with respect to inequality is also interesting. One inter-
pretation of this result is that kleptocracy is less likely to arise when there is a balance of
power between the ruler and a powerful producer group in society. This is consistent with
the experiences of a number of more successful economies in sub-Saharan Africa, such
as Botswana and Mauritius, which have both managed to become stable democracies
and refrain from the most distortionary policies. A possible explanation is the political
power of major producer groups, such as the cattleowners in Botswana and the sugar
planters in Mauritius, which has placed real constraints on the behavior of political elites
(see, for example, Leith, 2000, and Acemoglu, Johnson Robinson, 2003, on Botswana
and Bowman, 1991, on Mauritius). Our result is also consistent with Bates’ emphasis
that economic policies were less distortionary in Kenya than in Ghana, because large
landowners in Kenya were better able to solve the collective action problem and act as an
important force in politics. The interpretation suggested by our model is that, in Kenya,
the presence of a social class with suﬃcient wealth and power (thus greater inequality
among producers) counterbalanced the power of the ruling party KANU (Kenya African
National Union) under Jomo Kenyatta.7
       In addition to these comparative static results, we should emphasize that kleptocratic
rule can be sustained because of two features of our political game: (1) the ability of the
ruler to make a counteroﬀer after the proposal of one of the groups; (2) the ability of
the ruler to charge diﬀerent tax rates and make diﬀerential transfers to the two groups.
The first feature is plausible in a weakly-institutionalized society where politicians can
exploit their power to consolidate their rule. The second feature is also plausible in the
context of many less developed countries where ethnic, geographic and economic divisions
enable policies with very diﬀerent distributional consequences for various groups to be
implemented. In the next section, we provide a brief discussion of how these divisions
were important in the survival of some kleptocratic regimes.
       This paper is related to a number of diﬀerent literatures. As we noted, weakly-
institutionalized polities have received little attention by political economists. For in-
stance, the political economy literature on dictatorships is very underdeveloped. Most
models are similar to ours in that they formalize dictatorship as the maximization of an
individual’s or group’s utility function subject to the constraint of staying in power (e.g.
   7
    In this context, it is also interesting that in the most extreme examples of kleptocracy in the Americas,
the Dominican Republic, Haiti and Nicaragua, revolution and U.S. intervention destroyed traditional elites
that might have blocked the power of kleptocrats.


                                                     5
North, 1981, Levi, 1988, Grossman, 1991, Grossman and Noh, 1994, McGuire and Olson,
1996, Robinson, 1998, Wintrobe, 1998, Acemoglu and Robinson, 2000b, La Ferrara and
Bates, 2001, Bueno de Mesquita et al., 2003, Acemoglu, 2003).8 However, these models
do not capture the notion that the nature of politics under weak institutions is diﬀerent
than in strongly-institutionalized polities. Our model develops this idea and shows how
this can lead to the divide-and-rule strategy in weakly-institutionalized societies, and how
divide-and-rule leads to very diﬀerent comparative static results.
       Political scientists often distinguish between diﬀerent types of "autocracies" or dicta-
torships. For example, the seminal study of Linz and Stepan (1996) posits the existence
of four types, totalitarian, post-totalitarian, authoritarian and sultanistic. Sultanism,
which is close to what we mean by kleptocracy, is also equivalent to other concepts used
by political scientists. Scholars working in African politics, for instance, refer to this as
"neopatrimonialism", "personal rule", or "prebendalism". In the words of Bratton and
van der Walle (1997, p. 62): "the right to rule in neopatrimonial regimes is ascribed to a
person rather than to an oﬃce, despite the oﬃcial existence of a written constitution. One
individual ... often a president for life, dominates the state apparatus and stands above
its laws. Relationships of loyalty and dependence pervade a formal political and admin-
istrative system, and oﬃcials occupy bureaucratic positions less to perform public service
... than to acquire personal wealth and status. Although state functionaries receive an
oﬃcial salary, they also enjoy access to various forms of illicit rents, prebends, and petty
corruption, which constitute ... an entitlement of oﬃce. The chief executive and his inner
circle undermine the eﬀectiveness of the nominally modern state administration by using
it for systematic patronage and clientelist practices in order to maintain political order."
That such neopatrimonialism is at the heart of Africa’s economic crisis is the conventional
wisdom in political science (see Sandbrook, 1985, Herbst, 2000, Bates, 2001). Jackson and
Rosberg (1982, pp.17-19) note that personal rule is "a system of relations linking rulers
... with patrons, clients, supporters, and rivals, who constitute the ‘system.’ If personal
rulers are restrained, it is by the limits of their personal authority and power and by the
authority and power of patrons, associates, clients, supporters, and–of course–rivals.
The systems is ‘structured’ ... not by institutions, but by the politicians themselves."
   8
     There are interesting comparative static results from the literature on dictatorships. Existing ideas
suggest that better economic policies are chosen by dictators with long time horizons (Levi, 1988, Gross-
man and Noh, 1994), who are “encompassing” in the sense that a large fraction of income accrues to them
(McGuire and Olson, 1996), who do not fear losing their political power (Robinson, 1998, Acemoglu and
Robinson, 2000b), or who have to gain the support of a large “winning coalition” (Bueno de Mesquita et
al., 2003). See also Acemoglu and Robinson (2000b, 2004) for a framework to analyze transitions from
dictatorship to democracy.


                                                    6
      Our contribution to this literature is to provide a formal model of kleptocracy (personal
rule), to systematically investigate how a divide-and-rule strategy supports kleptocracies,
and to develop a number of comparative static results on the likelihood of kleptocratic
regimes and policies. These are all prerequisites to a full understanding of politics in
weakly-institutionalized societies.
      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we briefly discuss
the experiences of two countries under kleptocratic regimes, with special emphasis on how
these regimes were sustained. Section 3 presents a model that formalizes the main ideas
discussed above and derives the main comparative static results. Section 4 concludes.

               2   The Kleptocratic Experience: Two Case Studies

In this section we briefly discuss two classic kleptocracies. The rule of Mobutu Sese
Seko in the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 1965 to 1997 and the rule of Rafael
Trujillo in the Dominican Republic from 1930 to 1961. Our discussion emphasizes several
characteristic features of these regimes. First, both rulers were true kleptocrats in that
their prime aim was to accumulate personal wealth for themselves and their families.
Second, neither regime, despite their longevity, had an extensive base of support in society.
Third, each ruler maintained control of power by manipulating people and groups along
the lines of divide-and-rule. Finally, the grip on power of both rulers was greatly facilitated
by the nature of society, natural resource rents and foreign aid.

2.1     Mobutu Sese Seko and Le Mal Zairois

Joseph Mobutu seized power in the Congo, which became independent from Belgium in
1960, in a military coup in 1965 and quickly established himself as a dictator at the head
of a one-party state, the MPR (Mouvement Populaire de la Révolution). There is no
doubt that the aim of Mobutu was to use the state for the enrichment of himself and his
family. He was a true kleptocrat. In the 1970s, 15-20 percent of the operating budget of
the state went directly to Mobutu. In 1977 Mobutu’s family took $71 million from the
National Bank for personal use and by the early 1980s his personal fortune was estimated
at $5 billion (Leslie, 1987, p. 72). Turner and Young (1985, pp. 178-183) devote six pages
to listing Mobutu’s assets and wealth.
      The social base of the Mobutu regime was very narrow. Mobutu himself came from
a small ethnic group, the Ngbandi, in the Équateur province and there is some evidence
of systematic favoritism towards fellow Équateurians especially towards the end of his
regime. For example, in 1990 46% of the oﬃcer corp, 34% of diplomats and 19% of

                                                7
the MPR Central Committee were from Équateur. Nevertheless, it was relatively few
who constituted the base of support. These people, called by Zairians les gros légumes
or les barons du regime constituted "an inner core of persons with especially close kin-
ship, ethnoregional, or personal ties to the president; variously known as the ‘presidential
brotherhood’ or the ‘untouchables,’ they were able to conduct their mercantile aﬀairs in
blatant disregard for normal legal regulations." (Turner and Young, 1985, p. 398)
   Mobutu used various strategies to maintain power, including the military and nation-
alist ideology, and most notably the philosophy of ‘Mobutuism’ after 1974. However, his
most important strategy was similar to what we refer to as "divide-and-rule," creating an
environment in which any person or group could be rewarded or punished selectively. For
example, Leslie (1987, p. 70) describes this as: "Individuals in public oﬃce are totally
dependent on him for selection and maintenance of power. By frequently rotating gov-
ernment posts, Mobutu manages to maintain uncertainty and vulnerability... He plays
the role of big chief ... bestowing favors on his subjects based on personal discretion."
   Turner and Young, in their seminal book on the Mobutu state, describe the same situa-
tion as follows: "Client oﬃce holders have been constantly reminded of the precariousness
of tenure by the frequency of oﬃce rotation, which simultaneously fuels the hopes of those
Zairians anxiously waiting just outside the portals of power. The MPR Political Bureau,
for example, was revamped a dozen times in the first decade of party life. No one (except
of course Mobutu) has been continuously a member, and only six persons have figured on
as many as half of the membership lists... Insecurity has been sustained among top state
and party personnel by the frequent application of sanctions. During the first decade
of the Mobutu regime, 29 of the 212 leaders went directly from their posts to prison on
either political or corruption charges. An additional 26 were removed on grounds of dis-
loyalty or dishonesty, with penal sanctions... Frequently in presidential speeches reference
is made to unnamed disloyal or corrupt persons in the leadership ranks... Cumulatively,
these devices constitute a powerful mechanism of informal intimidation, and suggest why
systematic opposition has never arisen within the top organs of the state." (1985, pp.
165-166). Later they continue (pp. 397-398): "As a co-optative resource, a pool of vacant
high oﬃces was sustained, ... the sanction for not cooperating ... was imprisonment on
corruption, nepotism, or subversion charges, or exile. Access to high rank in all state
agencies depended upon presidential favor." They sum up the essence of Mobutu’s state
as: "the shifting patterns of membership [of the Political Bureau] ... constituted the very
essence of patrimonial politics." (p. 193).
   Gould’s analysis concurs when he notes that "the frequent cabinet shuﬄes and trans-


                                              8
fers of oﬃcials from region to region ... may be explained as largely reflections of the
president’s skill at using people while they can provide assistance to him and at the same
time keeping factions separated from each other, thus preventing autonomous power cen-
ters from developing." (1980, p. 83)
   The career of Nguza Karl-i-Bond, who started as an opponent of Mobutu in the 1960s,
illustrates the workings of divide-and-rule and the nature of shifting personal alliances.
In the 1970s he was brought into the Mobutu camp and at one point became the foreign
minister. In 1977 he was accused of treason and sentenced to death. In 1979 he was
released and made prime minister. By 1981 he was in exile and gained fame by his book
on the Mobutu regime (Karl-i-Bond, 1982). By 1985 he was back in favor, and became
the ambassador to the United States (Leslie, 1987, p. 70-71). There are many other cases
like this, for example Kamitatu-Massamba and Mbujimayi Belshika (see Gould, 1980, p.
83). Turner and Young (1985, p. 166) note in this context "though sanctions could be
severe, a fall from grace was not necessarily permanent. Those jailed seldom remained
in prison for very long. Repentance and renewed cultivation of the favor of the sovereign
could make possible a return to full grace."
   The impact of divide-and-rule was catastrophic for the eﬃciency of the bureaucracy
and the state. Leslie (1987, p. 6) notes that in Mobutu’s regime: "what is considered to
be simply bureaucratic disorganization and economic mismanagement by external actors
such as the [World] Bank and the IMF, is to Zaire’s ruling elite a rational policy of
‘organized disorganization’ designed to maintain the status quo."
   Added to this, the personal wealth accumulation of Mobutu and his clique destroyed
much of the economy. The nationalization of foreign owned firms, most of which ended
up in the hands of Mobutu and the regime, under the Zairianization program initiated
in November 1973 was particularly disastrous, destroying what was left of the economy.
According to Maddison (1995) GDP per-capita in 1992 was less than half of what it had
been at independence in 1960.
   What factors facilitated Mobutu’s use of divide-and-rule? During the rule of Mobutu,
the Congo was clearly very poor and characterized by low productivity, making it easy
for him to buy oﬀ potential challengers. Moreover, the Congo is endowed with enormous
natural resource wealth including 15% of the world’s copper deposits, vast amounts of
diamonds, zinc, gold, silver, oil and many other resources (Leslie, 1993, p. 3). This vast
natural wealth gave Mobutu a constant flow of income to help sustain his power.
   The Congo is also a huge and geographically diverse country (see Herbst, 2000, for
an analysis of the "diﬃcult geography" of the Congo) and many scholars have seen it


                                               9
as having a uniquely complex cultural heritage. The common estimate is that there are
about 200 distinct ethnic groups in the Congo (Leslie, 1993, p. 68) and Young (1965, p.
271) argued that "The particular colonial experience has worked to make ethnic loyalties
in the Congo stronger and supra-tribal identification probably weaker than in most other
African states." According to numbers reported in Easterly and Levine (1997), the Congo
is the second most ethnically diverse country in the world after Tanzania. The fragmented
nature of the country, combined with the impact of the Belgian colonial state, meant that
there was no large group or socio-economic class that could oﬀset the power of Mobutu
and help obstruct his personal rule. As we noted in the Introduction, this is in stark
contrast to Botswana and Mauritius where the existence of such classes placed checks on
state power and limited the potential for kleptocracy. Moreover, the regional and ethnic
identification of diﬀerent groups made it straightforward for Mobutu to engage in the
types of targeted redistribution and punishment emphasized in our model.
      Finally, there is general consensus among scholars that foreign aid was a key factor
enabling Mobutu to stay in power for so long. Leslie’s analysis of the relationship between
the Mobutu regime and foreign aid agencies suggests that aid and foreign financial support
was crucial in propping up the regime. She notes (1987, p. 135) "the regime ... views aid
agencies such as the [World] Bank and bilateral donors as sources of foreign exchange,
not partners in development," and also emphasizes that Mobutu and his clique "sees
development assistance as yet another means to accumulate personal wealth" (1987, p.
6). Mobutu made eﬀorts to reform the regime and its economic policies only when "[the
abysmal situation] undermined the confidence of Western governments and investors, and
thus flows of foreign exchange, resources vital for Mobutu and his clique" (1987, p. 142).9
      Thus the Mobutu regime is a classic example of how divide-and-rule can be used to
sustain a regime with little, if any, popular support. One could ask why Mobutu, faced
with ruling such a polity, could not simply sustain himself through repression, rather than
resort to the relatively complex strategy we have outlined. One reason is that Mobutu
always kept the military relatively weak because he could never be sure of its support.
Divide-and-rule was used with respect to military oﬃcers as well as civilian political elites.
When Mobutu needed eﬀective military forces he relied instead on the Belgians and the
French, who could not be expected to repress domestic opponents. The experience of the
Congo during this awful era also illustrates the importance of the factors highlighted by
the comparative statics of our model.
  9
    The reforms were never properly implemented, however, because "[such] reforms strike at the heart
of Mobutu’s patrimonial system and will only serve to undermine patron-client networks, eﬀorts to buy
loyalty, and wealth seeking strategies" Leslie (1993, p. 123).


                                                 10
2.2     The Dominican Republic under Rafael Trujillo

The Dominican Republic, the eastern half of the island of Hispaniola, became indepen-
dent from Spain in 1821. However, in 1822 it was invaded by Haiti, and regained its
freedom only in 1844 after a war of independence. The Haitian occupation destroyed the
traditional ruling elite of large landowners who fled the country never to return. In the
subsequent decades, the country was plagued by serious political instability and a series
of dictatorships. In 1916 the United States took over the country (previously, they had
controlled the customs since 1906 to recover deliquent loans), an occupation that lasted
until 1924. During this period the country was run by a military governor. To establish
control of the country, the United States trained a domestic constabulary, which became
the Nation Army after 1924. Trujillo became the head this constabulary in 1928 and in
1930 used it as a power base to help a coup against the government, after which he had
himself elected President in a fraudulent election. Throughout his rule Trujillo carried
out the facade of elections, regularly being re-elected by 100 percent of the vote and even
on two instances, from 1938 to 1942 and from 1952 to 1961, stepping down from the
Presidency and controlling power from behind the scenes.
       As with Mobutu, there is no doubt about the kleptocratic tendencies of Trujillo. In-
deed, relative to the size of the economy, Trujillo’s regime was probably the most successful
case of kleptocratic accumulation in history. By the end of his regime, the fortune of the
Trujillo family was equal to about 100 percent of GDP at current prices and the family,
"controlled almost 80% of the country’s industrial production. About 60% of the coun-
try’s labor force depended on him directly or indirectly, with 45% employed in his firms
and another 15% working for the state" (Moya Pons, 1995, p. 398).
       Trujillo used many tools to maintain power. He used coercion and force against poten-
tial rivals, and murdered and tortured many opponents. But as in the Congo, divide-and-
rule was a key strategy. As a result, Hartlyn explains that "Trujillo eventually became
the single dominant force in the country by combining abuse of state power, threats and
co-optation. Although certain of the country’s economic elite maintained some individual
autonomy there was no possibility for independent organization" (1998, p. 99-100).10
       How the Dominican version of divide-and-rule worked is explained in Turits (2003, p.
  10
    Those who benefitted from the regime were few outside Trujillo’s extended family. A 1953 New
York Times article (quoted in Wiarda, 1968, p. 74) found that 153 relatives were employed by the
government. Trujillo himself was minister of foreign relations, minister of social security, ambassador at
large, and special ambassador to the United States. Family members held the presidency (his brother),
two senatorial posts, six major diplomatic assignments, the positions of commander in chief of the armed
forces, undersecretary of defense, chief of staﬀ of the air force, inspector general of the army, inspector of
embassies, plus a great number of other posts.

                                                     11
7): "Trujillo continually shuﬄed cabinet members and other important oﬃcials in and out
of government posts to prevent their developing an independent power base. He exerted
still tighter control over the national legislature. Upon assumption of oﬃce, members
of the National Congress were obliged to sign their own resignations, a document that
on Trujillo’s order could be handed to them at any moment... In certain cases, these
resignations were reportedly delivered to legislators in the middle of their speeches before
the assembly. In the 1942 to 1947 period, for example, there were 32 resignations in a
Senate of 19 members, and 139 resignations in a House composed of 42 deputies."
   Wiarda’s analysis is similar: "Trujillo’s was a highly personalistic dictatorship in which
power was not shared, even among a small clique, but concentrated in the hands of one
man" (1968, p. 26). He further demonstrates that "Trujillo’s principal method of con-
trolling the governmental machinery was the constant shuﬄing and reshuﬄing of political
oﬃceholders. He had the constitutional authority ... to appoint and remove almost all
government personnel and he used his power extensively. In addition, he kept a file of
signed but updated resignations for all government employees, and oﬃcials frequently ar-
rived at work only to learn that Trujillo had filled in the date and that they had ‘resigned.’
The technique of shuﬄing government personnel was employed for the same reason as Tru-
jillo’s frequent changing of the armed forces and police commands ... Anyone who gained
a powerful position could expect to be replaced ... no potential opposition power centers
were allowed to develop" (1968, p. 62). Wiarda continues:

         "Trujillo’s technique was to fragment the power of the many and, corre-
      spondingly, to concentrate all authority in his own hands." (p. 62)

   As in Zaire, people who were demoted, jailed or exiled were often pardoned and re-
turned to positions of power (Wiarda, 1968, p. 63 and Crassweller, 1966, for many
examples). Hartly (1998, p. 100) adds: "Politically, Trujillo combined guile, cynicism,
ruthlessness and co-optation. There was ... incredible manipulation of individuals, who
found themselves moved and removed from public oﬃce in complex and disconcerting
fashion even as personal rivalries were promoted and tested."
   Trujillo also employed the strategy of divide-and-rule to control the rural sector. Turits
(2003, pp. 82-83, 95) describes this as follows: "in exchange for land access and state
assistance, peasants were compelled to farm in a more sedentary, intensive and land
eﬃcient manner... The dual nature of the Trujillo state’s protección, or support, of the
peasantry was evident in the severe methods it used to augment peasant production.
The state distributed rewards to those it deemed ‘man of work’ by variously providing

                                             12
them with land, irrigation, tools, seeds, credit, and technical assistance, while it harshly
punished with vagrant penalties (jail and forced labor) and withdrawal of usufruct rights
those it considered to be idle... The distribution of lands under Trujillo was represented
as a gift more than a right and thus served to dramatize the dictator’s personal power."
Most notably, Turits (2003, p. 113) explains:11 "the state’s mediation of peasants’ access
to land fostered a high level of political control. All individuals who wished to obtain land
had to supply a certificate of ‘good conduct’ from the neighborhood authority... Certainly
anyone suspected of political disloyalty ... would be excluded."
       The divide-and-rule strategy was facilitated by the extraordinary control that Trujillo
accumulated over the economy. According to Wiarda (1968, pp. 87, 90-91): "Trujillo
could hire and fire whom he pleased when he pleased. Since the great majority of the
population was absolutely dependent on him for day-to-day existence, his control over it
was assured ... there was so little economic independence that even a bare minimum of
political independence was impossible... Trujillo frequently employed his economic power
to destroy his political opponents. Banks could and did ... refuse loans and foreclose
mortgages; government agencies refused export or import permits ... electricity or phone
services were interrupted; and streets and sidewalks infront of selected business establish-
ments were torn up."
       As with divide-and-rule in the Congo, one eﬀect was to destroy the eﬃciency of much
of the state machinery. Turits (2003, p. 140) notes: "confusion within the state was
an almost inevitable by-product of Trujillo’s system of continually circulating high-level
functionaries into diﬀerent positions almost every year for the purposes of maintaining
his control." Nevertheless, economic performance under Trujillo was not as bad as under
Mobutu. Though there appears to be no reliable national account data for this period, the
scholarly consensus appears to be that the Dominican Republic experienced some growth
during Trujillo’s rule.
       What facilitated divide-and-rule in the Dominican Republic? Unlike the Congo, not
all the factors suggested by our model fit the Dominican experience. For example, though
the country has very rich agricultural lands, it does not have large quantities of minerals,
oil, or other natural resources. Also the Trujillo regime took place in a period before
the existence of the IMF, World Bank and much international development assistance,
so this cannot have played an important role in sustaining the regime. Although the
United States was generally friendly to the regime, it did not provide great quantities
  11
    Turits (2003) interestingly claims that despite the manipulative nature of the relationship between
Trujillo and the peasantry, the fact that Trujillo did actually give peasants access to land created quite
a large degree of support for his regime.


                                                   13
of financial assistance. However, two factors clearly are important. When Trujillo took
power in 1930 the Dominican Republic was a very poor country and this made it relatively
feasible for Trujillo to buy oﬀ support. Moreover, although the country is not ethnically
heterogeneous in the way the Congo is, the impact of the 19th century Haitian occupation
and the United States military intervention, meant that there was no organized traditional
elite to counterbalance Trujillo’s rise to power and kleptocratic tendencies.

                                       3     A Model

We now outline a simple model to formalize the ideas discussed above, and to illustrate
how, in weakly-institutionalized societies, a kleptocratic regime sustained by a divide-
and-ruled strategy can emerge. Our purpose is not generality, but to construct a simple
framework, which can be used to derive new comparative static results on the incidence
and sustainability of kleptocratic regimes.

3.1    The Environment

We consider a small open economy (alternatively, an economy with linear technology)
producing three goods: a natural resource, Z, and two goods, q1 and q2 . We normalize
the prices of all goods to 1, which is without loss of any generality, since we will allow
diﬀerences in the technology of production of the two goods. To start with, we focus on
the case where the production of the natural resource good Zt is constant in all periods,

                                            Zt = Z.

Natural resources create rents in this economy, which, in turn, aﬀect political equilibria.
We assume that the natural resource rents accrue to the government, and can then be
distributed to the producers or consumed by the ruler.
      There are two (large) groups of agents, n1 that produce q1 and n2 that produce q2 .
We normalize n1 = n2 = 1. Both groups have utility at time t given by:
                    X ∞                       X∞     µ               ¶
                          s                        s        η 1+η  η
                         β uis (yis , lis ) =     β yis −       lis                     (1)
                     s=t                      s=t
                                                          1 + η

where β < 1 is the discount factor, yit denotes their after-tax income, and lit is labor
supply at time t. This specification implies that labor is supplied with elasticity η > 0.
      For each producer of group i, the production technology is:

                                           qit = ωi lit ,                               (2)

                                                14
where ωi is the productivity of group i = 1, 2. Without loss of generality, we assume
that group 1 is more productive, i.e., ω 1 ≥ ω 2 . To parametrize the degree of inequality
between the two groups, we denote:

                                  ω 1 = ω(1 + x) and ω 2 = ω(1 − x),                                       (3)

where, by construction, ω is the average productivity of the economy, and x ∈ [0, 1]. A
greater x corresponds to greater inequality between the two groups.
    The only redistributive tools in the economy are a linear income tax that is potentially
specific to each group, and group-specific lump-sum transfers. The option to use group-
specific taxes and transfers are important for the results, and plausible in the context
of African societies, where there are clear geographic and ethnic distinctions between
producer groups.12 The post-tax income of the two groups are

                                         yit = (1 − τ it ) ω i lit + Tit ,                                 (4)

where τ it ∈ [0, 1] is the income tax imposed on group i at time t and Tit ∈ [0, ∞) is a
(non-negative) lump-sum transfer to group i.
    In each period, each producer maximizes his utility function (1) taking the tax rate
τ it as given. This implies a labor supply function:

                                         lit (τ it ) = [(1 − τ it ) ωi ]η .                                (5)

This equation relates labor supply, and therefore output, to taxes, and illustrates the
distortionary eﬀects of taxation: greater taxes reduce labor supply and output.
    Using (5), the instantaneous indirect utility of a representative agent in group i is
found to be:
                                                    1
                              Ui (τ it , Tit ) =       [ωi (1 − τ it )]1+η + Tit ,                         (6)
                                                   1+η
and tax revenues are:

         R(τ 1t , τ 2t ) = τ 1t q1t + τ 2t q2t = τ 1t (1 − τ 1t )η ω 1 1+η + τ 2t (1 − τ 2t )η ω 2 1+η .   (7)

The government budget constraint is

                               T1t + T2t + CKt ≤ R(τ 1t , τ 2t ) + Z + Ft ,                                (8)
  12
     In practice, diﬀerential taxes also include indirect taxes levied on the producer and consumer groups,
as well as the use of marketing boards to manipulate agricultural prices, a frequently-used policy in many
African countries (see Bates, 1981).



                                                         15
where CKt ∈ [0, ∞) is the consumption of the (kleptocratic) ruler, R(τ 1t , τ 2t ) is tax
revenue given by (7), and Ft ∈ [0, ∞) is foreign aid, if any. The ruler is assumed to have
the utility function at time t:
                                             X
                                             ∞
                                                   β sK CKs ,
                                             s=t

where β K < 1 is the discount factor of the ruler, which could diﬀer from those of the
citizens.
       The political system is either "dictatorship" (controlled by the ruler), K, or democ-
racy, D. Our focus is whether dictatorship can survive and to what extent it will be
"kleptocratic" (i.e., to what extent the ruler will be able to tax producers for his own
consumption, while ensuring the survival of the dictatorship). To focus on this question,
we model democracy in the simplest possible way, and assume that in democracy the
two producer groups are in power jointly, thus they set zero taxes, and share the natural
resource rents and foreign aid equally (and therefore, set CKt = 0).13
       In what follows, we assume that only the ruler receives foreign aid (i.e., there is no
foreign aid in democracy). More formally, denoting the political state by St−1 , we have
Ft = 0 if St−1 = D and Ft = F if St−1 = K. This assumption is not as extreme as it
appears, since any part of foreign aid that is perpetual can be included in the natural
resource rents, Z, and therefore, Ft can be interpreted as the additional portion of foreign
aid that the ruler receives because under his rule there is more poverty or famine, or
because the ruler pursues a foreign policy in line with the donors’ interests. Moreover, if a
democracy will receive more foreign aid than the ruler, we can allow this by letting F < 0.
Finally, we can interpret F as the fungible part of foreign aid. In this case, even if foreign
aid will continue after democracy it will be allocated to some specific purposes such as
poverty reduction or education for disadvantaged groups. In this case in democracy the
two producer groups will not have access to aid, and this situation is equivalent to the
one here with Ft = 0 when St−1 = D.
       Given this assumption, the instantaneous utilities of the two groups in democracy are:

                                                   ω 1+η
                                                     i    Z
                                         UiD =           + .                                        (9)
                                                   1+η    2
       In contrast, in kleptocracy, the ruler will maximize his consumption, subject to the
constraint that he keeps power (alternatively, he can be removed from power, and in this
  13
    This formulation of policies in democracy is adopted to simplify the discussion, and the results are
robust to more realistic models of decision-making in democracy, as long as democracy is more attractive
for both producer groups than the kleptocratic regime. For example, we could allow the two groups to
be of diﬀerent sizes, and the larger group to impose limited redistributive taxes on the smaller group.

                                                    16
case, democracy will result, and CKt = 0 for all future periods). Before describing the
constraints facing the ruler in detail, let us write the "unconstrained" solution. This is
given by maximizing R(τ 1t , τ 2t ), which is achieved at the tax rates:
                                                                     1
                                            τ ∗1t = τ ∗2t = τ ∗ ≡       ,                                      (10)
                                                                    1+η

and paying 0 transfers, i.e., Tit∗ = 0, thus setting CKt = R(τ ∗ , τ ∗ ) + Z + F . The instanta-
neous utilities of the two groups under these tax rates are given by:
                                                           µ    ¶1+η
                        ∗              ∗             ω 1+η
                                                       i     η
                      Ui = Ui (τ it = τ , Tit = 0) =                  .                                        (11)
                                                     1+η 1+η

3.2     The Political Game and Definition of Equilibrium

The timing of events in the political game are as follows. In each period, t, society inherits
a political state, either St−1 = D or St−1 = K. St−1 = D is an absorbing state, so if the
economy ever becomes a democracy, it remains so forever. If St−1 = D, the two producer
groups play the simple game described above, denoted by Γt (D) for convenience, where
they set the taxes and share the natural resources rents equally. If society is a dictatorship,
i.e., St−1 = K, then the following game, Γt (K), is played:
      1. The ruler announces tax rates (τ 1t , τ 2t ) and transfers (T1t , T2t ).
      2. Each group i decides whether to make a proposal to remove the ruler from power.
pit = 1 denotes that group i has made a proposal and pit = 0 denotes otherwise (if both
groups simultaneously choose to make a proposal, one of them is chosen randomly to have
pit = 1 and the other one has pit = 0). If one of the two groups makes a proposal to
replace the ruler, we denote this by Pt = 1, with Pt = 0 otherwise.
      3. If Pt = 0, then (τ 1t , τ 2t , T1t , T2t ) is implemented and the political system remains
at St = K.
      4. If Pt = 1, i.e., if pjt = 1 for one of the groups, then: the ruler makes a new oﬀer of
taxes and transfers, (τ r1t , τ r2t , T1tr , T2tr ) such that this policy vector satisfies the government
budget constraint, (8). Group i 6= j then responds to the proposal of “proposer” group j
and the ruler’s new policy vector. If the “proposed”, group i, chooses dit = 1, the ruler is
replaced and there is a switch to democracy, i.e., St = D. If dit = 0, the political system
remains at St = K, and (τ r1t , τ r2t , T1tr , T2tr ) is implemented.
      5. Given the policy vector, either (τ 1t , τ 2t , T1t , T2t ) or (τ r1t , τ r2t , T1tr , T2tr ), individuals in
both groups choose labor supply.
      6. Output is produced, tax revenues are collected and consumption takes place.


                                                         17
       7. If Pt = 1 and the proposed group plays dit = 1, then in the next period the stage
game switches to Γt+1 (D), and otherwise it is Γt+1 (K).

       There are a number of noteworthy features: first, we assume that all individuals within
a producer group act in cohesion in the political game. This is a natural assumption
here, since there are no costs of political action, and all agents within a group have the
same preferences, so there is no free-rider problem. Second, there is a specific (political)
structure built in the timing of the political game: the ruler can only be replaced if the
two groups agree to replace him. This assumption captures the fact that in weakly-
institutionalized societies, those controlling the state may have considerable power, and
cannot be easily removed from oﬃce by one of the social groups alone.14 An alternative
political game, where the party in power needs to receive support from all social groups
or compete against potential rivals, would correspond to "political institutions" placing
checks on politicians. However, such strong political institutions are absent in a number
of less developed countries. In these weakly-institutionalized polities, the implied power
of the ruler, combined with the fact that after the proposal to remove him from power he
can oﬀer a diﬀerent policy vector, gives him the opportunity to use a "divide-and-rule"
strategy, which will be the focus of our analysis.
       To simplify the analysis, we will focus on the (pure strategy) Markov Perfect Equilib-
ria (MPE) of the above game (though this restriction is not important for the results).
An MPE is a mapping from the current state of the game (and from the actions taken
previously in the same stage game) to strategies. Here, the only state variable is St−1 ,
which denotes whether the political state is either democracy or dictatorship.

3.3      Analysis

The MPE will be characterized by backward induction. When St−1 = D, there are no
interesting actions, and the ruler receives zero utility, while the two groups receive lifetime
utilities of:
                                                              UiD
                                                    ViD =         ,                                                 (12)
                                                             1−β
with UiD given by (9). Note also that ViD given by (12) is what the proposed group will
receive if it chooses dit = 1 and removes the ruler from power.
       On the other hand, if, in response to the reaction of the ruler (τ rit , Titr ),15 the proposed
  14
     In addition, in some countries the ethnic and social divisions enabling diﬀerent taxes and transfers
on distinct groups may be absent, thus also undermining the logic of the divide-and-rule strategy.
  15
     The reaction of the ruler is the vector (τ r1t , τ r2t , T1t
                                                               r     r
                                                                  , T2t ), but since only the component (τ rit , Titr ) is
relevant for group i, we will use this lower-dimensional vector to simplify notation.

                                                           18
group chooses dit = 0, its members will receive

                                                                                                  βUi (τ ei , Tie )
                                 ViC (τ rit , Titr | τ ei , Tie ) = Ui (τ rit , Titr ) +                            ,   (13)
                                                                                                    1−β

where Ui is given by (6) and (τ ei , Tie ) is the MPE tax transfer combination that applies to
this group. The reasoning for this expression is that in this period, the proposed group
receives (τ rit , Titr ), and the kleptocrat remains in power, so in the future, the play goes
back to the equilibrium policy of (τ ei , Tie ).16
        In addition, the response of the ruler must satisfy the government budget constraint:

                                               T1tr + T2tr ≤ R(τ r1t , τ r2t ) + Z + F.                                 (14)

        The "divide-and-rule" strategy will be successful and the ruler will keep power only if

                                                   ViC (τ rit , Titr | τ ei , Tie ) ≥ ViD .                             (15)

        It is useful to distinguish two cases:
        1. The ruler will be able to maintain power, with the equilibrium strategy of τ eit =
τ ∗ ≡ 1/ (1 + η) as given by (10) and Tite = 0 for i = 1, 2 and for all t. We denote the
set of parameters such that this happens by Σ∗ , i.e., if σ 0 = (η, β, Z, F, ω̄, x) ∈ Σ∗ , then
(τ e1t , τ e2t , T1te , T2te ) = (τ ∗ , τ ∗ , 0, 0).
        2. The ruler will not be able to maintain power if he set (τ ∗ , τ ∗ , 0, 0), thus σ 0 ∈
                                                                                               / Σ∗ .
As we will see below, in this case, the ruler can reduce taxes and increase transfers so as
to maintain power. We will also see that in this case (τ e1 , τ e2 ) < (τ ∗ , τ ∗ ), that is, the ruler
will necessarily be forced to reduce taxes, and policy will be less distortionary.
        To characterize Σ∗ , let us start with the subgame in which group j has proposed to
replace the ruler, and denote the policies initially chosen by the ruler by (τ e1t , τ e2t , T1te , T2te ).
If the ruler responds with (τ rit , Titr ) for i 6= j such that ViC (τ rit , Titr | τ ei , Tie ) < ViD , then he
will be replaced. This shows that the ruler must ensure (15).
        To analyze how, and when, the ruler can do so, let us first define

                                     ViC [τ ei , Tie ] =         max               ViC (τ rit , Titr | τ ei , Tie )     (16)
                                                           τ r1t ,τ r2t ,T1t
                                                                          r ,T r
                                                                              2t


subject to (14). If ViC [τ ei , Tie ] < ViD for i = 1 or 2, then group j 6= i, anticipating that its
proposal will be accepted, will propose to replace the ruler, and the ruler will be deposed.
   16
        Since the deviation does not aﬀect any payoﬀ-relevant variable in the continuation game, the MPE
involves return to the same strategy, and since we are focusing on pure strategy equilibria, this is simply
(τ ei , Tie ).


                                                                         19
Therefore, the ruler must guarantee that ViC [τ ei , Tie ] ≥ ViD for i = 1 and 2 to remain in
power.
   Consequently, we first need to find ViC [τ ei , Tie ], the maximum utility that the ruler can
give to the proposed group oﬀ the equilibrium path. To do this, we need to maximize
(16) subject (14). Straightforward diﬀerentiation establishes that
                                                                    1
                                           τ ri = 0 and τ rj =         .
                                                                   1+η
Therefore, in fighting oﬀ a challenge from group j, the ruler will set the revenue-maximizing
tax rate on this group, and set zero taxes on the proposed group i. In addition, the ruler
will clearly give the minimum possible amount to the proposer group, thus Tjr = 0. Then
the government budget constraint, (8), implies:

                                          Tir = R(τ ri , τ rj ) + Z + F.

   Using these expressions, we can derive the maximum oﬀ-the-equilibrium-path payoﬀ
of the proposed group, as a function of the MPE policy vector (τ e1t , τ e2t , T1te , T2te ). This is
                                           µ   ¶η
               C   e     e    ω1+η
                               i
                                     ω 1+η
                                       j     η                βUi (τ ei , Tie )
             Vi [τ i , Ti ] =      +              +Z +F +                            .           (17)
                              1+η 1+η 1+η                          1−β
This expression is the maximum utility that the ruler can give to group i, following a
proposal by group j, as a function of the equilibrium tax and transfer rates on group i.
   Given this analysis, the problem of finding the MPE is equivalent to finding a solution
to the following maximization problem of the ruler:
                                                       1
                                  max                      [R(τ e1 , τ e2 ) + Z + F ]           (18)
                            τ e1t ,τ e2t ,T1t
                                           e ,T e
                                               2t   1 − βK
subject the constraint set:

                                     ViC [τ ei , Tie ] ≥ ViD for i = 1, 2.                      (19)

   We now characterize the solution to this constrained maximization problem. First,
notice that combining (11), (12) and (17), the constraint set, (19), can be rewritten as:
              µ     ¶η                µ                               ¶       µ 1+η         ¶
ω 1+η
  i
        ω 1+η
          j      η                β        1                  1+η         1     ωi       Z
      +                +Z+F +                 [ω i (1 − τ i )]    + Ti ≥              +       ,
1+η 1+η 1+η                      1−β 1+η                                 1−β 1+η          2
                                                                                      (20)
for i = 1, 2 and j 6= i. Then exploiting the fact that ω1 = ω(1 + x) and ω2 = ω(1 − x), we
can write the constraint set as
                                            µ      ¶
                                                 1
                         Ψ(τ 1 , T1 , x) ≥ Z β −     − (1 − β) F , and                          (21)
                                                 2

                                                           20
                                                  µ      ¶
                                                       1
                              Ψ(τ 2 , T2 , −x) ≥ Z β −     − (1 − β) F,                                    (22)
                                                       2
where
                                               µ         ¶η
              (1 − β) ω 1+η (1 − x)1+η              η           β ω1+η (1 + x)1+η ¡               ¢
Ψ(τ , T, x) ≡                                                 −                    1 − (1 − τ )1+η +βT.
                       1+η                         1+η                1+η
                                                                                                    (23)
Moreover, in the case where there is no inequality between the two groups, i.e., when
x = 0, the constraint set is simply:
                                                            µ      ¶
                                                                 1
                      Ψ(τ i , Ti ) ≡ Ψ(τ i , Ti , x = 0) ≥ Z β −     − (1 − β) F.                          (24)
                                                                 2

      It is already possible to see why the divide-and-rule strategy can arise in equilib-
rium. The constraint set, characterized by (21) and (22), will be satisfied when, oﬀ-the-
equilibrium path, the ruler can shift enough resources to the proposed group. In other
words, a very ineﬃcient set of policies can be supported when each group knows that if it
proposes to replace the ruler, the ruler will bribe the other group successfully and remain
in power. Recognizing this oﬀ-the-equilibrium path threat, no group will challenge the
ruler, who will then be able to pursue kleptocratic policies along the equilibrium path.

3.4       Equilibrium Without Inequality

Let us start with the case in which x = 0 and there is no inequality between the two
groups. First, note that whenever he can, the ruler would like to set the tax rates that
maximize (18), i.e., (τ e1t , τ e2t , T1te , T2te ) = (τ ∗ , τ ∗ , 0, 0). Therefore, the first step is to char-
acterize the set of parameters Σ∗ such that these best tax rates (from the point of view
of the kleptocratic ruler) can be supported as equilibria. Using (24) and substituting
(τ e1t , τ e2t , T1te , T2te ) ³
                               = (τ ∗ , τ´∗ , 0, 0), we immediately obtain the set Σ∗ as the set of parame-
                                 1
                                                  ¡      ¢
ters such that Ψ 1+η                , 0 ≥ Z β − 12 − (1 − β) F , or more explicitly:
     ½                           µ   ¶η            µ     ¶            ¾
      ∗                     ω1+η   η      β ω1+η       1
  Σ = σ = (η, β, Z, F, ω) :             −        ≥Z β−     − (1 − β) F .
                            1+η 1+η        1+η         2
                                                                      (25)
If σ = (η, β, Z, F, ω) ∈ Σ∗ , then the MPE involves (τ e1t , τ e2t , T1te , T2te ) = (τ ∗ , τ ∗ , 0, 0). What
happens if σ ∈    / Σ∗ . Then, (τ e1t , τ e2t , T1te , T2te ) = (τ e , τ e , T e , T e ) will be chosen such that
                 ¡      ¢
Ψ(τ e , T e ) = Z β − 12 −(1 − β) F (given the symmetry between the two groups, the ruler
will choose the same taxes and transfers for both groups). Moreover, inspection of (23)
                                             ¡      ¢
establishes that as long as Ψ(τ̂ , T = 0) = Z β − 12 − (1 − β) F for some τ̂ ∈ [0, τ ∗ ], the
ruler will reduce taxes to τ̂ and sets 0 lump-sum transfers (this is intuitive, since taxes are

                                                       21
distortionary). The important point to note is that the ruler can always satisfy (25), and
therefore remain in power.17 This highlights the importance of the underlying political
institutions in this context: by allowing the ruler to use divide-and-rule, the current set
of political institutions make sure that he always remains in power. Nevertheless, the
extent to which he can transfer rents to himself and distort the allocation of resources
will depend on parameter values as we will see below.
       This discussion establishes the following proposition:

Proposition 1 Let Σ∗ be given by (25). Then we have:

1. When σ ∈ Σ∗ , then the unique MPE is an unconstrained kleptocratic regime where
         (τ e1t , τ e2t , T1te , T2te ) = (τ ∗ , τ ∗ , 0, 0) for all t and i = 1, 2.

          / Σ∗ , then the unique MPE is a constrained kleptocratic regime where the
2. When σ ∈
         equilibrium policies are (τ e1t , τ e2t , T1te , T2te ) = (τ̂ , τ̂ , 0, 0) if
                                                               µ          ¶
                                                                       1
                                Ψ(τ̂ , T = 0) = Z β −                         − (1 − β) F,                              (26)
                                                                       2

         for some τ̂ ∈ [0, τ ∗ ], and (τ e1t , τ e2t , T1te , T2te ) = (0, 0, T̂ , T̂ ) where Ψ(τ = 0, T̂ ) =
           ¡     ¢
         Z β − 12 − (1 − β) F otherwise.

 In both cases, a challenge from group j, i.e., pjt = 1, is met by (τ rjt , Tjtr ) = (τ ∗ , 0) and
         (τ rit , Titr ) for i 6= j such that ViC (τ rit , Titr | τ ei , Tie ) = ViD where ViC (τ rit , Titr | τ ei , Tie ) is
         given by (13) and ViD is given by (12).


       The discussion above establishes this proposition. The only part that may need more
comment is the uniqueness of equilibrium. Recall that if group j makes a proposal to
remove the ruler from power, the ruler will respond with τ rjt = τ ∗ , and when σ ∈ Σ∗ ,
we also have τ ejt = τ ∗ . It may therefore appear that we can construct equilibria where
there are challenges along the equilibrium path when σ ∈ Σ∗ , and thus the equilibrium
described in part 1 of Proposition 1 is not unique. This is not the case, however. Any
  17
    To see this, suppose that for some parameter values, the kleptocrat is removed from power. Then it
must be the case that ViC [τ ei , Tie ] < ViD for i = 1 or 2. But in this case, it is credible for the kleptocrat to
reduce τ ei and increase Tie , and by construction, ViC [τ ei = 0, Tie = Z/2] > ViD , providing a contradiction
and establishing that the kleptocrat will not be removed from power along the equilibrium path. This
argument would not necessarily work when F < 0, however.
  In a more general set up with stochastic productivity or costs of removing the ruler, there would also
be parameter values for which dictatorship cannot survive, similar to, and for the same reasons as, the
models of transition to democracy in Acemoglu and Robinson (2000b, 2004).


                                                               22
combination of strategies where pjt = 1 cannot be an equilibrium. If it were, a deviation
  ¡            ¢
to τ ejt , Tjte = (τ ∗ , ε) for ε > 0 would be a best response for the ruler, and the strategy of
pjt = 1 would then cost group j an amount ε > 0. Since a smaller ε is always preferred
by the ruler, the only combination of best response strategies is when ε → 0, which is the
one described in the proposition.
   This proposition therefore formalizes how the ruler remains in power and is able to
transfer resources to himself thanks to the divide-and-rule strategy. He achieves this as
follows: when threatened by the "proposer" group, he can always gain the allegiance of
the other, "proposed" group, by shifting resources to them. Because the proposed group is
pivotal, the ruler can remain in power if he can successfully buy oﬀ the proposed group. If
this is the case, anticipating this outcome, neither group will attempt to remove the ruler
from power, and he will be able to establish a kleptocratic regime transferring resources
to himself at the expense of the productive groups in society.
   The proposition also highlights the notion of "constrained kleptocratic regime," where
the ruler is able to pursue kleptocratic policies transferring resources to himself, but in
this endeavor he is constrained by the threat that the two groups will coordinate and
remove him from power. To avoid this possibility, the ruler reduces the equilibrium taxes
(or sometimes sets 0 taxes and makes positive transfers) to the two groups.
   Notice that when σ ∈ Σ∗ , the equilibrium does not feature the notion of "punishment",
which was discussed in the introduction. According to this notion, kleptocrats are in power
because they can threaten to punish challengers and reward loyal groups. In this case,
both on and oﬀ the equilibrium path, the group that challenges the ruler is taxed at
                                                           / Σ∗ , τ ej < τ ∗ , and if group j
the rate τ ∗ and receives 0 transfers. In contrast, when σ ∈
challenges the ruler, not only will group i 6= j be bribed to cooperate with the ruler, but
also group j will be punished with the tax increased to τ ∗ .
   Next we turn to a discussion of a number of natural comparative statics in this model.
Most of those are immediate from the inspection of (25) and (26):
   1. Greater F makes σ ∈ Σ∗ more likely, and when σ ∈
                                                     / Σ∗ , greater F increases taxes.
   This comparative static is intuitive: greater F , i.e., greater foreign aid, relaxes the
budget constraint of the ruler and provides him with more resources to buy oﬀ the pivotal
group oﬀ the equilibrium path. Therefore, greater F makes the kleptocratic regime easier
to sustain. This comparative static result suggests that the foreign aid given to many
African regimes by the United States and the United Nations during the Cold War period
may have had the unforeseen consequence of consolidating kleptocratic regimes. As we
discussed in the introduction, this comparative static result may help us understand why in


                                               23
the postwar period, foreign aid appears to have had no positive eﬀect on economic growth
on average, and in fact, it may have had a negative eﬀect on the economic outcomes in
certain non-democratic countries.
      2. Greater β makes σ ∈ Σ∗ less likely, and when σ ∈
                                                        / Σ∗ , greater β reduces taxes.
      Greater β means that both groups are more patient. Since the benefit of replacing the
ruler–greater returns in democracy–accrues in the future, greater patience makes it less
likely that the ruler will be able to maintain his kleptocratic regime. This comparative
static suggests that kleptocratic regimes are more likely to emerge in societies where
citizens or their political representatives value the future less.
      3. If β < 1/2, then greater Z makes σ ∈ Σ∗ more likely, and when σ ∈
                                                                         / Σ∗ , it increases
taxes. If β > 1/2, the opposite comparative statics apply.
      Inspection of (25) shows that greater natural resource rents create two opposing forces.
First, like foreign aid, greater Z relaxes the budget constraint of the ruler, and enables him
to sustain his kleptocratic regime by buying oﬀ pivotal groups when challenged. Second,
greater Z increases the value of democracy. When β < 1/2, the two groups are suﬃciently
short-sighted that the first eﬀect dominates. When β > 1/2, the second eﬀect dominates.
The reason why the relevant threshold is 1/2 is that in democracy natural resource rents
will be divided between the two groups, whereas oﬀ the equilibrium path, the ruler can
pay all the rents to the proposed group. Casual empiricism suggests that the case with
β < 1/2 appears more relevant here, and suggests that natural-resource-rich countries
may be more prone to kleptocratic regimes.18 In fact, the comparative static that greater
rents from natural resources make kleptocracy more likely (i.e., the case with β < 1/2)
may help us explain why kleptocratic and neopatrimonial regimes have often emerged
in resource-rich countries, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Zaire), Sierra
Leone, Liberia, and Nigeria.
      4. If β > (η/ (1 + η))η , then greater ω makes σ ∈ Σ∗ less likely, and when σ ∈
                                                                                    / Σ∗ , it
reduces taxes. If β < (η/ (1 + η))η , the opposite comparative statics apply.
      This result can be obtained by diﬀerentiating (25). The intuition for the result may
be better understood by considering condition (20), which separately shows the eﬀect
of the productivity of the proposed and the proposer groups. Higher productivity of
the proposed group, ω i , makes the condition less likely to hold (and kleptocracy more
likely to survive), because the proposed group has more to gain from democracy. On the
other hand, a greater level of productivity of the proposer group, ωj , makes kleptocracy
more likely to survive, because it implies greater tax revenues that the ruler can use
 18
      The relevant time period here is not a year, so β < 1/2 may not be unreasonable.


                                                   24
to bribe the proposed group. Consequently, higher average productivity ω creates two
opposing forces. When the discount factor β is suﬃciently large, i.e., β > (η/ (1 + η))η ,
the own eﬀect dominates and greater productivity makes kleptocracy less likely.19 This
comparative static suggests that, as long as β is not very low, societies that are otherwise
less productive are also more likely to suﬀer from kleptocratic regimes and distortionary
policies of rulers.

3.5     Equilibrium With Inequality

Let us now return to the case where the two groups do not necessarily have the same
productivity, i.e., x ∈ (0, 1]. First, recall that despite the diﬀerences in productivity
between the two groups, the analysis in subsection 3.3 above established that the most
preferred (unconstrained) policy for the ruler is still (τ e1t , τ e2t , T1te , T2te ) = (τ ∗ , τ ∗ , 0, 0). The
question is when this policy vector will be possible for the ruler.
   To answer this question, recall that σ 0 = (ω, η, β, Z, F, x) is the vector of parameters,
                                                                      ¡     ¢
and let Σ1 the the set of parameters such that Ψ(τ ∗ , T = 0, x) ≥ Z β − 12 −(1 − β) F and
                                                               ¡      ¢
Σ2 the set of parameters such that Ψ(τ ∗ , T = 0, −x) ≥ Z β − 12 − (1 − β) F . In other
words, σ0 ∈ Σ1 implies that if group 2 makes a proposal to remove the ruler from power,
the ruler can make a counteroﬀer that co-opts group 1 even when along the MPE group
1’s members are taxed at the rate τ ∗ and receive no transfers. Σ2 is the corresponding
set for group 2.
       Formally, these two sets are defined by
                  ½                              µ      ¶η
                     0   (1 − β) ω1+η (1 − x)1+η    η
         Σ1 =      σ :                                                            (27)
                                  1+η              1+η
                                       "    µ      ¶1+η #   µ     ¶             )
                    β ω 1+η (1 + x)1+η          η               1
                  −                      1−               ≥Z β−     − (1 − β) F
                           1+η                1+η               2
and
                 ½                               µ     ¶η
                    0   (1 − β) ω 1+η (1 + x)1+η    η
        Σ2 =      σ :                                                             (28)
                                 1+η               1+η
                                       "    µ      ¶1+η #   µ     ¶            )
                   β ω 1+η (1 − x)1+η           η               1
                 −                      1−                ≥Z β−     − (1 − β) F .
                          1+η                 1+η               2
Since Ψ(τ ∗ , T = 0, x) is a decreasing function of x, we have that Σ1 ⊂ Σ2 . In other words,
when the producers in one of the groups become more productive they also become more
  19                                    η                                                      η
    It can be verified that (η/ (1 + η)) is monotonically decreasing in η, with (η/ (1 + η)) → e−1 ' 0.37
as η → ∞. Therefore, for the set of parameters where greater natural resources rents make kleptocratic
policies more likely, while simultaneously greater average productivity make them less likely, we need
β ∈ (0.37, 0.5).

                                                      25
willing to oust the ruler. Consequently, the tighter constraint faced by the ruler is to
satisfy the more productive group oﬀ the equilibrium path. This result reflects the fact
that the more productive group has more to gain from democracy, where its members will
not be taxed (or more generally, where they will be taxed more lightly). The logic of the
political game above therefore implies that, everything else equal, the constraints that the
ruler has to worry about is group 2 making an oﬀer and group 1, the more productive
group, accepting this proposal.
   This observation and a similar analysis to the one in the previous subsection lead to
the following proposition:

Proposition 2 Let Σ1 and Σ2 be given by (27) and (28). Then we have:

1. When σ 0 ∈ Σ1 , then the unique MPE is an unconstrained kleptocratic regime where
      (τ e1t , τ e2t , T1te , T2te ) = (τ ∗ , τ ∗ , 0, 0) for all t and i = 1, 2.

2. When σ 0 ∈
            / Σ1 but σ 0 ∈ Σ2 , then the unique MPE is a partially constrained kleptocratic
      regime where the equilibrium policy combination is (τ e1t , τ e2t , T1te , T2te ) = (τ̂ 1 , τ ∗ , T̂1 , 0)
      with                                                      µ      ¶
                                                                     1
                                           Ψ(τ̂ 1 , T̂1 , x) = Z β −     − (1 − β) F.                     (29)
                                                                     2

3. When σ 0 ∈
            / Σ2 , then the unique MPE is a fully constrained kleptocratic regime where
      (τ e1t , τ e2t , T1te , T2te ) = (τ̂ 1 , τ̂ 2 , T̂1 , T̂2 ) with
                                                                       µ      ¶
                                                                            1
                             Ψ(τ̂ 1 , T̂1 , x) = Ψ(τ̂ 2 , T̂2 , −x) = Z β −     − (1 − β) F.              (30)
                                                                            2

   This proposition extends Proposition 1 to a situation with potential heterogeneity in
the productivities of the two groups. It also introduces the notion of partially- and fully-
constrained kleptocratic regimes: as before, an unconstrained kleptocratic regime pursues
the policy most preferred by the ruler. When it is partially constrained, the ruler has to
reduce the tax rate on the more productive group, but can tax the less productive group
as heavily as he wishes. When the regime is fully constrained, the tax rates on both
groups are constrained.
   The comparative static results discussed in the previous subsection continue to apply
in this extended model. The new result here is with respect to x, the degree of inequality
between the two producer groups. A greater x–greater inequality between the producer
groups–makes the unconstrained kleptocratic regime less likely (i.e., it makes it less likely
that σ 0 ∈ Σ1 ). Intuitively, the more binding constraint from the point of view of the ruler

                                                                    26
is to satisfy the more productive group: when this group becomes even more productive,
democracy becomes more attractive for the producers in this group, and therefore, it
becomes more diﬃcult for the ruler to buy them oﬀ when challenged. This comparative
static captures the notion that when there is a strong producer group in society, the
ruler has less room to maneuver, and therefore the unconstrained kleptocratic regime is
less likely to emerge. Loosely speaking, we can say that a highly productive producer
group creates a "balance of power", and this balance between one of the major producer
groups and the ruler prevents the most egregious kleptocratic policies. This comparative
static result might help us understand why kleptocracies are rare in African countries with
powerful producer groups, such as the cattleowners in Botswana or the sugar planters in
Mauritius.20

                                   4   Concluding Remarks

Most current political economy research focuses on the study of politics in environments
where formal political institutions place eﬀective constraints both on politicians and on
political strategies. This approach does not seem suﬃcient to understand the nature of
politics in weakly-institutionalized societies such as Liberia, Haiti, the Dominican Re-
public, or the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In these polities, diﬀerences in formal
political institutions cannot be the main determinant of diﬀerences in policies. For ex-
ample, even though the Congo had several constitutions during the rule of Mobutu, it
appears that this had little impact on his behavior. For example, Gould (1980, p. 63)
shows that the 1974 Zairian Constitution put Mobutu: "above the constitution, giving
him the right ... to run for president as often as he wishes, to modify the conditions
governing elections, to change the number of seats on the Political Bureau [the governing
body of Mobutu’s political party and eﬀectively of the state], to dismiss as many polit-
ical commissioners as he would like, and indeed to abrogate the constitution as he sees
fit." Indeed, Mpinga Kasenda, a professor of law and subsequently Zairian prime minister
noted in 1975 before an audience at the Institut Royal des Relacions Internacionales in
Brussels that (quoted in Turner and Young, 1985, p. 70): "Zairians have no need to refer
to Montesquieu to determine what form of government they need."
       Such a situation is perhaps extreme. Zimbabwe currently has a much more conven-
  20
     Note, however, that a diﬀerent timing of events might lead to the opposite comparative static with
respect to inequality. For example, if after the two groups agree, the ruler can make a counteroﬀer to
one of the groups, then he will always choose the “weakest link”, the group more likely to agree, which
will be the less productive group. In that case, greater inequality may make kleptocracy more likely. We
believe that the timing of moves in the political game in the text is more plausible.


                                                  27
tional constitution, written during the Lancaster House negotiations of 1979 with the
British government before the end of the Rhodesian state. Nevertheless, it is clear that
the Mugabe regime acts in flagrant disregard for the formal structure of the constitution.
   Motivated by these observations, and as a first step on the road to building a framework
for analysis of weakly-institutionalized polities, we developed a model of how kleptocratic
rulers that expropriate the wealth and incomes of their citizens remain in power without
a significant base of support in society. The success of kleptocrats rests on their ability
to use a particular type of political strategy–"divide-and-rule". Members of society
(producer groups) need to cooperate in order to depose a kleptocrat. The kleptocrat
may undermine such cooperation, however, by using the tax revenues, the rents from
natural resources and the funds from foreign aid to bribe other groups to maintain his
position. Thus kleptocrats can intensify the collective action problem by threats which
remain oﬀ the equilibrium path. In equilibrium, all are exploited and no one challenges the
kleptocrat because of the threat of divide-and-rule. We argue that such a model provides a
good stylistic description of the behavior of many kleptocratic regimes, including Mobutu
Sese Seko in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Zaire) and Rafael Trujillo in the
Dominican Republic.
   Our model not only formalizes divide-and-rule, but yields a number of comparative
static results useful in thinking about the emergence, longevity and implications of klep-
tocracy. We showed that foreign aid and rents from natural resources typically help
kleptocratic rulers by providing them with greater resources to buy oﬀ opponents. Klep-
tocratic policies are also more likely to arise when producer groups or their political rep-
resentatives are shortsighted and when the average productivity in the economy is low.
Also interestingly, greater inequality between producer groups may constrain kleptocratic
policies because more productive groups are more diﬃcult to buy oﬀ. We discussed how
these comparative static results are useful in interpreting a number of cases of kleptocratic
rule.
   We view this paper as only a first tentative step towards a systematic analysis of
equilibrium politics in weakly-institutionalized polities. To understand the political econ-
omy of less developed societies, we need a theory of behavior and change in weakly-
institutionalized societies. We developed a simple model to study a specific aspect of
political behavior that seems to be endemic in such polities, but did not attempt to ana-
lyze how weakly-institutionalized societies may develop their institutions, and what makes
a society possess weak institutions in the first place. These are not only important, but
also exciting areas for future research.


                                             28
                                   5   References

  Abreu, Dilip, David G. Pearce and Ennio Stacchetti (1990) "Toward a Theory
of Discounted Repeated Games with Imperfect Monitoring," Econometrica, 58, 1041-1063.
   Acemoglu, Daron (2003) "Why Not a Political Coase Theorem?" forthcoming in
the Journal of Comparative Economics.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001) "Colonial
Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation," American Economic
Review, 91, pp. 1369-1401.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2003) "An
African Success Story: Botswana." In In Search of Prosperity: Analytic Narratives on
Economic Growth edited by Dani Rodrik, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2000a) “Why did the West Extend
the Franchise? Democracy, Inequality and Growth in Historical Perspective,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 115, pp. 1167-1199.
   Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson (2000b) "Political Losers as Barriers
to Economic Development", American Economic Review, 90, pp. 126-130.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2004) Economic Origins of Dicta-
torship and Democracy, book manuscript, forthcoming.
   Bates, Robert H. (1981) Markets and States in Tropical Africa, Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press.
   Bates, Robert H. (1989) Beyond the Miracle of the Market, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
   Bates, Robert E. (2001) Prosperity and Violence: The Political Economy of De-
velopment, New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
   Bowman, Larry W. (1991) Mauritius: Democracy and Development in the Indian
Ocean, Boulder: Westview Press.
   Bratton, Michael and Nicolas van de Walle (1997) Democratic Experiments in
Africa: Regime Transitions in Comparative Perspective, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
   Brautigam, Deborah (2000) Aid Dependence and Governance, Stckholm: Almqvist
and Wicksell.
   Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce D., James D. Morrow, Randolph M. Siverson
and Alastair Smith (2003) The Logic of Political Survival, Cambridge: MIT Press.
   Burnside, Craig and David Dollar (2000) "Aid, Policies and Growth," American
Economic Review, 90, pp. 847-68.

                                            29
   Cox, Gary W. (1997) Making Votes Count, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Crassweller, Robert D. (1966) Trujillo: The Life and Times of a Caribbean Dic-
tator, New York: Macmillan.
   Dollar, David and Lant Pritchett (1998) Assessing Aid; What Works, What
Doesn’t, and Why, New York: Oxford University Press.
   Easterly, William (2001) The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists’ Adventures
and Misadventures in the Tropics, Cambridge: MIT Press.
   Easterly, William and Ross Levine (1997) "Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies
and Ethnic Divisions," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, pp. 1203-1250.
   Easterly, William, Ross Levine and David Roodman (2003) "New Data, New
Doubts: Revisiting ‘Aid, Policies, and Growth"’, Center for Global Development Working
Paper # 26. http://www.cgdev.org/wp/cgd_wp026.pdf
   Gould, David J. (1980) Bureaucratic Corruption and Underdevelopment in the
Third World: The Case of Zaire, New York: Pergamon Press.
   Green, Edward J. and Robert H. Porter (1984) "Noncooperative Collusion
under Imperfect Price Information," Econometrica, 52, pp. 87-100.
   Grossman, Herschel I. (1991) "A General Equilibrium Model of Insurrections,"
American Economic Review, 81, pp. 912-921.
   Grossman, Herschel I. and S.J. Noh (1994) "Proprietary Public Finance and
Economic Welfare," Journal of Public Economics, 53, pp. 187-204.
   Hartlyn, Jonathan (1998) "The Trujillo Regime in the Dominican Republic," in
Chehabi, H.E. and Juan J. Linz eds. Sultanistic Regimes, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
   Herbst, Jeﬀrey I. (2000) States and Power in Africa: Comparative Lessons in
Authority and Control, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
   Jackson, Robert H. and Carl G. Rosberg (1982) Personal Rule in Black Africa,
Berkeley: University of California Press.
   Karl-i-Bond, Nguza (1982) Mobutu, ou, L’incarnation du Mal Zairois, London:
Rex Collins.
   Knack, Stephen (2000) "Aid Dependence and the Quality of Governance," World
Bank, Policy Research Working Paper #2396.
   La Ferrara, Eliana and Robert H. Bates (2001) "Political Competition in Weak
States," Economics and Politics, 13, pp. 159-184.
   Leith, J. Clark (2000) Why Botswana Prospered, Unpublished Book Manuscript,
Department of Economics, University of Western Ontario.


                                            30
   Leslie, Winsome J. (1989) The World Bank and Structural Transformation in
Developing Countries: The Case of Zaire, Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publishers.
   Leslie, Winsome J. (1993) Zaire: Continuity and Political Change in an Oppressive
State, Boulder: Westview Press.
   Levi, Margaret (1988) Of Rule and Revenue, Berkeley: University of California
Press.
   Linz, Juan J. and Alfred Stepan (1996) Problems of Democratic Transition and
Consolidation: Southern Europe, South America, and post-communist Europe, Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
   Maddison, Angus (1995) Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1992, Paris: OECD
Development Centre.
   McGuire, Martin C. and Mancur C. Olson (1996) "The Economics of Autoc-
racy and Majority Rule," Journal of Economic Literature, 34, pp. 72-96.
   Mehlum, Halvar, Karl Ove Moene and Ragnar Torvik (2001) "Institutions
and the Resource Curse," Department of Economics, University of Oslo,
   http://econwpa.wustl.edu/eps/ge/papers/0210/0210004.pdf
   Moya Pons, Frank (1995) The Dominican Republic: A National History, Princeton:
Markus Weiner.
    North, Douglass C. (1981) Structure and Change in Economic History, New York:
W.W. Norton & Co.
   North, Douglass C. and Barry R. Weingast (1989) "Constitutions and Com-
mitment: The Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century
England" Journal of Economic History, 49, pp. 803-832.
   Olson, Mancur C. (1965) The Logic of Collective Action; Public Goods and the
Theory of Groups, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
   Olson, Mancur C. (2000) Power and Prosperity, New York: Basic Books.
   Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2000) Political Economics: Explaining
Economic Policy, Cambridge: MIT Press.
   Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2003) The Economic Eﬀects of Consti-
tutions: What Do the Data Say? Cambridge: MIT Press.
   Robinson, James A. (1998) "Theories of ‘Bad Policy’," Journal of Policy Reform,
3, pp. 1-46.
   Robinson, James A., Ragnar Torvik and Thierry Verdier (2002) "Political
Foundations of the Resource Curse," CEPR Discussion Paper #3422.
   Ross, Michael (1999) "The Political Economy of the Resource Curse," World Pol-


                                          31
itics, 51, pp. 297-322.
   Ross, Michael (2001) "Does Oil Hinder Democracy?" World Politics, 53, pp. 325-
361.
   Sachs, Jeﬀery D. and Andrew Warner (1995) "Natural Resource Abundance
and Economic Growth," Harvard Institute for International Development, Development
Discussion Paper no. 517.
   Sandbrook, Richard (1985) The Politics of Africa’s Economic Stagnation, New
York: Cambridge University Press.
   Shepsle, Kenneth A. and Barry R. Weingast (1995) Positive Theories of Con-
gressional Institutions, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
   Turits, Richard Lee (2003) Foundations of Despotism: Peasants, The Trujillo
Regime, and Modernity in Dominican History, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
   Turner, Thomas and Crawford Young (1985) The Rise and Decline of the
Zairian State, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
   Van de Walle, Nicolas (2001) African Economies and the Politics of Permanent
Crisis, 1979-1999, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Wiarda, Howard J (1968) Dictatorship and Development: The Method’s of Control
in Trujillo’s Dominican Republic, Gainesville: University of Florida Press.
   Wintrobe, Ronald (1998) The Political Economy of Dictatorship, New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
   Young, Crawford (1965) Politics in the Congo, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.




                                           32
