                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE PROPER MEASUREMENT OF GOVERNMENT BUDGET
          DEFICITS: COMPREHENSIVE WEALTH ACCOUNTING OR
        PERNANENT INCOME ACCOUNTING FOR THE PUBLIC SECTOR:
        ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR POLICY EVALUATION AND DESIGN



                         Willern H. Buiter


                      Working Paper No.   1013




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RES EPLRC H
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                          November 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBERts research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper 111013
                                                  November 1982



         The Proper Measurement of Government Budget Deficits:
   Comprehensive Wealth Accounting or Permanent Income Accounting
for the Public Sector: Its Implications for Policy Evaluation and Design


                              ABSTRACT


     The paper studies budgetary, financial and monetary policy evaluation
and design using a comprehensive wealth or permanent income accounting
framework. A set of stylized balance sheets and permanent income accounts
is constructed for the public, private and overseas sectors. These are
then contrasted with the conventionally measured balance sheet and flow
of funds accounts. This permits a new look at the issues of "crowding out"
and the "eventual monetization of fiscal deficits."

     The conventionally measured public sector financial surplus, even
when evaluated at constant prices or as a proportion of GNP, presents a
potentially very misleading picture of the change in the real net worth
of the public sector. One reason is that capital gains and losses on out—
standing stocks of marketable financial assets and liabilities are not
included in the flow of funds. This includes changes in the real value
of nominally denominated public sector debt due to inflation. A second
reason is the omission of revaluations in non—marketable (and often merely
implicit) assets and liabilities such as the future stream of tax receipts
and the future stream of benefit payments.

      The paper then proposes some general rules for the design of stabili-
zation policy——policies to facilitate expenditure smoothing by avoiding or
minimizing the incidence of capital market imperfections. Both national
governments and international agencies should design fiscal, financial
and budgetary policies so as to induce an evolution of the conventionally
measured balance sheet and flow of funds accounts that permits private agents
and national economies, respectively, to approximate the behavior that
would be adopted if comprehensive wealth or permanent income were the only
binding constraint on economic behavior. This can be achieved by keeping
disposable income in line with permanent income and by ensuring an adequate
 share of disposable financial wealth in total wealth.


                                   Professor Willem H. Buiter
                                   Department of Economics
                                   London School of Economics
                                   Houghton Street
                                   London, WC2A 2AE
                                   England
                                    (01) 405 7686
         The Proper Measurement of Government Budget Deficits:
   Comprehensive Wealth Accounting or Permanent Income Accounting for
 the Public Sector: Its Implications for Policy Evaluation and Des ign*

                                      Willem H Buiter,

                                 London School of Economics
                                          and NBER
                                   September , 1982


                                    I.   Introduction

    This paper studies budgetary, financial, and monetary policy
                                                                            evaluation

and design using a comprehensive wealth and income accounting framework.

The focus is on the public sector accounts, but inevitably some attention

is paid to the private and overseas sectors. After constructing a stylized

comprehensive balance sheet for the public sector and its "fiow counter-

part——the change in real public sector net worth——they are compared with

the conventionally measured balance sheet and flow of funds accounts.


              wa S   writ t en   wh ile Iwas iThT ting   scholar irt t he
                                                                fiscal
Affairs Department of the International Monetary Fund during August
September 1982.  I would like to thank Vito Tanzi, Sheetal Chand, Andrew
Feltenstein, Menachem Katz, Oystein Pettersen, and Arigapudi Premchand
for helpful discussions. Comments made during a Fiscal Affairs Department
seminar by Alan Tait, Morris Goldstein, George von Furstenberg, Mohs1n
Khan, and John Makin were most useful. I am indebted to Marcus Miller
for unscrambling my thinking on this subject on numerous occasions. All
views expressed are strictly my own.
  This research is part of the NBER's Programs in International Studies and
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. The views expressed are those of
the author     and not necessarily those of the NBER, Inc.
                                    —2-


The conventionally measured public sector balance sheet typically contains
                                       liabilities. On the asset side it
only marketable financial assets and

omits such items as the value of the stock of social overhead capital,
                                          mineral rights, and the present
the value of government—owned land and
                                             the liability side it omits the
value of future planned tax revenues. On

present value of social insurance and other entitlement programs.

     The conventionally measured public sector financial surplus, even
                                                 potentially very misleading
when evaluated at constant prices, presents a
                                                                       One
picture of the change in the real net worth of the public sector.
                                                              of govern
reason is that capital gains and losses on outstanding stocks
                                    included in the flow of funds. These
ment assets and liabilities are not

include capital gains or losses due to relative price changes (e.g.,
                                                             real value
changes in thE real value of mineral rights), changes in the
                                          debt due to inflation, and changes
of nominally denominated public sector
                                                     assets and liabilities
in the real value of f0rejgn_curreflCydef0milt

 caused by exchange rate changes.
                                                                       in
      A second reason is that changes in tax and entitlement programs,

 the future revenue base and in discount rates, etc., may significant]-Y
                                                 of taxes and benefits and
 alter the planned or expected future streams
                                       and losses on such implicit, non
 their present value. Capital gains
                                                                       of
 marketable assets and liabilities are part of the Hicks—Simon concept
                                                          accounts.
 permanent income but are excluded from the flow of funds
                                                    measured and the
      The differences between the conventionally
                                                           periods large
 comprehensive accounts can be very large. In inflationary
                                          deficits may be more than offset by
 conventionally measured public sector
                                   —3—

                                  in the real value of the government's
the inflation—induced reduction
                                       conventionallY measured current
nominal liabilities. Changes in the
                                             may be offset or enhanced by
account deficit of the balance of payments
                                                        associated with
changes in the value of external assets and liabilities
                                                               may alter
exchange rate changes. Changes in social security legislation
                                 contributions. With efficient, forward
the future flows of benefits and
                                      changes will not mearly alter
looking financial markets such policy
                                      implications of current legislation
rates or return——when the financial
                                              through changes in the amount
become visible and directly measurable, say
                                         have an effect on current financial
of public sector borrowing. They will
                                            anticipated future deficits may
asset prices and rates of return; larger

raise current interest rates.
                                           and conventionally measured
     After presenting the comprehensive
                                   the private sector, and the overseas
accounts for the public sector,
                                                                   I believe
 sector, I propose some very general rules for policy design.
                                      unreasonable policy norm or objective
 that these rules derive from a not
                               uncontroversial assumptions about private
 and from rather minimal and
                                                                         rather
 sector behavior. To translate these general (and, indeed, perhaps,
                                       is a task that is well beyond the
 vague) rules into concrete policies
                                                        knowledge will be
 scope of this paper.     A wealth of countryspeciflc

 required in each case.
                                        that in a first—best world, private
      The essence of the argument is
                                                                 decide on
                             international organizations would
 agents, governments, and
                                                 and portfolio allocation
  their spending, saving, lending, production,
                                                       permanent income.
  programs constrained only by comprehensive wealth or
                                   —4—


Single—period or other short—run "budget constraints" would not represent

further effective or binding constraints on economic behavior. The perfect
                                                               the first—best
internal and external capital markets required to implement

solution do not exist. Private agents are constrained by the illiquidltY -
                                                       rights, human
and rionmarketability of certain assets (e.g., pension

capital, and expected future tax cuts).    Dearth of suitable collateral

often renders infeasible the borrowing required to spend in line with

permanent income. These cash flow constraints, illiquidity, credit
                                     norimarketabilitY of certain assets and
rationing, lack of collateral, the

liabilities, and a host of otheT capital market imperfections force the
                                                       to depart from the
actions of private agents and national governments
                                                         net worth or permanent
behavior that would be optimal if only comprehensive

income constraints had to be taken into account.

     Flow of funds accounting on a cash or transactions basis and the
                                               of marketable claims is useful
analysis of balance sheets consisting only
                                          the conditions under which the
precisely because it will help identify
                                                                   other
behavior of economic agents is likely to be constrained by factors

 than comprehensive net worth.
                                           a
                                                  accounting helps to decide
      Within   a national economy, conventional

when and how the national authorities, through appropriate fiscal,
                                                        agents to avoid or
 financial, and monetary measures, can help private

 overcome obstacles to spending and saving in line with permanent income
                                                                      of
 (in the case of households) and impediments to production in pursuit

 long—run profit or social net benefit (in the case of enterprises).
                                                   identify the conditions
 Within the international economy it serves to
                                  —5—

                                          should extend or restrict credit
under which international organizations

to nation states to enable them to develop in line with their long—run

potential'. Financial evaluation exercises such as the IMF's
                                                                financial
programing should, therefore, start from two sets of accounts. The first

contains the conventional cash—based flow of funds accounts, the SNA
                                                                          d
income expenditure accounts, and the   conventional   balance sheets of

marketable assets and liabilities. The second set of accounts contains

the comprehensive balance sheets or wealth accounts outlined in the paper

                                                         in real sectoral net
and their "flow" counterparts describing the changes

worth over time and thus permanent income——the ultimate accrual—based

accounts.

     Both national governments and international agencies should design
                                                                      of
fiscal, financial, and monetary policies so as to induce an evolution

the conventionnally measured balance sheet and flow of funds accounts

                                            national economies, to appro-
that permits private agents, respectively
                                               comprehensive wealth or
ximate the behavior that would be adopted if

permanent Income were the only binding constraint on economic behavior.

     Conventional financial planning is, therefore, an essential input
                                                design. Without a set of
into optimal (or even merely sensible) policy

comprehensive wealth and permanent income accounts, however, financial

analysis does not possess the minimal data base required for proper policy

 evaluation and design. Conversely, without the conventional accounts,

analyses based just on the comprehensive wealth and permanent income

 accounts will fail to take into account many of the actually binding

 constraints on economic behavior.
                                   —6—

    "Stabilization policy" as viewed in this paper is potentially useful

                                                 clear contitluouslY. The
and effective even if goods and factor markets

existence   capital market imperfections that prevent private agents
                                               disposable income and nations
from spending in line with permanent private
                                                income is necessary for
from spending in line with national permanent
                                                     actions or rules
there to be scope for stabilization policy policy
                                                 time by removing or neutra-
designed to permit consumption smoothing over

lizing constraints on spending other than permanent income. Successful

stabilization policy keeps disposable income in line with permanent
                                                      financial wealth in
income and ensures an adequate share of disposable

comprehensive wealth. Another necessary condition for potentiallY
                                                      have access to capital
desirable stabilization policy is that governments

markets on terms that are more favorable than those faced by private
                                             have financial options that
agents, or more generally that governments
                                         Mutatisrnutndi.S the same applies
are not available to private agents.

in an International setting for certain international agencies visViS

national governments. The existence of Keynesian effective demand
                                          and factor markets would, of
 failures due to disequilibria in goods

 course, strengthen the case for stabilization policy.
                                                  that it is the government's
      This view of stabilization policy implies
                                      _ransfer_borroWlflg and money
 financing policies_chaflge8 in its

 creation mix—that should be used rather than variations in its spending

 program on goods and
                        services. The latter should aim to achieve the

                                            mix out of national permanent
 best feasible public—private consumption

 Income.
                                   —7—


               II. A Stylized Set of Public Sector Accounts

     Table 1 contains a stylized and simplified "comprehensive" balance

sheet for the public sector. Many definitional problems are ignored:

throughout this paper the terms "government" and "public sector" are used

interchangeably. 1/   It is assumed that a very heterogenous set of assets

and liabilities can somehow be expressed in common value terms. This in

spite of the fact that some of the assets are not marketable (KS0C) or,

even if potentially marketable, may lack a current observable market

price (KG). Some assets and liabilities are neither marketable nor

tangible and merely represent implicit, noncontractual (and reversible)

political commitments (T and N).

     Referring to T, N, and 1 as present discounted values of future

streams of payments or receipts involves a rather cavalier use of certainty

equivalence: the conditional mathematical expectations .of the uncertain

future revenues or outlays are discounted using "risk adjusted" discount

rates.   If, for example, future tax revenues are highly uncertain, T

would be correspondingly small. The relevant horizon is, in principle,

Infinite.

     For many purposes it is better not to try and reduce marketable and

nonmarketable, implicit and explicit claims to a common balance sheet

measure of value. Instead each of the items in the balance sheet would

be modeled as having potentially distinct behavioral effects. The proper

way of handing this will depend on the specifics of the model and appli

cation under consideration.


  1/ See Boskin (1982).
                                       —8—

                                              Consolidated Public Sector
               Table 1. The Comprehensive
                Balance Sheet at Current (Market or Implicit) Prices



                                                                   Liabilities
                        Assets


                                                             Net jterestbeartng
p          K50C:   Social overhead capital                   debt denominated in
    KSOC           (nonmarketable)                           domestic currency, held
                                                             by residents
                   Equity. in public enter-
PGK:
                   prises (partly poten             BF:      Net jterest—beartflg
                   tially marketable)                        debt denominated in
                                                             domestic currency, held
                   Land and mineral asset
PRR:                                                         by nonresidents
                   (marketable)
                                                    eB*H:    Net jnterestbearing
eE*:               Net foreign exchange                      debt denominated in.
                   reserves                                  foreign exchange, held
                                                             by residents
T:                 Present value of future
                   tax program, including
                   social security con-             eB*F:    Net   jnterestbeartng
                                                             debt denominated in
                   tributions, tariff
                                                             foreign exchange, held
                   revenue, etc.
                                                             by nonresideflts
                   (implicit asset)

                    Imputed net value of             pBH:    Net   jterestbeari1g
                                                             index—linked debt
                    the government's                         held by residents
                    cash monopoly
                                                     p81!:
                                                              Net jnterestbearing
                                                              index—linked debt held
                                                              by nonresidetlts

                                                     H:       Stock of high powered
                                                              money

                                                     N:       Present value of social
                                                              insurance and other
                                                              entitlement programs
                                                              (implicit liability)

                                                              Public sector net worth
                                      —9—

For a first pass at the problem of comprehensive wealth and Income

accounting in the public sector, the heroic balance she&t of Table 1

does, however, have its uses.

     Most of the items in the balance sheet are self—explanatory.

Public sector overhead capital is assumed to yield an implicit rental

rSOCp        KSOC which corresponds to the item pGSOC, public sector consumption
     1(° C


of social overhead capital services, on the debit side of the public

sector current account. pGKG is the balance sheet counterpart of the

operating surplus of the public enterprise sector in the public sector

current account. This may well be a negative item for some of the secular

public enterprise loss makers, in which case it should be moved to the

liability side of the 'balance sheet. The present value of current arid

capital grants is not entered separately; it can be viewed as subsumed

under N or T. Net foreign exchange reserves E* are entered separately as

                                                              BF+ BFp
an asset rather than netting them out against B*F or B*F +

For simplicity only nominal capital—certain bonds, and real capital—

certain bonds are considered. 1/

     The treatment of money in this exposition of the comprehensive wealth

accounting framework is somewhat nonstandard. The reason for adopting

this approach is that it represents the simplest way of introducing a

nontrivial role for money. Specifically, it avoids the economy from

becoming isomorphic to a barter economy when, in Section VI, we consolidate

the accounts of the public and private sectors in our investigation of


 1/ See Marcus Mifler (1982).
                                                — 10 —



                                                                                    and corive—
debt neutrality: money as a social asset producing liquidity
                                                                                        assets
nience services does not disappear when private and public sector

and liabilities are netted out. The usefulness of the comprehensive

wealth accounting framework does not depend on the acceptability of this

approach to modeling money.
                                                                          it yields a flow of
       Money has value to the private sector because
                                                                  services. Let M be the
imputed, nonpecuniary liquidity and convenience

nonpecuniary rate of return on money. The value to the private sector

of their money holdings is given by VM in equation (1):

                                                 U
                                                —fi(s,t)   ds

                             H(t)   pM(u,t)e                    du .:./                     (1)
       vM(t)             f



       Assuming    that      the pecuniary and nonpecuniary yields on money and bonds

are equalized at the margin, we also have:


                                                                                            (2)
       pM=i=r+
       Equations (1) and (2) imply that:
                                                                                            (3)
       vM=
                                                                               future flow of
       Let uN be present discounted value of the expected
                                                                                       Assuming
profits to the government from operating the printing presses.

that cash can be produced costlessly, this is given by:

  !/    Or, equivalently, by:
                                           —fr(s,t) ds
                  H(t)                      t
                                                           du
       vMct)      .1
                       (u,t)    pM(u,t)e


       For any variable x, (s,t) is the value of x expected at time t
                                                                                                to
 prevail at time s.
                                                     — 11 -




                                            U
                                           —fi(s,t)ds
                       1                    t
         M (t) =
        II                        H(u,t)e                   du                                     (4)
                   p(t)       f


        Integrating (4) by parts we get:


         M         — H(t) + AM(t) /                                                                (4')
        II (T)
                           p(t)
where
                                                       U
                                                      —J I ( s ,   t   )   ds
                       1                                t
       AM(t) —(4)             f i(u,t)
                              t
                                           H(u,t)e                              du                 (5)



        Thus AM(t), the net value of the government's cash monopoly, can be

interpreted as the present discounted value of the Interest Income the

central bank expects to earn at each future date on a portfolio of govern

merit bonds equal in value to the stock of high—powered money at that date.

        The conventionally measured public sector balance sheet typically

omits from Table 1 all nonmarketable and nonfinancial assets and liabili

ties, i.e., Ksoc, KG, RG, T, N, and AM

        The current and capital accounts of the public sector whose balance

sheet Is given in Table 1 are represented in Table 2. 3/ They are


  1/     Or, equivalently,

                                     —y     (s,t)ds
         M (t) =
                   C
                                       t
        II         i       (u,t) e                      du
                   t


  2/     It is assumed that for any variable x, i(t1, t2) =                          x(t1)   for
t1 t2: the past and present are assumed known.

  3/ See Ott and Yoo (1982).
                I
                    Table    2.   Public Sector Income and Expenditure and Capital Finance Accounts

                                             (At current (market or implicit) prices)



                                                                                      Credit
                     Debit


                                                          Current account

                                      Covernment consumption          I                            tax receipts
p(Gcl080C)                                                                                         (including social
                                      including imputed
                                      rental from social                                           security contributions)
                                      overhead capital                  G c R      G
                                                                       r p,K +r PRR            :   profits from public
                                                                                                   enterprises and ownership
S(P                               :   capital consumption                                          of natural resources
     KsocK80PG)
                                      transfer and benefit                *   *
                                                                       ei E                    :   interest received
                                      payments
                                                                                               :   Imputed return from
i(BU+BF)+ei*(B*h1+B*})                                                        PKSOC                social overhead capital.
                                      interest paid

SC                                    surplus on current
                                      account

                                                           Capital account

                                       gross investment                                             surplus on current account
 pK80K)    .G       C                  in structures
                                                                                                    capital consumption
    '                )                 and equipment
                                                                       a(p$0K50C÷pKG)
—                                      net   financiaL
    [+(a*h1÷n*F'_*)
             •1                        investment
          tU tF
       -sp(B 4-B    )-i-Hj




                                       net purchases of
PRP'
                                       existing assets
                                                 — 13 —




stylized      SNA accounts and have a number of significant shortcomings when

used uncritically as a guide to the changes over time in the balance

sheet——especially as regards the evolution of real public sector compre-

hensive net worth and its components.

       For simplicity I have assumed that government consumption cc and

the imputed rental services from social overhead capital have the same

price, p. 1/ A uniform depreciation rate 6 for different types of capital

is also imposed. Foreign exchange reserves are assumed to pay the same

interest rate as other foreign—currency—denominated financial claims.

All   these    assumptions are for illustrative purposes only.

      The "public sector budget constraint" rediscovered by macroeconomic

theorists in the early l970s is obtained by consolidating the current and

capital accounts of Table 2.               Liputed income and consumption are netted

out. Deflating by the general price level yields the conventionally

measured public sector financial surplus (at constant prices) given in

equation (6):

          —        — Cc — PKSOc 6KSOC            6c — (BH +BF)
      n p                   p               p                 p

      —       j*(g*H + B*F —     E*)   —   r(BH + F) + rG             KG
          p

      + rR "R RG -
                         PKSOC
                                 SOC +     G G + PR       G   — 1     (H +   F)
               p           p                p.        p           p


      _!.(B*'1+ *F_* —
          P
                                       (H+F)          H
                                                      p                            (6)


  1/ Consumption of the imputed services from social overhead capital
can be viewed as a transfer (in kind) from the public sector to the
private sector rather than as an item of public sector consumption.
Alternatively, the services from the stock of public sector overhead
capital could be an input into private production.
                                                    — 14 —



                                             to be a poor indicator of
Even this "real" surplus, however, is likely
                                               sector, as defined from
the change in the real net worth of the public
                                                                   the
the balance sheet in Table 1. This change in the real net worth of

government is given in equation (7):


       d(W)          pKS0SOc+PG*G+G
       dt p              p       p              p

                         i(ñH+BF) e(*R÷B*F.E*)
                                  p
                         p


                     -   (H +         F) -      !+ i(1' - ) +
                     + (P(SOC          -        PK50c   KSOC + (G_ E) .Si. KG
                                                                       p     p
                        pg6oc               p     p




                             PR
                                  -    )—R
                                      PP
                                            PR G    +_(—)
                                                     p Bl+BF+H
                                                        p      p


                     —   (_E)!(B*H+
                          e pp
                                    B*F_                     E*)

                                                                                                      (7)

                         P
                                                                   (6) and (7), we observe that
 Comparing the right—hand sides of equationS
                                                                 the change
 the difference between the "real" or constant price surplus and
                                                               and losses, 2, and to changes
 in real net worth is due to capital gains
                                                        where
 in the value of the implicit assets and liabilities, ,


              PK50c -                                        - £)       KG   + (-? - £) ?-! RG
         =
              pKsoc
                                      P(50 KSOC + (..r.i.
                                        P                      p p               PR PP
                                                                                                      (8a)
                     (Br' + BF +jj              - (e- )pp
                                                       (B*11 ÷        B*F -   E*) -       (T   - N)
             +                                                                        p
                 p                p
 and
                                                                                                      (8b)




 of T and N in nominal terms.
                                  — 15




     As regards Z, the statement that the change in wealth or net worth

equals saving plus capital gains will not come as a surprise to anyone.

The importance of. accounting fully for capital gains and losses on existing

government assets and liabilities in order to obtain a correct understandipg

of the short—run and long—run implications of past, present, and prospective

budgetary, monetary, and financial policies has not, however, been univer-

sally appreciated.

     Considerable interest attaches to behavior by an economic agent,

sector, or group of sectors that leaves real comprehensive net worth

unchanged. Such agents or sectors consume their permanent income and

their behavior is (ex_ante) permanently sustainable. For policy design,

policies aimed at keeping total national (public plus private) consumption

In line with national permanent income, i.e., policies focusing on the

consolidated public and private sector comprehensive balance sheet

accounts, are of special relevance. These are considered in Section VI.

While there certainly exist valid reasons for optimal consumption to

depart from permanent income, such divergences must necessarily be

temporary, with overshooting and undershooting of the permanent income

benchmark canceling in present value terms. Focusing on spending behavior

consistent with constant real comprehensive net worth should, therefore,

come naturally in policy evaluation and design. Note that equations (7),

(8a), and (8b) represent         or realized measures only. For planning.

including consumption planning, the ax ante measures are relevant. They

are obtained by replacing actual changes in prices by anticipated changes

in prices in equations (7) and (8a), and by substituting anticipated
                                             — 16 —




changes in the value of implicit assets and liabilities for actual changes

in equations (7) and (8b).           In what follows, anticipated capital gains and

losses replace the. ex post measures whenever planned private or public

sector behavior is discussed.


                       III. Amortization of Public Debt Through
                             Inflation and Currency AppreciatlO

       Consider first changes in the public sector balance sheet due to

"pure' or general inflation. This is defined as a situation in which all

money prices (including the prices of real capital assets) change at the

same rate, i.e.,


       PKSOC        GR
       PKSOC p                  P


       For reasons of space we ignore capital gains or losses on the implicit

assets and liabilities T and N due to inflation.

       Inflation—induced changes in real public sector net worth            cz'   are

given by:


            =       (B11 + BF + H) + (-2.   — -) (B*11 + B*F — E*)   .
                                       p      e                      p                  (9a)
                p         p


1.     The closed economy

       In a closed economy the last tertn          on   the right—hand side can be

ignored and the reduction in the real value of the outstanding stock of

nominally denominated government liabilities is given by fl'. 1/



     1/ Note that B 0 here.
                                   — 17 —




               (BH+H)                                                   (9b)
           p         p

      Proper wealth accountinng requires that the amortization of public

 debt through inflation should be put "below the line" in measuring the

 financing of the government's net "real" borrowing. 1/ Above the line, a

higher rate of inflation will (if interest rates are free) swell the

measured deficit as nominal interest rates rise with the rate of inflation.

 If the Fischer hypothesis holds and real interest rates are invariant

with respect to the rate of inflation, the increased nominal interest

payments associated with a higher rate of inflation will be matched

exactly by the reduction in the real value of the government's stock of

nominally denominated, interest—bearing debt, Q''', defined by


     2''' jBH                                                      (9c)
               p.p

Subtracting 2''' from the conventionally measured deficit gives the

deficit "at real interest rates"—what the conventionally measured deficit

would have been had all interest—bearing debt been index—linked.   In


models that do not exhibit "pre—Ricardian' debt neutrality, changes iü

the real value of the stock of government interest—bearing debt are the

major proximate determinant of "financial crowding out"—the displacement

of private capital formation by government borrowing, holding constant

the size and composition of the government's real spending program. The

exact nature (degree, scope, and time pattern) of financial crowding out

will, of course, be "model—specific". A number of simple examples will


  1/ Clear statements of this proposition can be found in Siegel (1979)
and in Taylor and Threadgold (1979). See also Buiter and Miller (1982)
and Buiter (l982b).
                                      — 18 —




be analyzed in a sequel to this paper. 1/ The central (and obvious) point
                                                               demands are for
is that ceteris paribus private agents (whose portfolio
                                                           illusion) will absorb
real stocks of assets if agents are free from money
                                                              the erosion in the
additional issues of nominal government bonds equal to

real value of their existing holdings due to (anticipated) inflation,

without requiring any increase in the real rate of interest.          Such govern-

ment borrowing, therefore, does nOt raise the degree to which the public

sector competes with the private sector for real investible resources.

        The ceteris paribus clause of the previous paragraph includes a given

stock of real money balances. Additional monetary financing equal to the

inflation tax on existing money balances ,1L.'i        leaves real money balances
                                               'P P'
unchanged. A conventionally measured deficit equal to 1" financed by
                          H                                         is, therefore,
borrowing an amount           and by money creation equal to
                       pP                                      pP
consistent with constant real interest rates and a constant degree of aggregate

financial crowding out pressure. 2/ Note that subtracting
                                                                  "   from the

conventionally measured defiit yields a somewhat wider concept of the

deficit at "real interest rates" since the real rate of return (ignoring

nonpecuniary liquidity and convenience services) on highpowered money
                                                                         3/
bearing a zero nominal interest rate is minus the the rate of inflation.
                                                                 in the closed
        The argument for public sector inflation accounting
                                                a simplified version of equations
economy can be summarized succintly using


terc.
   2/ It is assumed that borrowing and money creation per
determinants of the demand for public debt other
                                                          se do not affect
                                                 than expected real rates
of return.
   3/ This is the ex post measure. The ex ante  real yields are defined
 in terms of the expected rate of inflation.
                                           — 19 —



                                                                                    = p and define
(1)   and (2). We ignore GSOC, KSOC, and RG, assume that

C' =   KG       (net investment by public sector enterprises) and                    =    T   —
                                                                                              p

(real taxes net of transfers and other benefits). If we assume in addition

that r =        i — P,
                    p
                       then the conventionally measured government budget cons


traint is given by:

                                                                  H
       M + !+ H -         Gc   I + óKG -      ÷    (r   + )   B       + r -        rGKG           (10)
            p                                            pp
The change in the real value of the stock of interest—bearing debt is

given by:

                                                  + r(L + H) —              rGKG    — H           (11)
             (BR ÷         Ge + C1 + KG —
       dt p                                             p                             p

The deficit measure relevant for aggregate financial crowding out pressure

on private capital formation given in equation (11) will, of course,

depend on the amount of monetary financing the authorities are permitting.

Useful benchmarks are (a) monetary financing sufficient to keep the real

money stock constant:                    and (b) monetary financing consistent with a
                                p pp
zero trend rate of inflation:           H =   y H where i             is   the natural rate of growth. 1/
                                        p         p

       Equation (11) answers the questions as to whether the fiscal stance

(defined by Cc, C', and ¶)          and th monetary target (defined by ) imply


aggregate financial crowding—out pressure (..                 (L+
                                                            dt p
                                                                      H                       p


                                                                           BR) > 0) or crowding



in pressure (          (+
                     dt p
                               B) < 0). This issue can be addressed in the short


  1/ Money demand is assumed to be unit elastic in income and wealth.
                                       — 20 —




run   (for a single period), in the medium term (by applying (11) sequen-
                                          interested in) or In the steady
tially for as many periods as one is
                                                    gains or losses on nonindexed
state. Note that inflation—induced capital

bonds cancel the inflation premium in the
                                                 nominal interest payments: in

                                              real rates of interest. 1/
(11) all debt service is evaluated at
                                                    total national (private plus
       For aggregate crowding—out pressure on
                                         useful simple measure is (noting that
public sector) capital formation, a

CI

       4      + 8H KG) =    CC   -   + r(- ÷        - KG)
       dt p                               p


                                                          —     11              (12)
                                     + (r — (rG — 6 )) KG
                                                                p

       The conventional deficit measure is further modified in (12) by

subtracting out net investment by public sector enterprises. Interest
                                 liabilities (B + B11 — KG) are evaluated at the
payments on net nonmonetarY

real interest rate r.     If the net rate of return on public enterprise

                                                                      (r) the
capital (rC —     6) exceeds the opportunity cost of borrowing
"corrected" deficit is further reduced.           If the opposite prevails, the
                                                         — (rG — 6)) KG.
 "corrected" deficit Is larger by an amount (r

        The decline in the real value of total public sector tangible net

 worth Is given by:

        d H+B11
              +8 H_K)=GC_
                   '             R —K)
                          t +r(_+B
                                    G              311

      .dt     p
                               p
                                                                                (13)
                                         +(r_(rG6))KG_!
                                                     pp


 Interest rate varies with the Inflation rate.
                                     — 21




This could be called the inflation—corrected government current account

deficit. Debt service payments and receipts on all assets and liabilities

(including money) are evaluated at real rates of return. 1/

      Some idea of the magnitude of the overstatement of the government's

true borrowing by the conventionally measured deficit under inflationary

circumstances is provided by Table 3a for the United Kingdom and Table 3b

for the United States.

      In 1981 the public sector borrowing requirement in the United Kingdom

was £10.6 billion and the public sector financial deficit £7.5 billion.

The inflation correction In that year atnounts to about £11 billion, using

a variety of estimates. The inflation—corrected deficit was actually a

surplus.   If one notes that during 1981 the United Kingdom economy was

also experiencing the worst recession since the 1930s, there can be no

doubt that the inflation—corrected and cyclically adjusted (trend or perma-

nent) deficit was actually a very sizeable surplus. It is a matter of some

practical importance whether that constitutes wise countercyclical fiscal

policy. The United States during the period 1979—81 also had an inflation

corrected balanced Federal budget. Any      reasonable   cyclical correction for


eertainpurposes,crowdingoutpressureperUflitOfPaCity0ut
put or crowding—out pressure per unit of efficiency labor is of interest
(see, e.g. Sargent and Wallace (1981)). This would involve replacing (11)
by:


      d(+
      dt
          BHp1)
             y
                      Cc +G'+ 6KG
                                 y
                                      -     +(r      pY Y


                             Y       pY
                                                 22 —



               Table 3a. Correcting the U.K. Public Sector Deficit for Inflation


        Public                                                                      Inflation
                                                              Inflation   Inflation
        Sector
                                                              Correction Correction Correction
         Debt
                                        PSFD       PSFD          (1)        (2)        (3)
         (MV)        PSBR   PSBR
                                                   GDP Z      £ Billion   £ Billion   £ Billion
Year GDP Z        E Billion CDP Z    £ Billion


                                                    3.8           0.5         0.6         1.0
1967      81          1.9     4.6         1.5

                                                                   1.4        2.0         1.2
1968      77          1.3     3.0         0.9       2.0

                             —1.0        -0.5      —1.1            1.2        2.0          13
1969      70         —0.4
                                                                   2.1        2.7          1.4
1970      67          0.0     0.0        —0.7      —1.3

                                                                   3.0         3.2         1.5
1971      59          1.4     2,4         0.3       0.53

                                                                   3.3         3.2         1.7
1972      58          2.1     3.2         1.5       2.4

                                                                   3.0         4.0         2.3
          49          4.2     5.8         2.8       3.8
1973
                                                    5.7            7.0         9.3         3.3
1974      43          6.4     7.7         4.7

                                                    7.3           10.3        11.9         3.9
1975      41          10.5    9.9         7.7

                                                                   7.5         7.4         5.0
1976      43          9.1     7.3         8.3       6.6

                                                                  10.1         9.3         5.8
          47           6.0    4.2          5.9      4.1
1977
                                                                   6.2         6.4         6.5
          44           8.4     5.1         8.1       4.9
1978
                                                                  12.3        13.8         8.2
          42          12.6     6.6         8.1          4.2
1979
                                                                    9.6       12.1        10.5
                      12.2     5.4         9.7          4.3
 1980      36
                                                        2.9        10.8        11.7        11.8
 1981      38         10.6     4.1         7.5




   Source: Marcus Miller (1982).

   MV: market value.
   PSBR: public sector borrowing requirement.
   PSFD: public sector financial deficit.
                                            inflation x market value of public
   Inflation correction (1): annual rate of
                                                                    -
     sector debt (mid—year).                            nominal value of public
   Inflation correction (2): annual rate of inflation x
     sector debt.
   Inflation correction (3): based on assumption of a 2 per cent long—run real
     interest rate.
                                             Thbi   3b.   U.S. Federal Deficits and Debt Since 1967


                                                 Par Value of Public             Par Value of Public
             Total Federal Budget               Debt Securities Held            Debt Securities Held
            and Off—budget Deficit              by Private Investors        by Private Investors End of    Inflation       Public Debt
                   Fiscal Year                   End of Fiscal Year          Fiscal Year; 1967 Prices     Correction        GNP Ratio
Year                      (1)                                (2)                           (3)               (4)               (5)
                  .                                                                                                    .

                                                          (in billions of U.s.    dollars)                                           .




1967                      8.7                             204.4                           204.4              5.9               .26


1968                     25.2                              217.0                          208.3              9.1               .25

1969                     '-3.2                             214.0                          194.9            116                 .23


1970                      2.8                              217.2                          186.8             12.8               .22


1971                     23.0                              228.9                          188.7              9.8               .21
                                                                                                      .
1972                     23.4
                                         '                 243.6                          l944,              8.0               .21

                         14.9                              258.9                          194.5             16.1               .20
1973

1974                      6.1                              255.6                          173.1             28.1               .18


                         53.2                              303.2                          188.1             27.6               .20
1975

                         73.7                              376.4                          220.8             21.8               .22
1976

                         53.6                              438.6                          241.7             28.5               .23
1977

                         59.2                              488.3                          249,9             37.6               .23
1978

                                                           523.4                          240.8             59.1               .22
1979         ,           40.2

                                                           589.2                          238.7             79.5               .22
1980                      73.8

                                                           665.4                          244.3             69.2               .23
1981                      78.9


   Source:       Economic Report of the President; 1982.

   Column (3)          Column    (2)   deflated by c.p.i.
   Column (4)      —   Column (2) x      proportional      rate of   change of   c.p.i.
                                       — 24 —




1981 produces a large inflation—corrected, cyclically adjusted surplus.

High U.S. real interest rates in 1981 can only be explained by the fiscal

stance if large anticipated future inflation—Corrected cyclically adjusted

deficits are postulated.

2.    The open economy
                                                      and lend domesticallY or
       In an open economy, governments can borrow

abroad. rTheir financial assets and liabilities can be denominated in

foreign or domestic currency or be index—linked.            Consider equation (9a).

                                          denominated in domestic currency is
The real value of public sector debt

reduced by domestic inflation whether this debt is owned by the private

sector or the rest of the world. While ceteris paribus inflation also
                                                                 financial claims,
reduces the real value of foreign_currency—denominated
                                                                    holds
exchange rate depreciation increases it. If purchasing power parity

     — e      and through choice of units, ep* =      p),    equation (9a) becomes

 p     e p
                                                                           (9a')
               (BR + BF ÷      + p B*H+    B*F _E*)
       cz'                H)
             p       p          p
With p.p.p. reductions in the real value of foreign_curreflcY_deflomu18ted
                                                                     of
public sector debt can be calculated by multiplying the foreign rate

inflation into the real value of net foreigncUrreflCY_r0mthated liabilities.
                                                              of the position of a
       Consider the following stylized representation
                                                that lack a significant domestic
number of small, open developing countries
                                                                        tends to be
capital market. Government debt is largely placed abroad and
                                                U.S. dollars). In such countries
denominated in foreign currency (typically

BR     3F    BR = BF   B*H =   0.   The conventionally measured public sector

deficit is: 1/



public sector accounts made earlier in this section of the paper.
                                           — 25 —




                                                                                      (14)
                                                    + e j*(B*F —   E*) —   rGKG
    -+       e (B*F — E*) = Cc + G1 + KG
                                                      p
    p        p
                                                                            —   E*)    equals the
                                               borrows overseas, . (B*F
If, in addition, only the government                            dt
                                                              balance of
current account deficit (in terms of foreign currency) of the

payments:
                                                                                       (15)
         (B*F —   E*) =   —X   + j*(B*F — E*)
     p                           p
                                                    and services (excluding debt
Here X denotes real net export8 of goods

service) plus net transfers and grants from abroad.
                                                            identical in
     Compare the current account balances of two countries,
                                      of world inflation' If r* is the world
real terms but facing different rates

world real rate of interest, i =           r   + P, i.e.,


                                                                                      (15')
                        = —x +   . (r* +       (B*F - E*)
     e (B*F -     E*)
     p                           p
                                            is independent of the inflation rate
If the world real rate of interest
                                               account deficit of the country facing
and if p.p.p. prevails, the current
                                             ()l, will exceed that of the country
the hIgher rate of world inflation


facing the lower rate of world inflation (p*)2 by an amount


         —   ()2)e(        p
                               E*), equal to the difference in
                                                                    external debt service


                                                       should, however,
payments. This difference in current account balances
                                    higher debt service item above the line
have no real consequences since the
                                                    reduction in the real value of its
is matched below the line by the larger
                                               inflation means faster amortization
external liabilities: higher world
                                       — 26 —



                                                              the change in net real
of external indebtedness. Thus    d (        (B*F —   E*)),
                                  aE     p
                                                                    facing
external.liabilities, is the same in the two economies. The country
                                                         inflation should
the larger current account deficit owing to higher world
                                                external interest payments. 1/
be able to borrow to finance its higher
                                                of course, is an increase in
     What we have seen in recent years,

world real interest rates (r*).    This does require adjustment rather

                                  financing, with the relative weights on
than, or in addition to, merely
                                              on the extent to which the increase
adjustment versus financing depending
                                                              than tran
in world real interest rates is perceived as permanent rather
                                                                    rather
sitory. Also, to the extent that countries have borrowed long—term
                                                               changes in
                                interest rates), unanticipated
than short—term (or at variable
                                                                    or
interest rates will result in (once and for all) real capital gains
                                                           from p.P.P.
losses on external debt. Finally, significant departures
                               since the breakdown of Brettoti Woods.
have been the rule, especially
                        world real interest rate r*, a country's real
Thus, even with a given

external indebtedness will increase whenever P —
                                                              ( — ), the
                                                                excess of
                                              p*    p   e

                                                      inflation minus the
the world rate of inflation over the domestic rate of

                          of the exchange rate, increases.
percentage depreciation
                                                                       starting from the
     Nany other kinds of open economies can be analyzed
                                             (7), and (9a), but the general princi
 general framework of equations (6),
                                                   analyzed.
 ples should be clear from the simple example just




             dis cus s ion of these Issues see        Sacha (19 81).
                                        — 27




                     IV. Budgetary Policy and Monetary Growth:
                          The Eventual Monetization of Deficits

                                                               about crowding out of
     If bond financing of deficits causes concern
                                                                   adverse
private capital formation and, in the open economy, about possible
                                               monetization of deficits is a
consequences for external indebtedness,
                                                        implications. We saw that
source of concern because of its inflationary

it was necessary to correct the conventionallY measured budget deficit
                                                         appreciation on the real
for the effects of inflation and exchange rate
                                                       financial assets and liabi-
value of outstanding stocks of public sector

lities in order to assess (changes in) the extent to which the public

sector competes for investible resources with the private and overseas

sectors

     Similar adjustments are required to understand the monetary implica-

tions of the deficit, as will be shown in this section.

1.   The closed econorny
                                                      constraint in equation (10),
     From the simplified government budget
                                          for the proportional rate of growth of
we obtain the following expression

the nominal money stock. 1/


     H_ Gc+GI+ÔKG_T +(r+ )                      -+r——r
                                                BTM 3H   —
                                                       CKG
     _—V[
     H                   p                      pY       Y y
                        Y

                                                                                  (16)

                pY     Y

                                                                of money. To evaluate
      v =        is   the income velocity of circulation
            H

 the implications of the fiscal stance for monetary growth, we must specify
                                       and taxation and for nonmoney financing.
 paths both for public spending
 1/ The money stock throughout this paper is the high-powered money stock.
 Adding a private banking sector will, in general, be required for practical
 applications but does not alter significantly the conceptual framework outlined
 here.
                                          — 28 —



                                                 Is one which keeps
A particularly useful benchmark financing policy

constant the real values of all government assets and liabilities (other

than money) per unit of output. This would be a policy of constant

crowding out pressure per unit of output.           These constant liabilitY

(or asset—) output ratios need not be the historically inherited ones.
                                                                      implications for
The exercise can be applied to evaluating the longer—run
                                                                desired
monetary growth after the debt—output ratios have achieved some

                                                                        I
long—run (or even steady state) values.            Given this rule,         =!Y
                                                                       KG   3H

and       =   I   + P..   Equation (16) then becomes:
                    p




Defining the longer—run fiscal stance by given constant values of L, Y
                                                                      —,
                                                                  pY
                                                            C
     C                                                  of Q. and E, we
and and by given, but not necessarily constant, paths                   Y        Y
      Y
                                                     growth is governed by a deficit
can   see from (17) that longer—run monetary
                                       conventionally measured deficit in a number
concept that differs from the
                                                                nominal
of ways. First, the reduction in the real value of the stock of

government bonds due to inflation is subtracted from the conventional

measure. Second, in a growing economy the real stocks of government
                                            the natural rate I while leaving the
 assets and liabilities can grow at
                                            constant. The net debt service term
 asset—output or debt—output ratios
                                    —29—


in (17), therefore, involves the real, growth—adjusted
                                                         interest rate r —     1.

Under inflationary conditions this can be significantl-Y
                                                           less than i =   r   +
                                                                                   p

the nominal interest rate. Note that in order to infer the long—term
                                              for inflation) of the fiscal
implications for monetary growth (and thus

stance, an inflation correction is applied only to the jterestbeariflg
                                         liabilities. The conventionally
component of the government's nominal
                                                  the erosion of the real
measured deficit should not also be reduced by
                                                    balances, p .   The reason
value of the nominal stock of high—powered money               pp
is that constancy of the real value of all (monetary and nonmonetary)
                                         consistent with any deficit and any
government debt per unit of output is

rate of inflation.

     Large conventionally measured (even jf cyclically adjusted) deficits
                                                                          1/
that correspond to small inflation—corrected deficits (or even surpluses)

reflect current high inflation. They do not indicate the inevitability

of high crowding out pressure or high rates of monetary growth in the

future. Even without correcting for real growth, an ir.flatiOflC0rrect
                                                                           would
(trend) surplus means that (a) even with zero money financing, there

be(gregate)croWdiflg in and (b) with a bond—financing policy of zero

(aggregate) crowding in, there would be negative monetary base growth.

      Equation (17) by itself does not permit one to draw conclusions
                                         fiscal stance on monetary growth.
about the effects of say, changes in
                                                         the effect of any
 Positive economic models are required to incorporate
                                    variables such as velocity, V, real rates
 parameter changes on .endogenous



                                                      bonds.
 the real value of the stock of nominal government
                                           — 30   —




                                                                             Such
of   interest, r and rG, and even the natural rate of growth y.
                                                  monetarist models such as Sargent
analysis Is simplest in very classical

and Wallace's (1981) in which velocity, the real interest rate, and the

natural rate of growth are constants, but (17) can be incorporated in

models of any hue. (See also Buiter (1982a and 1982b).)

2.       The open economy
                                                            constraint we obtain the
         From the simplified open economy budget

expression for the percentage growth rate
                                                       of the nominal money stock


given in equation (18):



     H
         = VEG     + 6KG
                      y
                               + (r + £)
                                      p
                                           (B+pYB)     + r (B + BF)
                                                               Y


                                                        - 1    BH+BF) -    BH+BF
             + i*e (B*H +B*F - E*) - rG           +


                                                                                    (18)

               p           Y
                                                                of the fiscal stance,
To evaluate tte longer—run monetary implications
                                                                  of (18)
we again assume that all stock—flow ratios on the right—hand side

 are kept constant. Equation (18) then reduces to:


                     — + (r —       ) (+     BF   +   ?+ F — KG)
         H           Y                     pY           Y    Y



               + (j*   - ( - e) -         (B*   + !*._ E*)e + (r - (rG - 6)) KG1
                                                  pY
                                                                             Y
                                                                                           (19)

                           p
                                       — 31 —




With p.p.p. this simplifies to:



     H        Y                      pY         Y      Y


                              ÷ B*F —                                    (19')
         + (r* ) (B                   E*) + (r — (rG       6)) KG1
                                                               Y
                                p*Y
                                                                     a
                                                            fiscal stance
The evaluation of the long—term monetization implied by the

requires the consideration of a deficit measure which has nominal debt

service payments "corrected" for the effects of domestic inflation,

exchange rate appreciation, and real growth.

     In any particular period the economy may well be far removed from

the long—run trend captured in equations (17) and (19) or (19'). Actual

monetary growth in the short run will be given by equations (16) or (18).

If current inflation is a function only of current monetary growth, as

would, for example, be the case if velocity were constant, the price

level were perfectly flexible, and output grew at its exogenously given

trend rate y, then       = — y.     Authorities concerned with nf1at1on
                     p    H

in the short run may not be much comforted by the knowledge, that the long—

run rate of inflation implied by their fiscal stance is low, if current

monetary growth and inflation are high.         If, as seems more likely, current

inflation is a function of current and past monetary growth and

if current inflation depends also on anticipated future monetary growth

(as it does in models with forward—looking rational expectations) then
                                                            (19), and (19') become
the long—run monetary growth expressions in (17),

the relevant ones even for short— and mediumterm policy.
                                              — 32 —




              V.          The Role of Implicit       Assets and   Liabilities

                                                             balance sheet we included T,
     On the asset side of the public sector
                                                      anticipated tax revenues and AM,
the present value of future planned or
                                                     cash monopoly. On the liability
the imputed value of the overnment'S
                                              future transfers and benefits under
side was N, the present value of
                                                                           consider how the
                                               this section I shall
various entitlement programs. In
                                                                                  time. I shall
                                          and liabilities changes over
value of these implicit assets
                                                        of private sector
focus on N. The treatment of T, AN, and (in Section VI)
                                        N is defined in equation (20): 1'
human wealth is analytically identical.

                    U
                  —fr(s,     t)ds
                      t                                                                     (20)
     N(t)     fe                          t)du
              t

                                    discounted value of expected future benefits is
The change in the present

given by:                                            U
                                                    —Jt(s, t)ds
                                                      t               a
                                                                      at
                                                                             t)
      t.   N(t)   =   1(t)    N(t) —   n(t)   + fe
      dt                                        t
                                                                  a
                             u                                                       (21)
                      —n(u,t)f          t(s, t)ds] du


                                                         side of (21) show how the present
 The first two terms on the right—hand
                                                                           oncerniflg the
 value of future benefits changes if all expectations
                                                    interest rates remain the same.
 future flow of benefits and future
                                                       in expectations
 The last term shows the effect of changes (at time t)
                            (i-i(u, t) and future interest rates
 concerning future benefits
                                        at
                                      — 33 —




                   As expected, upward revisions in future benefit enti—
(.....i(s   t)).
entitlements raise N while higher future expected interest rates lower it.

      The only item on the right—hand side of (21) that appears in the cash—

based public sector deficit or flow of funds accounts is n(t), current

benefit payments. i(t)N(t) does not appear because future entitlements

are not a marketable interest—bearing liability of the authorities.

Changes in planned or expected future benefit entitlements will only

appear in the accounts if and when they actually become payable in the

future. Yet such 'revaluations" •of N are of considerably policy interest.

Even if financial markets are not "forward—looking," i.e., even if govern-

ment borrowing affects market rates of return only when it actually

occurs, increases in N unmatched by increases in T (or by cuts in other

spending programs) imply increased future borrowing or money Issues and

thus store up trouble for the future. Financial markets do, furthermore,

appear to be linked intertemporally (as formalized, e.g., by models of
                                                                     rational
efficient asset market equilibrium incorporating forward—looking

expectations). A larger anticipated future borrowing requirement will,

therefore, affect asset prices and rates of return today.      An unanticipa-

                                                          deficits will crowd
ted increase in future expected (inflation—corrected)

out private spending today. The intangible items in the public sector

balance sheet must be taken into account.
                                 — 34 —




          VI.   The Public Sector Accounts and Private Behavior

1.   The private and overseas sectors' accouflS

     Comprehensive balance sheets analogous to the public sector balance

sheet of Table 1 are drawn up for the private sector and the overseas

sector in Tables 4 and 5, respectively. For reasons of space, the private

sector balance sheet consolidates the household sector, the corporate

sector, and the private financial sector.   For practical applications,

further sectoral disaggregation will often be required.    The balance

sheets require little further explanation. Consumer durables and private

residential housing can be viewed as included in K, and their imputed
                                                     consumption in the
service flows as subsumed under private income and

budget connstraint.

     For simplicity it is assumed that all claims on or debts to the rest
                                                  financial claims. Direct
of the world take the form of interest—bearing

foreign ownership of domestic real capital or of domestic resources is

not considered but could be added without dIfficulty. Human wealth, L,

the present discounted value of future expected labor income, is a

(nonmarketable) asset in the household balance sheet. The total national

stock of land and mineral rights is assumed to be given by R. 1/

                                                                     t
ble re pre S ents t he balance S heet 0f t hose private
currently alive, the horizons involved in N, T, and L would be finite if
                                                 absent. N and T in the
operative intergenerational bequest motives are
private balance sheet would, therefore, be smaller  than the corresponding
                                               if public sector and private
items in the public sector balance sheet, even
sector discount rates were identical. If there are operative intergenera-
tional bequest motives, or if the private sector is viewed abstractly as
containing both current and future generations, an infinite horizong for
T, N, and L In Table 4 is appropriate. Even with common horizons, different
                                                          could lead to changes
discount rates as between the public and private sectors
in private net worth resulting from changes in  the public sector balance sheet
                                                These issues are discussed
that leave public sector net worth unchanged.
further in Section VI.2.
                                     — 35 —

                   Table 4. Private Sector Balance Sheet

                             (At current prices)



              Assets                               Liabilities


              net interest—bearing            T     :   present value of
              government debt deno—                     future taxes
              minated in domestic
              currency held by                          private sector
              residents                                 net worth

eB            net interest—bearing
              government debt deno—
              minated in foreign
              currency held by
     •

              residents

          : net interest—bearing
              index—linked govern-
              ment debt held by
              residents

U             stock of high—powered
              money

N         :   present value of
              social insurance and
              other entitlement
              prograinnies

FU        :   net interest—bearing
              claims on the foreign
              sector denominated in
              domestic currency

eF*H      :   net interest—bearing
              claims on the foreign
              sector denominated in
              foreign currency

p             value of claims on
    K••       real reproducible
              capital (including
              inventories)
     ,
          ' land    and mineral assets

L         : present value of
             future expected
              labor income
                                  — 36



               Table 5. Overseas Sector Balance Sheet

                        (At current prices)



           Assets                               Liabilities



                                     eE
                                          *         net foreign exchange
           overseas holdings
           of nominal domestic—                     reserves of the
           currency—denominated                     government
           government bonds
                                                :   net interest—bearing
           overseas holdings                        debt to the domestic
eB*P
                                                    private sector deno-
           of foreign—currency
                                                    minated in domestic
           denominated govern-
           ment bonds                               currency

       :   overseas holdings             eF     :   net interestbearing
           of index—linked                          debt to the domestic
                                                    private sector deno—
           government debt
                                                    trtinated in foreign
                                                    currency

                                                : overseas sector net
                                                   worth
                                                      — 37 -




     The conventionally measured private sector financial surplus (at

constant prices) and the change in real private net worth are given

in equations (22) and (23), respectively:

          + r K + r' R + (r + )
                                                            p
                                                                    (! +
                                                                    p       p
                                                                                     + i:* (B*1 + F*")
                                                                                        p
     p             p                 p


                       I-C-              5K   -             F) + BR + . (B*                     + F* )   +   —
     + rB + -                                     (B                                                         p
                  p    p                                p                        p

                                                                                                                 (22)
                                          p             p



     dt p
           WP)         BH+ FR)
                           p
                                              ÷   p
                                                                +
                                                                            p         p



                       PRG +(L+ N -                     T)      + ( -E) K
                       P             p                            K




                           R     1                          p           p


                                                                                                                 (23)
                           e pp                                     p


The conventionally measured overseas sector financial surplus (at constant

prices) and the change in the real net worth of the overseas sector are

given in equations (24) and (25), respectiVelY

                                                                        —
     —x   +   - j*(B*F     —         — E*) + (r + ) (BF                         FR) +       r
              p                                                 p       p


                                                                                                         (24)
          e (B*F               - E*) + (!!
                                                  p
                                                       F) + F
          p
                                    — 38 —




     — () . (B*F'             - E*) ÷
                                             p
                                                 FR) + F p (B-F)
                                                        p           p
     dt.p    p


                                                                               (25)
              ÷ (! — P.)   . (B*F   F*H —    E*)
                  p pp
These flow of funds and change in real net worth equations require little

explanation. In the case of the private sector, the difference between

the financial surplus (at constant prices) and the change in real net

worth reflects capital gains and losses on existing marketable assets

and liabilities (including capital gains and losses due to inflation and

exchange rate changes) and changes In the value of the intangible and

nonmarketable items L, N, and T.    On the left—hand side of equation (22)

we have omItted, because only cash transactions are included, the implicit

liquidity and convenience yield on money balances, pM
                                                            p
                                                                =   i   p
                                                                            as an

item of private consumption and of private income.

2.   The positive irrelevance nd normative relevance of debt neutrality,

     The simplest theory of the interaction of the private and public

sectors is based on the so—called (pre—) Ricardian debt—neutralitY

hypothesis (see Barro (1974), Carmichael (1979), Buiter (1980), Buiter

and Tobin (1979), and Tobin and Buiter (1980)). This hypothesis holds

that, given the level and composition of the public sector's real spending

program on goods and services, private sector behavior will be invariant

with respect to changes in the taxation—borrowing mix that finances this

spending. Most of the formal models dealing with this issue concern

closed barter economies and the formal invariance propositions tend to be

stated in terms of borrowing versus taxing without explicit consideration
                                     — 39 —



                                        lore on the subject does, however,
of monetary financing. The informal
assert the irrelevance for real outcomes of the way in which governments
                                         financing modes. The argument
finance their spending, for all three
                                     theorem for the public sector   visViS
underlying this Modigliani-4lihler
                                                   must be financed (in a
the private sector runs as follows. Spending
                                                         money. Borrowing is
closed economy) by taxation, borrowing, or printing
                                                        borrowing should,
merely deferred taxation. A switch between taxation and

therefore, not affect the permanentincome and consumption behavior of

                                              Monetary financing implies the
rational, well—informed private agents.
                                                                      condi-
imposition of an inflation tax which (under suitably restrictive
                                              income as explicit taxes. 1/
tions) has the same effect on permanent
                                                         behavior, for a given
     With debt neutrality, private sector spending
                                                    constrained only by
program of public spending on good and services, is
                                  sheet shown in Table 6. The distri-
the consolidated national balance
                               nation's resources between the public and
bution of the ownership of the
                                   The national flow of funds account
 private sectors is irrelevant.
                                                         streams) is given




                                                                    -
 (including nonmarketable imputed income and consumption

 in equation (26):




            Mog aM-        er t   eor em 0r money      a nc
                                              a store of value only. Such
 formally for models in which money serves as
                                     with what economists have always
 'money" has only the name in common
                                  of payment or medium of exchange. See
 meant by money, that is, a means
 Wallace (1981).
                               - 40

Table 6.    Consolidated Public and Private Sector Balance Sheet



            Assets                             Liabilities



             Soc
      PKSOC K
       pK
       G
                                                   W+WG
       KP
       PRR

                      *F
       e(E+F*H—B )
            *


       ÷   rw- BF-    F
                     p3

       L
           M
       pA
                                                — 41 —




     - {& +   rp0 + rGp                       KG + r1pK + rRp                      i*e(E* + H B*')


              + i(FH — BF)            rpY +         H} — {GC + GSOC + C

                                                                    M
              + (PKSOCKS0C + pGK+ PKPKP) ÷                                        {pKsocjsoc

                                                                                                    S    (26)
              + p        + p          + e       +   F*H            B*')   + FH — BF —
                G             K                                                                     p


The first bracketed term on the left—hand side of equation (26) contains

current income, including the imputed return from the government's cash

monopoly iH •       This item is matched in the second bracketed term, containing
          p

current consumption, by pM11, the imputed value of the nonpecuniary
                          p

services of money consumed by the private sector. Those unhappy with our

treatment of money can omit both items. The change in real national com-

prehensive net worth is given by:


        () p—
     dt p   dt
                             ÷                + (K° -
                                                               p
                                                                     PKsoK
                                                                          p
                                                                                      (G
                                                                                      p
                                                                                              - p) pG   KG
                             p            p     p
                                                KSOc                                   C


                        pp            pp       p                        —     •
                                       K Kp • (R
                                  •                        •
                                                       -            p             -       e    (E* + F* - 3*
                +   (K                                     P)        R R +                                      )
                                 p    p                    Pp                 e pp
                        {11 — BF} + (L/p) ÷          jM                                           (27)
                    p
                                  — 42 —




The change in real net worth equals saving, 5, plus capital gains on
                                            p

marketable assets plus changes in the imputed or implicit value of non—

marketable items of wealth. A program of total national consumption in

line with permanent national income means choosing the value of the second

bracketed terms in (26) such that the expected value of         =o    Such a
                                                          dtp
consumption program is ex ante indefinitely sustainable and serves as a

useful benchmark for consumption planning in this debt—neutral economy.

     Debt neutrality is bad positive economics. It requires private

agents to be infinite—lived or to have operative intergenerational bequest

and child—to--parent gift motives in every generation. Perfect capital

markets are another necessary condition: future labor income is a source

of current spending power on a par with current disposable income and

current holdings of government debt. 1/

     The economic behavior that would be generated under debt neutrality

is, howefer, a useful guide to what policy should try to achieve in a

world in which a variety of capital market imperfections prevent the

"unaided" private sector from acting according to permanent income

principles.


  1/ Debt neutrality, i.e., invaiiance of the solution trajectories of
real economic variables under changes in the borrowing—taxation mix of
the government also requires the taxes to be lump—sum. With nonlumpsum
(distortionary) taxes, transfers and subsidies, public sector claims on
the private sector and private sector claims on the public sector still
are netted out in the balance sheet. Real behavior will be altered when
the borrowing—taxation mix changes because the familiar allocative effects
of nonlump—sum taxes, etc., will alter equilibrium prices and rates of
return.
                                       — 43 —




     It   is, for example, well—known that,
                                                  in the absence of operative

                                        motives, changes in the borrowing
private intergenerational transfer

taxation mix can redistribute the burden of financing a given government
                                                    without the existence of
spending programme between generatiOnSeVefl
                                                     is motivated by a concern
capital market imperfections. If government
                                                        pattrns) of future
for the utility (i.e., the lifetime consumption

generations as well as of the current generation, it can use the
                                                                      act
budgetary and financial mechanism to induce the current generation to
                                            private sector income rather than
as if it were constrained by permanent

merely by the present value of its own lifetime resources.

     The endowments listed on the asset side of Table 6, the nation's
                                           international trading and lending or
technology (broadly defined) and the
                                                the unavoidable constraints on
borrowing conditions it faces, represent
                                                  of resources. 1/ The purpose
the nation's intertemporal transformation

of financing policy, i.e., the choice of the tax, transfer, borrowing,

and money creation mix for a given real public spending programme on



                                    the present value of future labor
consume today by borrowing against
                                         effect intertempora]- shifts of
income, a closed economic system cannotmarket economy these and other
future labor endowments. In an ideal                             demands
technological constraints will be reflected in the sequence of
and supplies over time and thus in equilibrium prices (including the In an
                                   sheets) at each point in time.
asset prices entering the balance         programming and the use of
ideal planned economy, material balances
shadow prices would ensure the same outcomes.
                                          economy. The intertefllPoral
     Consider, e.g., a simple two—period
                                  trading off c1, consumption in period
consumption possibility frontier                                     It is
                                   2, is given by AA in Figure A.
1, for c2, consumption in period,              K1, the labor endowments
defined by the initial endowment of capital,
in periods 1 and 2 (L1 and L2), the  well—behaved  production functiofl8

                                        f2(K2,L2) and the constraint:
 in the two periods f1(K1,L1) and

 o          f + K1, o    c2 <   f2   + K2, c1 =   f4K1,L1) + K1K2.
     c1
                                        — 44 —



                                                                    flow
goods and services, should be to avoid additional constraints——cash
                                                                             nonmarketabilitY
shortfalls, inadequate liquidity, insufficient collateral,
                                         ---—   -.--        —.--   —--   .
  1/   (Continnued from p. 43.)




                                      /1::
                                  /
                             'I
                 C

                                                       Ct
                  0                    Figure A
                                                            OD = OC, deter-
     The permanent income at his closed system is given by
                                                          frontier with
mined by the intersection of the consumption possibility
the 450 line OF. The opportunity for international lending and borrowing
at a rate r would raise the permanent income of this system unless the
slope of the international capital market constraint BB (given by —(l+r))
equals the slope- of the closed economy locus at E. For the figure we
show how a low external interest rate raises permanent income.tO 0D.
Figure B shows when a closed economy should not consume its permanent
income in each period. Very favorable intertemporal transformation possi-
bilities (Figures Bl and B2) suggest consuming in excess of permanent
                                                                   It is
income in period 2. The opposite applies in Figures B3 and B4.
still the comprehensive balance sheet that matters for consumption, but
constant net worth is unlikely to be optimal. Even with international
lending and borrowing, the presence of nontraded goods whose production
                                                        can make a
can only be augmented slowly and at considerable cost,
programme of corisumptioon equal to permanent income infeasible or
suboptimal. (I am indebted to Morris Goldstein   for this observation.)
                      — 441 —


C2                              C2



               (1)                                      (2)



           /                                        /
                                               ,
                                         ,
                                                              C
                     C




 CL                             Cz


               (3)                                      (4)




      //                                           //
                                        //
                                     'ci 4.ç              1
                                                              C
                     CI




                     FIGURE B
                                   - 45   -




of   assets, credit rationing, etc.——becoming binding or, failing that, to

minimize their incidence and consequences. 1/

       Through their budgetary and financing policies, governments (within

a national economy) and International organizations (with the interna-

tional economic system) can act as a superior financial intermediary,

changing the composition of private sector portfolios (respectively nation

state portfolios). Well—designed policy interventions of this kind can

minimize the extent to which disposable income, current cash flow and

the portfolio of liquid, marketable financial assets become binding

constraints on consumption, Investment, production and portfolio allo-

cation, enforcing undesirable departures from behavior according to

permanent income principles. Governments, through their unique ability

to impose taxes, through their monopoly of legal tender and through the

superior quality of their debts, have a "comparative advantage" over the

private sector in borrowing to smooth out income streams. 2/ The same

  1/ The first—best policy of eliminating capital market imperfections
as far as possible, should of course be pursued to the full. Budgetary
policies should aim to neutralize those imperfections that cannot be
eliminated.
  2/ Because governments have the unique power to impose taxes (unre-
quited transfers to itself) and because of their ability to declare
certain of their liabilities legal tender, the risk of default on
government bonds is les than that on private debt. Total current and
future natural income is in a sense the collateral for government
borrowing. National income tends to be much less variable and uncertain
than the incomes of individual private agents. Governments effectively
pool individual risks and thus eliminate diversifiable risk. An obvious
question is why this risk—sharing cannot be done equally well through
private insurance markets. One answer is that even if this were possible,
it would be more costly than making minor alterations to a tax structure
that is required in any case.
     A second answer relies on familiar moral hazard problems in insurance
markets.  It may be possible to devise efficient private insurance schemes
for "bad—luck" default, Private insurance markets will operate ineffi-
ciently (or may not exist at all) if there Is frequent "voluntary" or
                                  — 46 —




though perhaps to a lesser extent, holds for certain international
organizations vis——vis nation states.

     I shall now illustrate with a few examples this role of the govern-

ment as the natural borrower and its unique ability to restructure the

conventionally measured sectoral balance sheets, flow of funds and income

expenditure accounts. so as to permit the economy as a whole to approximate

more closely bahavior constrained only be comprehensive wealth or

permanent income.

Fiscal aspects of a natural resource disX

     Consider the effects cm public sector and private sector balance

sheets of an oil discovery. We can represent this by an unexpected

increase in PR' the value of property rights in land and mineral assets

by, say, dpR > 0. To the extent that these property rights are privately

owned and marketable, disposable private net worth increase by (R_RC)dpR.

Following permanent income principles, private agents would consume the

perpetuity equivalent of this capital gain in each period.   If spending

was constrained by a dearth of marketable financial wealth to begin with,

a temporarily larger increase in private consumption spending would

result. The value of public sector assetsincreased by RGdpR.    The

government could choose to Increase its own consumption spending in line


  1/ (Continued from p. 45.) 'dishonest default and if lenders and
insurers cannot differentiate between dishonest and honest borrowers.
If it is easier and less costly for the government to levy taxes On
reluctant taxpayers than it is for private lenders and insurers to compel
performance by dishonest borrowers, then governments have a role as
financial intermediaries and government debt will not be "neutral".
(See Webb [1981, 1982].)
                                    — 47 —



                                                                If it chooses
with   the permanent income equivalent of this capital gain.

not to do so, it faces the problem of enabling the private sector to raise

its spending by the perpetuity equivalent of RGdpR.

       One way to approachthis would be to distribute to the private sector
                                                             the stream of
(in the form of tax cuts or increased transfer payments)

actual additional oil revenues ri¼t)RG(t)dpR(t) as and when they accrue.

The present value of such future anticipated tax cuts (or transfer payment
                                                             asset which is
increases) is, however, a nonmarketable, highly illiquid

singularly poor collateral for private borrowing.      If there is a gestation

period before the new oil comes on stream and a fortiori if development

costs have to be incurred before the oil starts to flow, the additional
                                                         sector) may well be
cash flow to the government (and thus to the private

negative for a number of years.

       Private agents whose current spending is constrained by current

disposable income or other forms of illiquidity will therefore be unable

to raise their spending in line with their permanent income. A superior
                                                            transfers) as
fiscal option is for the government to cut taxes (raise

soon as the new oil wealth is discovered, by an amountt equal to the

perpetuity equivalent or annuity value of the discoverY. 1/ This will
                                             until the moment that actual
require additional government borrowing
                                              which time the authorities
revenues exceed their permanent value, at
                                               issues whose function is merely
will be able to retire the temporary debt
                                               constrained households. With
 to relax the spending limits on cash—flow


   1/ See Flemming (1982)
                                      — 48 —




this   transformation of future tax cuts into present tax cuts the nation

can consume in line with its new, higher permanent income:      the government

has transformed future tax cuts into disposable income.

       An alternative proposal to handle the same problem has been made by

Sam    Brittan   of the Financial Times. His proposal amounts to a capital

gift o the private sector by the public sector: the equity in the newly

discovered oil riches is transferred to the private sector.      If this

newly privatized wealth takes the form of marketable financial claims,

private spending in line with permanent income is again likely to be

encouraged relative to a policy of cutting taxes in line with current

oil revenues: the government has transformed future tax cuts into

disposable financial wealth.

        In this paper I have used the same symbol T for the present value

of the (uncertain) expected stream of future tax payments and receipts {r},

both where the present value to households of expected future tax payments

and where the present value to the government of expected future tax

receipts was concerned. Similarly N represented both the household asset

and the government liability corresponding to the stream of future

benefits n}.

        The presence of an impact on private spending of offsetting changes

in say T, N and BH that would prima fade appear to leave household net

worth unchanged was then attributed, in a rather ad hoc manner, to

                                                                   collateral
differences in the liquidity, inrketabi1Ity and usefulness as

of T, N, and B11. An alternative, but still ad hoc, way of avoiding the

debt—neutrality conundrum is to assume that households discount future
                                         — 49 —



                                             market rate of return on
taxes and benefits at a higher rate than the
                                                       discounts its tax
bonds (and at a higher rate than the government
                                       This approach was not adopted here to
revenues and benefit payments).

avoid further growth in the list of symbols and notation. A truly

satisfactory treatment of these issues requires the tools of the new

microeconomics of credit rationing, collateral and other capital market
                                          be found e.g., in the work of Jaffee
imperfections whose beginnings can
                                            Webb (1981, 1982) and Stiglitz and
and Russell (1976), Benjamin (1978),

Weiss (1981)..

"Cyclical"      corrections t   the ub1ic sector deficit

        Consider an economy in which the level of economic activity, as
                                                        around a trend. We do
measured e.g., by output and employment, cycles

not at this stage assume that these cycles represent Keynesian departures
                                                  utilization. They could be
from full employment and normal capacity

regular swings in the natural rate of unemployment.
                                                        equation (10) even further
        If we simplify the economy represented by
                                          and index—linked bonds, the government
by ignoring public sector capital

budget constraint becomes
                                 •
                                     H
 (28)    fl+B
            p                    p p
                                                              rate i. Actual
 Y,   the   trend level of output grows at a proportional
                                         this trend. If the demand for debt is
 output Y, cycles steadily around

 a demand for real debt                    and if population (in efficiency units)

                                                      financing will tend to
 and Y grow at the same rate, then government
                                                           H
 exercise upward pressure on the real
                                      interest rate when d  ) > 0 at the
                                                      dt
                                              — 50 —




given   real interest rate and the given real per capita stock of money

balances. From       (28)   we see that

             H       c                    H
(29) d(B)_C—t+(r—Y)BH
        dt



It is a stylized empirical fact that while exhaustive public spending (CC)

tends to grow in line with trend output, taxes net of transfers (')

tend to vary positively with the current level of economic activity.

These two relationships can be summarized by

(30a) G = gCY             1 > gC > 0

(30b) ¶=OY1 1>0>0
Substituting     (30a,b) into (29) yields

           iH
(31) d (B= gC 0y+ (r—6) B—H
                                          H

        dt/                 V          V
Similarly,   the proportional rate of growth of the money stock, assuming

that the authorities keep constant the stock of real bonds per capita or

per unit of trend output, is given by

(32) H =     V{gC —      0 + (r—) BH}
     H           Y                pY
                            H
Thus the current change in B overstates (understates) its trend or
                                        — 51 —



                                                     of growth of the
long—run average rate of change and the current rate
nominal money stock overstates (understates) its trend or long—run average

rate of growth whenever output is below (above) its trend value.
                                                            H
     Even if it is only the current values of d• (B) and H that matter
                                             at          H

for current crowding out and current inflation respectively, the trend or
                                 H
long—run behavior of d (B) and H, obtained by evaluating (31) and (32)
                       dt              H

with output at its trend value Y, will still be of interest to all but

the most short—sighted governments..

     Furthermore, if current crowding out is a function of anticipated
                   H
future changes in B and current inflation depends on anticipated future
                  pY
monetary growth (as well as possibly on past monetary growth) current

d (B) and H will be a poor proxy for the future developments if there
dt          H

are transitory swings in the deficit. From this perspective cyclical

corrections are a simple, if ad hoc, way of approximating the long—run

implications of the fiscal stance for crowding out and monetary growth,

i.e., a short—hand way of calculating the permanent deficit.

     Evaluating Y at V      in   (31) and (32) will yield a reasonable approxi-

mation to the long—run averages only if the positive and negative

deviations of Y from Y cancel each other out in the long run, as would,

e.g., be the case if output followed a regular sinusoidal motion about

trend such as Y(t) =
              c(t)
                            + ACOS (wt + ).      If   positive and negative
                                   — 52 —




deviations   of Y from Y do not balance on average, the simple cyclical

correction will give a biased estimate of the long—run crowding out

pressure and monetary growth implications of the deficit. They will

have to be replaced by an explicit averaging of, (31) and (32) over long

periods of time.

     There are good reasons for letting taxes net of transfers vary with

the current level of economic activity rather than making them functions

of long—run or permanent income. Assume, as seems reasonable, that

during the downswing a significant number of private agents are con-

strained in their spending by current disposable income. 1/ By reducing

taxes and increasing borrowing during the downswing, public spending

during the downswing will be financed to a larger extent by private agents

who are not constrained by current disposable income (the purchasers of

the bonds). Total consumption will, therefore, decline by less than if

taxes (which we assume to fall equallyondispoSableiflComeC0flStt'th

and permanent—income—constrained private agents) had been kept constant.

In the upswing, the additional debt incurred during the downswing can

be repaid out of higher than normal taxes. 2/ The net result is that

consumption is smoothed out over the cycle. This would be desirable on

grounds of intertemporal allocative efficiency even if product and factor


  1/ One may wish to replace the phrase spending constrained by current
disposable income" by the following: the effect of current disposable
income on spending exceeds that of permanent income multiplied by the
share of current disposable income in permanent income (allowing for the
effect of changes in current income on expectations about future income
streams).
  2/ These higher taxes during the upswing fall on a population which,
on average, is likely to be less constrained by current disposable income
than it was during the downswing.
                                     — 53 —




markets cleared continuously.     If there is wage or price stickiness,

Keynesian problems of effective demand failure can occur in addition.

Exogenous shocks to demand can set in motion contractioflarY or expafl
                                                      agents are constrained
sionary multiplier processes if (some) private
                                                        The usefulness of
in their spending by current disposable income.

automatic stabilizers and of countercyclical budget deficits derives
                                                          spending and other
from current_disposable_iflc0me0115trathed private

capital market imperfections.     It is reinforced by output and labor

market disequilibrium.
     Current disposable income constraints on private consumption need
                                                      in real income do not,
not be absolute. Regular, anticipated cycles
                                                             even for individuals
of course, imply corresponding cycles in consumption
                                                      in order to consume in
who can only borrow on very unfavorable terms
                                                  They have the option of
excess of their current disposable income.
                                                         be run down and built up
accumui.ating a stock of liquid savings which can
                                                 stochastic swings in the level
again procyclically. Even with uncertain,

of economic activity, a buffer stock of liquid financial assets may
                                                                            4


permit a measure of income smoothing.         Such private saving strategies

                             inferior substitutes for access to borrowing
are, however, likely to be

on the terms available to the govérnuient.

      A further option available to the government is to choose (partial)

                                deficit increases rather than borrowing.
money financing of cyclical
                                                                       of
 This option will be more attractive the smaller the number and wealth
                                                                      and
 private agents that are not constrained by current disposable income

 liquidity. The more inelastic the demand       for   government bonds, the larger
                                    154_

 the   increase in interest rates required to unload additional bond issues

on the private sector. (Access to international capital markets may

make the total demand for domestic government bonds considerably more

 interest—elastic than private domestic demand alone.) Such counter—

cyclical money issues and withdrawals need not imply any increase in the

trend rate of growth of the money stock.

       Note that this view of stabilization policy suggests that taxes and

transfers rather than exhaustive" public spending on goods and services

should be used to dampen fluctuations in economic activity. Public

consumption spending, like all consumption spending, should be smoothed

over time in line with permanent income. Public sector capital formation

should have its time profile determined largely by the optimal public

sector consumption programme, Public works and other public spending

on goods and services can be effective in regulating the overall level

of demand and of economic activity, but are likely to distort the optimal

private sector—public sector consumption mix, unlike well—designed changes

in the taxation, borrowing, and money financing mix.

Public sector asset sales and cosmetic changes in the PSBR

       Sales of existing public sector financial assets do not appear in

the SNA public sector financial surplus but do appear in the public

sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) and similar transactions records.

A "stock—shift" sale of government—owned natural resources rights _dRG

or of claims to public enterprise capital —dxc to the private sector

would not by itself alter public sector or private sector net worth.

Assuming the government wishes neither to reduce the level of the money
                                      — 55 —



                                                                  of a
stock   nor to acquire private sector capital, the counterpart

reduction in RC or in KG would be a reduction in BH,B*H or H with

 Rd RG + PGdK = d      + ed B* H + pd.
                                                                  to nation-
        There may, of course, be efficiency reasons for wishing

alize or denationalize. Total national net worth will be altered by such

ownership transfers If the efficiency with which the resources are managed

differs between sectors. The financial consequences, however, are

virtually nil: bonds in private portfolios are replaced by other

financial claims.     If the government sells its assets gradually to finance

a flow of spending (p4        R9 + PGdKG < 0) the difference between this
                         dt          dt

policy and one of conventional financing by borrowing is also largely

cosmetic. 1/ When it borrows, the government incurs an obligation to

service the additional debt. When it sells assets it loses the future

income from the assets it sells. It makes little sense, therefore, to

attribute economic significance to the distinction between sales of

public debt (below the line) and sales of government financial assets

(above the line) as is done with the PSBR in the United Kingdom..

Conclusion

        The general conclusions have been stated in the introduction.

 In this concluding section I shall confine myself to some more specific

and, I hope, practical remarks.
        Comprehensive wealth and permanent income accounting requires
                                                about the future. This arises
 explicit judgments concerning expectations

 from the need to evaluate nonmarketable and often intangible and merely

                     cay eat abo ut d Ifferences in the effic iency with
 the assets are managed applies here again.
                                    — 56 —




implicit   assets and liabilities such as future tax and benefit streams.

I consider. this to be a salutory aspect of comprehensive wealth

accounting. It brings out the distinction between mechanistic bookkeeping

and recording of transactions, on the one hand, and, on the other hand,

accounring for economic policy evaluation and design.

     Inflation accounting in the public sector is long overdue. Money

illusion in the public sector should cease to be an obstacle to sensible

budgetary policy. By themselves, the public sector financial deficit and

the public sector borrowing requirement (at current or constant prices or

as as proportion of GM?), are not very informative statistics. They must

be corrected for the change in the real value of the outstanding stocks

of interest—bearing public debt to evaluate either the implications of

the deficit for financial crowding out or the "eventual monetization"

implied by the government's fiscal stance. Analogous corrections should

be made to the conventionally measured external current account deficit

or surplus: changes in the real value of external assets and liabilitieS

due to changes in the price level and the nominal exchange rate have to

be allowed for.   .




     To omit government—owned capital and public sector property rights

in land and natural resources from' the public sector balance sheet can

give a very misleading picture of the net worth of the public sector and

of its present and future fiscal and financial options. This holds true

especially for countries where the government owns significant mineral

rights (e.g., Norway, the United Kingdom, the United States, and many of
                                   - 57   —




the   oil—producing nations) and countries in which the nationalized sector

accounts for a large share of economic activity (e.g., the United Kingdom

and many developing countries). The sign of the effect on public sector

net worth of including publicly—owned capital is not self—evident:

virtually open—ended commitments to subsidize loss—making public enter-

prises depress net worth.

      The implicit assets and liabilities of the public sector represented

by the streams of future tax revenues and of future benefits and transfer

payments may well dwarf the marketable financial assets and liabilities

in the government balance sheet.

      Transitory (e.g., cyclical) deficits and surpluses are a mechanism

enabling current—disposable—income—constrained private agents to smooth

out consumption and keep it more closely in line with permanent income.

By permitting consumption to be maintained in the face of a transitory

decline in income they also mitigate m-iemployinentand exces capacity if

price and wage rigidities prevent an instantaneous market—clearing

response to demand shocks, For governments to borrow in the downswing

on behalf of" private agents with less favored access to capital markets

and to retire these countercyclical debt increases during the upswing,

is sound fiscal management, regardless of what the rate of inflation

happens to be. Alternatively, cyclical increases in the deficit could

be financed (partly or wholly) by money creation, to be reversed during

the upswing. The optimal financing mix of cyclical (i.e., transitory

and reversible) deficits need not be the same as that of permanent

deficits. Aconsideration of this important issue would require the
                                     — 58 —




 analysis   of specific, detailed models. It is, therefore, well beyond

 the scope of this paper which has tried to focus on general propositions

 that rely on as few detailed, model—specific properties as possible.




 List of symbols used

 PKsoc             price of social overhead capital

                   price of public enterprise capital

 PKP               price of prfvat capital

 PR                price of land and natural resource property rights

 p                 domestic general price level

 p*                foreign general price level

 e                 nominal exchange rate (domestic currency price of
                     foreign exchange)

 i                nominal interest rate on bonds denominated in domestic
                    currency

 r                domestic real interest rate

rG                rate of return on public enterprise capital

                  non—pecuniary rate of return on money balances

rR                rate of return from ownership of land and natural
                    resources

rP                rate of return on private capital

rSOc              rate of return on social overhead capital

1*                nominal interest rate on bonds denominated in foreign
                    currency

                  foreign real interest rate

K50C              stock of social overhead capital

K0                stock of public enterprise capital

RG                government—owned land and natural resource rights

RI'               privately owned land and natural resource rights
                           — 59 —




        total   natural resource rights

BH      domestically held nominal government bonds

BF      foreign—held nominal government bonds

B*H     domestically held foreign currency denominated government
          bonds

        foreignheld foreign currency denominated government
          bonds

        domestically held index—linked government bonds

        foreign—held index—linked government bonds

H       stock of high—powered money

        stock of foreign exchange reserves

N       present value of entitlement programmes

T       present value of tax programmes

L       present value of future expected labor income

WG      public sector net worth

WP      private sector net worth

        overseas sector net worth

w

FR
        home_currency_denominated private claims on the overseas
          sector

         foreign_currencY_deflbmthat private claims on the
 F*H
           overseas sector -

KP       private capital stock

 11      net value of the government's cash monopoly

 Gs0c    government consumption of services of social overhead
           capital

 cc      government consumption spending (excluding capital
           consumption and consumption of imputed services of
           social overhead capital)
                                             — 60 —




C1                 d      KG :    net investment in public enterprise capital
                   dt

t                  current       taxes

n                  current transfer and benefit payments

¶                      (t-n)/p

c                      private   consumption

X                      trade balance surplus, including net international
                         transfer receipts

Y                      real output

Y                      capacity or trend output

£                      current labor income

S                      total national saving

I                      natural rate of growth

iS                     proportional      rate of depreciation

V                      income velocity of circulation of money

x=d x
       dt
     (s,t) —   value   of x expected at t to prevail at s.
                                     — 61 —



                                   Re f   e r en ce s



R. J. Barro (1974), "Are government
                                           bonds net wealth," LofPo11tii
  Economy, 182, pp. 1095—1117.
                                of Collateral to Enforce Debt Contracts,"
D. K. Benjamin (1978), "The Use
  Economic Ir3uiry, 16, pp. 33359.
                                         Deficits: Some Myths and
M. J. Boskin (1982), "Federal Government
  Realities," Arerican Economic Re    , Papers and proceedings, 72,
  May, pp. 296—303.
                                   of private capital formation by and
W. H. Buiter (980), "Crowding out
  government borrowing In the presence of intergenerational gifts
  bequests," Greek Economic Review, 2 August, pp. 111—42.
                      "Comment on T. J. Sargent and N. Wallace: Some
____________ (1982a),   Arithmetic," NBER Working Paper No. 867, March.
  Unpleasant MonetariSt
                                                                     The
             (1982b), "Money, Deficits, Crowding Out and Inflation:
____________                               presented at the
  Economic Foundations of the MTFS," paper

                           ji a1U                       ReneVaJne ,1982.
                          "Deficits, Crowding Out and Inflation," unpublished
____________ (l982c),
  paper, September.
                                    "The Thatcher Experiment: The First
V. H. Buiter and M. MIller (1981),
                                  Economic ActjvitY, 2, pp. 315—67.
  Two years," BrookingS Papers on
                                   "Debt neutrality: A brief review of
W. H. Buiter and J. Tobin (1979),
  doctrine and evidence," in C. M. von Furstenberg, ed.
       versus Private Savin&, Ballinger.

 J .    Carmichael (1979), The

                              Macro—POlICY Response to Oil Price Shock8
 J. S. Flemming (1982), "U.K.         Economic Review, 18, May/June,
   of 1974—75 and 1979—80," European
   pp. 651—66.
                                                              Uncertainty
 D. M. Jaffee and T. Russell (1976), "Imperfect Information,
                                     Journal of EconomicS, 90, pp. 651—66.
   and Credit Rationing," Quarterly
                                           the Public Sector Financial
 N. Miller (1982), "flatjonadjUSting         for Policy" in T. Kay ed.,
       Deficit: Measurement and Implications
       The 1982 Budg, Blackwell.
                                    — 62   —




                                     Measurement of Government Saving,"
A. F. Ott and J. H. Yoo (1980), "The
  in C. von Furstenberg," ed., The
                                                          Forma,
  pp. 177—241, Ballinger.
                                         and Macroeconomic Adjustment in
J. D. Sachs (1981), "The Current Account
                                            Activity, 1, 1981.
  the 1970's," BrookingS Papers on EconornC

T. J. Sargent and N. Wallace (1981), "Some Unpleasant MonetariSt
  Arithmetic," unpublished, October.
                                     distortions in government and
J. Siegel (1979), 'InflationlnduCed
                                  Review of Econo .cs and Statist1.c_ticS,
  private saving statistics," The
  February, pp. 83—90.
                                  "credit'Ratj0thg in Markets with
 J. Stiglitz and A. Weiss (1981),
                                   Economic RevieW, 71, June, pp. 393—410.
  Imperfect Information," American
                                          "'Real' National Saving and
C. T. Taylor and A. R. Threadgold (1979),
                                     England Discussion Paper No. 6,
  Its Sectoral Composition," Bank of
  October.

3. Tobin and W. H. Buiter (1980), "Fiscal and Monetary Policies, The
                                                                 Capital
  Formation and Economic Activity," in C. N. von Furstenberg ed.
  Government and Capital FormatiOg.
                                        Theorem for Open Market Opera-
N. Wallace (1981), "A Modigliani—Miller
  tions," American Economic Review, 71, June, pp 267—74.
                                                               when
D. C. Webb (1981), "The net wealth effects of government bonds
  credit markets are imperfect," Economic Jou, 91, pp. 40514.
                   "Default risk in a model of corporate and government
__________ (1982),
