NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE USE OF LITERATURE BASED ELASTICITY ESTIMATES
IN CALIBRATED MODELS OF TRADE-WAGE DECOMPOSITIONS:
A CALIBMETRIC APPROACH
Hui Huang
John Whalley
Working Paper 10137
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10137
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

We are grateful to the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council for support and to Shunming Zhang
and Jim Davies and a seminar group at University of Western Ontario for comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Hui Huang and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Use of Literature Based Elasticity Estimates in Calibrated Models of
Trade-Wage Decompositions: A Calibmetric Approach
Hui Huang and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 10137
December 2003
JEL No. C5
ABSTRACT
How to best utilize the wide range of estimates of elasticities that characterize econometric literature
when using calibrated models is the issue we address here through a blending of econometrics and
calibration into calibmetrics. Econometrically generated literature based elasticity parameters are
typically used in calibrated models a very simple manner, appealing to a single value. Here we
explicitly incorporate the full range of values of elasticities yielded by econometric studies in both
the calibration procedure employed and the uses made of a calibrated model. This is important
because the ranges for such values can be large. This allows us to assess how uncertainty in
exogenously specified parameter values affects the performance of calibrated models, and how much
added information is obtained by using the full range of literature estimates of key parameters in
calibration.
Hui Huang
Department of Economics
University of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5C2
Canada
hhuang@uwo.ca
John Whalley
Department of Economics
University of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5C2
Canada
and NBER
jwhalley@uwo.ca

1

Introduction
Much of the literature on calibration debates the relative merits of calibration and

econometrics as if these were mutually exclusive choices. The papers in a symposium issue
of the Journal of Economic Perspectives in 1996 all take this approach with papers by Sims
(1996), Hansen and Heckman (1996), and Kydland and Prescott (1996). These and later
contributions are summarized in Dawkins, Srinivasan, and Whalley (2001).
Here we take a different approach, arguing that calibrated models now occupy a central
position in what is accepted in many circles as empirical work in economics and so the
coexistence of econometrically estimated and calibrated models is the defacto situation. To
us, the more realistic approach to calibration and econometrics seems to be to blend the
two rather than argue their merits. We refer to this as calibmetrics.
In most calibration exercises elasticity parameters play a critical role since these are
exogenously specified and econometric studies are typically appealed to justify the choices
of parameter values. Usually, single values are used with some form of sensitivity analysis
frequently employed. However, the reality is that for key elasticity parameters, such as for
labour supply, capital labour substitution, intertemporal substitution, import demand, and
others, the literature is characterized by wide ranges of estimates and even contrary signs
for some estimates (see Killingsworth (1984), Piggott and Whalley (1985), Stern, Francis,
and Schumacher (1976)). These differences in estimates occur for many reasons. Elasticity
concepts differ across studies (compensated versus uncompensated, for instance), estimation
methods differ, time periods vary, and sample sizes differ.
How to best utilize such a wide range of estimates in calibrated models is the issue we
address here through calibmetrics. Our aim is to more fully explore the use of literature
based econometrically generated elasticity parameters in calibrated models beyond what is
typical in the literature. Our approach is to explicitly incorporate the full range of values
of elasticities yielded by econometric studies in both the calibration procedure employed
and the uses made of the calibrated model, asking how uncertainty in exogenously specified
parameter values affects the performance of calibrated models.
Unfortunately the meaning of the term calibration varies from author to author and
subarea to subarea. In microcalibrations, the roles of exogenous and endogenous variables
are reversed with an equilibrium being treated as observed with calibration used simply

2

to infer parameter values consistent with the observation. This typically requires data
preadjustment since raw data do not meet the necessary equilibrium conditions of the model.
In macrocalibrations parsimonious stochastic dynamic models are used which usually cannot
be fitted exactly to data. Calibration in these cases then tries to obtain parameterizations
for which model solutions are close to data, usually with little or no preadjustment to ensure
full data admissibility to the equilibrium conditions in the model.
We use recent general equilibrium calibration and decomposition work due to Abrego
and Whalley (2003) as the vehicle for our investigation. In this, these authors seek to evaluate the underlying causes of increases in the relative wage of skilled to unskilled labour in
the UK between 1979 and 1995. Key elasticity values enter their calculations in a major
way. Using UK data for both years they prespecify skilled-unskilled labour substitution
elasticities in production and calibrate a two-period equilibrium structure so as to determine calibrated but data consistent rates of either skill or sector biased technical change.
Between these years large differences in the ratio of skilled to unskilled wage rates are observed along with surges of imports of unskilled intensive goods and changes in the relative
prices of unskilled and skilled intensive goods. The issue they address is how important
each of these separate changes is in accounting for the observed total wage ratio change.
Removing either technical change or relative price change from the second period equilibrium calculation allows them to decompose the influence of either on relative wage change
using counterfactual equilibrium computation.
Abrego and Whalley adopt a procedure found in many other modeling efforts of using
a single central tendency value, appealing to econometric literature estimates and citing a
study by Hamermesh (1993) which reviews many studies of labour demand elasticities. This
study includes a section on skilled unskilled labour substitution elasticities. While Abrego
and Whalley use an elasticity estimate of 1.25, behind this is a key table in Hamermesh
reporting 19 estimates. 5 of these are of the wrong sign, 1 is below 0.3 and 2 are above 5.
While 1.25 may be a defensible central tendency value for their purposes, how best to use
this additional information in their model procedures is not clear, as also is whether one
can make useful statements as to the likelihood of certain model outcomes in light of this
range of estimates.
We focus on questions not addressed by Abrego and Whalley in our application here of
calibmetrics. One is whether observations of large positive relative wage change for some
3

economies (eg. US, UK) and close to zero for others (eg. Canada, France) can be consistent
with the same model structure and only reflect parametric differences, or whether different
structural models (such as those including unions, for instance) are needed to account for
such observations. Another is how estimates of decompositions are affected by taking into
account the full range of literature elasticity estimates.
We use a compendium of estimates of elasticities of skilled-unskilled labour substitution
due to Hamermesh (1993) to infer the parameters of an assumed lognormal distribution
(and later other distributions) of parameter estimates for the key Abrego-Whalley elasticity
parameters (discarding all negative elasticity estimates). We then choose ranges around the
wage change taken as observed in two economies, and using calibration and decomposition
find the implied range of elasticities needed for any claimed contribution of international
price change to observed wage change within the range. We then calculate the likelihood
of the two target ranges of wage change occurring together, which we find to be small.
We also make a number of other calculations using the same approach. We assess the
added information obtained by using a lognormal distribution compared to a uniform prior
over a prespecified range of parameter values for these same calculations, implicitly asking
what is the added value of using econometric estimates of elasticity parameters over an
assumed range. We also grade and evaluate 14 estimates of substitution elasticities, showing
how the use of various individual and subgroup estimates makes a substantial difference to
model calculations of likelihood. We also use the same distributional approach to elasticity
parameter specification to calculate likelihood values for the decompositions performed by
Abrego and Whalley. We compare these to the decomposition results reported by Abrego
and Whalley using this single central tendency elasticity estimate.
Our conclusion is that the ways in which elasticity parameters are used in calibrated
models affects results in significant ways, in part because a wide range of estimated values
exists in the literature and how one selects among these matters. While this conclusion
may not seem surprising, the methods we exposit do, in our view, highlight the need for
empirical work in economics to be as concerned with the numerical behaviour of analytical
structures under different parameter settings as with more conventional hypothesis testing
and forecasting. Calibmetrics represents this form of evolution in numerical simulation
analysis. Here there is no hypothesis testing and no forecast, but the likelihood calculations
produced are insightful for the subjective judgments on model choice that all empirical
4

economists ultimately confront.

2

Abrego and Whalley’s Decomposition Experiments
In their decomposition work Abrego and Whalley use a model of a small open, price-

taking economy calibrated to UK data for two years (1979 and 1995). During the period
they study a substantial increase in wage inequality occurred in the UK with the relative
wage of skilled to unskilled labour increasing by around 25%. The issue they discuss is what
portion of observed wage change can be attributed to import surges of low-wage goods which
adversely affect unskilled labour and which to skill biased technical change. The UK, like
other OECD countries, generally imports low-skill intensive goods and exports high-skill
intensive goods.
They use a Ricardo-Viner specific-factors trade model with fixed factors in each of 2
sectors (skilled and unskilled labour intensive) as well as 2 sectorally fully mobile factors
(skilled and unskilled labour). They use this model because for functional forms widely
used for production, such as Cobb-Douglas or CES, Heckscher-Ohlin models (with homogeneous goods and constant returns to scale) have problems in accommodating relatively large
product price changes due to the near linearity of the transformation frontier implied by
the model (Abrego and Whalley, (2000)) and problems of complete specialisation following
relative price changes ensue (Johnson, (1966)). Conventional Heckscher-Ohlin structures
are also incapable of accommodating factor-biased technical change as a source of wage
change for the small open economy case (Leamer, (1998); Krugman, (2000)).

2.1

Production

On the production side of the economy, they treat the UK as a small open price-taking
economy that produces two goods, M and E, both of which are traded at fixed world prices
in period t (Pit ; i = M, E). The production of each good in each period requires the use of
two mobile factors: skilled labour, S, and unskilled labour, U , along with a sector-specific
fixed factor. Production, consumption and trade take place in each of the two time periods,
1 and 2, which they refer to as the initial and terminal periods.
Each good in each period is produced according to a decreasing returns to scale tech-

5

nology:
Yit = Ait Lαitit ,

i = M, E;

t = 1, 2

(1)

where Yit represents output of good i in period t, Lit is the use of a composite labour input,
and Ait denotes a sector-specific efficiency measure for a composite labour factor input. ait
is the elasticity of output with respect to composite labour, assumed to be strictly less than
one to yield decreasing returns to scale.
The composite labour input in each sector, Lit , is, in turn, a CES aggregate of skilled
and unskilled labor, Sit and Uit , used in sector i in period t, i.e.

 σit
σit −1
σit −1 σ −1
it
U
S
Lit = Bit βit (δt Uit ) σit + (1 − βit )(δt Sit ) σit
,

i = M, E;

t = 1, 2

(2)

where Bit defines units for composite labor used in sector i in period t, and βit is the
CES share parameter in the aggregation function. δtU and δtS are factor-augmenting technical change parameters which capture changes in input quality over time. σit denotes the
elasticity of substitution between unskilled and skilled labour in sector i in period t.
Combining (1) and (2) for each sector in each period yields

 αit σit
σit −1
σit −1
σit −1
U
S
σit
σit
Yit = γit βit (δt Uit )
+ (1 − βit )(δt Sit )
,

i = M, E;

t = 1, 2

(3)

where the units parameter in the consolidated function (3) γit = Ait Bit . Consistent with
the Ricardo-Viner approach, this production function implicitly defines a fixed factor in
each sector with a Cobb-Douglas share of (1 − αit ). In (3), changes in γit represent sectorspecific, Hicks-neutral technical change, while δtU and δtS determine factor-biased technical
change. In the empirical implementation of their model, Abrego and Whalley assume that
production of M , the importable good, is intensive in unskilled labour in both periods, i.e.
βM t > βEt , ∀t (as is the case in most OECD economies).

2.2

Labour Markets

Competitive labour markets are assumed with each type of labour paid its marginal
value product and full employment of each type of labour in each period. The endowments
of skilled and unskilled labour are assumed to be fixed in each time period at S̄t and Ūt
respectively, while varying across periods.

6

First order conditions for factor demands implied by marginal product pricing are
σit −1
σ

WU t =

σit (αit −1)+1
σit −1

Pit αit βit δU t it Yit

,

αit σit
σit −1

1
σit

i = M, E;

t = 1, 2

(4)

Uit γit
and

σit −1
σ

WSt =

σit (αit −1)+1
σit −1

Pit αit (1 − βit )δSt it Yit
1
σit

,

αit σit
σit −1

i = M, E;

t = 1, 2.

(5)

Sit γit

where WU t and WSt denote unskilled and skilled wage rates in period t, and Pit are the
(fixed) world prices for good i in period t. Given the decreasing returns technology set out
in (1), payments to skilled and unskilled labour do not exhaust the value of production in
each sector. The remaining factor income in the period implied by (1) accrues to the fixed
factor in the relevant sector.

2.3

Trade and Trade Shocks

Imports and competitive domestically produced goods are treated as homogeneous in
the model, with a similar treatment used for exportables. This homogeneity assumption
implies that trade flows for any good are always one-way, and that one of the goods is
exported and the other imported. In equilibrium a zero trade balance condition holds, i.e.
Σi=M,E Pit Tit = 0

(6)

where Tit denotes the net trade of the country (import/export) in the two goods in the
period, Mit and Eit . If good i is exported, domestic production less consumption, Tit is
positive; if good i is imported, Tit is negative.
Trade shocks are modeled as changes in world prices which typically induce increased
imports. The shock Abrego and Whalley consider for the UK between 1979 and 1995 is a
fall in the relative price of unskilled intensive to skill intensive goods between the two years.
These generate larger imports, adjustment of labour out of the unskilled intensive sector,
and increases in exports of skilled-intensive goods.

2.4

Equilibrium

Given the small open economy assumption used in the model, goods markets do not clear
domestically since they are but part of integrated world markets. Imports and exports reflect
7

positive and negative excess demands which are absorbed or met by world markets (subject
to trade balance). The UK, as a small economy, thus faces perfectly elastic demands and
supplies at the fixed world prices.
In the model, equilibrium in each period is given by unskilled and skilled wage rates
such that each of the two domestic labour markets clear. The value marginal product of
each type of labour in each sector is equal to the corresponding wage (as in (4) and (5)),
and the fixed factor in each sector i receives the residual return, Fit , in period t.
Market clearing conditions for each labour market hold in both periods, with skilled and
unskilled wage rates WU t and WSt determined such that
Σi Uit = Ūt ,

i = M, E;

t = 1, 2.

(7)

Σi Sit = S̄t ,

i = M, E;

t = 1, 2.

(8)

and

The fixed factor in each sector receives the difference between the value of production
at world prices and payments to the two types of labour. This enters incomes which, in
turn, finance demands.
Consumption of each good is given by the difference between production and net trade,
i.e.
Cit = Yit − Tit ,

i = M, E;

t = 1, 2.

(9)

where Cit denotes consumption of good i in period t. A property of equilibrium in such a
model (from Walras Law) is that trade balance holds.

2.5

Model Calibration and Decomposition Experiments

Abrego and Whalley’s calibration of this model structure to 1979 and 1995 UK data
consists of choosing values for model parameters such that the model gives equilibrium
solutions which are consistent as far as possible with observed data in both periods. In the
small open economy case, behaviour on the demand and production sides of the model is
independent in the sense that once optimizing decisions are made on the production side of
the economy incomes are determined, and (given world prices) demands on the consumption
side are determined. Since the focus of their decomposition is on determinants of wage rate
change, demand side considerations are not involved (nor are there statements made about
8

consumer welfare). This independence feature allows Abrego and Whalley to concentrate
only on the production side when calibrating their model.
The decompositional focus in Abrego and Whalley is to better understand the significance of factors behind ex-post changes in key variables (skilled and unskilled wage rates).
Calibration in micro-based models used to evaluate policy options on an ex-ante basis
usually occurs in so called levels form to a single, model-consistent equilibrium data set
constructed from observed outcomes (see Dawkins, Srinivasan, and Whalley (2000)). The
data used in these procedures are typically constructed from basic data which frequently violate the model equilibrium conditions. They are typically modified for model compatibility
through a series of subjective judgment driven modifications to yield a benchmark equilibrium model admissible data set (see Shoven and Whalley, (1992)). Abrego and Whalley’s
aim is to use a calibration which is consistent with data in both periods, and which captures
these changes in variables over time that are at the heart of their analysis. It thus involves
two data observations rather than one as in more conventional micro based calibration.
It is usual in single period calibrations to assume that the values of elasticities of substitution in production (σ) are exogenously given, with the values chosen based on literaturebased estimates of the relevant parameters. They use a single substitution elasticity parameter value between skilled and unskilled labour for both the sectors of 1.25, appealing to
Hamermesh’s (1993) literature survey of econometric estimates. They explore how changes
in this parameter value(from 0.75 to 2.5) affect their results through sensitivity analysis.
Abrego and Whalley’s assumed values for both periods leave sixteen production-side
parameter values in their model to be determined through calibration. These are output
elasticities with respect to composite labour, units terms in sector production functions,
CES shares in aggregation functions, and factor biased technological change parameters,
i.e.
αit , γit , βit , δtU , δtS ;

i = M, E;

t = 1, 2.

(10)

For these parameters to be consistent with the model equilibrium conditions in each
time period, the values determined must satisfy the first order conditions (4) and (5), as
well as equation (3). This yields a system of 12 equations in 16 unknowns, and additional
restrictions are needed to determine parameter values using this system.

9

Abrego and Whalley first set
δ1U = δ1S = 1

(11)

which they interpret as a normalization rule for factor-biased technological change.
They then impose further restrictions on model parameterizations to yield an equation
system for calibration across the two time periods in which the remaining endogenous model
parameters are exactly identified. They use three alternative sets of restrictions, each of
which yields an exactly identified system from which parameter values for the model can
be determined.
These are
Restriction 1

δtU = δtS = 1

Restriction 2

γi1 = γi2 ,

i = M, E

(13)

Restriction 3

βi1 = βi2 ,

i = M, E

(14)

(12)

or

Restriction 1 implies that no factor-biased technical change occurs over time. Restriction
2 implies that no Hicksian-neutral technical change takes place over time. Restriction 3
allows technical change to be both Hicks-neutral and factor-biased, but rules out any change
over time in share parameters in the composite CES labour aggregation function. These
three alternatives differ in their implied treatment of technical change over time. Abrego
and Whalley do not restrict their choice of αit when implementing calibration since these
parameter values determine the share of composite labour input in sectoral income, and
must be consistent with the shares implied by the data used for each time period.
Using each of these sets of restrictions, they are able to calibrate their model and then
assess the implications of each for their decomposition results. They use their model (calibrated in each of the three ways set out above) to generate estimates of the contribution
of increased trade, factor-biased technical change, and also factor endowment change (demographics) to changes in UK wage inequality between 1979 and 1995. All the changes in
model parameters taken together are consistent with observed wage inequality change as
well as with other characteristics of the observed period 2 equilibrium. They capture trade
shocks in their analysis as changes in world prices (the relative price of skill intensive to
unskilled intensive goods facing the UK in international markets between 1979 and 1995).
10

These shocks affect trade flows, which are endogenously determined in the model. Factorbiased technical change is modeled as changes in the technical change parameters δtU and
δtS .
For each model parameterization generated by the three alternative calibrations set out
above, they assess the contribution of each component to changes in wage inequality. They
do this by first taking the equilibrium of period 1 as the base, and then resolving the model
for the second period only including the trade shock. This permits a calculation of the
portion of the observed two-period change in wage inequality which can be attributed to
the trade shock. They can also accommodate the various restrictions implied by each of the
technology parameter changes implied by each of the calibration procedures they use and
repeat their procedures. They also assess the impacts of changes in factor endowments on
inequality in a similar manner.
The proportions of the total change in wage inequality between the two years attributed
in this way to each component need not (and typically will not) sum to the total change in
wage inequality actually observed. Each experiment only considers a change in a subset of
three exogenous variables, and these have interacting effects which imply that their separate
contributions may sum to more or less than the observed wage inequality change. The
quantitative significance of this non-additivity property is something revealed by numerical
computation.
Abrego and Whalley conclude from their calculations that the contribution of trade
shocks to observed increases in wage inequality in the UK is relatively small, but also that
the calibration procedures used affect results.

11

3

Calibmetrics, Elasticity Parameters, Country Comparisons
of Relative Wage Change, and Likelihood Results for Decompositions
The first of our applications of calibmetrics reported on here using the Abrego-Whalley

approach focuses on elasticity parameters and the cross country feature noted in some of
the trade and wages literature that there is different behaviour of the relative skilled to
unskilled wage rate across countries even where the same international shocks seemingly
apply to individual economies. An example is the difference between the US and Canada.
In the US the relative wage change has been in the order of 25% (see Slaughter (1999)) while
in Canada there have been small to zero change in the relative wage of skilled to unskilled
labour over the last decades (see Murphy, Riddell and Romer (1998)). Similar experiences
apply for the different outcomes across European countries, between the UK and France for
instance.
If two economies are subject to the same international price shocks, and if technical
change flows equally across national borders, there is seemingly a puzzle as to how this
could happen. One hypothesis is that the two economies at issue can be represented by
the same model structure, but parameter values differ between the economies and hence a
different outcome is observed. Another is that different structural models are needed for
the two economies to account for the different empirical observations. For instance, it may
be that a model of Canada that explicitly incorporates, say, resource rents or labour unions
is helpful instead in accounting for differences relative to US experience.
In applying calibmetrics to explore the possible consistency of different outcomes from a
common model to two countries with differences in parametric values used in the same model
structure, we note the key role played by elasticities of skilled-unskilled labour substitution
in the Abrego-Whalley calculations, and the large range of elasticity estimates in the key
table from Hamermesh (1993) on which they draw.
This table is reproduced here as Table 1, from which it can be seen that in reality there
is a wide range of elasticity estimates; not the single value used by Abrego and Whalley.
As can be seen there are differences in sign and also large differences in size of estimates
across studies. Most estimates are for the US, some are for all manufacturing others for

12

particular industries. Some use duality (translog) approaches, some directly estimate a
production function. Given the range of values reported in Table 1, which estimates to use
in a calibrated model and why is the issue. Abrego and Whalley suggest in their paper that
this table loosely supports use of a value of 1.25 and use a single value for both sectors in
their model and make their decompositional calculations on this basis.

Table 1. Hamermesh (1993) Estimates of Substitution (σ)
Between Skilled and Unskilled Workers1

Study

Description

Dougherty (1972)

All industry, US states, 1960;

σ
4.1

multilevel CES, 8 occupation groups
Chiswick (1979)

US States, manufacturing, 1910, 1920;

2.5

professional, others; CES
Kesselman, Williamson,

US Manufacturing annual 1962-71;

and Berndt (1977)

KBW, translog cost

Clark and Freeman (1977)

US Manufacturing, annual, 1950-76;

0.49

0.91

KBW, translog cost
Berndt and White (1978)

US Manufacturing, annual, 1947-71;

3.70

KBW, translog cost
Dennis and Smith (1978)

2-digital US manufacturing, annual, 1952-73;

-0.05

KBW, money balances; translong cost
Grant (1979)

US SMSAs, 1970; KB, 2 white-collar; translog

0.62

cost. Professional, managers
Grant (1979)

US SMSAs, 1970; KB, 2 white-collar; translog

0.14

cost. Sales, clericals
Freeman and Medoff (1982)

2-digit manufacturing, US states, 1972;

-0.02

KBW; translog cost: Union
Freeman and Medoff (1982)

2-digit manufacturing, US states, 1972;
KBW; translog cost: Nonnion

1

Source: Hamermesh (1993) Table 3.7, P.110-111

13

0.76

Table 1. (Continued)
Study

Description

Berger (1984)

2-digit manufacturing, US states, annual,

σ
<0

1971-77; KBWE prices, translong cost
Turnovsky and Donnelly (1984)

Iron and steel, annual, 1959-79;

-0.48

Australia, translong cost: KBWEM
Turnovsky and Donnelly (1984)

Iron and steel, annual, 1959-79;

-0.04

Australia, translong cost: KBWE
Bergstrom and Panas (1992)

2-digit manufacturing, annual, 1963-

1.20

80; Sweden; K, salaried, wage earners,
translog cost
Berndt and Christensen (1974)

US Manufacturing, annual, 1929-68

5.51

KBW translog production
Denny and Fuss (1977)

US Manufacturing, annual, 1929-68; BW,

4.76

equipment, structures, translog production
Denny and Fuss (1977)

US Manufacturing, annual, 1929-68; BW,

2.06

equipment, structures, translog cost
Klotz, Madoo, and Hanson (1980)

3- and 4-digit US manufacturing, 1967; KBW,

6.00

translog production. highest quartile plants
Klotz, Madoo, and Hanson (1980)

3- and 4-digit US manufacturing, 1967; KBW,
translog production. lowest quartile plants

14

2.00

We first modify the Abrego-Whalley procedures by utilizing the full range of the elasticity estimates reported in Hamermesh (1993) while maintaining their assumption that
the same common value applies to each of the two sectors in their UK model. We ask
what is the likelihood of observing two different country outcomes for relative wage change
given both common price and technology shocks and the range of elasticity estimates in
Table 1. We then make calculations of the likelihood of observing different wage changes
across economies using the same structural model as common to two economies but with
differences allowed in elasticity parameter values. To do this we calibrate the model to the
same base case data for the UK and then use different elasticity values for the common
skilled-unskilled labour substitution elasticity parameter in place of the value used in the
original calibration. In each case we calculate the implied wage rate change for a common
price shock.
We begin from the model specification used by Abrego and Whalley and the parameter
values generated by their first calibration procedure using an elasticity value of 1.25. We
then construct a density function, f (σ), over the common elasticity value used in the two
sectors using the range implied by the literature estimates in Table 1. We first use a
lognormal distribution with the mean and variance of this distribution calculated from
Table 1, discarding all elasticity estimates of the wrong sign and letting the range be nonnegative.
We then adopt target values for wage change in two economies of 0% and 25% and
use the same UK data and non-elasticity calibrated parameters as Abrego and Whalley to
explore whether these ranges apply. This enables us to calculate the density for 0% and
25% wage changes for given ranges around these target values. We use ±2.5% and ±5% as
our ranges. 0% and 25% are not the precise values characterizing observed wage changes
in two actual economies, but are roughly reflecting of the differences in the 1980’s and 90’s
between the UK and France. Our likelihood estimates are set out in Table 2, which show
small estimates to be involved. These suggest that the likelihood that different observations
of wage change across two economies (UK and France) could be consistent with the same
structural model, but different values of the elasticity of substitution between skilled and
unskilled labour compatible with the distribution of literature estimates is small. Seemingly,
the more plausible position is to argue that different structural models (such as with and
without unions) are a more satisfactory way to accomodate the phenomenon observed.
15

Table 2. Assessing the Likelihood of Observing Different Joint Wage
Change across 2 Countries Using the Same Structural Model
in which Only Substitution Elasticities Parameters Vary
A. Experiment
• Target wage change for 2 economies selected for UK model
double calibrated (using procedure 1 above) to 1979 and
1995 data
• Specify range around targets (see below)
• Use non-negative literature estimates of σ to construct
lognormal f (σ)
• Calculate joint density for two country wage changes given
the above
B. Likelihood Results (Targets for wage change (0%, 25%))
Range of wage change

2

±2.5%

±5.0%

Density2 for 0% wage change

0.023

0.047

Density2 for 25% wage change

0.101

0.210

Implied joint density2 (likelihood)

0.002

0.010

These are the portion of a total density of unity.

In Table 3 we use alternative uniform density functions to investigate the sensitivity
of the results in Table 2. We use a range of values of σ given by their minimum and
maximum values reported in Table 1. We assume a uniform density function instead of the
lognormal distribution used above. The calculated likelihood estimates change substantially
(by a factor of approximately 3) when the form of density functions used is varied. These
are considerably lower in the uniform density case, since the target values of 0% and 25%
change are concentrated in regions of the lognormal density functions with large mass.
We interpret these calculations as providing an assessment of how the full distribution
16

of literature estimates of elasticity parameter values can change or inform estimates of
likelihood of observing joint wage outcomes across two economies using the same structural
model.

Table 3. Sensitivity of Likelihood Calculations to Assumed Density
Function for σ of Joint Observed Wage Change

A. Experiment
• Same as Table 2
• Now repeated for uniform prior for σ, i.e. uniform density function f (σ) over
a prespecified range
B. Results (Targets for wage change (0%, 25%))
Range of wage change
±2.5%

Density2 for

±5.0%

literature

uniform density

literature

uniform density

based f (σ)

f (σ) over

based f (σ)

f (σ) over

(table 2)

min/max range

(table 2)

min/max range

0.023

0.010

0.047

0.020

0.101

0.067

0.210

0.150

0.002

0.001

0.009

0.003

0% wage change
Density2 for
25% wage change
Implied joint
density2 (likelihood)

2

These are the portion of a total density of unity.

17

Table 4 reports the sensitivity of likelihood calculations of joint wage change over target
ranges to alternative specifications of the experiments and changes made in implementing
calculations. We both change the range of the uniform density function assumed, and vary
the target for wage change in one the countries as well as use alternatives to the lognormal
distribution. Likelihood calculations for joint wage change within target ranges change
again and by even larger amounts than in Table 3, with estimates spanning a range of 5:1.
They still remain small, however.

Table 4. Sensitivity of Likelihood Calculations of Joint Wage
Change to Experiment Implementation Procedures

A. Experiment
• Same as Table 2
B. Results For Implied Joint Density2
Range of wage change
±2.5%

Table 3 (above)

±5.0%

literature

uniform density

literature

uniform density

based f (σ)

f (σ) over

based f (σ)

f (σ) over

(table 2)

min/max range

(table 2)

min/max range

0.0023

0.0006

0.0098

0.0030

0.0023

0.0002

0.0098

0.0008

0.0037

0.0012

0.0158

0.0053

Min/max range in uniform density2 replaced
by 2×min/2×max
Density2 when Targets
changed to (10%, 25%)

2

These are the portion of a total density of unity.

18

Table 5 considers the impacts of variations on the calibration procedures used on joint
wage likelihood calculations, modifying these from procedure 1 in Abrego and Whalley to
their procedures 2 and 3 discussed above. The proportional size of variation in estimates
between lognormal and uniform distribution enlarges as different procedures are used, again
suggesting differences in results across procedures but also indicating how these different
procedures can be implemented. These results suggest that choice of calibration method
may be more important for estimates of joint likelihood than the choice of σ, as conventional
calibration literature focuses on. In turn, the wider implication is that a range of characteristics and procedures beyond simple parameter selection affect the outcomes generated
by calibrated models, a point not currently recognized in literature.

Table 5. Sensitivity of Likelihood Calculations of Joint
Wage Change to Calibration Procedures

A. Experiment
• Same as Table 2
B. Results For Implied Joint Density2
Range of wage change
±2.5%
Implied Joint Density2

±5.0%

literature

uniform density

literature

uniform density

based f (σ)

f (σ) over

based f (σ)

f (σ) over

(table 2)

min/max range

(table 2)

min/max range

Table 3 (above)

0.0023

0.0007

0.0098

0.0030

Use of Calibration

0.0006

0.0002

0.0025

0.0008

0.0001

0.00002

0.0003

0.0001

method 2 (not 1)
Use of Calibration
method 3 (not 1)

2

These are the portion of a total density of unity.

19

Table 6 reports the sensitivity of the likelihood calculations made above to the value
used as the central tendency elasticity estimate extracted from the literature in both sectors
in the original Abrego-Whalley procedure. We report on different procedures for obtaining
a single value in the Table and show the implications for calculations of likelihood of joint
wage change. Results are sensitive to the choice of value, highlighting the key role played by
judgment in implementing calibration procedures through the choice of elasticity parameter
values. The degree of sensitivity, however, is considerably less than that shown for other
characteristic of calibration procedure (see table 5).

Table 6. Sensitivity of Likelihood Calculations of Joint Wage
Change to Methods Used to Survey Literature Elasticities
to Produce an Initial Central Tendency Estimate

Alternative Methods

Implied Elasticity

Likelihood (implied joint density2 )

Used to Group Hamm-

Value for skilled-

of observing joint (0%, 25%)

unskilled substitution

wage change with interval of ±2.5%

As in Abrego-Whalley

1.25

0.0023

Simple average of all

1.898

0.0051

2.482

0.0073

0.774

0.0007

3.3

0.0099

1.969

0.0054

1.806

0.0047

ermesh Estimates

estimates
Drop all negative
elasticity estimates
from average
Average of translog
cost function estimates
Average of CES estimates
Average of only US
estimates
Averaged estimates using
annual times series data

2

These are the portion of a total density of unity.

20

Finally, we assess the sensitivity of the Abrego-Whalley decomposition estimates themselves to the use of the full range of skilled-unskilled elasticity estimates in the Hamermesh
study rather than only use a single central tendency value. To do this we approximate the
lognormal density function f (σ) by a sense of piecewise linear segments, and for the central
value of each range we repeat the Abrego-Whalley decomposition. We then use the density
of each range to produce expected values for decomposition results. These are reported in
Table 7. These show some degrees of sensitivity of results to the procedure used but the
impacts are small. Interestingly, while using the full range of σ values from econometric
literature in calculations of joint likelihood of wage change seems to make a large difference,
for the decomposition results themselves as reported by Abrego and Whalley the impacts
seem small. This highlights how calibmetrics as a procedure and approach will both vary
from question to question, and yield different insights. In an assessment of how important
it is to use the full range of literature estimates for key parameters in calibrated models here it matters for reconciling joint economy outcomes with model structures but for
decomposition results it appears not play such a large role.

Table 7. Sensitivity of Abrego-Whalley Trade-Wage
Decomposition to the Use of Fall Range of
Literature Elasticity Values in Distribution From

Original Abrego-Whalley

Procedures repeated

decompositions showing

for piecewise linear

relative importance of

approximation of f (σ)

factors in observed UK

and combined to yield

wage change 1979-1995

expected value

17%

19%

Factor-biased technical change

0

0

Hicks-neutral technical change

1%

−4%

−144%

−183%

Changes in βit

183%

189%

Changes in αit

−19%

−22%

Increased trade

Factor endowment changes

21

4

Concluding Remarks
This paper presents procedures for combining the typically wide range of econometrically

generated estimates of key elasticity parameter values used in calibrated models with the
implementation procedures actually used in calibration and counterfactual calculations. We
term our approach calibmetrics, reflecting a blending of econometrics and calibration in light
of the defacto situations of calibrated models relying on literature estimates of parameter
values selected from often disparate econometric estimates. We emphasize the inevitable
need for subjective judgement in all numerical (or empirical) work in economics including
in econometrics. Here the issues are what difference it makes to use the full and typically
wide rage of econometric estimates of key parameters when using calibrated models.
We draw on a study of the UK of trade effects on relative skilled and unskilled wage rates
due to Abrego and Whalley using data for 1979 and 1995 which utilizes a single elasticity
parameter value for te elasticity of substitutions between skilled and unskilled labour loosely
justified by appealing to a literature compendium produced by Hamermesh (1993). Abrego
and Whalley use a single value of 1.25, even though Hamermesh reports 19 values which
range from negative to over 5. We show how it is possible to use calibration methods so as to
incorporate the full range of elasticity estimates produced by Hamermesh in distributional
form. We use a range of procedures to explore the likelihood of model observations of
joint wage changes across economies, using a similar parameter specification for a common
model using the full variation in elasticity parameters across economies. We also assess
the implications for decompositional analysis for each of a number of underlying factors
driving changes in relative skilled-unskilled wage changes over time. Calibmetric results are
sensitive to the procedures used, and using the full range of literature estimates changes the
model results significantly. Interestingly, using the full range of calibmetrically generated
estimates seems to make large difference to likelihood calculations but only a small difference
to decomposition results.

22

References
[1] Abrego, L. and J.Whalley (2000) The Choice of Structural Model in Trade-Wages
Decompositions.

Review of International Economics, 8, 462-77.

[2] Abrego, L. and J.Whalley (2003) Decomposing Wage Inequality Change Using General
Equilibrium Models.

Forthcoming in ed. T.J.Kehoe, T.N.Srinivasan, and J.Whalley,

New Frontier in Equilibrium Modelling, Cambridge University Press.
[3] Dawkins, C., T.N.Srinivasan, and J.Whalley (2000) Calibration in ed. E.C.Leamer
and J. Heckman, Handbook of Econometrics, North-Holland.
[4] Hamermesh, D.S. (1993) Labor Demand. Princeton, N.J: Princeton University
Press.
[5] Hansen, L.P. and J.J.Heckman (1996) The Empirical Foundations of Calibration.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10, 87-89.
[6] Johnson, H.G. (1966) Factor Market Distortions and the Shape of the Transformation
Frontier. Econometrica, 34, 686-98.
[7] Killingsworth, M.R. (1983) Labor Supply. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press.
[8] Krugman, P. (2000) Technology, Trade and Factor Prices.

Journal of International

Economics, 50, 51-71.
[9] Kydland, F.E. and E.C.Prescott (1996) The Computational Experiment: An Econometric Tool.

Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10, 69-71.

[10] Leamer, E. (1998) In Search of Stolper-Samuelson Linkages between International
Trade and Lower Wages. In ed. S. M. Collins Imports, Exports, and the American
Worker. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
[11] Murphy, K.M., W.C.Riddell, and P.M.Romer (1998) Wages, Skills, and Technology
in the United States and Canada. NBER working paper no. 6638.
[12] Shoven, J.B. and J.Whalley (1992) Applying General Equilibrium. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
23

[13] Slaughter, M. (1999) Globalization and Wages: A Tale of Two Perspectives. World
Economy, 22, 609-29.
[14] Sims, C.A. (1996) Macroeconomics and Methodology. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10, 105-07.
[15] Stern, R.M., J.Francis, and B.Schumacher (1976) Price Elasticies in International
Trade: An Annotated Bibliography. London: Macmillan (for the Trade Policy
Research Center).
[16] Piggott, J. and J.Whalley (1985) New Development in Applied General Equilibrium Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

24

