NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HAVE NATIONAL BUSINESS CYCLES
BECOME MORE SYNCHRONIZED?
Michael D. Bordo
Thomas Helbling
Working Paper 10130
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10130
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

Paper presented at the Kiel Conference on “Macroeconomic Policies in the World Economy”, Kiel, Germany,
June 23-24, 2003. The views presented in the paper reflect only those of the authors and should not be
attributed to the International Monetary Fund. For helpful comments, we thank our discussant, Mathias
Hoffmann, and also Linda Tesar, Jon Faust, and participants at a seminar at the Bank of Canada, especially
John Helliwell. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Michael D. Bordo and Thomas Helbling. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Have National Business Cycles Become More Synchronized?
Michael D. Bordo and Thomas Helbling
NBER Working Paper No. 10130
December 2003
JEL No. E32, N10
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we document evidence on the synchronization of business cycles across 16 countries
over the past century and a quarter, demarcated into four exchange rate regimes. We find using three
different methodologies that there is a secular trend towards increased synchronization for much of
the twentieth century and that it occurs across diverse exchange rate regimes. This finding is in
marked contrast to much of the recent literature, which has focused primarily on the evidence for
the past 20 or 30 years and which has produced mixed results. We then considered a number of
possible explanations for the observed pattern of increased synchronization. We first ascertained the
role of shocks demarcated into country-specific (idiosyncratic) and global (common). Our key
finding here is that global (common) shocks are the dominant influence across all regimes. The
increasing importance of global shocks we posit reflects the forces of globalization, especially the
integration of goods and services through international trade and the integration of financial markets.
Our evidence shows a modest role for increasing bilateral trade in explaining synchronization, with
stronger evidence for regional integration in Europe and North America but the evidence for the role
of financial integration proxied by the removal of capital controls is inconclusive.
Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
New Jersey Hall
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1284
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Thomas Helbling
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431
thelbling@imf.org

-2-

I. INTRODUCTION
The increasing worldwide integration of goods, capital and financial markets is widely
believed to have led to more interdependence between national business cycles. In the recent
encyclopedia Business Cycles and Depressions, Dore (1997) considers the synchronization
of international cycles a stylized fact and argues that “[i]nstitutional changes such as free
capital mobility, floating exchange rates, and the increase in international arbitrage and
speculative activities have increased interdependence among the major capitalist nations,
which is likely to lead to further synchronization of cycles.” From a theoretical perspective,
however, the correlation between business cycle synchronization and integration is not
necessarily positive. Krugman (1993) noted that stronger trade integration may lead to
greater regional specialization, which can lead to less output synchronization with industryspecific shocks. Relatedly, Heathcote and Perri (2002) showed how increased financial
integration may be an endogenous reaction to the regionalization of real sector linkages, as
the latter allow for gains from the global diversification of asset portfolios.

The broadly synchronized recent downturn in the industrial countries has generally
reinforced the notion of international business cycle synchronization. Paradoxically,
however, the empirical evidence for the past three decades is so mixed that it remains
difficult to make a strong case for the notion of increased or increasing business cycle
linkages among industrial countries. Depending on the sample period, output correlations
have even decreased in recent decades, largely on account of a remarkable cycle desynchronization among the major industrial countries in the late 1980s and early 1990s
(Helbling and Bayoumi, 2003). The empirical case against increased synchronization is made

-3-

forcefully by Doyle and Faust (2002), who analyze changes in the comovements among the
growth rates of G-7 countries since 1971 and found no evidence for significant increases in
output correlations over time, even for Canada and the United States or for the euro area
member countries. On the other hand, studies using dynamic factor models find evidence of
increased international business cycle linkages. For example, Kose, Otrok and Whiteman
(2002) report that a global factor explains larger shares of output variances in the G-7
countries during 1986-2001 than it does during the Bretton Woods period (1960-1972).

In this paper, we study international business cycle synchronization over 120 years, using
annual data that covers four distinct eras with different international monetary regimes. 1 The
four eras covered are 1880-1913 when much of the world adhered to the classical Gold
Standard, the interwar period (1920-1938), the Bretton Woods regime of fixed but adjustable
exchange rates (1948-1972), and the modern period of managed floating among the major
currency areas (1973 to 2001). The annual data for 16 industrial countries that we use in this
paper come from Mitchell (1998a, 1998b, and 1998c) and other sources. They were used by
Bergman, Bordo, and Jonung (1998) and Bordo and Jonung (2001). 2 The IMF’s
International Financial Statistics was used to update the dataset to 2001.

1

This approach follows Bergman, Bordo and Jonung (1998) and Backus and Kehoe (1992). Unlike these
papers, we focus on international synchronization and devote less attention to the comparison of national
business cycle properties such as output volatility or output-consumption comovements.
2

These references also provide more details on the data. The countries included in our data set are Australia,
Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. In some of the tables, we list the countries by their
geographical proximity rather than in alphabetical order.

-4-

We believe that using a much longer data sample provides a much-needed broader and
complementary perspective on business cycle synchronization. In the short term, much of the
business cycle dynamics depends on the shock dynamics, which tends to overshadow the
effects of integration. Changes in the latter, as a recent essay in the IMF’s World Economic
Outlook (2001) has pointed out, are often minor over short periods of time. Across the four
eras that we examine, the variation in cross-border integration in the markets for goods,
capital and financial assets has been considerably larger than over the last 20 years while the
influence of particular shock realizations appears arguably to have been somewhat less
important.

The paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses conceptual issues regarding
international business cycle synchronization and provides the basic stylized facts. The
subsequent section looks at the role that changes in this structure of shocks may have played
in the observed changes in the synchronization of cycles. Section IV analyzes how changes
in trade integration and the exchange rate regime have contributed to the observed increased
international synchronization of business cycles.

II. CROSS-COUNTRY BUSINESS CYCLE S YNCHRONIZATION OVER TIME

The notion of business cycles becoming increasingly synchronized across countries captures
the observation that the timing and magnitudes of major changes in economic activity appear
increasingly similar. For example, in the most recent slowdown, output growth started to

-5-

weaken at about the same time in the major advanced economies (e.g., Helbling and
Bayoumi, 2003). Despite its frequent use, however, synchronization as a formal concept has
only recently been formally introduced into the business cycle literature, where comovements
among cyclical time series have been the dominant object of analysis for many decades.
Harding and Pagan (2002b) proposed a definition of cross-country cycle synchronization that
is an offspring of the traditional concepts developed by the National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER) starting in the early 1920s. Specifically, they consider national business
cycles to be synchronized if turning points in the corresponding reference cycles occur
roughly at the same points in time. On this basis, they have derived a statistical measure, the
concordance correlation, that allows one to test whether national cycles are significantly
synchronized or not. This approach to measuring synchronization boils down to national
business cycles being in the same phase—expansions and recessions—at about the same
time.

Using NBER-based business cycle concepts has distinct advantages, including the fact that
there is no need to apply detrending procedures and a rich collection of empirical studies
dating back to the 1920s and 1930s. There are also distinct disadvantages. First, the use of
non-linear filters and judgments in the derivation of turning points in the reference cycle
often precludes standard statistical analysis based on the linear models widely used in
economics. 3 Second, since Koopman’s (1947) review of Measuring Business Cycles by
3

However, recent advances in econometrics and information technology have facilitated the use of nonlinear
models in empirical economic research. Diebold and Rudebusch (1999) address business cycle issues with
(nonlinear) regime switching approaches.

-6-

Burns and Mitchell (1946), the mostly a-theoretical framework of the traditional NBER
business cycle measures has been recognized as problematic by many. In particular, it
remains difficult to link the phase-based NBER measures with structural models of
macroeconomic fluctuations, including with the impulse-propagation approach to modeling
business cycles that has increasingly dominated the academic literature. Finally, NBER
reference cycle dates do not exist for all the countries in the sample from 1880-2001.

For an analytical paper, the costs associated with these disadvantages weigh heavily and we
will adopt a more eclectic approach to measuring business cycle synchronization. In
particular, we make extensive use of standard correlations and factors-based measures of
synchronization, both measures which have frequently been used in the academic literature.
We will, however, follow Harding and Pagan (2002, 2003), Stock and Watson (1999), and
others by using real gross domestic product—or output in short—as the measure of aggregate
economic activity or the business cycle rather than the synthetic reference cycle series used
by the NBER. In addition, we will also examine the synchronization in industrial production.
While we would not associate national business cycles with industrial production (IP),
studying the latter is nevertheless interesting for two reasons. First, fluctuations in IP are
more cyclical than fluctuations in some other sectors, especially services or government,
which helps to understand the extent to which the cyclical sectors in an economy are
interrelated with those abroad. Second, IP approximates fluctuations in the tradables sectors.

-7-

A. Output Synchronization

1. Concordance Correlations

Harding and Pagan (2002) proposed to measure the cross-country synchronization of
business cycles in countries i and j by the correlation between the binary cycle indicator
variables Sit and Sjt. The latter are 1-0 variables that take on the value 1 in period t if an
economy is in an expansion and the value 0 if it is in a recession (determined on the basis of
output developments, as discussed). 4 As the correlations are related to the so-called
concordance statistic (the sum of the products of the binary cycle indicators), which
determines the number of periods during which national cycles are in the same phase (as a
fraction of the total number of periods in the sample), we will refer to them as concordance
correlations. 5 If two cycles are perfectly synchronized, in the sense of being in the same state
in every period, the concordance correlation coefficient ñS is 1. If the two cycles are exactly
in the opposite state in every period (Sit=1-Sjt, t=1...T), the correlation is -1. Finally, if the two
cycles are uncorrelated, the correlation is 0.

We have calculated the binary business cycle state indicator variable Sit for four eras for a
panel of 16 industrial countries, for which GDP data are available from 1880. (As noted
4

See Chapter 3 of the April 2002 World Economic Outlook for an overview of business cycle concepts and
methods.
5

Specifically, Harding and Pagan (2002) demonstrate that the bilateral concordance correlation coefficient and
its statistical significance can be estimated by regressing the binary cycle indicator of one country, adjusted by
its standard deviations, on that of the other country.

-8-

above, real GDP is our measure of aggregate economic activity). With annual data, the
determination of expansions and recessions is straightforward. A recession is defined as one
or more consecutive years of negative real GDP growth, while an expansion consists of a
year or more of positive growth. The resulting business cycle turning points broadly match
the dates in the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) chronologies for the United
States, the United Kingdom, France, and Germany (available in Glasner, 1997). The
differences reflect the use by the NBER of higher frequency (monthly) data and a broader
variety of indicators, such as employment and department store sales. On this basis,
correlation coefficients between all country pairs and their significance were estimated.

Figure 1 shows the concordance correlation coefficients by percentile for three of the four
eras. The reason for leaving out the Bretton Woods era is that most countries did not
experience any classical recession during this period. Hence, the business cycle indicator Sit
takes on the value 1 in every period. Naturally, the regression-based correlation coefficients
can not be derived in the circumstances, as cycles (cycle states) become perfectly correlated
without variation in the cycle phases. Table 1 shows the average concordance correlations by
era, including for a number of country groups.

Comparing the distribution of the correlation coefficients by era suggests the following.

•

In the Gold Standard era, the average of the correlation coefficients was just about
zero, as about half of all the pairs of national business cycles were negatively related

-9-

to each other while the other half was positively related to each other. Hence, on
average, business cycles were not synchronized according to this measure.

•

In the interwar and the post-Bretton Wood periods, more than half of all pairs of
national business cycles were positively related to each other. On average, the
correlation is about 0.2, suggesting generally synchronized business cycles during
these eras. Nevertheless, more than one fourth of all cycles remained negatively
related, which explains why the average “synchronization” remains relatively weak.
Comparing the distributions of the two periods suggests no significant difference
(which is confirmed by a Wilcoxon Rank sum test).

Figure 1. Bilateral Output Concordance Correlations By Percentiles

0.700
0.600

Value of rho(s) at percentile

0.500

1880-1913

0.400

1920-38

0.300

1973-2001

0.200
0.100
0.000
-0.100
-0.200
-0.300
-0.400
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Percentiles

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

- 10 -

Overall, we find that synchronization was most pronounced in the Bretton Woods era, when
many economies enjoyed uninterrupted expansions. As shown below, the finding is
misleading because output comovements were not stronger in that era than in either the
preceding or the subsequent era. The relevant key finding is that synchronization patterns
appear to have systematically changed once the world went off the classical Gold Standard.
During the latter era, cycles were, on average, uncorrelated while, beginning with the
interwar period, they started to become synchronized on average.

2. Output Correlations

Output correlations have been the perhaps most frequently used measures of business cycle
synchronization. According to this measure, national cycles are synchronized if they are
positively and significantly correlated with each other.

The higher are the positive

correlations, the more synchronized are the cycles. Compared with concordance correlations,
measuring synchronization with standard contemporaneous correlations is more stringent, as
the latter require similarities in both the direction and magnitudes of output changes. 6

Figure 2 shows the correlation coefficients for log output growth by percentile for the four
eras. The distribution of the correlation coefficients differs substantially from era to era. In

6

As we use annual data, it is not surprising that there is little evidence of strong lead-lag relationships among
the log output growth rates in our dataset.

- 11 -

particular, there has been a tendency toward higher, positive output correlations, not just a
one-time level increase in synchronization, as observed in the previous subsection based on
concordance correlations. During the Gold Standard, about one half of all country pairs were
characterized by negative output correlations and the average output correlation coefficient is
about 0 (Table 2). A first important step toward synchronization occurred during the interwar
period, when the share of negative correlations fell below 30 percent while the average
correlation increased to about 0.15. A subsequent reversal during the Bretton Woods era was
small, and correlations remained, on average, above those found for the Gold Standard era. A
second important increase then occurred during 1973-2001, when less than 10 percent of all
country pairs were characterized by negative output correlations and the average correlation
was 0.33.
Figure 2. Bilateral Output Correlation Coefficients By Percentile
0.800

1880-1913
1920-38
1948-72
1973-2001

0.600

Value of rho at percentile

0.400

0.200

0.000

-0.200

-0.400
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Percentiles

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

- 12 -

Are these changes over time statistically different? This question is relevant since the
confidence intervals for the bilateral correlation coefficients are relatively wide given the few
observations per era. 7 We used both nonparametric and parametric tests to address the issue.
(Nonparametric) Wilcoxon Rank sum tests suggest that the upward shifts in the distribution
of the correlation coefficients are significant at the 5 percent level for the interwar period
(compared to the Gold Standard era) and for the modern floating era (compared to both the
interwar and the Bretton Woods eras). The downward shift in the distribution of correlation
coefficients from the interwar to the Bretton Woods eras is only significant at the 10 percent
level.

The Wilcoxon rank sum test does not require any assumption about the underlying
distribution of the correlation coefficients. In practice, however, it is typically assumed that
the correlation coefficients of a vector series of log first differences of outputs reflect an
underlying multivariate normal distribution, at least asymptotically. For this reason, we also
formally tested for the equality of the covariance and correlation matrices over subsequent
periods using the tests proposed by Jennrich (1970). In a first step, we tested for the
significance of the changes in the average correlation coefficients. The changes between the
Gold Standard and the interwar eras and between the Bretton Woods and the modern floating
eras, respectively, are statistically significant while the decline between the interwar and the
7

The sampling standard deviation of estimated correlation coefficients depends on the size of the estimated
coefficient and the number of observations. Given the former, small samples tend to amplify the sampling
uncertainty greatly. For example, for a correlation coefficient of 0.15—the average for the interwar period—the
standard deviation for a sample of 20 observations is 0.23. With 50 and 100 sample observations, the standard
deviations decline to 0.14 and 0.10, respectively.

- 13 -

Bretton Woods eras is insignificant (Table 3). Given the small number of observations per
era, this is a strong result.

Beyond average correlations, however, the statistical significance of the changes in output
comovements in general is more ambiguous. Regarding the six possible pairs of covariance
matrices for the four eras, all but two are statistically significantly different from each other
at the 5 percent level (Table 4), which bears on the factor model-based approach to
measuring synchronization discussed in the next subsection. The pairs that are insignificantly
different are 1880-1913 vs. 1926-1938 and 1880-1913 vs. 1951-1972, respectively.
Regarding correlation matrices, only two are statistically different at the 5 percent level
(1926-1938 vs. 1973-2001 and 1951-1972 vs. 1973-2001, respectively). This, however,
reflects to some extent “substitution” among country pairs, as some correlations increased
while others decreased.

For smaller groups, especially the (old and new) core countries and European countries, the
changes in the correlation matrices from era to era are generally statistically significantly
different from era to era, except for the pair 1880-1913 vs. 1926-1938. We attribute the fact
that the changes between those two eras are often insignificant to the few number of
observations for the interwar era, which tends to reduce the sampling precision (as noted in
footnote 7). Overall, the results of all the tests support the notion of a secular increase in
business cycle synchronization.

- 14 -

So far, we have looked at business cycle synchronization through a global lens, noting the
increased synchronization without consideration for other factors. However, one would
expect that synchronization patterns differ considerably across groups of countries,
depending on factors such as “gravity” or country size. The evidence clearly illustrates that
the extent to which gravity has shaped the synchronization trends depends on the region
(Table 2). For core European countries (the old “EEC”) and Continental European countries,
the increase in business cycle synchronization was clearly much sharper than the general
increase. At the other end of gravitas, business cycle synchronization between Japan and the
other countries in the panel has increased by less. In particular, there is no evidence for an
increase between the Bretton Woods era and the modern floating rate period.

The fact that the increase for all Continental European countries was smaller than that for the
Core European countries suggests that the forces of gravity are affected by common policies,
preferential trading agreements, and specific currency arrangements. The increase in
correlations among the Anglo-Saxon countries is also remarkable even though it seems more
difficult to attribute this to forces of gravity. 8 While we do not believe that common
institutions and heritage among the Anglo-Saxon countries account directly for the increased
synchronization, as Otto et al. (2002) have argued, they likely have fostered similar patterns

8

The emergence of strong business cycle linkages among core European countries and among the Anglo-Saxon
countries was noted, among others, by Helbling and Bayoumi (2003) and Stock and Watson (2003).

- 15 -

in the transmission of shocks through what appear to be similar, market-based financial
systems. 9

While the regional perspective reinforces the notion of a trend increase, it should be noted
that stark regional differences have only really emerged during the modern floating rate
period. Forces of gravity were not a factor behind business cycle synchronization during the
classical Gold Standard, as differences in correlations among regions were minor, with the
high correlation between Canada and the United States and, to a much lesser extent, among
the Scandinavian countries, being the main exceptions. During the Bretton Woods period,
increased regional synchronization began to emerge in the core European countries.
Interestingly, the increased synchronization during the interwar period was primarily on
account of an increased synchronization between the cycles in the United States and other
countries, which in turn seems to reflect the equity boom bust cycle and its effects from the
mid-1920s to the mid-1930s.

So far, all the cycle correlations we have studied were based on log first differences of
output. Does the detrending method matter for our findings? Naturally, high frequency noise
is not a great concern, given our panels of annual data, but it is possible that the increases in
cycle correlations from the 19th to the end of the 20th century really reflect changes in trend
comovements. For this reason, we have also looked at correlation patterns in bandpass-

9

See Bayoumi and Edison (2003) on the distinction between market- and bank-based financial systems.

- 16 -

filtered log output data (Table 5). 10 The results show that the detrending method makes little
difference and that the same principal changes in the patterns of cycle synchronization are
found with bandpass-filtered output data.

3. The Importance of Common Factors

Another measure of business cycle synchronization is related to the notion of common
factors. Many macroeconomists would probably agree that international business cycle
linkages are best understood as a small set of factors that are common to all countries and
that explain a substantial fraction of fluctuations in major macroeconomic aggregates. Baxter
(1995), for example, refers to the world component to business cycles. 11 The common factors
themselves reflect a combination of global shocks affecting all countries and country-specific
disturbances with significant spillover effects. It is, therefore, quite natural to examine
international business cycle linkages with factor models. 12

In our context, we have estimated the following factor model for each country i in the
sample:

10

We used the parameter setting recommended by Baxter and King (1999) for annual data.

11

This is akin to Stock and Watson’s (1989) suggestions to use the first common factor in a panel of business
cycle indicators as the reference cycle.
12

See, among others, Gerlach (1988), Gregory, Head, and Raynauld (1997), Lumsdaine and Prasad (1999),
Kose, Otrok, and Whiteman (2002), Monfort and others (2002), and Helbling and Bayoumi (2003).

- 17 -

yit = λi' Ft + ε it

(2.1)

where yit denotes (log) output growth in country i at time t, Ft is a vector of factors, λi is a
'

vector of factor loading for country i, and åit an idiosyncratic error term. In this set-up, the
factors in Ft are common to all countries but each country has specific factor loadings,
allowing for country-specific responses to shocks to the factor. Subsequently, we will call the
product λi' F the common factor(s) for country i. This model is what is called a static
approximate factor model in the literature (e.g., Bai and Ng, 2002). It is static because it does
not allow for dynamics in the relationship between output and the factors. It is approximate
because the set-up allows for serial correlation and heteroskedasticity in the idiosyncratic
components. While seemingly restrictive, these assumptions seem compatible with the
properties of the data we use, given little evidence of significant serial correlation in output
growth rates during all four eras.

A frequently used measure of output synchronization is the fraction of the output variance
that is explained by common factors. Following practices in the literature, we use the first
common factor as a measure of the common elements in cross-country business cycle
fluctuations (Table 6). 13 The results are based on log output growth rates (the results obtained
with bandpass-filtered log output series are, again, very similar). The role that common
factors play in explaining output fluctuations has clearly increased over time. The share of
13

Bai and Ng (2002) proposed to use information criteria to determine the appropriate number of factors.
However, their Monte Carlo simulations show that for panel datasets where the cross-sectional and time
dimensions are as low as in ours, the tests are not very reliable and tend to imply too high a number of factors.

- 18 -

the variance in output fluctuations attributable to fluctuations in the common factor doubled
from about 20 percent during the Gold Standard era to about 40 percent during the modern
era of flexible exchange rates.

B. The Synchronization of Cycles in Industrial Production

Unfortunately, IP data are only available for some of the countries in our panel. Based on a
small eight country panel, we calculated the same set of synchronization measures for
fluctuations in IP indices over all four eras. With a larger panel, we calculated them for the
post-World War II eras. The results are qualitatively very similar with those for output
fluctuations, and we only show the correlation coefficients (Table 7). Compared with output
fluctuations, all measures clearly suggest a much stronger increase in synchronization over
time. Strikingly, the evidence for much stronger increases in regional synchronization
compared to the average increase is weaker than in the case of output linkages.

III. EXPLAINING INCREASED S YNCHRONIZATION: THE ROLE OF SHOCKS
Using three measures of synchronization, we found evidence of increased cross-country
business cycle synchronization over time among industrial countries. From an impulsepropagation perspective, the increased synchronization could reflect changes in the nature of
the impulses (the “shocks”) driving the economies, especially changes in their cross-country
correlations, changes in the transmission channels and mechanisms, resulting inter alia from
increased integration, or, most likely, both.

- 19 -

Disentangling the relative contributions of the changes in the correlation of shocks and
changes in the transmission channels to the changes in output correlations is difficult,
however, as this would require a comprehensive structural model of the economy that can be
estimated empirically. Such a model, which would need to allow for factors such as changes
in trade and financial integration and a multitude of shocks, seems beyond our reach, given
the current state of the art in multi-country modelling. Financial integration, for example, is
not yet satisfactorily accounted for in any of the leading multi-country models.

Against this background, we will proceed with a more modest research agenda. In this
section, we will focus on deriving measures of the impulses driving each economy and study
the changes in their variance-covariance structure. On this basis, we will then attempt to
assess the extent to which changes in this structure of shocks may help to explain the
observed changes in the synchronization of cycles. In the next section, we will focus on how
changes in integration and the policy environment may have shaped changes in business
cycle synchronization.

A. Global Shocks versus Idiosyncratic Shocks

In a first exercise, we will address the issue of whether there is evidence that global shocks
have been driving the increased business cycle synchronization. This is a natural hypothesis,
given the evidence of increased globalization, that is, economic interdependence through

- 20 -

trade in goods, services, and assets. To structure our discussion, the following canonical,
simple model is a helpful illustrative device:14

 y1 t   a11
  =
 y2 t   a21

a12   y1 t −1   ν1 t 

 + 
a22   y2 t −1   ν2 t 

(3.1)

where yit denotes the log output growth rate in country i. Following Stock and Watson
(2003), the error vector í is assumed to be determined by the following factor structure:15

 ν1t 
 η1t 
  = Gζt +  
ν2 t 
 η2 t 

(3.2)

In this factor VAR model, æ is a global shock and çi is a country-specific idiosyncratic shock,
both of which are assumed to be white noise processes. G is a vector of factor loadings.
According to this model, increased output synchronization—as measured by output
correlation—between countries 1 and 2 can, ceteris paribus, arise for three reasons:

•

Increases in the variance of the global shock relative to the country specific
idiosyncratic shocks.

14

Canova and Dellas (1993) show how a very stylized two-country real business cycle model implies such a bivariate vector autoregressive representation.
15

In contrast, in the standard dynamic factor model, the coefficient matrix A is usually assumed to be zero and
the dynamics arise from the factors, which are modelled as autoregressive processes.

- 21 -

•

Increases in the covariance of the idiosyncratic shocks ç1 and ç2 .

•

Increases in the “transmission” coefficients a12 and a21, which determine the spillover
effects that shocks in country 1 have on country 2 and vice versa. 16

Extending the simple bivariate model (3.1) and (3.2) to a general model that includes all the
16 countries in our sample proved to be difficult. First, given few observations for each era,
very few degrees of freedom would be left if the model were estimated even with one lag.
For the interwar era, the number of common observations for all 16 countries is even less
than the number of parameters, so that comparability of the model across eras could not be
ensured. Second, in our annual data, the degree of autocorrelation in output growth is
generally low in all eras. While there are some intrinsic dynamics in the cross-country output
dynamics, they are generally insignificant, as the null hypothesis of a11 =a12 =a21 =a22 =0 could
usually not be rejected in bi-variate VARs. In the circumstances, we used two simplified
versions of the general factor VAR model for the analysis:

•

The center country model. In this version, the equation for each country’s real GDP
growth includes lagged own GDP growth and lagged GDP growth in the center
country (the United Kingdom in the Gold Standard era and the United States in the

16

In the simple model of Canova and Dellas (op. cit.), these coefficients follow from the production structure,
as foreign intermediate goods are needed to produce the final consumption goods.

- 22 -

other eras). The rationale behind this model is that idiosyncratic shocks in the center
country can be transmitted through the traditional channels while idiosyncratic shocks
elsewhere have only limited effects on other countries.

•

The trade linkages model. In this version, the equation for each country’s real GDP
growth includes lagged GDP growth and lagged GDP growth in important trading
partner countries (the ones reported in Mitchell (1998a, 1998b, and 1998c, as
explained below). The rationale behind this model is, of course, straightforward.

We estimated the models with a two-step, semi-parametric procedure. In the first, we used
SURE estimators to obtain the coefficients and the residual series í it. In a second step, we
used the approximate factor model approach of section 2.3 to obtain the global shock æ and
the idiosyncratic shocks çi from the residual series í it. Both models turned out to be roughly
similar in terms of information criteria for all eras, although the restrictions implied by the
center model compared to the trade model were rejected by standard likelihood ratio tests
(we note, though, that the values of log determinants of the variance-covariance matrix of the
simple de-meaned log growth rates are generally lower than the information criteria for either
model in each era).

A first set of results concerns the issue of whether the moderation in the volatility of national
output growth rates over time in the postwar period reflects primarily reductions in the

- 23 -

volatility of global shocks. 17 Table 8 shows the average standard deviations of the national
output series (log growth rates) and compares them with the estimated variances of the global
shock and the average idiosyncratic shock. As was to be expected, the direction of change in
the standard deviations of both global and idiosyncratic shocks generally follows that of the
average standard deviation of output growth. The most striking feature is the change in the
difference between the standard deviations of the two types of shocks. While idiosyncratic
shocks were clearly larger than global shocks during the Gold Standard and the interwar
period, their magnitudes became about equal during the modern floating era. In this sense,
global shocks have become more important in shaping national output dynamics.

A second set of results concerns the issue of whether global shocks or spillovers drive the
observed increases in output synchronization. Table 9 presents averages of 4-step variance
decompositions of the output growth rates for the four eras, distinguishing between the shares
of total output variance explained by the global shock, the idiosyncratic shocks, and
transmission. To have a variance decomposition based on orthogonal shocks, we used the
diagonal of the variance-covariance matrix of the çi series rather than the full matrix. 18
Hence, we assume that the transmission of shocks—which can be both due to global shocks

17

The general moderation in the amplitude of output fluctuations has been analyzed by Blanchard and Simon
(2001).
18

We note that the cross-correlation among idiosyncratic shocks is very minor.

- 24 -

and idiosyncratic shocks—occurs with a one-year lag. 19 Output synchronization due to a
global shock is thus immediate, while that due to transmission occurs gradually.

The variance decomposition suggests the following. First, idiosyncratic shocks have become
less important in shaping each country’s output dynamics. Second, both global shocks and
transmission have become more important. Third, the relative importance of the last two
factors in accounting for the lesser role of idiosyncratic shocks depends on the model. The
center model suggests that the increases in the variance share of the global shock account for
most of the reduction in the variance share of the idiosyncratic shocks. The increase
accounted for by the transmission of idiosyncratic shocks is minor. On the other hand, the
trade model suggests that both increases in the variance shares of the global factor and the
transmission account for the reduction in the variance share of idiosyncratic shocks.
However, it is noteworthy that shock transmission appears more important for peripheral
countries than for core countries in the trade model. For the core countries, the increase in the
variance share related to global shocks accounts for most of the decrease in the share
explained by idiosyncratic shocks.

Our factor VAR models thus suggest that the increased business cycle linkages among core
countries, as measured by output correlations, largely reflect the dynamics of common global
shocks. Remarkably, the increased importance of transmission for peripheral countries only
19

The shares of the global shocks and the idiosyncratic shocks reported in Table 9 are the shares explained by
each country’s own autoregressive structure in response to each of the two shocks. We do not, therefore,
distinguish between the transmission of global shocks and idiosyncratic shocks.

- 25 -

arises in the trade model. This suggests that it is not transmission from the center country, a
channel that operates in both models, that accounts for the increased variance share of
transmission. It is rather the intra-European transmission that matters in the modern floating
era, a fact that seems consistent with the above average output synchronization among
European countries reported in Table 2.

For a further understanding of the role of global shocks, Figure 3 is instructive. Each panel
shows the global shocks from the trade model (solid lines) for an era, supplemented by dotted
lines depicting the global shocks from the simple factor model discussed in section 2.3 and
bars showing time dummies—the equivalent of global shocks—from an error components
model that are significant at the 5 percent level. 20 21 We estimated the latter to obtain a
measure for large and important shocks. The global shocks implied by the two factor-based
approaches—the trade model and the simple factor model—are surprisingly similar except
for the interwar period, although the shocks from the trade model are generally smaller in
magnitude. The latter finding is not that surprising since the possibility of transmission
implies lower shock variances with equal output variances.

20

Naturally, only the product ËFt is identified in this factor model. We normalized the square of the factor
loadings, i.e., Ë’Ë/16=1, to identify Ft . We believe this to be the natural normalization, as it allows for
comparable variances between outputs and factors. The alternative would be to normalize the factor variance
to 1 (Bai and Ng, 2002).
21

We estimated the following traditional error component model with our panel dataset:

y

i ,t

=

λ

t

+ η

i ,t

where ët denotes a time dummy taking on the value 1 in time t and çi,t a shock specific to country i.

- 26 -

Figure 3. Global Shocks, 1887-2001
(Solid Lines: trade model; dotted lines: simple factor model; and bars: significant time dummies)

Gold Standard
0.06
0.04

Log percent

0.02
0
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
-0.08

1887

1889

1891

1893

1895

1897

1899

1901

1903

1905

1907

1909

1911

1913

Interwar Period
0.06
0.04

Log percent

0.02
0
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
-0.08

1926

1927

1928

1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

1937

1938

Bretton Woods
0.04

Log percent

0.02
0
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06

1952

1954

1956

1958

1960

1962

1964

1966

1968

1970

1972

Modern Managed Floating Period
0.04

Log percent

0.02

0

-0.02

-0.04

1973

1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

Source: Authors' calculcations (see text for details).

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

- 27 -

The general picture emerging from Figure 3 is that global shocks appear noticeably important
at times of world-wide downturns, suggesting an asymmetry between downturns and
upturns. 22 However, as the differences in the global shocks for the interwar period illustrate,
simple factor models can occasionally identify global shocks when it is really the
transmission of a large idiosyncratic shock in one of the large economies that is behind
synchronized output fluctuations, a problem noted by Stock and Watson (2003). 23 The Great
Depression is a case in point. It originated largely in the United States, but was transmitted
abroad rapidly through “the golden fetters” of the Gold Standard (Friedman and Schwartz,
1963, and Eichengreen, 1992). Similarly, the “Volcker shock” in 1981/82 also hit other
countries hard at a time when the after effects of the 1979-80 oil shock were still widely felt.
Indeed, this corroborates findings reported in IMF (2002), where episodes of broadly
synchronized classical recessions were found to have generally coincided with recessions in
the center country. 24

Overall, our results are consistent with both globalization and business cycle moderation.
With increased economic and financial interdependence through trade and financial linkages,
the scope for global shocks or the rapid transmission of shocks in the center countries has

22

This corroborates Helbling and Bayoumi (2003), who found a similar result for the G-7 countries during
1973-2001 using quarterly data and a dynamic factor model to isolate common cycles.
23

While global shocks continue to be important in the trade model, it can be noted that the magnitudes of these
shocks in this model are smaller compared to the simple factor model, highlighting the importance of
transmission in output synchronization.
24

Helbling and Bayoumi (2003) have shown that during 1973-2001, the tendency for major growth contractions
to be synchronized and coincide with recessions in the center country also holds.

- 28 -

clearly increased. In addition, with global shocks, floating exchange rates do not provide
much scope for insulation, since shocks affect all countries in similar ways. At the same time,
business cycle amplitudes have clearly moderated during the post-World War II period,
reflecting, among other factors, changes in sectoral structure, automatic stabilizers, the use of
lender of last resort operations, and the use of discretionary counter-cyclical policies. 25 In this
context, it is interesting to note that the volatility of idiosyncratic shocks has decreased more
than that of global shocks. Among other factors, this finding is consistent with the notion that
the changes in the sectoral structure and the use of automatic stabilizers as well as other
counter-cyclical policies have been fairly similar across the industrial countries.

B. Demand and Supply Shocks over Time

In a second exercise, we study what are often called “demand” and “supply” shocks by era
for each country and analyze their correlation structure. Following Blanchard and Quah
(1989), the two kinds of shocks are derived on the basis of the residuals of bivariate vector
autoregressive (VAR) models for output growth and inflation for each country by era. 26 The
demand and supply shocks are orthogonal and are identified by differences in their long-run

25

See McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000), Ahmed, Levin and Wilson (2002), Blanchard and Simon (2001),
IMF (2002), Dalsgaard, Elmeskov, and Park (2002), and Stock and Watson (2002) for recent studies examining
the volatility of output fluctuations in industrial countries, especially the United States, and the reasons thereof.
26

Bordo and Jonung (1996) and Bayoumi and Eichengreen (1994) used the same approach with similar data for
other purposes.

- 29 -

cumulative effects on growth. 27 Demand shocks only have temporary effects on real GDP
while supply shocks have permanent effects on real GDP. We would like to emphasize,
however, that we merely follow conventional wisdom in the terminology and that we will not
focus on whether the impulse response functions meet the standard overidentifying
restrictions. 28 We are primarily interested in obtaining shock series that can be used to
analyze whether the increased importance of global shocks concerns primarily permanent or
temporary shocks or both. In addition, we hope to corroborate our earlier findings using
another approach that does not require assumptions about the factor structure and relies on
country-specific information in the data only.

For the underlying VAR models, two versions were estimated for each country. 29 For the first
version, the lag length for each country model was determined on the basis of the standard
likelihood ratio tests, starting from an initial lag length of 3. For the second version, the lag
length for each country model was determined on the basis of the Bayesian information
criterion, also starting from an initial lag length of 3. The results are very similar, and we
only show those based on information criteria minimization.

27

In addition to this long-run behavioral restriction, the identification requires additional restrictions. Following
standard practice, the restrictions used ensure that the variance-covariance matrix of the orthogonalized shocks
matches that of the VAR residuals.
28

Bordo and Jonung (1996) discuss these and related issues in the context of a similar exercise that also uses
long time series going back to the late 19th century.
29

We note that, unlike in the case of bi-variate VARs for output growth, the autoregressive dynamics are more
important in this set-up.

- 30 -

For supply shocks, the average correlation has clearly increased over time for both VAR
versions (Table 10). From being roughly uncorrelated during the classical Gold Standard,
they became more correlated over time, although the average correlation and the change
between the Bretton Woods era and the modern floating rate era remain small in magnitude.
With regard to the regional breakdown, we note that the increase in the correlations of supply
or permanent shocks is particularly strong for the continental European and, even more so,
for the core European countries and the United States and Canada. In addition, the increase in
supply shock correlations has been steady for the case of the United States and Canada while
for the European countries, it largely occurred between the Bretton Woods era and the
modern floating rate era, which is consistent with the patterns in European integration.

For demand shocks, the average correlation followed a u-shaped pattern (Table 11). After the
classical Gold Standard, the correlation of demand shocks fell during the interwar and the
Bretton Woods eras and then increased again during the modern floating rate era to a level
above the initial one. Regarding the regional breakdown, we note that the increase in the
correlations of demand or temporary shocks is particularly strong for the continental
European countries and, even more so, for the core European countries. This regional
increase in correlations occurred largely between the Bretton Woods era and the modern
floating rate era, which is consistent with the coordination of policies required with the
pegging of currencies within Europe.

Overall, the direction of changes in the average correlation of the demand and supply shocks
obtained with the first versions of the VAR seems consistent with the direction of changes in

- 31 -

output correlations. Under the classical Gold Standard, output correlations were, on average,
zero, which, according to our shock decomposition exercise, coincided with roughly
uncorrelated shocks. The subsequent increase in output correlations reflected in part
increased shock correlations. The fact that output correlations increased by more than shock
correlations could be explained with larger spillover effects, as cross-border economic and
financial linkages in the modern floating rate period have also risen compared to the classical
Gold Standard era.

Finally, we also examined the factor structure in our panel of shocks series (Table 12). This
analysis suggests that the shares of the shock variances explained by the global component
contained in each national shocks series increased over time for demand or temporary
shocks. For permanent shocks, the evidence is less clear-cut. In particular, relative to the
Gold Standard era, the increase is very small only. The fact that the global component plays
an increasing role in demand shock realizations is consistent with our earlier finding of the
global synchronization of recessions, the effects of which are, after all, reversed in the
subsequent recoveries.

IV. EXPLAINING INCREASED S YNCHRONIZATION II: INTEGRATION AND POLICIES

Changes in the nature of shocks are only one reason for the observed increased in business
cycle synchronization. In parallel with the factor model-based literature on the sources of
international business cycle linkages, the role of structural factors such as trade integration

- 32 -

and exchange rate regimes in determining shock correlations as well as the transmission
coefficients aij has also been studied. For example, as noted by Canova and Dellas (1993),
the extent to which two or more countries are linked through trade is an important
determinant of the aij coefficients and thus of the strength of business cycle linkages. In this
section, we will focus on how changes in integration and the policy environment may have
shaped changes in business cycle synchronization.

A. Trade Integration

Starting with Canova and Dellas (1993), the role of trade interdependence in explaining
international business cycle linkages has received considerable attention in the literature. 30
Frankel and Rose (1998) found that in the period from 1959-1993, OECD countries with
closer trade links tended to have more tightly correlated business cycles. In this subsection,
we follow Frankel and Rose’s methodology and examine the linkages between business cycle
synchronization and trade links for the four eras that are the subject of our paper. In
particular, we will try to address the questions of whether and to what extent the observed
changes in trade linkages can explain the changes in business cycle synchronization.

Using data from Mitchell (1998a,1998b, and 1998c) for the Gold Standard and the interwar
period and from the IMF’s Direction of Trade Statistics for the Bretton Woods era and

30

See, for example, Frankel and Rose (1998), Otto, Voss, and Willard (2001), and Imbs (2003).

- 33 -

modern floating era, we constructed a measure of the trade intensity between countries i and j
proposed by Frankel and Rose (1998):31

wYijt =

X ijt + M ijt
Yit + Y jt

(4.2)

where X and M denote exports and imports, respectively, and where a double subscript ij
stands for bilateral trade values. Y denotes nominal GDP. Unfortunately, based on the limited
information provided in Mitchell (1998a, 1998b, and 1998c), we could not construct the two
measures for all the 120 correlation observations that we have for each era. We will thus
show results for a sample of 59 observations for each of the four eras and for a sample of all
the 120 country pair combinations for the post-World War II eras.

With these measures, we estimated cross-sectional regressions of the form for each era ô:

f (corrij ,τ ) = α + β ln(wijk ,τ ) + ε ij ,τ

(4.3)

where the bar over the trade intensity measure wk (k=T, Y) indicates that it is an era average
and where the function f(·) maps the output correlation coefficient corrij from the interval [-

31

We also constructed the other measure proposed by Frenkel and Rose (1998), where bilateral trade is
normalized by total trade:
wijtT =

Xijt + M ijt
X it + M it + X jt + M jt

where simple subscripts i or j indicates aggregate trade values. We found that this measure lacked a clear time
trend, which suggests that the direction of trade has been quite stable over time.

- 34 -

1,1] to [- , ] so that standard assumptions in the linear regression model are met. 32 As do
Frankel and Rose, we treat trade intensity as an endogenous variable and use gravity
variables as instrumental variables. Specifically, the following three instruments are used: the
natural logarithm of the distance between the main business centre in each country, a dummy
variable for common borders, and a dummy variable for common language.

Table 13 shows the results for both trade intensity measures and for both the smaller and
larger sample, as discussed earlier. The estimated â coefficients all have the right sign but
they are not always significant. However, the insignificant coefficients are confined to the
smaller panel covering all four eras, which may reflect small sample problems, as we are
missing bilateral trade relations among the smaller European countries in particular. The
simple regressions suggest the following observations.

•

There is substantial variation in the slope coefficients (and the constant terms) across
eras. In fact, the assumption of identical slope coefficients and constant terms is
rejected for both samples.

•

As do Frankel and Rose, we find that changes in bilateral trade intensities are
estimated to have large effects on output correlations. For example, a one percentage

32

1+ x 
 following Otto, Voss, and Willard (2001). Frankel and Rose (1998) used
1 − x 

We use the function f ( x) = ln 

raw correlation measures.

- 35 -

point increase in trade intensity generally raises output correlations by more than 3½
percentage points in the case of bilateral trade normalized by GDP.
•

The difference in the estimated â coefficients for the Gold Standard and interwar eras
is small. Between the Bretton Woods era and the modern floating rate era, however,
the synchronization effects of higher trade intensity appear to have increased, which
may suggest that the synchronization effects of trade intensity depend on other factors
as well. We will take up this issue below, but note in the meantime that this finding is
consistent with the argument that stronger trade linkages in recent years have
reflected common policies, including, for example, those related to European
monetary integration. 33 It is also consistent with our earlier finding of increased
structural shock correlations, since bilateral output correlations are determined by the
product of the transmission coefficients, which in turn can be considered to be
functions of trade intensities, and shock correlations. 34

•

Finally, similar to Otto, Voss, and Willard (2001), we find that while they are
significant determinants, trade intensities alone explain relatively little of the overall
variation in bilateral output correlations, especially for the interwar and the Bretton
Woods eras. For the Gold Standard era, bilateral trade intensities appear to explain
about the same share of output correlations as during the modern floating era with the

33

34

This argument was advanced by Bayoumi and Eichengreen (1993).

In the general autoregressive model (3.1), the positive interaction between transmission coefficients and
shock correlations holds for a wide range of the admissible parameter values.

- 36 -

first measure. Interestingly, the explanatory power of the gravity variables in the first
stage regressions appears to increase over time.

So far, the results suggest that bilateral trade intensities explain only a small share of the
differences found in bilateral output correlations for each era. Can changes in trade intensities
from era to era explain the increased international business cycle synchronization? In Table
14, we show the estimated impact of the actual changes in trade intensities between eras on
bilateral output correlations (the second set of columns in the table corresponds to the larger
sample for the postwar eras). Since the restriction of identical slope coefficients between eras
can generally be rejected, we use both the estimated values for the current and the previous
era to generate predicted changes. 35

The actual changes in the average bilateral output correlation are generally much larger than
the changes predicted by changes in trade intensities. The model is successful in explaining
the increase in output correlations from the interwar to the Bretton Woods eras, where the
rise in trade intensity explains roughly half of the increase or more, depending on the â
coefficient used in the calculations. This finding is consistent with the notion that trade
liberalization after World War II, when the earlier increase in the restrictiveness of trade
regimes was reversed under the umbrella of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(Irwin, 1995), has played an important role in shaping business cycle synchronization. The

35

We do not use changes in the constant between eras in the calculation of the predicted changes.

- 37 -

model is less successful in explaining the strong increase in output correlations from the
Bretton Woods era to the modern floating rate period. We interpret this as possible evidence
that the momentum of trade liberalization has slowed down in recent decades, as efforts in
the most recent GATT/WTO rounds have shifted from tariff reductions on industrial goods
towards nontariff barriers and trade in agriculture and services (Irwin, op. cit.). It also may be
that increased financial integration played a bigger role in shaping output synchronization
than trade integration during recent decades.

B. Asset Market Integration

Increasing asset market integration is another channel through which globalization can affect
international business cycle synchronization. Baxter and Crucini (1995), for example, show
how asset market integration affects the spillover effects of country-specific shocks and, thus,
output correlations. Unfortunately, asset market integration remains difficult to measure.
Bilateral data in (net) asset trade is all but unavailable, especially for a period covering our
four eras. Measuring asset market integration through the correlation of asset returns may
suffer from problems of reverse causality. We decided, therefore, to use a very crude
indicator to measure asset market integration. Based on the annual capital control dummy
variables for each country prepared by Bordo et al (2001), we derived an indicator, which we
will refer to as CC, that measures the number of years (as a fraction of the total number of
years covered by each era) during which capital flows were subject to restrictions.

- 38 -

With this indicator, we first estimated the simple regression equation:

f (corrij,τ ) = α + δ CC ij,τ + ε ij,τ

(4.4)

where the function f (·) is the same as above for each era but the Gold Standard era. The latter
is because our dummy variables suggest that none of the countries in our sample imposed
capital controls. Ordinary least squares was used to estimate the coefficients. Subsequently,
we also estimated the following equation that combines trade and asset market integration:

f (corrij,τ ) = α + β ln(wijY ,τ ) + δ CC ij,τ + ε ij ,τ

(4.5)

for both post-World War II eras. By focusing on the postwar period only, we have 120
observations for the trade intensity measures, which is preferable, given that we suspect
small sample problems for the data set covering all four eras. As above, we treat the trade
intensity measure wY as an endogenous variable using the gravity variables discussed above
as instruments (and our capital control indicator CC).

The results are shown in Table 15. The ä coefficients have the right signs for the interwar and
modern floating rate eras but are insignificant. The conclusion is that adding the capital
control indicator to the trade equation does not add to the explanatory power of the equation.
We interpret these results mainly as a reflection of possible shortcomings of our dummy

- 39 -

variable rather than as a rejection of the hypothesis that financial market integration has been
a major factor behind international business cycle synchronization. 36

C. Exchange Rate Policy

One of the main arguments, if not the main argument, in favor of flexible exchange rates has
been that they allow a country to insulate itself from external shocks through an independent
monetary policy. With fixed exchange rates, the scope for pro-cyclical spillovers can be
expected to be larger, unless capital controls or other restrictions allow for some monetary
independence.

To some extent, we have accounted for differences in the exchange rate and external policy
environment by distinguishing between four eras with different international monetary
regimes. Nevertheless, there are interesting cross-sectional variations in the exchange rate
regime in each era. For example, Italy went off the Gold Standard in 1894 and did not return
to a gold parity until 1928. To the extent that the cross-sectional variation in exchange rate
regimes has changed over time, this may be a factor that could explain changes in the
36

Other measures of financial market integration have been suggested to us. In particular, our discussant and
other conference participants suggested that we use Lewis’ (1996) consumption sharing “betas” to construct an
alternative measure. The consumption betas are the coefficients from a panel regression of consumption growth
on GDP growth, which, with perfect cross-country consumption insurance, should not be statistically
significantly different from zero. However, we faced the problem that the betas are not only positive and
statistically significantly different from zero (a problem also faced by Lewis) but also increasing in magnitude
from era to era, which contradicts the widely-accepted hypothesis of a u-shaped pattern in international
financial integration (Obstfeld and Taylor, 1998 and 2003, and Bordo, Eichengreen, and Kim, 1998). We intend
to explore this puzzle in future research.

- 40 -

average business cycle synchronization from era to era. To estimate the effects of exchange
rate regimes, we have constructed a dummy variable, which, again, is based on the annual
exchange rate regime indicators for each country prepared by Bordo et al (2001). The
indicator, which we will refer to as Z, measures the number of years (as a fraction of the total
number of years covered by each era) during which the exchange rate between two countries
was pegged (disregarding re-alignments in the case of fixed but adjustable rates).

With this indicator, we estimated the simple equation:

f (corrij ,τ ) = α + γ Z ij ,τ + δ CC ij,τ + ε ij ,τ

(4.6)

for each era. 37 We would expect the ã coefficient to be positive for the reasons noted above.
Despite earlier problems, we kept the capital control indicator CC in the equation, since it is
important to control for these effects. Subsequently, we also added the exchange regime
indicator to the trade equation but only for the two post-World War II eras for the reason
explained above.

The results are shown in Table 16. The ã coefficients generally have the right sign and are
significant at the 10 or 5 percent levels, except for the Gold Standard era. The latter may be
explained by the fact that only four out of the 16 countries had not pegged their currencies to
gold (at least during some time) in this era. For the interwar period, the ã coefficient has the

37

As explained above, the capital control indicator CC is redundant for the Gold Standard era.

- 41 -

wrong sign, which may reflect the fact that the countries hanging on to the Gold Standard
after the United States and other countries went off resorted to exchange controls and
increased trade restrictions to maintain their peg. The ä coefficients are generally of the right
sign, except for the Bretton Woods period.

The exchange rate regime effect is not robust to small variations in the specification. 38 For
example, adding the trade intensity variable reduces the size of the exchange rate regime
effect considerably. Similarly, the significance also changes once that additional variable is
included. Finally, we would like to note one interesting aspect for the modern floating rate
period. If a European country dummy is included, the exchange rate regime indicator
becomes insignificant, which can be interpreted as evidence that the exchange rate pegging
within Europe (all bilateral fixed exchange rate regimes in the modern floating rate period are
confined to that continent for our panel of countries) has been really important or that the
exchange rate indicator picks up the effects of European integration more generally.

38

Frankel and Rose (1998), who in one specification added a dummy variable for country pairs with fixed
exchange rates, argued that the exchange rate regime choice is also endogenous and used the same gravity
variables as instruments to correct for this endogeneity. We remain somewhat skeptical about the relevance of
these instruments and note the technical problems in using a 1-0 variable as an endogenous variable in a linear
regression. We have, however, used instrumental variable estimators with the same instruments to check the
robustness of our results. For the simple equation (0.6), the results are robust. In fact, the size of the exchange
rate effect increases somewhat, and the standard errors of the ã coefficients decrease. For the interwar period,
the sign of the ã coefficient changes. If the trade intensity variable is included, the results do not remain robust.
In particular, as Frankel and Rose, we find that the ã coefficients are negative and insignificant.

- 42 -

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have documented evidence on the synchronization of business cycles across
16 countries over the past century and a quarter, demarcated into four exchange rate regimes.
We find using three different methodologies that there is a secular trend towards increased
synchronization for much of the twentieth century and that it occurs across diverse exchange
rate regimes. This finding is of interest because it is in marked contrast to much of the recent
literature, which has focused primarily on the evidence for the past 20 or 30 years and which
has produced mixed results.

We then considered a number of possible explanations for the observed pattern of increased
synchronization. We first ascertained the role of shocks demarcated into country-specific
(idiosyncratic) and global (common). Our key finding here is that global (common) shocks
are the dominant influence across all regimes. We note, however, that it remains difficult to
distinguish between “true” global shocks and major shocks in the center country(ies). For
example, shocks in the largest country, the U.S., were, unsurprisingly, a key factor in the
worldwide Great Depression.

This finding coupled with earlier evidence produced by ourselves and others that business
cycles since World War II have become less volatile, less frequent and asymmetric with a
tendency towards recoveries exceeding downturns in duration, has some interesting

- 43 -

implications. We suggest that what may be occurring is that the weakening in national
business cycles since World War II coupled with the diminution of idiosyncratic shocks
reflect the forces discussed by Zarnowitz (1992) and others, such as changes in the
composition of output, the advent of automatic stabilizers, improvements in discretionary
monetary and fiscal policy, the implementation of effective lenders of last resort and a
financial safety net, and the proliferation of private risk sharing instruments. 39

At the same time, the increasing importance of global shocks we posit reflects the forces of
globalization, especially the integration of goods and services through international trade
(Findlay and O’Rourke 2003) and the integration of financial markets (Obstfeld and Taylor
2003). We present evidence showing a modest role for increasing bilateral trade in explaining
synchronization, with stronger evidence for regional integration in Europe and North
America. Evidence for the role of financial integration proxied by the removal of capital
controls is inconclusive.

Finally, we began considering explicitly the role of the policy regime in explaining the
pattern of synchronization. We find little evidence for the prediction that adhering to fixed

39

We would like to emphasize that the decrease in idiosyncratic shock volatility does not necessarily imply that
it is the volatility of the underlying “deep structural” shocks (e.g., a widespread drought) that we are measuring.
Given that we derive the shocks on the basis of GDP series alone, it means that the effects of these deep shocks
on output have diminished. There is, however, some evidence that shocks that are widely perceived as being
exogenous may have an endogenous component. Barsky and Kilian (2001), for example, argue that the sharp
increase in real oil prices in the 1970s was in part a reaction to the earlier massive expansion of the world
money supply.

- 44 -

exchange rates fosters synchronization except in the period since 1973, and these results
appear driven largely by the process of European Monetary Union.

What are the policy lessons to be gleaned from these findings? One lesson from the
dampening of national cycles and the diminution in idiosyncratic shocks is that to the extent
that they reflect sound domestic macro policy and the creation of an environment conducive
to the development of both private and public risk sharing institutions and instruments that
these policies should continue to be fostered.

A second lesson is that globalization seems to be associated with the creation of a global
business cycle. Whether policies should be developed at the global level to counter it is
another matter. Regarding monetary policy, experience suggest that the key to success has
been that policy makers get their policy objectives right. In addition, for monetary policy to
be effective, it is also critical that policy makers get the shocks right. In this sense, policy
coordination is likely to be very important. As Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002) have argued, there
is probably little gain from policy coordination beyond this, provided that central banks have
the right policy objectives. The generally negative experience with policy coordination in the
1970s and 1980s supports this view (Frankel, 1990).

A third lesson, to paraphrase Forrest Gump, is that shocks happen! We live in a stochastic
world and shocks generate business cycles via diffuse propagation mechanisms. Moreover
productivity shocks occur in a non linear fashion, asset markets overshoot and people are at
times over optimistic and other times over pessimistic. In this reality the best strategy is to

- 45 -

encourage the development of private market mechanisms to insure against cyclical risks, in
the case of incomplete markets related to market failures to provide public insurance, and to
maintain stable and predictable macro policies.

- 46 -

References

Ahmed, S., A. Levin, and B. A. Wilson (2002). Recent U.S. Macroeconomic Stability: Good
Luck, Good Policies, or Good Practices? International Finance Division Working
Paper No. 730. Washington: Federal Reserve Board.
Backus, D. K., and P. J. Kehoe (1992). International Evidence of the Historical Properties of
Business Cycles. American Economic Review 82 (3): 864–88.
Bai, J., and S. Ng (2002). Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate Factor
Models. Econometrica 70 (1): 191-221.
Barsky, R. and L. Kilian (2001). Do We Really Know that Oil Caused the Great Stagflation?
A Monetary Alternative. In B. S. Bernanke and K. Rogoff (eds.), NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2001. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Baxter, M. (1995). International Trade and Business Cycles. In Grossman, Gene M.; Rogoff,
Kenneth (eds.), Handbook of international economics, Volume 3. Handbooks in
Economics, vol. 3. Amsterdam; New York and Oxford: Elsevier, North-Holland.
Baxter, M. and M. J. Crucini (1995). Business Cycles and the Asset Structure of Foreign
Trade. International Economic Review 36 (4): 821-54
Baxter, M. and R. G. King (1999). Measuring Business Cycles: Approximate Band-Pass
Filters for Economic Time Series. Review of Economics and Statistics 81 (4): 575–93.
Bayoumi, T. and B. Eichengreen (1993). Shocking Aspects of European Monetary
Integration. In Torres, F. and F. Giavazzi (eds.), Adjustment and growth in the
European Monetary Union. Oxford; New York and Melbourne: Cambridge
University Press.
_____ (1994). Economic Performance under Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes: Some
Historical Evidence. In Kenen, P. B.; F. Papadia, and F. Saccomanni (eds.), The
international monetary system. Cambridge; New York and Melbourne: Cambridge
University Press.
Bayoumi, T. and H. Edison (forthcoming). Is Wealth Increasingly Driving Consumption?
IMF Working Paper. Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Bergman, U. M., M. D. Bordo, and L. Jonung (1998). Historical Evidence on Business
Cycles: The International Experience. In J. C. Fuhrer and S. Schuh (eds.), Beyond
Shocks: What Causes Business Cycles? Boston, Massachusetts: Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston.
Blanchard, O. J. and D. Quah (1989). The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and
Supply Disturbances. American Economic Review 79 (4). 655-73.
Blanchard, O. and J. Simon (2001). The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output Volatility.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2001 (1): 135 – 164.
Bordo, M.D., B. Eichengreen, and J. Kim (1999). Was There Really an Earlier Period of
International Financial Integration Comparable to Today? In: S. Lee (ed.),
Implications of the Globalization of World Financial Markets. Seoul: Bank of Korea.
Bordo, M. D., B. Eichengreen, D. Klingebiel, and Ma. S. Martinez-Peria (2001). Is the Crisis
Problem Growing More Severe? Economic Policy 32 (1): 53–82.

- 47 -

Bordo, M. D. and L. Jonung (1996). Monetary Regimes, Inflation and Monetary Reform. In
Daniel Vaz and Kumarasvamy Velupillai (eds.) Inflation, Institutions and
Information, Essays in Honor of Axel Leijonhufvud. (London: Macmillan Press Ltd).
_____ (2001). A Return to the Convertibility Principle? Monetary and Fiscal Regimes in
Historical Perspective: The International Evidence. In Leijonhufvud, A. (ed.),
Monetary theory and policy experience. IEA Conference Volume, no. 132.
Houndmills, U.K. and New York: Palgrave in association with the International
Economic Association.
Burns, Arthur F., and Wesley C. Mitchell, 1946, Measuring Business Cycles (New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research).
Canova, F. and H. Dellas (1993). Trade Interdependence and the International Business
Cycle. Journal of International Economics 34 (1-2): 23–47.
Dalsgaard, T., J. Elmeskov, and C-Y Park (2002), “Ongoing Changes in the Business Cycle –
Evidence and Causes,” OECD Economics Department Working Paper no. 315. Paris:
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Diebold, F. X., and G. D. Rudebusch (1999). Business Cycles: Durations, Dynamics, and
Forecasting. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Dore, M. H. I. (1997). Stylized Facts. In D. Glasner (ed.), Business Cycles and Depressions:
An Encyclopedia. Garland Reference Library of Social Science, Vol. 505. New York:
Garland Publishing.
Doyle, B. and J. Faust (2002). Breaks in the Variability and Co-Movement of G-7 Economic
Growth. Manuscript. Washington: Federal Reserve Board.
Eichengreen, B. (1992). Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression,
1919-1939. New York: Oxford University Press.
Estevadeordal, A., B. Frantz, and A. M. Taylor (2002). The Rise and Fall in World Trade,
1870-1939. NBER Working Paper No. 9318. Cambridge, Massachusetts: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Findlay, R., and K. O’Rourke (2003). Commodity Market Integration 1500-2000. In M. D.
Bordo, A. Taylor and J. Williamson (eds.), Globalization in Historical Perspective.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, in press.
Frankel, J. A. (1990). Obstacles to Coordination, and a Consideration of Two Proposals to
Overcome Them: International Nominal Targeting (INT) and the Hosomi Fund. In
W. Branson, J. Frenkel, and M. Goldstein (eds.), International Policy Coordination
and Exchange Rate Fluctuations. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
______, and A. K. Rose (1998). The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency Area Criteria.
Economic Journal 108 (449): 1009–25.
Friedman, M. and A. J. Schwartz (1963). A Monetary History of the United States. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Gerlach, H. M. S. (1988). World Business Cycles under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates.
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 20 (4): 621–32.
Glasner, D. (1997). Business Cycles and Depressions: An Encyclopedia. Garland Reference
Library of Social Science, Vol. 505. New York: Garland Publishing.
Gregory, A. W., A. C. Head, and J. Raynauld (1997). Measuring World Business Cycles.
International Economic Review 38 (3): 677–701.

- 48 -

Harding, D. and A. Pagan (2002). Synchronization of Cycles. Uunpublished. Victoria:
University of Melbourne, Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social
Research.
——— (2003). A Comparison of Two Business Cycle Dating Methods. Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control 27 (3): 1681-90.
Heathcoate, J. and F. Perri. (2002). Financial Globalization and Real Regionalization. NBER
Working Paper 9292. Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Helbling, T. and T. Bayoumi (2003). Are They All in the Same Boat? The 2000-2001
Growth Slowdown and the G-7 Business Cycle Linkages. IMF Working Paper 03/46.
Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Imbs, J. (2003). Trade, Finance, Specialization, and Synchronization. Paper presented at the
Global Linkages Conference, January 30-31, 2003 at the International Monetary
Fund, Washington D.C. Paper available at http://web.mit.edu/kjforbes/www/GLWebsite/GlobalLinkagesMaterial/FinalPapers&Data/Imbs-Paper.pdf.
IMF, 2001, “Business Cycle Linkages Among Major Advanced Economies” in: World
Economic Outlook, October 2001 (Washington, D. C.: International Monetary Fund).
______, 2002, “Recessions and Recoveries” in: World Economic Outlook, April 2002
(Washington, D. C.: International Monetary Fund).
Irwin, D. A. (1995). The GATT in Historical Perspective. American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceedings 85: 323-28.
Jennrich, R. I. (1970). An Asympotic ÷2 Test for the Equality of Two Correlation Matrices.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 65 (2), pp. 904–12.
Koopmans, T. (1947). Measurement without Theory. The Review of Economic Statistics 29
(3): 161-172.
Kose, M. A., C. Otrok, and C. Whiteman (2002). Understanding the Evolution of World
Business Cycles. Paper presented at the Global Linkages Conference, January 30-21,
2002. Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Krugman, P. (1993). Lessons of Massachusetts for EMU. In Torres, F. and F. Giavazzi
(eds.), Adjustment and growth in the European Monetary Union. Oxford; New York
and Melbourne: Cambridge University Press.
Lewis, K. K. (1996). What Can Explain the Apparent Lack of International Consumption
Risk Sharing? Journal of Political Economy 104 (2): 267-97.
Lumsdaine, R. L., and E. S. Prasad (1999). Identifying the Common Component in
International Economic Fluctuations: A New Approach. IMF Working Paper
No. 99/154. Washington: International Monetary Fund.
McConnell, M. M, and G. Perez-Quiros (2000). Output Fluctuations in the United States:
What has Changed Since the Early 1980’s? American Economic Review 90(4): 14641476.
Mitchell, B. R. (1998a). International historical statistics, Europe, 1750-1993. London:
Macmillan Reference.
______ (1998b). International historical statistics, the Americas, 1750-1993.London:
Macmillan Reference.

- 49 -

______ (1998c). International historical statistics, Africa, Asia, and Oceanian, 1750-1993.
London: Macmillan Reference.
Monfort, A., J.P. Renne, R. Rüffer, and G. Vitale (2002). Is Economic Activity in the G7
Synchronised? Common shocks vs. spillover effects. Unpublished manuscript.
Frankfurt: European Central Bank. .
Obstfeld, M., and K. S. Rogoff (2002). Global Implications of Self-Oriented National
Monetary Rules. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (2): 503-35.
Obstfeld, M. and A. Taylor (1998). The Great Depression as a Watershed: International
Capital Mobility over the Long Run. In Bordo, M. D., C. Goldin, and E. N. White
(eds.), The defining moment: The Great Depression and the American economy in the
twentieth century. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press,
_____ (2003). Globalization and Capital Markets. In M. D. Bordo, A. Taylor and J.
Williamson (eds.), Globalization in Historical Perspective. Chicago University of
Chicago Press, in press.
Otto, G., G. Voss, and L. Willard (2001). Understanding OECD Output Correlations.
Research Discussion Paper 2001-05. Sidney: Reserve Bank of Australia.
Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (1989). New Indexes of Coincident and Leading Economic
Indicators. In Blanchard, O. J. and S. Fischer (eds.), NBER macroeconomics annual:
1989. Cambridge, Mass. and London: MIT Press.
______(1999). Business Cycle Fluctuations in U.S. Macroeconomic Time Series. In J. Taylor
and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1A. Amsterdam and
New York: North-Holland.
______(2002). Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why? In B. Bernanke and K. Rogoff
(eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2002. Cambridge, Mass and London: MIT
Press.
______(2003). Understanding Changes in International Business Cycle Dynamics. NBER
Working Paper 9292. Cambridge, Mass. : National Bureau of Economic Research.
Zarnowitz, V. (1992). Business Cycles: Theory, History, Indicators, and Forecasting. NBER
Studies in Business Cycles, Vol. 27. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press.

- 50 -

Table 1. Average Concordance Correlations By Region and Era
(Based on first differences of log output)
Region (Number of obs.)

1880-1913

1920-38

1973-2001

0.02
-0.01

0.19
0.14

0.20
0.28

0.01

0.19

0.13

0.03
-0.01
0.01
-0.02

0.21
0.05
0.20
0.08

0.21
0.51
0.10
0.69

One country Core European (48)b

0.00

0.15

0.25

One Country North America 28)
One country Japan (15)
Anglo-Saxon Countries (6)c

0.03
0.03
0.16

0.35
0.20
0.26

0.18
-0.01
0.37

Memorandum items:
USA-Canada
Scandinavian countries only (6)
One country Scandinavian (48)

0.71
0.08
0.02

0.77
0.36
0.25

0.44
0.04
0.12

All countries (120)
Core countries (15)a
Peripheral countries (45)a
One country core, one periphery (60)
Continental European countries only (55)
One country Continental European (55)
Core European countries only (6)b

a

Core countries comprise France, Germany, the United Kingdom, the United States, the
Netherlands, and Switzerland during 1880-1913 and 1920-39 and the G-7 countries
afterwards.
b

Core European countries comprise France, Germany, the Netherlands, and Switzerland
during 1880-1913 and 1920-39 and the EEC countries in the panel (France, Germany,
Italy, the Netherlands) afterwards.
c

Comprises Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States.

- 51 -

Table 2. Average Output Correlations By Region and Era
(Based on first differences of log output)
Region (Number of obs.)
All countries (120)
Core countries (15)
Peripheral countries (45)
One country core, one periphery (60)
Continental European countries only (28)
One country Continental European (64)
Core European countries only (6)
One country Core European (48)
One Country North America 28)
One country Japan (15)
Anglo-Saxon Countries (6)
Memorandum items:
USA-Canada
Scandinavian countries only (6)
One country Scandinavian (48)

1880-1913

1920-38

1948-72

1973-2001

0.01
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.07
-0.02
0.00
-0.08
0.12

0.15
0.13
0.21
0.12
0.08
0.17
0.10
0.09
0.28
0.05
0.29

0.12
0.15
0.11
0.11
0.10
0.13
0.25
0.14
0.04
0.16
0.17

0.33
0.45
0.27
0.33
0.49
0.26
0.59
0.36
0.38
0.17
0.63

0.55
0.11
0.00

0.86
0.48
0.17

0.61
0.17
0.11

0.77
0.31
0.25

Note: See Table 1 for definitions of regions and country groups.

- 52 -

Table 3. Jennrich Test for Equality of Average Correlation Coefficients
(Marginal significance levels)
Region (Number of obs.)

1880-1913
vs.
1926-38

1926-38

1952-72

1880-1913

1880-1913

1926-38

1952-72

1973-2001

1952-72

1973-2001

1973-2001

All countries (120)

0.01

0.85

0.06

0.02

0.00

0.03

Core countries (15)
Old
New

0.30
0.04

0.40
0.85

0.25
0.02

0.02
0.05

0.00
0.00

0.08
0.09

Continental European countries (28)

0.26

0.19

0.01

0.01

0.00

0.00

Core European countries (6)
Old
New

0.92
0.98

0.12
0.15

0.50
0.01

0.06
0.07

0.00
0.00

0.05
0.00

Anglo-Saxon Countries (6)

0.49

0.76

0.01

0.68

0.00

0.04

Memorandum items:
USA-Canada
Scandinavian countries only (6)

0.18
0.11

0.48
0.25

0.66
0.57

0.34
0.60

0.14
0.25

0.70
0.51

Note: See Table 1 for definition of regions and country groups and Jennrich (1970) on the computation of the
variance-covariance matrix of the correlation coefficients.

- 53 -

Table 4. Jennrich Test for Covariance and Correlation Matrix Equality
(Marginal significance levels)
Region (Number of obs.)

1880-1913

1926-38

1952-72

18801913

18801913

1926-38

vs.
1926-38

1952-72

19732001

1952-72

19732001

19732001

Covariance matrices
All countries (120)

0.86

0.01

0.01

0.28

0.00

0.00

Core countries (15)
old
new

0.04
0.07

0.00
0.00

0.01
0.01

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.06

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Core European countries (6)
old
new

0.00
0.01

0.00
0.00

0.02
0.02

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

Anglo-Saxon Countries (6)

0.44

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Memorandum items:
USA-Canada
Scandinavian countries only (6)

0.36
0.08

0.00
0.01

0.96
0.53

0.00
0.05

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.02

Continental European countries
(28)

Correlation matrices
All countries (120)

0.86

0.01

0.01

0.28

0.00

0.00

Core countries (15)
old
new

0.04
0.07

0.00
0.00

0.01
0.01

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.06

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Core European countries (6)
old
new

0.00
0.01

0.00
0.00

0.02
0.02

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

Anglo-Saxon Countries (6)

0.44

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Memorandum items:
USA-Canada
Scandinavian countries only (6)

0.36
0.08

0.00
0.01

0.96
0.53

0.00
0.05

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.02

Continental European countries
(28)

Note: See Table 1 for definition of regions and country groups and Jennrich (1970) on the computation of the
variance-covariance matrix of the correlation coefficients.

- 54 -

Table 5. Average Output Correlations By Region and Era
(Based on bandpass-filtered log output series)
Region (Number of obs.)

1880-1913

1920-38

1948-72

0.01
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.00
-0.01
0.06
-0.01
-0.01
-0.08
0.16

0.21
0.17
0.22
0.22
0.09
0.22
0.11
0.14
0.36
0.18
0.38

0.16
0.21
0.15
0.15
0.22
0.17
0.27
0.22
0.01
0.24
0.11

0.30
0.42
0.23
0.30
0.44
0.21
0.59
0.34
0.35
0.16
0.63

0.52
0.11
0.00

0.86
0.31
0.24

0.68
0.16
0.13

0.75
0.26
0.24

All countries (120)
Core countries (15)
Peripheral countries (45)
One country core, one periphery (60)
Continental European countries only (28)
One country Continental European (64)
Core European countries only (6)
One country Core European (48)
One Country North America 28)
One country Japan (15)
Anglo-Saxon Countries (6)
Memorandum items:
USA-Canada
Scandinavian countries only (6)
One country Scandinavian (48)

1973-2001

Note: See Table 1 for definitions of regions and country groups.
Table 6. Fraction of Variance of Output Fluctuations Explained by First Principal Component
(Based on first differences of log output)
Country

1880-1913

1920-38

1948-72

1973-2001

Denmark
Finland
Norway
Sweden
France
Germany
Italy
Switzerland
Netherlands
Portugal
Spain
UK
Australia
US
Canada
Japan

0.51
0.55
0.00
0.14
0.15
0.44
0.05
0.08
0.31
0.04
0.04
0.06
0.25
0.01
0.02
0.55

0.30
0.55
0.22
0.64
0.14
0.47
0.28
0.31
0.46
0.01
0.00
0.05
0.11
0.71
0.82
0.12

0.17
0.45
0.00
0.31
0.13
0.17
0.20
0.78
0.44
0.07
0.05
0.43
0.10
0.09
0.00
0.19

0.31
0.33
0.06
0.31
0.69
0.45
0.63
0.35
0.49
0.38
0.44
0.51
0.23
0.51
0.50
0.11

Average

0.20

0.32

0.22

0.39

- 55 -

Table 7. Industrial Production: Average Correlations By Region and Era
(Based on first differences of log series)
8 Country Panel a
Region (Number of obs.)

All countries (28/91)
Core countries (6/21)
Peripheral countries (6/21)
One country core, one periphery (16/49)
Continental European countries only
(10/15)
One country Continental European (15/48)
One Country North America (7/24)
One country Japan (7/13)
Anglo-Saxon Countries (1/6)
Memorandum items:
Output correlations for identical groups
All countries (28/91)
Core countries (6/21)
Peripheral countries (6/21)
One country core, one periphery (16/49)

a

18801913

1920-38

1948-72

0.11
0.28
0.03
0.08
0.16

0.35
0.38
0.30
0.35
0.35

0.23
0.30
0.15
0.16
0.19

0.04
0.04
0.03
0.30

0.34
0.47
0.14
0.67

-0.01
-0.03
0.09
-0.04

0.05
0.07
0.15
0.00

14 Country Panel b
19732001

1948-72

19732001

0.57
0.63
0.52
0.49
0.62

0.27
0.30
0.28
0.25
0.15

0.50
0.61
0.42
0.49
0.65

0.25
0.17
0.32
0.32

0.53
0.58
0.55
0.65

0.28
0.20
0.28
0.37

0.47
0.54
0.52
0.66

0.13
0.16
-0.07
0.12

0.38
0.46
0.40
0.29

0.13
0.15
0.12
0.12

0.34
0.45
0.29
0.31

In the panel of 8 countries, core countries comprise France, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States
during 1880-1913 and 1920-39 and the G-7 countries excluding Canada afterwards while the Anglo-Saxon countries
include the United Kingdom and the United States.
b
Excludes Portugal and Switzerland. See Table 1 for country groupings.

- 56 -

Table 8. Output and Shock Standard Deviations By Era
(Based on first differences of log output)
Aggregates 1

1880-1913

1920-38

1948-72

1973-2001

Average output growth

0.047

0.057

0.027

0.023

Center Model
Global factor
Idiosyncratic shocks

0.023
0.037

0.028
0.040

0.014
0.020

0.012
0.016

Trade Model
Global factor
Idiosyncratic shocks

0.022
0.034

0.017
0.024

0.013
0.018

0.010
0.014

1

Unweighted averages across countries.

Table 9. Variance Decomposition of Output Growth
(Fractions of forecast error variance; based on first differences of log output; simple averages over countries)
Countries (Number of obs.)

1887-1913
Global
Factor

Center model
All countries (16)
1-step ahead
2-step ahead
3-step ahead
4-step ahead

Trade model
All countries (16)
1-step ahead
2-step ahead
3-step ahead
4-step ahead
New core countries (7)
1-step ahead
2-step ahead
3-step ahead
4-step ahead

1926-38
Idiosyncratic
Shocks

Global
Factor

Transmission

1952-72
Idiosyncratic
Shocks

Global
Factor

Transmission

1973-2001
Idiosyncratic
Shocks

Global
Factor

Transmission

Idiosyncratic
Shocks

0.22
0.22
0.21
0.21

0.0
0.03
0.05
0.05

0.78
0.75
0.74
0.74

0.24
0.21
0.21
0.21

0.0
0.12
0.14
0.15

0.76
0.67
0.65
0.64

0.28
0.27
0.27
0.27

0.0
0.04
0.04
0.04

0.72
0.69
0.69
0.69

0.36
0.33
0.33
0.33

0.0
0.10
0.10
0.10

0.64
0.57
0.57
0.57

0.19
0.19
0.19
0.19

0.0
0.02
0.03
0.03

0.81
0.79
0.78
0.78

0.31
0.29
0.29
0.28

0.0
0.07
0.09
0.10

0.69
0.64
0.62
0.62

0.24
0.23
0.23
0.23

0.0
0.02
0.02
0.02

0.76
0.75
0.75
0.75

0.45
0.42
0.42
0.42

0.0
0.08
0.08
0.08

0.55
0.51
0.51
0.51

0.23
0.20
0.19
0.19

0.0
0.13
0.17
0.18

0.77
0.67
0.64
0.63

0.24
0.17
0.16
0.15

0.0
0.40
0.47
0.52

0.76
0.43
0.37
0.33

0.32
0.28
0.27
0.27

0.0
0.16
0.19
0.20

0.68
0.56
0.54
0.53

0.31
0.25
0.24
0.23

0.0
0.24
0.29
0.32

0.69
0.51
0.47
0.45

0.27
0.25
0.24
0.24

0.0
0.12
0.16
0.16

0.73
0.63
0.60
0.60

0.22
0.18
0.17
0.15

0.0
0.26
0.33
0.40

0.78
0.56
0.50
0.45

0.27
0.24
0.24
0.24

0.0
0.11
0.12
0.13

0.73
0.65
0.64
0.63

0.46
0.38
0.37
0.37

0.0
0.17
0.19
0.19

0.54
0.45
0.44
0.44

Note: See Table 1 for regions and country groupings.

- 57 -

New core countries (7)
1-step ahead
2-step ahead
3-step ahead
4-step ahead

Transmission

- 58 -

Table 10. Average Supply Shock Correlations By Region and Era
(Based on first differences of log output; lag length determined with BIC minimization)
Region (Number of obs.)

1880-1913

1920-38

1948-72

1973-2001

All countries (120)
Core countries (15)
Peripheral countries (45)
One country core, one periphery (60)
Continental European countries only (28)
One country Continental European (64)
Core European countries only (6)
One country Core European (48)
One Country North America 28)
One country Japan (15)
Anglo-Saxon Countries (6)

0.01
-0.02
-0.01
0.04
0.06
0.00
0.07
0.01
-0.03
-0.02
0.01

0.09
-0.04
0.13
0.08
0.02
0.08
0.04
0.02
0.10
0.06
0.12

0.09
0.14
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.11
0.07
0.13
0.02
0.18
0.13

0.11
0.14
0.09
0.12
0.24
0.04
0.35
0.11
0.10
0.07
0.22

Memorandum items:
USA-Canada
Scandinavian countries only (6)
One country Scandinavian (48)

0.13
-0.01
-0.01

0.30
0.44
0.11

0.55
0.02
0.09

0.52
0.12
0.08

Note: See Table 1 for definition of regions and country groups.

- 59 -

Table 11. Average Demand Shock Correlations By Region and Era
(Based on first differences of log output; lag length determined with BIC minimization)
Region (Number of obs.)

1880-1913

1920-38

1948-72

1973-2001

0.16
0.11
0.14
0.18
0.19
0.15
0.26
0.20
0.07
0.09
0.00

0.05
0.11
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.07
0.15
0.08
-0.20
0.14
-0.13

0.20
0.08
0.32
0.18
0.13
0.21
0.05
0.20
0.23
-0.23
0.36

0.25
0.22
0.25
0.25
0.35
0.23
0.61
0.29
0.12
0.10
0.13

-0.17
0.41
0.17

0.35
0.24
0.09

0.13
0.50
0.26

-0.19
0.41
0.27

All countries (120)
Core countries (15)
Peripheral countries (45)
One country core, one periphery (60)
Continental European countries only (28)
One country Continental European (64)
Core European countries only (6)
One country Core European (48)
One Country North America 28)
One country Japan (15)
Anglo-Saxon Countries (6)
Memorandum items:
USA-Canada
Scandinavian countries only (6)
One country Scandinavian (48)

Note: See Table 1 for definition of regions and country groups.
Table 12. Fraction of Demand And Supply Shock Variance Explained by First
Principal Component
(Lag length in underlying VAR determined with BIC minimization)
Type of Shocks (Model Version)

1880-1913

1920-38

1948-72

1973-2001

Demand shocks
Average

0.25

0.40

0.33

0.35

Supply shocks
Average

0.18

0.27

0.22

0.21

- 60 -

Table 13. Bilateral Trade-Output Regressions a
(Standard errors in parenthesis; coefficients significant at the 5% level are bolded)
Limited Sample (59 Observations)
1880-1913
1920-3 8 1950-7 2 1973-2001

âb

Panel

Full Sample (120 Observations)
1950-72 1973-2001
Panel

0.120

0.134

0.087

0.210

0.138

0.123

0.205

0.168

(0.071)

(0.154)

(0.099)

(0.088)

(0.057)

(0.056)

(0.053)

(0.042)

-0.013

-0.017

0.022

0.071

0.028

0.066

0.16

0.123

0.179

0.187

0.398

0.460

0.271

0.431

0.551

0.484

R-square c
R-square
first-stage regressions
F-testd
Number of observations

0.000
59

59

59

59

236

a

Constant is not reported. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity-consistent.

b

Instrumental variable estimate.

c

From an OLS regression of the trade equation.

d

Marginal significance level from an F-test of the restriction that the panel coefficients are not

significantly different from those obtained for each period.

0.000
120

120

240

- 61 -

Table 14. Actual and Predicted Change in Output Correlationsa
(All variables in percent or percentage points)

Limited Sample (59 Observations)
1880-1913 1 9 2 0 - 3 8 1 9 5 0 - 7 2 1973-2001

Average trade intensity
Change in average trade intensity

0.757

Average actual change
in output correlations
Predicted change
Based on â of previous era
Based on â of current era
Based on â of panel

Full Sample
1950-72 1 9 7 3 - 2 0 0 1

0.491
-0.266

0.698
0.207

0.956
0.258

0.460

0.612
0.152

13.409

2.332

22.815

21.615

-1.962
-2.198
-2.265

1.695
1.110
1.744

0.992
2.348
1.560

1.271
2.093
1.724

a

All data including correlation coefficients are reported in percent (percentage points). The â coefficients
are those shown in Table 15.

Table 15. Asset Market Integration, Bilateral Trade and Output Correlationsa
Bolded signifies significance at the 5% level and bolded-italicized significance at the 10 percent level)

ä

1920-38

1950-72

1973-2001

1950-72

1973-2001

-0.083
( 0.165)

0.066
( 0.108)

-0.089
( 0.110)

0.034
( 0.100)
0.119

-0.039
( 0.104)
0.191

( 0.059)

( 0.047)

0.059

0.155

0.324

0.447

120

120

âb

R-square c

0.002

0.003

0.007

R-square first-stage regressions
Number of observations

120

120

120

a

Constant is not reported. Standard errors in parenthesis are heteroskedasticity-consistent.

b

Instrumental variable estimate.

c

From an OLS regression of the fourth and fifth equation.

- 62 -

Table 16. Exchange Rate Regime, Asset Market Integration, Bilateral Trade and Output Correlationsa
Bolded signifies significance at the 5% level and bolded-italicized significance at the 10 percent level)

ã

1880-1913

1920-38

1950-72

1973-2001

1950-72

1973-2001

0.122
( 0.085)

-0.417
( 0.233)
-0.132
( 0.167)

0.603
( 0.187)
0.001
( 0.114)

0.624
( 0.176)
-0.183
( 0.103)

0.42
( 0.231)
-0.009
( 0.105)
0.109

0.332
( 0.205)
-0.1
( 0.114)
0.15

( 0.063)

( 0.059)

0.09

0.172

0.363

0.364

120

120

ä
âb
R-square c

0.006

0.012

0.064

0.092

R-square first-stage regressions
Number of observations

120

120

120

a

Constant is not reported. Standard errors in parenthesis are heteroskedasticity-consistent.

b

Instrumental variable estimate.

c

From an OLS regression of the fifth and sixth equation.

