NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENDOGENOUS FINANCIAL OPENNESS:
EFFICIENCY AND POLITICAL ECONOMY CONSIDERATIONS
Joshua Aizenman
Ilan Noy
Working Paper 10144
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10144
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

We would like to thank Shang-Jin Wei for sharing the data on financial openness. We would also like to
thank for useful comments we received from Carl Bonham, Mike Dooley, Doireann Fitzgerald, Byron
Gangnes, Ken Kletzer, Xenia Matschke, Donald Wittman, Ari van Asche and the seminar participants at
UCSC, University of Hawaii and University of Washington. Any errors are ours. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Joshua Aizenman and Ilan Noy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Enogenous Financial Openness: Efficiency and Political Economy Considerations
Joshua Aizenamn and Ilan Noy
NBER Working Paper No. 10144
December 2003
JEL No. F15, F21, F36, H21
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the endogenous determination of financial openness. We outline a framework
where financial openness is endogenously determined by the authority's choice of financial
repression as a taxation device, and where the private sector determines endogenously the magnitude
of capital flight. The optimal financial repression is shown to depend on the openness of the
economy to international trade, the efficiency of the tax system (which in turn may be affected by
political economy considerations), and on political polarization and the degree of opportunism.
Similar predictions are obtained in a model where authorities pursue an opportunistic policy
representing the interest of a narrow pressure group that engages in capital flight due to political
uncertainty. We confirm the predictions of the models, showing that de-facto financial openness
[measured by (gross private capital inflows + outflows)/GDP] depends positively on lagged trade
openness, and GDP/Capita. For developing countries, we find that a one standard deviation increase
in commercial openness is associated with a 9.5 percent increase in de-facto financial openness (%
of GDP), a one standard deviation increase in the democratization index reduces financial openness
by 3.5%, and a one standard deviation increase in corruption is associated with a 3% reduction of
financial openness. Similar negative dependence applies for measures of political competition. The
impact of a budget surplus on financial openness is negative for developing countries, but positive
for the OECD. The theoretical and empirical analysis leads us to conclude that a more openly
competitive, free and inclusive political system will lead to lower levels of de-facto financial
openness after controlling for incomes, macroeconomic policy (inflation and budget surpluses),
interest rates and commercial openness.
Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics
317 Social Science 1
UC Santa Cruz
1156 High Street
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu

Ilan Noy
Department of Economics
Suanders Hall 542
University of Hawaii, Manoa
2424 Maile Way
Honolulu, HI 96822
noy@hawaii.edu

1

1.

Introduction and overview
Salient features of the last twenty years have been the growing financial

integration of developing countries, and recurring financial crises. These developments
have led to contentious debate regarding the desirability of financial openness.
Prominent economists have concluded that the gains from financial integration are
illusive, cautioning developing countries not to rush towards financial openness [see
Rodrik (1999) and Stiglitz (2002)]. Yet, other studies have provided tentative support for
the presence of significant gains from financial openness [see Bekaert et. al. (2002) and
Henry (2003)]. These studies frequently focus on the formal acts associated with de-jure
financial opening, such as changing regulations and the attitude of the central bank and
the treasury to financial flows. Yet, as has been noted by Prasad, Rogoff, Wei and Kose
(2003), de-facto financial integration by itself, is of considerable interest. Indeed, the
actual level of financial openness [measured by (gross private capital inflows + gross
private outflows)/GDP] is the outcome of the interaction between market forces and
enforcement of existing regulations. The purpose of our paper is to focus on these links.
In particular, we highlight the endogenous determination of financial integration,
showing that de-facto financial openness is the outcome of macro-economic, public
finance and political economy considerations. As we argue in the concluding remarks,
understanding the links between the economic/political economy structure and de-facto
financial integration is a pre-condition for evaluating the challenges, risks and benefits
associated with de-jure financial integration.
In Section 2 we outline two polar models where financial openness is determined
endogenously. The first case describes a representative agent, public finance model of a
developing country where the benevolent authorities finance a given fiscal outlay by
means of distortionary taxes. The second case models a scenario where authorities
pursue an opportunistic policy representing the interest of a narrow pressure group that
engages in capital flight due to political uncertainty. Interestingly, the two models
provide similar predictions about the links between commercial openness, political
economy factors and de-facto financial openness.

2

In the public finance model, financial openness is endogenously determined by
the authority’s choice of financial repression, and the private sector determines
endogenously the magnitude of capital flight. Capital flight is intermediated via trade
mis-invoicing, and exposes agents to the risk of interception and ultimately, confiscation
of funds.1 Agents view this risk as exogenous, and determine their optimal portfolio by
weighing the gain from the higher interest rate on offshore deposits against the risk of
confiscation. We characterize the optimal portfolio as a function of the attitude towards
risk, the probability of capital flight interception, and the relevant interest rates. While
the probability of intercepting capital flight is exogenous for the atomistic agent, it is
endogenously determined by policies and the economic structure. Specifically, greater
trade openness would make it easier to intermediate a given volume of capital flight.
Hence, the probability of intercepting capital flight of a representative agent increases
with the resources spent on enforcement relative to the trade openness, and declines with
the magnitude of the aggregate capital flight.
The problem facing the fiscal authorities is to fund given fiscal outlays on public
goods relaying on two types of taxes: income tax, and financial repression. Both taxes
are costly: income tax is associated with collection costs, and enforcing financial
repression requires direct expenditure on monitoring and policing trade invoices, etc. We
show that financial repression characterizes countries that are below a certain threshold of
fiscal efficiency – high enough cost of tax collection would induce the implementation of
financial repression as a means of taxation. In these circumstances, higher tax collection
costs, higher fiscal expenditure and lower commercial openness would increase the
“optimal” financial repression.
Applying the insight of Cukierman, et al. (1992), we expect that the cost of tax
collection itself is endogenously determined. Functioning democracies will tend to have
more efficient tax collection systems, and thus tend to be associated with lower capital
flight. Similarly, we expect less polarized societies and those in which conflicts are
1

See Giovannini and de Melo (1993) for documenting and measuring financial repression as an implicit tax
on savings, and Kletzer and Kohli (2003) for analysis of the fiscal implications of financial repression in
India. See Dooley (1988), Tornell and Velasco, (1992), and Dooley and Kletzer (1994) on capital flight as a
mean of political economy risk diversification. See Dooley (1996) for an overview of financial controls;
and Claessens and Naudé (1993) and Boyce and Ndikumana (2001) for discussions on trade mis-invoicing
and capital flight.

3

solved peacefully within the political system to have more efficient tax collection
mechanisms in place, reducing capital flight motivated by tax evasion and/or
opportunistic behavior, looting, etc.
We close Section 2 with the polar case, corresponding to high degrees of
opportunism and political uncertainty. Here, first period policies are determined by a
policy maker representing a narrow interest group facing political uncertainty.
Specifically, we consider the case where the policy maker controls foreign exchange
income from exporting a natural resource in the first period, and faces an uncertain future
horizon. In these circumstances, his second period consumption would be partly
determined by the income from first period savings, conveniently put offshore, beyond
the control of the future regime. Second period output of the natural resource is impacted
by the tangible investment in the extraction of the resource. Such an investment can be
financed by the income controlled by the present policy maker. Alternatively, outsiders,
willing to bet that there is a positive chance that they will gain control of the surplus in
the second period, can finance the investment. We illustrate that with opportunistic
behavior, the combination of policy uncertainty and polarization would lead to greater
de-facto financial openness.
In section 3 we examine empirically some of the hypotheses suggested by our
models. We estimate the level of de facto financial openness as a function of lagged
trade openness, several macroeconomic control variables, and a vector of politicalinstitutional variables. We apply a two-step FGLS procedure for a panel of developing
and OECD countries for the years 1982-1998 using annual observations [the sample size
was determined by the availability of data and by excluding small-island economies].
We find that de-facto financial openness depends positively on lagged trade openness,
and the GDP/Capita. The budget surplus to GDP ratio is occasionally significant and
always negative for developing countries, but positive and significant for the OECD
countries. Including the corruption variable in our regressions also yields negative and
significant coefficients in almost all the iterations of the model we examined, confirming
Wei’s (2000) insight. For the full sample (developing and the OECD) and the developing
countries sub-samples, the effect of greater democratization is negative, significant and
apparently large. Any one-point increase in this index (out of the 20 points difference

4

between full autocracy and democracy) reduces financial openness (international
financial flows) by almost a one-half percentage point of GDP. The effect is about half
as large when we do not control for the level of corruption.
We further investigate the political-economy nature of financial openness by
replacing the democracy/autocracy (regime) variable with two others: a measure of
political competition and an index of government fractionalization. For the political
competition variable, we find that increased institutionalized competition within the
polity decreases financial openness. As we observed before, this effect is more
perceptible and significant once corruption is controlled for as well. We also find that the
more a government is fractionalized (the ruling coalition includes more political parties),
the higher is financial openness. Section 4 concludes the paper with interpretive remarks.
2.

The model
We consider two polar versions of models where financial openness is determined

endogenously. The first is a representative agent model, of a developing country where
the benevolent authorities finance a given fiscal outlay by means of distortionary taxes.
The second is the case where authorities pursue an opportunistic policy representing the
interest of a narrow pressure group that engages in capital flight due to political
uncertainty.
2.1

The public finance model
The utility of the representative consumer, i, is given by2
(1)

Vi = u (C1,i ) +

u (C 2,i )
1+ ρ

,

where C is the consumption of the domestic good. The production of the home good
uses domestic and foreign traded inputs:
(2)

2

kX α Y β

;

0 < α, β , α + β = 1,

The present model extends Aizenman and Guidotti (1994) and Aizenman (2003), by allowing the
endogenous linkage between commercial and financial openness, in circumstances where capital flight is
subject to stochastic confiscation.

5

and k is a normalization factor, k =

1

α

1−α

ββ

. To simplify, we normalize the prices of

both the domestic and the foreign inputs to one. The representative consumer starts
period 1 with past savings of S i , −1 (1 + r−1 ) . At the beginning of each period, the
representative consumer is endowed with X i units of the domestic input. The aggregate
endowment is denoted by X ,
(3)

X = ∑ Xi .
i

The Cobb-Douglas production (2) implies that aggregate imports are
(4)

βC

The fiscal authorities tax the endowment X and the interest rate income a rate t. The
consumer allocates savings between domestic and foreign bonds, S and F, respectively,
such that
(5)

C 1 , i = X i (1 − t ) + S 0 , i [1 + (1 − t ) r0 ] − S i − F i ,

where S 0,i is savings in period zero, yielding interest rate r0 . The fiscal authorities
impose capital control, leading to random interception of illicit capital flight. Let φ
denote the probability of intercepting agent i’s illicit capital flight, leading to
confiscation. Hence, the second period consumption is contingent on the success (s) or
failure (f) of capital flight:

(6) C2,i

2.2

C2s,i = (1 − t ) X i + Si (1 + r (1 − t )) + Fi (1 + r*)

=
 f
C2,i = (1 − t ) X i + Si (1 + r (1 − t ))

with

probability 1 − φ

.
with

probability φ

Consumer’s optimization
The allocation problem of the representative consumer is summarized by
(7)


(1 − φ )u(C 2s,i ) + φu(C 2f,i ) 
MAX E u(C1,i ) +

1+ ρ

,
S, F

6

Each consumer is small, thereby treating as exogenous the probability of capital flight
interception. The first order conditions associated with optimal domestic and foreign
savings are
(8)

u ' (C1 ) =

(1 − φ )(1 + r*)
u ' (C2, s );
1+ ρ

(9)

u ' (C1 ) =

1 + r (1 − t )
(1 − φ )u ' (C2, s ) + φu ' (C2, f )
1+ ρ

[

]

Applying (8) and (9), the equilibrium spread between the foreign and the domestic
interest rates facing the consumer is:
(10)

r * − r (1 − t )
1 + r*

=φ

Ω
1 − φ + φΩ

where Ω =

u ' (C2f,i )
.
u ' (C2s,i )

The premium between the foreign and the domestic after-tax real interest rates
compensates for the probability of intercepting the illicit capital flight, φ , at a rate
reflecting the consumer’s attitude towards risk. 3 Henceforth we use φ as a measure of
the de-facto financial repression. Applying the first order conditions (8) and (9), it can be
verified that

dFi
dFi
< 0 and
> 0 -- higher financial repression φ and lower tax rate t
dφ
dt

reduce the expected yield on offshore saving, reducing capital flight.
2.3

Endogenous enforcement
While the private agent views the probability of intercepting capital flight as

given, the actual value is determined by the fiscal resources spent on enforcing capital
controls, and by other macro variables impacting the efficacy of these controls. We
assume φ to depend positively on the ratio of resources spent on enforcement relative to
the capacity to engage in illicit capital flows. Specifically, we denote by τ the fraction of
endowment spent by the fiscal authorities enforcing capital controls. The experience of
developing countries has illustrated that exports under-invoicing and imports overinvoicing have been important channels facilitating capital flight. In these circumstances,
The term Ω is the ratio of the marginal utility of consumption in the case when the illicit capital is
intercepted, relative to the case when the authorities fail to intercept. The premium increases with the
probability of interception, and with the degree of risk aversion.
3

7

intermediating a given volume of capital flight would be easier in countries that are more
open to international trade. Recalling that imports are proportional to β , we assume φ to
depend positively on the enforcement/import rate, τ / β . We summarize the assumptions

in a reduced form
(11)

τ
φ =φ , F
β


'
'
''
"
 ; φ1 > 0; φ 2 < 0; φ1,1 < 0; φ1, 2 < 0 ; where F is the


aggregate capital flight [i.e., F = ∑ Fi ]. Higher capital flight implies fewer resources
i

devoted to supervision per unit of capital flight, reducing the probability of intercepting a
dollar of capital flight [though the total confiscation Fφ would increase].
The enforcement of income and interest rate taxes is associated with collection
cost λ per one dollar of gross taxes, implying that the net tax collected by a tax t is
(1 − λ )t . The fiscal budget constraint in period one is:
(12)

t (1 − λ )[ X + S −1r−1 ] + S = G + τX + S −1 (1 + r−1 ) .

The net revenue from the income tax, plus the revenue from the domestic bond sold in
period one finances the fiscal expenditure on public good (G), plus the cost of enforcing
capital controls, plus the repayment of old debt. Similarly, the second period fiscal
budget constraint is
(13)

t (1 − λ )[ X + Sr ] + φF (1 + r*) = G + S (1 + r ) .

Applying (10), (12) and (13) we consolidate the two budget constraints into the
intertemporal one:

(14)

where Γ =

1


t  X [1 +
] + S0 r0  + φF + S [φ + φ (1 − φ )Γ] =
1+ r *


;
Sr 
1
1

G[1 +
] + S0 (1 + r0 ) + τX + λt  X [1 +
] + S0 r0 +

1+ r *
1+ r *
1 + r *


Ω −1
.
1 − φ + φΩ

The left hand side of (14) is the gross tax revenue. It is the sum of the net present
value of the endowment tax and the tax on interest paid on the initial public debt (the first
term), plus the “confiscation tax” on foreign bonds, F , at the rate φ (which equals the
probability of intercepting capital flight), plus the implicit tax on domestic bonds, at a

8

rate φ + φ (1 − φ )Γ . For a risk neutral consumer, expected yields on the domestic bond
should match the expected yield on the foreign bond, (1 + r*)(1 − φ ) . This is equivalent to
imposing an implicit tax on first period savings at the rate φ (which equals the
probability of intercepting capital flight).4 Risk aversion magnifies the implicit tax
induced by financial repression -- it further reduces the equilibrium cost of the public
debt, by φ (1 − φ )Γ . This term is the risk premium demanded by the holders of foreign
bonds, needed to compensate for the confiscation risk. Unlike the private sector, the
effective real interest rate facing the fiscal authorities equals the foreign interest rate. The
RHS of (14) is the net present value of government outlays, which equals the net present
value of the public good [the first term], plus financing the repayment of the outstanding
initial pubic debt, plus financing the enforcement of capital controls and the cost of
collecting taxes.
Equation (14) is the fundamental budget constraint facing the government. It
defines implicitly a trade off between financial repression (as determined by the resources
spent on enforcement) and the endowment tax: t = t (τ ) . The policy maker chooses the
tax rates τ and the corresponding t determined by (14) that would maximize the utility of
the representative agent.
It is convenient to normalize the endowment, and henceforth we assume that
X = 1 . In the appendix we show that, for small changes,

(15)

dV 1
=
dτ u ' (C1 )

 dt 1 + r * −[1 + r (1 − t )](Ω − 1) ' u (C2, f ) − u (C2, f ) '
1
− [1 +
−
] + S 0 r0 
φτ
Sφτ +
(1 + r*)(1 − φ )
1+ ρ
 1 + r (1 − t )
 dτ

A useful benchmark is full financial integration, i.e. τ = 0 , where

φ = 0, r (1 − t ) = r*, Ω = 1 . The welfare effect of imposing marginal financial repression is
dV 1
dt
1
|τ =0 = (−
|τ =0 )[1 +
+ S 0 r0 ] − Sφτ'
dτ u ' (C1 )
dτ
1+ r *

(16)

4

In terms of (14), risk neutrality implies Γ = 0 , reducing the yield on domestic bonds to
φ + φ (1 − φ )Γ Γ = 0 = φ . Note that our analysis understates the revenue from financial repression –

[

]

part of it comes from taxing domestic financial intermediation. Adding the domestic banking system
would not affect the paper’s main results.

9

Imposing financial repression would allow reducing the tax rate t by −

dt
, inducing a
dτ

welfare gain equal to the drop in the tax rate times the relevant tax base. This welfare
gain is offset by the adverse welfare effect associated with shifting the tax burden from
an endowment tax to taxing savings, measured by the last term on the RHS of (16).
Applying (12) and (14) we infer that, in the vicinity of full financial integration,
government’s intertemporal budget constraint induces the following trade off:
(17)

t
tr *
]φτ' − 1 + λ
S[1 + λ
dt
1− t
1+ r *
|τ = 0 = −
1
r* 
S 
dτ


(1 − λ )t{1 + S0 (1 + r0 )} −
+ S0 r0 (1 − λ ) + λ
1 +

1+ r * 
1 − t 

 1+ r *

In the presence of lump sum income (i.e., λ = 0), equation (17) reduces to
(18)

dt
Sφτ' − 1
|τ = 0, λ = 0 = −
.
1
dτ
1+
+ S0 r0
1+ r *

As long as Sφτ' − 1 > 0 , spending on enforcing capital controls increases net revenue,

allowing cutting the income tax rate, t. Hence, Sφτ' |τ = 0 > 1 is a necessary condition for
financial repression to be considered as a viable policy option.5 Henceforth we will
assume it to hold. Applying (17) to (15) we infer that
(19)

dV 1
|τ = 0, λ = 0 = −1 .
dτ u ' (C1 )

With a lump sum endowment tax, there are no benefits associated with financial
repression, and the welfare effect of a dollar spent on enforcing marginal capital controls
reduces welfare by exactly one dollar. However, high enough collection costs would
imply that financial repression leads to a large drop in the cost of collecting conventional
taxes, inducing the tax authorities to add financial repression to the menu of taxes.6 In
these circumstances, the optimal depth of capital control is characterized by (15).

5

The condition Sφτ > 1 indicates that the economy operates on the left side of the Laffer curve associated
'

with financial repression.
Note that the numerator of (17) increases with the cost of tax collection, λ, whereas the denominator is
positive for low λ, approaching zero for a large enough tax collection cost, implying that (17) approaches
infinity for high enough λ.
6

10

Assuming that the cost of tax collection is high enough to induce positive but low
financial repression, we can apply (15) and (17) to infer
Claim 1:
High enough tax collection costs would induce the implementation of financial
repression. Under these circumstances, higher tax collection costs, λ , higher fiscal
expenditure G and lower commercial openness would lead to increased “optimal”
financial repression --

dφ
dφ
dφ
> 0;
> 0;
< 0 [see the Appendix for derivation].
dλ
dG
dβ

Following the approach of Cukierman, Edwards and Tabellini (1992), one expects
less polarized societies and better functioning democracies to be characterized by more
efficient tax collection systems [hence by lower λ ]. Applying this conjecture, a more
efficient tax system would be associated also with a lower tax rate, t, thereby reducing the
attractiveness of capital flight. It can be verified that with low enough financial
repression, the net effect of improving the tax system is to lower the incidence of capital
flight, thereby reducing de-facto financial integration.
Of course, de-facto financial openness is impacted by other considerations not
addressed by the public finance model described above, such as differentials in discount
rates and investment opportunities across countries, etc. One should view the above
model as suggestive of possible links between macro and political economy factors and
de-facto openness, motivating the empirical research. Yet, we do not claim that our
empirical work summarized in the next section is a test of this model. In fact, we argue
that the links we identify may be attributed to other economic forces, explained by
alternative models. To illustrate this point, we close this section by contrasting our
public-finance model with (arguably) the opposite case, where financial openness is
determined by pure opportunism associated with looting.7

7

Russia in the early nineties may provide a good case study. See Akerlof and Romer (1993). See also
Alesina and Tabellini (1989) for a model where political instability and the polarization between labor and
capital determines the incidence of capital flight and financial openness.

11

2.4

Political uncertainty, opportunistic model
A fair criticism of the public finance approach described above is that it more

accurately describes homogenous countries, where the policy maker is guided by the
interests of the median voter, and there is little political uncertainty pertaining to
competing parties and competing interest groups. Hence, it is useful to consider the
polar case, corresponding to high degrees of opportunism and political uncertainty. One
expects that most countries are characterized by regimes on a continuum between these
two polar cases. Interestingly, we will illustrate that both approaches may lead to similar
links between macroeconomic and political economy variables and de-facto financial
openness. We describe now a simple model summarizing de facto financial openness
under circumstances where policies in the first period are determined by a policy marker
representing a narrow interest group facing political uncertainty. Specifically, suppose
that the policy maker controls foreign exchange income from exporting a natural resource
in the first period, and faces an uncertain future horizon. With probability q, a new
government will take over in period 2, ousting the first period policy maker. In these
circumstances, his second period consumption would be determined by the income from
the first period savings, conveniently put offshore, beyond the control of the future
regime. The second period output of the natural resource is impacted by the tangible
investment in the extraction of the resource. Such an investment can be financed by the
income controlled by the present policy maker. Alternatively, it can be financed by
outsiders who are willing to bet that, with probability 1- q, they will gain control of the
surplus in the second period. For concreteness, suppose that the situation is summarized
by the following equations:
(20)

M 1 = M ( K 1 ); M 2 = M ( K 1 + I + I *), M ' > 0; M " < 0

(21)

u (C1 ) +

u (C 2 )
,
1+ ρ

where M t in (20) is the surplus generated by the natural resource at time t (t = 1, 2).
The second period surplus depends positively on first period investments, I and I*,
corresponding to the investment financed by the first period policy maker and the
outsider party, respectively. K1 is the initial stock of capital.

12

Equation (21) represents the utility of the policy maker. To simplify, we assume
that the outside party is risk neutral. The policy maker determines the first period
investment and saving by solving
(22)

qu ( S[1 + r*]) + (1 − q)u ( S[1 + r*] + M 2 ) 

MAX u ( M 1 − S − I ) +

1+ ρ


S, I

The problem facing the outside party is
(23)

qM 2 

MAX − I * +
1 + ρ  .

I*

The first order conditions are

(24)

[

]

1+ r * '
qu 2, l + (1 − q )u 2' , h = 0;
1+ ρ
;
1
'
'
'
− u1 +
(1 − q )u 2, h M I = 0
1+ ρ

− u1' +

M I' * =

1+ ρ
q

where M I' is the marginal product of capital; u2' ,l and u 2' , h are the second period
marginal utilities, for the cases where the policy maker is ousted and stays in power,
respectively. We can apply (24) to infer

Claim 2
dS
> 0;
dq

dI
< 0;
dq

dI *
> 0 -- Higher probability of regime change induces the present
dq

policy maker to increase savings, channeling them to offshore accounts via capital flight,
and to reduce the investment, I. The outside party would have the opposite incentive:
higher probability of regime change will increase the investment financed, I*. Assuming
that part of this investment is financed by foreign capital, we would observe that higher
probability of regime change would increase both capital flight and capital inflow,
implying that the de-facto financial openness increases with the probability of regime
change.

13

Greater commercial openness associated with greater availability of natural
resources would lead to greater financial openness, as has been the case in the public
finance model. This example also illustrates that with opportunistic behavior, the
combination of policy uncertainty and polarization would lead to greater de-facto
financial openness.8 Note the similarity of the predictions of the opportunistic and the
public finance approaches – in both cases, less cohesive social organization, greater
political uncertainty and greater commercial openness are associated with higher de-facto
financial openness.
3.

The Empirical model

This section reviews the methodology, the data, and the main results. For greater
detail, Appendix B summarizes the definition and the sources of the variables used in this
study.
3.1

Methodology
In the previous section, we suggested a number of characteristics that possibly

determine the degree of financial openness (or alternatively, financial repression). In
order to provide further motivation for this line of research we now empirically examine
some of the hypotheses outlined above.
We estimate the possible statistical significance of various sources of financial
repression by positing a linear structure for the determination of the level of financial
openness whereby:
(25)

FOit = α + β1 X it + β 2 CO it −1 + β 3 Pit + ε it , with ε it = ρε it −1 + µ it .

The dependent variable (FOit), financial openness for country i at time t, is assumed to be
dependent on an intercept (or alternatively separate country or regional intercepts), a
vector Xit of macroeconomic control variables, average of lagged commercial openness
8

In this example, polarization refers to the observation that the surplus is divided unequally among
competing parties – the policy maker controls the surplus and uses it to maximize his expected utility,
which differs from the expected utility of the outside party. In this example, the political uncertainty is
summarized by the probability of ousting the present regime, thereby shifting the future control of the
surplus to the outside party. Our example illustrates that, starting from the case of no political uncertainty
[ q = 0 ], higher probability of turnover will increase both capital flight and capital inflow, increasing defacto financial openness at a rate that depends positively on the commercial openness of the economy.

14

( CO it −1 ), a vector of political-institutional variables (Pit) and an error term. The variables
examined are described below. The error term is assumed to have an AR(1) structure
with µ iid.9
A Durbin-Watson statistic for all iterations of the model strongly indicates that the
error terms are autocorrelated. The autocorrelation coefficient was always estimated to be
about 0.7-0.9. We chose to estimate the model using the Prais-Winsten algorithm. The
Prais-Winsten procedure is a two-step FGLS procedure that utilizes the estimated
correlation coefficient obtained from the Durbin-Watson statistic from the first-stage
OLS regression as the initial autocorrelation value and reiterates the second step FGLS
using the whole sample till convergence (typically 2-3 iterations).10
3.2

The data
Appendix B provides a detailed summary of the variables and sources. We

measure de facto financial openness using the sum of total capital inflows and outflows
(in absolute values) measured as a percent of gross domestic product. Capital flows are
the sum of FDI, portfolio flows and other investments. This measure is exactly analogous
to the standard measure of commercial openness, which we employ as an independent
variable in our regressions. The financial openness variable was previously used by Wei
and Wu (2002).11
Tables 1A-1B describe our data for financial openness. Specifically, table 1A
presents averages for financial openness for geographical regions, decades and the
estimation samples we use. We find that for developing countries in general and in
particular for Asian, African and Middle Eastern countries, financial openness decreased
during the 1980s but rebounded and surpassed previous levels in the 1990s. This trend is
most pronounced for the East Asian countries for which capital flows was 11.2% of GDP
during the 1970s, 8.5% during the 1980s and 16.5% during the 1990s.12 Developed
E(µt)=0; E(µt2)=σu2; and Cov(µt, µs)=0 for t≠s.
For technical details see Greene (2000, pp. 546-550) and Greene (2002, E7 pp. 4-7). We use Limdep in
all our estimations.
11
We thank Shang-Jin Wei for making this data available to us. The data originates from the IMF’s
Balance of Payments Statistics database. See also Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001) for insightful analysis of
the net asset position of nations, based upon careful aggregations of the IMF’s database.
12
Our data does not completely reflect the slowdown in capital flows as a result of the Asian crisis as it
only covers up to 1998.
9

10

15

countries (OECD) do not show this trend but show a continual increase in financial
openness (from 7.3% to 9.3% to 16.8% for the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s respectively).
Interestingly, Latin America shows a similar continuous trend in spite of the 1980s debt
crisis.
For our commercial openness index, we average the sum of exports and imports
as a percentage of GDP over the previous 4 years (t-1 to t-4). By averaging, we smooth
out any fluctuations due to temporary changes in the terms of trade and obtain a more
robust finding in our multivariate analysis with respect to the temporal effect of
commercial openness on financial openness. We also investigate the dynamic structure of
the interaction between commercial and financial openness using annual data for both.
Table 1B presents the correlation coefficients between our financial openness
measure and the commercial openness measure (trade over GDP). Bivariate analysis
clearly shows a partial correlation between the two types of openness (both when
commercial openness is measured annually and when it is averaged for the previous 4
years). Notably, the correlation appears to be significantly weaker for Latin American
countries. We undertake a multivariate analysis of this issue in the following sections.
The financial openness index measures gross capital flows. Accordingly, we also show,
in column 3 of table 1B, the correlation of our gross flows measure with net flows (the
current account). We find that there is only a weak and unstable correlation between the
two (in some of our sub-samples the correlation is even negative).
Figures 1 and 2 further describe the correlations between the financial openness
measure, commercial (trade) openness, and the current account (net financial flows)
across time. As previously observed, there is an apparent partial correlation between the
openness measures, but a much weaker relationship between gross and net financial
flows. Furthermore, the partial correlation between commercial and financial openness
appears to be more pronounced for the 1990s than it was for the 1980s.13
As the previous theoretical discussion suggests, one of the determinants of de
facto financial openness should be legal impediments to financial flows (de jure financial
openness). Accordingly, we include in our multivariate analysis a binary measure for
13

The data cover the years 1980-1989 and 1990-1998. We do not present data for the 1970s as we do not
have a sufficient number of observations on trade openness for that decade to allow for any robust
conclusions.

16

restrictions on the capital account and/or the current account. Both indicators are taken
from the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions.
These binary measures, which we combine to make a single 0/1 indicator of legal
restrictions, are the only internationally comparable measures of de jure financial
openness available for our sample of countries and time period.14
For the political-economy determinants of financial openness, we concentrate our
empirical investigation on three political-institutional measures. In the first, we employ a
variable that measures the degree of democratic rule. Our democracy index is taken from
the Polity IV project and ranges from -10 (fully autocratic) to +10 (fully democratic).15
This approach follows from Cukierman, Edwards and Tabellini (1992); namely,
that functioning democracies will tend to have more efficient tax collection systems. In
our theoretical work, we argue that the degree of tax collection costs will determine the
degree of financial repression and to further examine this hypothesis we investigate
whether the capacity of the political system to prevent friction (and consequently mediate
conflicts through the political arena and thus facilitate more efficient tax and other
regulatory structures), is a relevant measure. Again, we expect less polarized societies
and those in which conflicts are solved peacefully within the political system to have
more efficient tax collection mechanisms in place.
We employ a variable that measures the degree of political competition within a
polity. This index combines two dimensions of political competition: (1) the degree of
institutionalization, or organization, of political competition and (2) the extent of
government restrictions on political competition. Combined, this measure identifies ten
broad patterns of political competition that roughly correspond with the degree of
“democraticness” of political competition within a polity (Marshall and Jaggers, 2000).
As Marshall and Jaggers (2000, p. 79) note “[t]he polar opposite [to a competitive
political system] is unregulated participation, in which there are no enduring national
political organizations and no effective regime controls on political activity. In such
14

We thank Michael Hutchison and Reuven Glick for making these data available to us. A thorough
description of these data is found in Glick and Hutchison (forthcoming).
15
The “Polity IV database includes annual measures for both institutionalized democracy (DEMOC) and
autocracy (AUTOC), as many polities exhibit qualities of both these distinct authority patterns….A third
indicator, POLITY, is derived simply by subtracting the AUTOC value from the DEMOC value; this

17

situations political competition is fluid and often characterized by recurring, contentious
interactions and shifting coalitions of strongly partisan groups” (italics ours). The 1-10
index defines steps between 1 (repressed competition –such as in totalitarian systems or
military dictatorships) and 10 (institutionalized open electoral participation). As we show
in the next section, this variable is highly correlated with the democracy-autocracy
measure described above.
Another political-economy variable we use to examine the robustness of our
results comes from a political data set constructed at the World Bank (Beck et al. 2001
and Keefer, 2002). As we hypothesized that more polarized social and institutional
arrangements will affect the efficiency of tax collections, we use an index that measures
the fractionalization within government. This variable is constructed from a Herfindahl
Index for government, which is obtained by summing the squared seat shares of all
parties in the government. Thus, a completely unified government will have an index of 1
and a government that is composed of many small parties will have a smaller index.16
Following the work of Wei (2000) and Dreher and Siemers (2003), we examine
whether corruption matters for the degree of financial openness. To that end, we use a
measure of corruption that is taken from the International Country Risk Guide. The data
are available in monthly observations. We obtain annual observations from 1982 onward
by averaging the monthly data points for each year. This index ranges from -6 (low
probability/risk of encountering corruption) to 0 (high risk of corruption).
Table 2 presents the correlation coefficients for political variables. As noted
earlier, the variable measuring political competition uses definitions related to the index
measuring the regime’s autocratic/democratic nature. Consequently, these variables are
highly correlated (correlation of 0.94). Besides this pair, the other political variables do
not seem significantly correlated and thus we include a number of them in our
regressions.
In order to insure our results are not driven by a ‘missing variables’ bias, we
include a host of macroeconomic control variables. In all regressions we use the inflation
procedure provides a single regime score that ranges from +10 (full democracy) to -10 (full autocracy).”
(Marshall and Jaggers, 2000, p. 12). We use the POLITY variable in our regressions.

18

rate (changes in the CPI), per capita gross domestic product (measured in PPP dollars),
the government’s budget surplus (as a percent of GDP), and a world interest rate (proxied
by the US Treasury Bill 1-year rate). All the macroeconomic data are taken from the
World Bank’s World Development Indicators (2001 edition). In order to examine
whether the occurrence of financial crises contaminates our result, as they might
systematically change the relationship between financial openness and our control
variables, we also include a crisis measure in a number of regressions.17
A priori, we see no reason to restrict our benchmark sample and therefore
attempted to include all 205 countries and territories for which data are available in the
2001 edition of the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI). Our control
variables, though, are available for only a subset of this group. Most importantly, most of
the data on financial flows as well as the data on corruption are typically available only
from the 1980s and only for a much smaller set of countries. Nevertheless, in most cases,
our data set is an annual panel of 83 countries for the years 1982-1998.
We further investigate the robustness of our results by examining various subsamples. Notably, we hypothesize that results for developed (OECD) countries might be
different from those for developing countries. We thus repeat our regressions for
developed economies – which we define as those economies that were members of the
OECD in 1990. As our focus is developing countries we include most of the regression
results for this sub-sample. These are defined as all the countries included in the 2001
edition of the WDI excluding OECD countries and island economies (as these are often
used as off-shore banking centers and their level of de facto financial openness is often
dramatically different from other countries). For a summary of the information described
in this section, see appendix B.
3.3

Estimation Results
Table 3 includes results for our benchmark regressions. As documented in the

previous section, all the estimations were obtained by assuming an AR(1) process and
16

This index equals NA if there is no parliament. If there are any government parties where seats are
unknown (cell is blank), the index is also blank. Independents are calculated as if they were individual
parties with one seat each.
17
For details see footnote #20.

19

using the Prais-Winsten algorithm. We consistently find a very high autocorrelation
coefficient (between 0.73 and 0.88) with what appear to be very accurately estimated
values (very high t-statistics). For the first stage regression, the R2 is between 0.20 and
0.67 depending on the exact specification and sample used.18 For the second stage, the
model converges very quickly (within two iterations) and most of the coefficients for the
benchmark control variables appear robust to the inclusion and exclusion of other
variables. In column (1) of table 3, which includes the full sample (829 observations), we
already observe many of the results that remain throughout the various iterations of this
simple model.
In examining the independent variables, we first turn to our control macrovariables. The coefficient for per-capita GDP is always significantly positive – i.e., an
increase in GDP per capita increases financial openness (except for a regression
containing only OECD countries in which the coefficient is insignificant). We find that
an increase of PPP$*1000 will facilitate a 0.14 to 2.28 percentage points increase in the
volume of capital flows (as percent of GDP). The ratio of budget surplus to GDP is
occasionally significant and always negative for developing countries. A bigger budget
deficit will increase de facto financial openness. Again, this result does not hold for our
OECD sub-sample; for this case, reported in table 3 column (2), the budget surplus
coefficient is positive and significant.19 The inflation rate and the world interest rate
(proxied by the US T-Bill rate) are always insignificantly different from zero. But, as
with the previous results, the coefficients for inflation and the world interest rate seem to
be different for the OECD sub-sample; although these are still insignificant for standard
significance levels, the effect of inflation on financial openness is larger (and negative)
for the OECD countries and the effect of the US T-Bill rate is smaller. Both these results
correspond with our intuition. We also include a binary variable for the 1990s and as we
expected the coefficient for this variable is always positive and significant; i.e., the 1990s
18

The higher R2 values are generally for the models that include more political/institutional variables and
for the developing and OECD sub-samples.
19
The disparity between the impacts of budget surplus in developing and OECD countries may be
explained by the differential cyclical patterns of fiscal policy. In contrast to the OECD countries, fiscal
policy tends to be pro-cyclical in developing countries: i.e., government spending drops and taxes increase
during recessions. Financial crises tend to lead to recessions in developing countries, inducing abrupt fiscal
adjustment, reducing fiscal deficits. These observations may lead to the positive association between

20

saw an across-the-board increase in financial openness (increased capital flows). This
increase in capital flows is found to be between 1.3 and 4.9 percent of GDP.
Our first interesting empirical finding is that the trade openness coefficient (ratio
of exports and imports to GDP) is always positive and highly significant. As this variable
describes the average openness over the previous four years we find that a history of
more commercial openness will tend to increase financial openness significantly. This
result is robust to all the iterations we present in tables 3 and .
Before discussing our empirical analysis of the political-economy determinants of
international financial flows, we note that including the corruption variable in our
regressions also yields negative and significant coefficients in almost all the iterations of
the model we examined.20 Similar results are analyzed in detail in Wei (2000) and Dreher
and Siemers (2003).
Our foci in this section are the political-economy variables. First, we examine the
affect of the nature of the political regime on financial openness (this index is between 10
– full democracy and –10 – full autocracy). For the full sample (table 3 column 1) and the
developing countries sub-samples (table 3 column 3) the coefficient for this variable is
negative, significant and apparently large.21 Any one-point increase in this index (out of
the 20 points difference between full autocracy and democracy) reduces financial
openness (international financial flows) by almost one-half a percentage point of GDP.
The effect is about half as large when we do not control for the level of corruption
(reported in table 3 column 4).
Since the results for the OECD sub-sample are consistently different, and our
theoretical modeling is focused on developing countries, we give most attention to the
developing countries sub-sample (these include all non-OECD countries that are not
islands/financial-centers). Columns 5 and 6 in table 3 repeat our specification for the
developing countries sample but exclude the regime variable in column 5 and both the

smaller budget deficits and lower de facto financial openness [see Gavin, Hausmann, Perotti and Talvi
(1996), Aizenman, Gavin and Hausmann (2000) and Talvi and Vegh (2000)].
20
Once more, this result does not hold for the OECD sub-sample (reported in table 3 column 2). In this
case, the coefficient is still positive but insignificant. Variability of the corruption variable for the OECD
sub-sample is much lower.
21
For the OECD sample (table 3 column 2), the coefficient has the same sign and magnitude but is
statistically insignificant.

21

regime and corruption measures in column 6. In both cases, we find that all the other
results reported above remain robust to these omissions.
Table 4 presents information on the quantitative significance of our findings for
the benchmark model. For the sample of developing countries, we find that a one
standard deviation increase in the commercial openness is associated with a 9.5
percentage points increase in de-facto financial openness (percent of GDP), a one
standard deviation in the increase in the democratization index reduces financial
openness by 3.5 percentage points, and a one standard deviation increase in corruption is
associated with a reduction of financial openness by 3.1 percentage points. Similarly, the
corresponding associations for the whole sample are 12.3, 3.1 and 2.9. Furthermore, a
developing country will have higher financial openness (measured as 3 additional
percentage points of GDP), were it to have the median level of trade openness of an
OECD country; and would be 2.2% less openness were it as democratic as the typical
OECD country and 4% more open to financial flows were is less corrupt as the typical
developed country.
In table 5 columns (1)-(4) we further investigate the political-economy nature of
financial openness by replacing the democracy/autocracy (regime) variable with two
others: a measure of political competition, and an index of government fractionalization.
For the political competition variable, we find that increased institutionalized competition
within the polity decreases financial openness. This result is not empirically puzzling
considering that this variable is highly correlated with our measure of
democracy/autocracy (even though the variable was created using different criteria).
Thus, a more openly competitive, free and inclusive political system will lead to lower
levels of financial openness after controlling for incomes, macroeconomic policy
(inflation and budget surpluses), interest rates and commercial openness. As we observed
before, this effect is more perceptible and significant once corruption is controlled for as
well.
For the government fractionalization index (reported in table 5 columns 3 and 4),
we find that the more a government is fractionalized (the ruling coalition includes more
political parties), the higher is financial openness. Quantitatively, the estimated

22

coefficient of 1.4-1.9 does not seem to suggest a very large effect on the level of
international financial flows.
In column (5) of table 5 we re-estimate our benchmark specification (table 3
column 3) but also include the de-jure measure of financial openness. Interestingly, the
coefficient for this binary measure of restrictions on the capital and current accounts is
not significant in this specification nor in other specifications we ran. Our main results
with respect to commercial openness and the political regime remain significant even
when the de jure measure is included; though the corruption coefficient is no longer
significant.
3.4

Robustness of Estimation Results
In addition to the specifications discussed above, we tested a number of

alternative specifications of our empirical model in order to verify the robustness of our
results. Because of space considerations we do not include the full specifications in our
tables but all these results are available upon request.
First, we hypothesized that financial crises (either banking or currency crises)
might significantly affect the level of financial openness in general and more specifically
the use of financial repression for generating government revenues. Interestingly, in all
iterations of the model we attempted, none of the coefficients for these variables comes
out significant for the developing countries sample (nor for the other samples).22
Second, besides including the average of past commercial openness, we also
included in our specification the contemporaneous TRADE/GDP variable and obtained
the following: In all cases, the lagged commercial openness variable remains positive
and highly significant. For the developing countries sample as well as the whole sample,
the lagged average is positive and highly significant with a now larger coefficient (0.20
and 0.21 respectively) while the contemporaneous variable is negative and significant.
For the OECD sample, the lagged average is still positive and highly significant while the
22

We utilized a number of variants of these binary indicators (currency crisis and banking crisis, their onset
year only, and these separately or together in the same specification) and we cannot reject the null (no
effect). For currency crises, our indicator is identified by periods in which an index, composed of a
weighted average of the real exchange rate and foreign reserves, changed dramatically – by more than 2
standard deviations. This measure is described in detail and evaluated in Hutchison and Noy (2002). The

23

contemporaneous variable is now positive but insignificant. The sum of the two
coefficients (summarizing the effect of commercial openness both past and present) is
0.05, 0.06, and 0.09, for the developing, OECD and the whole sample, respectively. This
sum is always positive and highly significant for the three different samples.23
As the political and institutional variables we use do not vary sufficiently over
time we do not present results for the model estimated with country effects. Typically, the
goodness of fit is higher but the independent political-institutional variables lose some of
their statistical significance (as would be expected). We include regional effects (binary
variables for Latin America and East Asia) in our large and developing countries
samples. We also experiment with time effects, but find that no additional significance is
gained by those besides a significant finding for the 1990s (reported above).

banking crisis binary indicator is taken from Caprio and Klingebiel (1999) and is analyzed in Arteta and
Eichengreen (2002) and Hutchison and Noy (forthcoming).
23
One possible interpretation is that major recessions in developing countries [potentially triggered by
capital flight] are associated with a drop in commercial openness, as would be the case if the drop in
imports dominated any increase in exports. Likewise, capital flight may increase financial openness. It is
difficult to provide a better rationale for it without desegregating financial openness into its various sub
accounts.

24

4.

Concluding remarks
Our analysis indicates that de-facto financial openness of developing countries is

a complex endogenous variable, systematically impacted by economic and political
economy factors which include commercial openness, democratization and corruption.
For the sample of developing countries, we find that a one standard deviation increase in
the commercial openness index is associated with a 9.5 percent increase in de-facto
financial openness (international financial flows as percent of GDP), a one standard
deviation increase in the democratization index reduces financial openness by 3.5
percent, and a one standard deviation increase in corruption is associated with a 3
percent reduction of financial openness [see Table 4].
The de-facto financial openness is the outcome of both efficiency and political
economy considerations; hence one should be careful in attaching normative implications
to these findings without having a good model of the economy. Yet, the results reported
in this paper may provide some guidelines to policy makers. A country that undergoes
rapid commercial integration will find it impractical to enforce rigid financial repression.
Hence, the question for China is not if, but when and how to implement de-jure financial
integration. To economists that are concerned about the possibility that financial
integration may lead to greater instability, our paper suggests that the process of
democratization may provide the side benefit of reducing financial openness. And to
economists who worry that some developing countries may find it difficult to rely on
external financing, steps to reduce corruption should make it easier to overcome this
obstacle.
While de-facto financial openness is a useful concept, it combines capital flows
motivated by political economy considerations with those motivated by efficiency
considerations. A remaining challenge is to find a way to disaggregate de-facto financial
openness into its various components. Additionally, a more direct empirical investigation
into some of our hypotheses is called for. For example, obtaining direct measures of tax
collection efficiency (for different tax instruments) and a more direct measure of political
uncertainty (in our model that is the likelihood of a future regime change) should both
enable us to better estimate the degree of de-facto financial openness and investigate its
links with political, political-economy and regulatory environments.

25
References
Aizenman, J., M. Gavin and R. Hausmann, (2000) "Optimal Tax and debt Policy With Endogenously
Imperfect Creditworthiness", Journal of International Trade & Economic Development, Volume 9
Number: 4, pp. 367 – 395.
Aizenman, Joshua (2003). “On the Hidden Links between Financial and Trade Opening”. NBER Working
Paper #9906, August.
_______ P. Guidotti. (1994): "Capital controls, collection costs, and domestic public debt," Journal of
International Money and Finance , February, pp. 41 - 54.
Akerlof, G. A. and P. M. Romer, “Looting: The Economic Underworld of Bankruptcy for Profit.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, pp. 1-60 and 70-74, (1993).
Alesina, A. And G. Tabellini (1989) "External Debt, Capital Flight, and Political Risk", Journal of
International Economics, 27: 199-220.
Arteta, Carlos and Barry Eichengreen (2002). "Banking Crises in Emerging Markets: Presumptions and
Evidence" in M. Blejer and M. Skreb (eds.), Exchange Rate and Financial Vulnerability in
Emerging Markets, MIT Press.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt and Ross Levine (2001). “New tools in comparative political
economy: The Database of Political Institutions,” World Bank Economic Review 15(1): 165-176.
Bekaert, G, C. R. Harvey and C. Lundblad, (2001). “Does financial liberalization spur growth?” NBER
Working paper #8245.
Boyce, J. K., and L. Ndikumana (2001): “Is Africa a Net Creditor? New Estimates of Capital Flight from
Severely Indebted Sub-Saharan African Countries, 1970-1996.” Journal of Development Studies,
38 (2): 27Caprio Gerard and Daniela Klingebiel (1999). Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises.
Manuscript (October).
Cukierman, Alex, Sebastian Edwards and Guido Tabellini (1992). “Seigniorage and Political Instability.”
American Economic Review, 82(3), June, 537-555.
Dooley, M. (1988). "Capital Flight: A Response to Differences in Financial Risks," IMF Staff Papers,
September 1988.
________ (1996): "A Survey of Literature on Controls Over International Capital Transactions," IMF Staff
Papers, 43(4):639-687.
_____,M. and K. Kletzer (1994) "Capital Flight, External Debt and Domestic Policies," Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco Review, Summer 1994, pp. 24- 38.
Dreher, Axel and Lars-H.R. Siemers (2003). “The Intriguing Nexus Between Corruption and Capital
Account Restrictions”, mimeo, June.
Gavin, M., R. Hausmann, R. Perotti and E. Talvi (1996) 'Managing Fiscal Policy in Latin America and the
Caribbean: Procyclicality, Volatility, and Limited Creditworthiness', mimeo, Inter-American
Development Bank.

26
Giovannini, A. and M. de Melo (1993). “Government Revenue from Financial Repression,” American
Economic Review 83, 953-63.
Glick, Reuven and Michael Hutchison (forthcoming). “Capital Controls and Exchange Rate Instability in
Developing Economies.” Journal of International Money and Finance.
Greene, W. (2000). Econometric Analysis. Prentice-Hall, New Jersey.
Greene, W. (2002). Linear models for panel data. In: LIMDEP Econometric Modeling Guide Volume 1.
Plainview, NY: Econometric Software, Inc.
Henry, P. B., (2003). "Capital Account Liberalization, The Cost of Capital, and Economic Growth",
American Economic Review, 93(2), May, pp. 91-96.
Hutchison, Michael and Ilan Noy (2002). "Output Costs of Currency and Balance of Payments Crises in
Emerging Markets," Comparative Economic Studies, XLIV(2), Summer.
Hutchison, Michael and Ilan Noy (forthcoming). "How Bad Are Twins? Output Costs of Currency and
Banking Crises" Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.
Keefer, Philip (2002). “DPI2000: Database of Political Institutions: Changes and Variable Definitions”.
Mimeo, The World Bank.
Kletzer K. and R. Kohli (2001). “Financial Repression and Exchange Rate Management in Developing
Countries: Theory and Empirical Evidence for India,” IMF working paper 01/103.
Lane, Philip R., and Giani Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2001). “The External Wealth of Nations:
Measures of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Nations,”
Journal of International Economics, Vol. 55, pp. 263–94.
Marshall, Monty G and Keith Jaggers (2000). “POLITY IV PROJECT - Political Regime Characteristics
and Transitions, 1800-1999: Dataset Users’ Manual”. Mimeo, University of Maryland.
Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei and M. Ayhan Kose (2003). “Effects of Financial
Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence.” Mimeo, IMF, March.
Rodrik, D. (1999): “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?” in Peter Kenen (ed), Should the IMF
Pursue Capital Account Convertibility? Essays in International Finance no. 207, Princeton:
Princeton University Press (May).
Stiglitz, J., (2002). Globalization and Its Discontents (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, June).
Talvi, Ernesto, and Carlos A. Vegh (2000). “Tax Base Variability and Procyclical Fiscal Policy.” NBER
Working Paper No. W7499, January.
Tornell, A. and A. Velasc., (1992). “Tragedy of the Commons and Economic Growth: Why Does Capital
Flow from Poor to Rich Countries?,” Journal of Political Economy, 100 (6):1208-31
Wei, Shang-Jin (2000). "How Taxing is Corruption on International Investors?" The Review of Economics
and Statistics, 82(1):1-11, February.
Wei, Shang-Jin and Yi Wu (2002). “The Life-And-Death Implications of Globalization.” Mimeo, IMF.

27

Appendix A - Derivations
This appendix overviews the derivation of several key results.
Equation (15)
Differentiating the expected utility we infer that

dV = u ' (C1 )dC1 +
(A1)

u ' (C1 )dC1 +

φu ' (C2, f )dC2, f + (1 − φ )u ' (C2, s )dC2, s u (C2, f ) − u (C2, f )
+
dφ =
1+ ρ
1+ ρ

φu ' (C2, f ) + (1 − φ )u ' (C2, s )
dC2, f +
1+ ρ

.

u (C2, f ) − u (C2, f )
(1 − φ )u ' (C2, s )
[dC2, s − dC2, f ] +
dφ
1+ ρ
1+ ρ
Consumer’s budget constraints [(5) and (6)] imply
(A2)

(A3)

dC1 = −[1 + S0,i r0 ]dt − dS − dF
dC2f = [1 + Sr ]dt + (1 + r (1 − t ))dS + S (1 − t )dr
dC2s = dC2f + (1 + r*)dF

.

Substituting (A2) and (A3) to (A1), and collecting terms, we infer that

dV
= −[1 + S0 r0 ]dt − dS − dF +
u ' (C1 )
(A4)

φu ' (C2, f ) + (1 − φ )u ' (C2, f )
{[1 + Sr ]dt + (1 + r (1 − t ))dS + S (1 − t )dr}
(1 + ρ )u ' (C1 )
+

u (C2, f ) − u (C2, f )
(1 − φ )u ' (C2, s )(1 + r*)
dφ
dF +
(1 + ρ )u ' (C1 )
(1 + ρ )u ' (C1 )

Applying the first order conditions [(8), (9)] to (A4), and collecting terms, we find

(A5)

u (C2, f ) − u (C2, f )
dV
X + Sr
S (1 − t )
]dt +
dφ
= −[ X + S0,i r0 +
dr +
1 + r (1 − t )
1 + r (1 − t )
(1 + ρ )u ' (C1 )
u ' (C1 )

Note that (10) implies that
(A6) dr =

r
[1 + r (1 − t )][1 + r * −[1 + r (1 − t )](Ω − 1)]
dt −
dφ
1− t
(1 + r*)(1 − φ )(1 − t )

28
Applying (A6) to (A5) we find that
(A7)

u (C2, f ) − u (C2, f )
1
1 + r * −[1 + r (1 − t )](Ω − 1)
dV
]dt +
dφ
= −[1 + S 0 r0 +
Sdφ +
1 + r (1 − t )
(1 + r*)(1 − φ )
(1 + ρ )u ' (C1 )
u ' (C1 )
Equation (15) is obtained from (A7), using the fact that dφ = φτ' dτ .
Claim 1
Recall that the first order condition determining optimal financial repression is
(A8)

where

dV 1
=0
dτ u ' (C1 )

dV 1
is given by (15). Denoting the RHS of (15) by ℜ , and the optimal financial
dτ u ' (C1 )

repression by τ~ , the implicit function theorem and the second order condition for maximization
imply that
(A9)

sign

dτ~
∂ℜ
.
= sign
∂λ
dλ

Assuming that the initial equilibrium is in the vicinity of low financial repression, we can apply
(16) and (17):
(A10)

dt
|τ =0 ]
∂ℜ
dτ
= sign
= sign
=
sign
∂λ
∂λ
∂λ
t
tr *
.
]φτ' − 1 + λ
S [1 + λ
−
+
1
1
*
t
r
∂
1
r* 
S 


+ S 0 r0 (1 − λ ) + λ
(1 − λ )t{1 + S 0 (1 + r0 )} −
1 +

1+ r *
1+ r * 
1 − t 

sign 
>0
∂λ
∂[ −

∂τ~

Similar logic implies that
(A11)

sign

dτ~
∂ℜ
dτ~
∂ℜ
= sign
= sign
< 0 ; sign
> 0.
dG
dβ
∂β
∂t

29
Appendix B – Data Sources and Samples
Code

Source

Description

KTOTAL

IMF-BOP statistics a: Wei (2002)

GDPPCPP

WDI b: NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD

TRADG

WDI: TG.VAL.TOTL.GG.ZS

TRADGAV

WDI: TG.VAL.TOTL.GG.ZS

Average for TRADG for t-1,…,t-4

DLCPI

WDI: FP.CPI.TOTL.ZG

Inflation, consumer prices (annual %)

BDGTG

WDI: GB.BAL.OVRL.GD.ZS
c

Sum of capital inflows and outflows
(% of GDP)
GDP per capita, PPP (current
international $)
Sum of exports and imports (% of
goods GDP)

Overall budget deficit, including
grants (% of GDP)

USTBILL

IMF-IFS

Interest rate on U.S. Treasury bill

CORRUPT

PRS: International Country Risk Guide

Level of Corruption d

POLITY2

POLITY IV project

Political regime type e

POLCOMP

POLITY IV project

Degree of political competition f

HERFGOV

World Bank's political dataset

Herfindehl index for ruling coalition g

KKCCAR

IMF- EAER h

Binary measure for current account
and/or capital account restrictions
Samples (1982-1998) i

ALL

All countries in the 2001 edition of the WDI (83 countries)

OECD

OECD countries (21 countries)

DEV
a

Developing countries – defined as all countries excluding OECD countries and
island states (60 countries)

The IMF’s Balance-of-Payments Statistics.
The World Bank’s World Development Indicators.
c
The IMF’s International Finance Statistics.
d
This index runs from -6 (low probability/risk of encountering corruption) to 0 (highly corrupt).
e
The index runs between -10 (fully autocratic) to +10 (fully democratic).
f
The index defines incremental steps between 1 (repressed competition –such as in totalitarian systems
or military dictatorships) and 10 (institutionalized open electoral participation).
g
The index is constructed by summing the squared seat shares of all parties in the government. Thus, the
index runs between 0 and 1 (a single party in the coalition).
h
The IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; see Glick and
Hutchison (forthcoming).
i
Data availability further constrained our samples. Thus, the numbers below reflect countries for which
data were available for the specifications described in table 3 columns 1-3 (but not necessarily for the
whole 1982-1998 time period for each country).
b

30
Table 1A.

Financial Openness – Descriptive Statistics
1970s

All years

6.23

5.43

8.63

6.82

OECD countries

7.34

9.31

16.79

11.50

East Asia

11.20

8.47

16.53

12.38

Latin America

4.81

6.05

8.15

6.53

a

6.21

4.89

7.10

5.93

6.83

6.96

10.35

8.23

All

Other includes Africa (North and Sub-Saharan), Middle East and South Asia.

Table 1B.

Financial Openness - Correlations

Correlation of financial

Comm. openness

Comm. openness

Current account

(t)

(previous average)

Developing countries

0.34

0.34

0.25

OECD countries

0.39

0.37

-0.04

East Asia

0.32

0.27

-0.23

Latin America

0.25

0.18

0.20

Other a

0.34

0.39

0.36

All

0.39

0.38

0.23

openness measure with…

a

1990s

Developing countries

Other
a

1980s

Other includes Africa (North and Sub-Saharan), Middle East and South Asia.

Table 2.

CORRUPT
POLITY2
HERFGOV

Correlation Coefficients for Political Variables
POLITY2

HERFGOV

POLCOMP

-0.26

0.12

-0.22

-0.27

0.94
-0.27

31

Table 3.

Benchmark Model Results
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.64**

0.14

2.28***

2.14***

2.02***

1.41***

(2.14)

(1.09)

(4.09)

(4.28)

(3.67)

(3.11)

Budget surplus

-0.26*

0.44***

-0.40**

-0.28*

-0.42**

-0.26*

(% of GDP)

(-1.70)

(4.60)

(-2.07)

(-1.62)

(-2.16)

(-1.81)

0.00

-0.14

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

(-0.16)

(-1.46)

(-0.38)

(-0.27)

(-0.47)

(-0.28)

-0.32

-0.03

-0.26

-0.31

-0.19

-0.13

(-0.88)

(-0.14)

(-0.53)

(-0.70)

(-0.38)

(-0.32)

0.11***

0.09***

0.07***

0.08***

0.08***

0.09***

(9.08)

(7.99)

(4.52)

(5.51)

(5.15)

(7.19)

-0.44***

-0.40

-0.51**

-0.26*

(-2.71)

(-0.37)

(-2.48)

(-1.60)

-2.01**

-0.12

-2.74**

-1.86*

(-2.23)

(-0.25)

(-2.24)

(-1.59)

4.89***

3.04***

4.65**

4.04**

3.52*

3.83**

(2.99)

(3.71)

(2.10)

(2.08)

(1.62)

(2.17)

0.88***

0.86***

0.88***

0.88***

0.88***

0.88***

829

222

607

694

607

768

ALL

OECD

DEV

DEV

DEV

DEV

Per capita GDP

Inflation (CPI)
US Treasury bill rate
Trade openness
(Average for t-1,…,t-4)

Democracy/autocracy
Corruption
The 1990s

ρ

a

Observations
Sample

b

t-statistics for all variables are given in parentheses. We denote significance levels at the 10%, 5% and
1% with *, ** and *** respectively.
The LHS variable is the sum of financial inflows and outflows (as % of GDP).
Estimation using the Prais-Winsten algorithm assuming an AR(1) process for the error terms.
For definitions of variables, see appendix B.

ε it = ρε it −1 + µ it .

a

ρ is the correlation coefficient for the AR(1) process:

b

ALL denotes the whole sample, OECD includes only OECD countries and DEV

denotes the developing countries sample. For precise definitions see appendix B and text.

32
Table 4.

Effects of Changes in Independent Variables on Financial Openness
Effect of positive

Effect of moving from the median value of

change of one standard

the variable in developing countries to the

deviation

median value in the OECD sample
Developing

Whole
Sample

a

Countriesb

Whole Samplea c

Trade openness

12.27

9.42

2.95

Democracy/autocracy

-3.13

-3.51

-2.21

Corruption

-2.89

-3.12

4.01

a

Specification in table 3 column 1.

b

Specification in table 3 column 3.

c

From our data, the median developing country is less open to trade, less democratic and more corrupt.

33
Table 5.

Robustness - Political Variables
(1)

Per capita GDP
Budget surplus
(% of GDP)
Inflation (CPI)
US Treasury bill rate
Trade openness
(Average for t-1,…,t-4)
Political competition

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

2.26***
(3.94)

2.15***
(4.17)

0.64***
(5.70)

0.33**
(2.03)

1.45***
(2.59)

-0.44**
(-2.19)

-0.30*
(-1.71)

-0.03
(-0.60)

-0.10*
(-1.70)

-0.28
(-1.42)

0.00
(-0.45)
-0.26
(-0.51)

0.00
(-0.32)
-0.27
(-0.59)

0.00
(0.02)
-0.30***
(-2.61)

0.00
(-0.29)
-0.22
(-1.41)

0.00
(-0.27)
-0.54
(-1.10)

0.08***
(4.65)

0.08***
(5.47)

0.05***
(15.04)

0.06***
(12.88)

0.07***
(4.48)

-0.67*
(-1.75)

-0.39
(-1.19)
-1.87**
(-2.22)

-1.40
(-1.24)

Government
fractionalization
Democracy/autocracy

-0.36*
(-1.71)

De jure financial
openness

-1.04
(-0.68)

Corruption
The 1990s

ρa
Observations
Sample b

-2.07*
(-1.74)
4.01*
(1.79)

3.70*
(1.88)

0.73***
(2.93)
1.27***
(2.56)

1.89***
(2.78)

1.13
(0.90)
3.41*
(1.56)

0.88***

0.88***

0.73***

0.83***

0.89***

591

673

552

635

578

DEV

DEV

DEV

DEV

DEV

t-statistics for all variables are given in parentheses. We denote significance levels at the
10%, 5% and 1% with *, ** and *** respectively.
The LHS variable is the sum of financial inflows and outflows (as % of GDP).
Estimation using the Prais-Winsten algorithm assuming an AR(1) process for the error
terms. For definitions of variables and samples, see appendix B.
a

ρ is the correlation coefficient for the AR(1) process:

b

DEV denotes the developing countries sample.

ε it = ρε it −1 + µ it .

34
Figure 1
Correlation of financial and trade openness
0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
ALL

DEV
1980s

OECD
1990s

-----------------------------------------------------------------Figure 2
Correlation for financial openness (gross flows) and the current account (net flows)
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
ALL

DEV

OECD

-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
1980s

1990s

