                       NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     OPTIMAL FINANCIAL Al!) POL IC I ES
                       FOR A SELECTIVE UN I VERB ITY




                          Ronald   G. Ebrenherg

                           Daniel F.   Sherman




                         Working Paper No, l0]J4




                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCE
                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge MA 02138

                             November 1982


Professor of Economics and Labor Economics at Cornell University and
Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research, and Ph.D.
candidate in Labor Economics at Cone1l University, respectively. The
empirical research reported in this paper is being performed in coopera—
tion with the Admissions and Financial Aid Office at Cornell. We are
grateful to James Scannell, Dean of Admissions and Financial. Aid, aid
Anthony Lalli, Director of Student Information Systems and Research, for
providing us with the data, computer time, and summer support for Sherman.
In addition, they have assisted us in our investigation with advice and
direction concerning those issues related specifically to admissions and
financial aid. We are also grateful to numerous colleagues at Cornell.
and the NBER and to Steven Floenack for their comments on an earlier draft.
The views we express here, however, are strictly our own and do not
necessarily represent the views of any of these individuals, of Cornell
University, or of the NBER. The research reported here is part of the
NBERs research program in Labor Studies.
                                              NBER Working Paper #1014
                                                   November 1982




       Optimal Financial Aid Policies for a Selective University



                               ABSTRACT



     Recent federal cut—backs of financial support for undergraduates have
worsened the financial position of colleges and universities and required
them to debate how they will allocate their scarce financial aid resources.
Our paper contributes to the debate by providing a model of optimal financial
aid policies .for a selective university——one that has a sufficient number
of qualified applicants that it can select which ones to accept and the type
of financial aid package to offer each admitted applicant.

     The university is assumed to derive utility from "quality—units" of
different categories (race, sex, ethnic status, income class, alumni rela-
tives, etc.) of enrolled students. Average quality in a category declines
with the number of applicants admitted and the fraction of admitted applicants
who enroll increases with the financial aid package offered the category.
The university maximizes utility subject to the constraint that its total
subsidy of students (net tuition revenue less costs including financial aid)
is just offset by a predetermined income flow from nonstudent sources (e.g.,
endowment). The model implies that the financial aid package to be offered
to each category of admitted applicants depends on the elasticity of the
fraction who accept offers of admission with respect to the financial aid
package offered them, the propensity of the category to enroll, the
elasticity of the categorys average quality with respect to the number
admitted, and the relative weight the university assigns in the utility
function to applicants in the category.

     While the latter must be subjectively determined by university
administrators, the former parameters are subject to empirical estimation.
The paper concludes with a case study of one selective institution's data
and illustrates how they may be estimated. Based upon data from the
university's admissions and financial aid files, as well as questionnaire
data which ascertained what alternative college most admitted freshman
applicants were considering and the financial aid packages at the alterna-
tive, probit probability of enrollment equations are estimated as are
equations that determine how average quality varies with the number admitted
for each category. These estimates are then applied to illustrate what the
"optimal" financial aid policy would be for the university.
                                          Ronald C. Ehrenberg
                                          Daniel R. Sherman
                                          New York State School of
                                            Industrial and Labor Relations
                                          Cornell University
                                          P.O. Box 1000
                                          Ithaca, New York 14853

                                          (607) 256—3026
I. INTRODUCTION


     Recent and proposed future cut—backs of federal financial support

for undergraduate students from lower— and middle—income families have

worsened the financial positions of colleges and universities and required

them to rethink how scarce financial aid resources should be allocated.

For example, the Ivy League universities and a number of other highly

selective universities have been following a policy of meeting the "full

financial need" of all accepted applicants who enroll. That is, after

evaluating how much an applicant and his or her family should be able to

contribute to the applicant's education, the difference between the total

cost of attending the university (tuition and fees, room and board, books,

and other expenses) and this sum was provided to the applicant in the form

of a package consisting of scholarships, loans, and in—school employment

opportunities. This policy was designed to assure equal access for all

qualified students to these universities; family income ceased to be a key

determinant of whether, a student could enroll at one of them. The worsen-

ing financial situation that these universities face has, in many cases,

called the continuation of these policies into question.

    What options do these universities, and other universities that have

never had the resources to meet the need of all accepted applicants, face?

What financial aid policies will maximize a university's welfare? Out

paper contributes to the debate by providing in Section II a model of

optimal financial aid policies for a selective university —— one that has

a sufficient number of qualified applicants that it can select both which

ones to accept and he type of financial aid package to offer each admitted

applicant.
     The university is assumed to derive utility from "quai ft—units" of
different categories (race, sex, ethnic status, income class, alumni
relatives,   etc.) of enrolled students. The average quality of a ccteory
declines   with the number admitted and the fraction of admitted   students

who enroll increases with the financial aid package offered the category.

The university maximizes utility subject to the constraint that its total

subsidy of students (its tuition revenue less costs including financial

                                                flow from nonstudent sources
aid) is just offset by a predetermined income

(e.g., endowment). The model implies that the financial aid package to be

offered to each category of admitted applicants should depend on (1) the

elasticity of the fraction who accept offers of admission with respect to

the financial aid package offered them and, in some cases, the propensity

of applicants to enroll (2) the elasticity of the category's average quality

with respect to the number admitted, and (3) the relative weight the

university assigns in its utility function to applicants in the category.

     While the latter must be subjectively determined by university

administrators, the former parameters are subject to empirical estimation.

 Section III presents a case study using data from one selective university,

 Cornell University, that illustrates how the parameters may be estimated.
                                                    and financial aid files,
 Based upon data from the university's admissions
                                      ascertained the alternative college that
 as well as questionnaire data that
                                          considering or enrolled at,
 most admitted freshman applicants were

 and the financial aid packages at the alternative, probit probability

 of enrollment equations are estimated as are equations that determine how
                                                                    each
 average quality varies with the number of applicants admitted from
                               of these estimates for the optimal structure
 category. The implications
                                                                                                 3




of   the university s finincia1 aid p01 icy are then discussed in Sec tion rv,
as   are some qualifications and implications for future research.


II. A MODEL OF OPTiMAL FINANCIAL AID AND ADMISSIONS POLICIES FOR
       A SELECTIVE UNIVERSITY


       By a selective university, we mean one in which the number of appli-

cants far exceeds the number of available positions, and thus the university

exercises considerable discretion in the admissions process. For example,

Cornell University admits only about one—quarter of its freshman applicants,

and undoubtedly a large number of potential applicants fail to apply because

they believe that their chances of admission are so low.                             Selective universities

can increase their applicant flows by publicly announcing slightly lower

admission standards.2

        Suppose that a selective university faces N                            different categories of

applicants. The categories may depend upon family income, minority

status, academic quality, region of the country, parent alumni status,

student athletic ability, or any other attributes that the university is

concerned about. To take an example, if the university was concerned only

about whether an applicant had an alumni parent and whether the applicant

was a minority, there would be four categories (yes/yes, yes/no, no/yes,

 no/no). Let X denote the number of applicants from category I that

 are admitted. Since the university's applicant pool is assumed to far

 exceed the number of available freshman enrollment opportunities, we treat

 the X as choice variables.3

        To simplify, we assume that over the range of potential total enroll-

 ment levels, the university faces a fixed marginal cost per student of C.

 Although it may establish a tuition level, which doesnot vary across
                                                                          .4

students, it awards different financial aid packages (treated here entirely

as scholarships) to different categories of students. Let           denote the

total net cost of attending the university for applicants from category i.

Then the share of the costs that the university bears for students from

this category, S.,, is given by



                            = 1 —                   i =
     (1)    S1 = (C—P1)/C           (Pr/C)


                                                 the university are aware
     We assume that students who have applied to

of its cost level C, which we treat as predetermined.         The fraction of

                                                                     is assumed
accepted applicants in category i that actually enroll,

to depend on the share of the costs that the university bears.4 Other

things equal, the proportion that will enroll (which is sometimes called

the yield) will increase as the university's share of the cost increases.

That is,



                                              0 <            < 1    i =
                                     Fj > 0         F1(S.)
      (2)   F1 =   F(S.)

Note that (2) asserts that the lower the net price charged applicants,
 the more likely that they will enroll. Also, there is nothing in this
                                                              the level of the
 formulation that prevents F1 from also depending upon

 university's costs.

      The product of the number of admitted applicants and the fraction who

 accept admission is the number of students who actually enroll in each

 category. The university is not indifferent, however, to the composition
                                                     that we can rank admitted
 of the enrolled students. Specifically suppose

 applicants by some objective measure of their academic quality, such as
                                                                           5



SAT scores or class rank, and that within each category the average quality
of   admitted   applicants (qj declines with tile number admitted.5


       (3)      q.    q,(X)           q(X.) < 0           i = 1,2,..


We assume that the university values the total quality units" of students

who actually enroll in each category and that the weights it places on

attracting different categories of students can be summarized by the quasi—

concave utility function



        (4)     U = U
                      [F1(S1)X1q1(X1), F2(S2)X2q2(X2), ...,



where                represents the total quality units of enrolled students

from category i.
                     .6

      Note    that this formulation distinguishes between the academic quality

of applicants and their relative attractiveness to the university. Quality

is an objective measure, and depends upon measurable academic attributes

as noted above. Relative attractiveness, however, depends upon the sub-

jective valuations of university decision—makers of applicant characteristics

such as minority status, athletic ability, family income class, and whether

the applicant has relatives who are alumni, that are summarized by the

form of the utility function in (4).

       We can define category I applicants as being relatively more attractive

to the university than category j applicants if for any equal number of

quality units of enrolled students of each type, the university obtains

greater marginal utility from enrolling an additional quality unit of

type I applicants. That is, if for equal numbers of enrolled quality

units
                                                                        ()




     (5)    Ui/Ui
                    1,




where the subscripts after the U indicate marginal utilities.

    The university seeks to maximize its utility from enrolling different

categories of students subject to a constraint that the net revenue it

receives from students plus its revenue from nonstudent sources that can
                                                    not be less than the
be applied to subsidizing students' education can

total cost of the students.7 Let R denote the total applidable revenue

from nonstudent sources; one can think of this as the revenue that is

                                                 from endowment and current
available to the university's operating budget

year gifts. Recalling, that S      is the share of per student costs borne

by the university (average cost per student less the net price actually
                                              the constraint can be written
charged students divided by average costs),


            N
                S.CF1(S.)X   R < 0
      (6)              1 1 -



Alternatively, if we let r be the tQtal number of students the university

 can enroll if it bears the entire cost of education (r =   R/C),   this can


 be expressed as



      (7)    S.F(S)X — r      <   o.8


                                                      the university enrolling
      Assuming that an interior solution exists, with
 all categories of students and just exhausting the revenue from nonstudent
                                                                         (7)
 sources, maximizing the utility function (4), subject to the constraint

 requires the university to pursue admissions (Xi) and financial aid (S1)

 policies that satisfy the following constraints
      (8)       U. [F.q. +
                          11 111                 +    S.F.
                                                       11    U           i =   1,2,... N
                    1




      (9)                  111
                U. [F'.X.q.] +
                    1                           111+ 11
                                                     F.X.1       =   0   i




                N
      (10)              S.F.X. —
                         111       r   =   0.
               1=1


A is a Lagrangian multiplier that has the interpretation of minus the

marginal utility of an additional quality unit of enrolled student divided

by the marginal cost. Conditions (8) and (9) require that the university

admit applicants from different categories and vary the share of the per

student cost that it bears across categories up until the point that the

ratio of the marginal utility to the marginal cost of obtaining an addi-

tional quality unit is equal for each action.

      Some algebraic manipulations of (8) and (9) indicates that they can

be rewritten as



      (ii)                                                               V i,j
                    (S/S)
and
                                                                         y i,j
       (12)         (1+nj)(1+(l/c)) =                (1+n.)(l+(l/e))

where n (< 0) is the elasticity of the average quality of category i

with respect to the number of category I applicants                            admitted (qX/q)

and          (> 0)       is the elasticity of the fraction of category i applicants
                                                                                 with respect to the
who will enroll (the yield of category I applicants)
                                                                                  One can show that
share of the costs borne by the university (FS1/F1).

given the utility function in (4) sufficient (but not necessary) conditions

 for a maximum to exist are either
                                                                                    8



                                                                      for each i
       (13)      c. constant, n'(X) < 0

or
                                                                      for each i
       (14)      n.constant, c?(S) < 0



       The former requires that the percentage decline in average quality

associated with a given percentage increase in admissions gets larger

(in absolute value) as the number of admitted applicants increases. The

latter requires that the percentage increase in the yield associated with
                                              the share of costs borne by the university
a given percentage increase in

becomes smaller as the share of cost-borne by the university becomes larger.9
                                                         differentiate the system of 2N + 1
       While in principle one could totally
                                                           static results for the model, it
equations in (8)—(1O) to obtain comparative
                                                          function. One tractable form is
is simpler to work with a specific utility

the Cobb-Douglas function


                                                                             >0
        (15)     U =
                       .j(F.Xjq)1                                      cz.




 Other things equal, the greater the value of a. the greater the relative
                                                           Moreover, with this formulation,
 attractiveness of category i applicants.

 the university must enroll some applicants from all N categories to obtain

       utility.10 Given this utility function, equation (11) becomes
 any


                  S.F.(S.)          a. (1+n.)X                         wj
         '16 '    —------- —i-- =      ____
                  S.F.(S.)          Ct.   (1+n.)
                                              3
                                                   X.
                                                    1
                   :33' 3             3
                                                                            9




     One can make use of equations (12) and (16) to derive a number of

propositions about how financial aid resources should be allocated across

different categories of applicants. These propositions, which are formally

proven in the appendix, can be summarized as follows.

     Suppose we first consider the case when the elasticity of the fraction

of admitted applicants who enroll with respect to the university's share of

costs is constant within each category (but may differ across categories).

In this case,, for each category F. =            and larger values of

indicate greater propensities to enroll, other things equal.

     'Proposition 1:   Suppose the enrollment elasticity c. is equal across

two categories, both face the same elasticity of average quality function,

and the elasticity of average quality varies with the number admitted.          Then

the relative price the university should charge to each category of applicants

depends only on their relative weights in the university's utility function

and on their relative propensity to enroll if admitted. Other things equal,

the group which is relatively more attractive to the university should be

charged a lower price. Similarly, other things equal, the group with a greater

propensity to enroll should be charged a higher price.

     Proposition 2:    Suppose the elasticity of the fraction of admitted

applicants who enroll differs across groups but that the two groups have

the same elasticity of quality function, the same values of the propensity

to enroll parameter (K), and are equally relatively attractive to the

university.    In this case the group whose CflrL'll :cnt 1 lL Ic itv   Is gretr
      d   bc chrd a I owtr price.
                                                                         10




    Proposition 3: Suppose at any given number of admitted applicants,

the elasticity of quality with rcspect to applicants differs across groups,

but that the two groups have the same (constant) elasticity of yield with

respect to the university's share of cost, the same values of the propensity

to enroll parameter, and are equally relatively attractive to the university.

In this case, the group whose elasticity of quality with respect to admis-

sions is larger (in absolute value) should be charged the lower price.

     Intuitively, these propositions all make sense. The first asserts the

university should charge lower prices to categories of applicants who it

derives more utility from and/or who are less likely to enroll at any given

price. The second asserts that applicants whose enrollment decisions are

more sensitive to price should be charged a lower price. Finally, the

third asserts that applicants whose average quality falls off more rapidly

with the number admitted should be charged a lower price to increase the

yield and thus reduce the number who need be admitted to reach any desired

enrollment figure.

     In an anlogous manner, one can consider the case when the elasticity

of average quality with respect to the number admitted is a constant for each
                                       =            and larger values of
category. Here, for each category q        q0jXi
indicate higher average quality, other things equal.

     Proposition 4: Suppose nj is equal across two categories and both

face the same probability of enrollment function.    In this case, the relative

number of applicants the university should admit depends only on the relative

weights it places on the different categories, with relatively more attrac-

 tive students being admitted with greater frequency.   Moreover, both

 categories should be charged the same price.
                                                                        11




     Proposition 5: Suppose the elasticity of average quality with respect

to the number admitted differs across two groups but that both face the

same elasticity of yield function. In this case, the university should

charge a lower price to the category whose elasticity of quality with

respect to the number admitted is more elastic (larger in absolute value).

     Proposition 6: Suppose n is equal across two categories and that,

at any given share of cost that the university bears one category's elas-

ticity of yield is larger than the other's. In this case, the university

should charge a lower price to the group whose elasticity of yield with

respect to the subsidy is higher.

     Given the explanation of the earlier propositions these latter three

are almost self—evident. Moreover, as Table Al in the appendix summarizes,

most of these six propositions continue to hold when several alternative

 forms of utility functions are used.

      Our model implies then, that the financial aid package to be offered

 to each category of admitted applicants should depend on (1) the elasticity

 of the fraction who accept offers of admission with respect to the financial

 aid package offered them and the propensity of the applicants to enroll,

 (2) the elasticity of the category's average quality with respect to the

 number admitted, and (3) the relative weight the university assigns in the

• utility function to applicants in the category. While the latter must be

 subjectively determined by university administrators, the other parameters

                                        and the next section illustrates how
 are subject to empirical estimation,

 this may be done.
                                                                          12




III.   ESTIMATING THE RELEVANT PARAMETERS: A CASE STUDY


       A number of prior studies have presented estimates of the determinants
of the college enrollment decisions of high school seniors, using data on

national or regional samples of individuals.2 While such studies are of

use in simulating the effects of various federal financial aid policies on

the level and composition (say by race or income class) of aggregate college

enrollments, they are of little use to an individual college or university

that is trying. to optimally set its own financial aid policies. What is

required in the latter case are institutionally based studies of the deter-

minants of the   enrollment   decision and in the first part of this section,

we indicate how such a study can be conducted, using data from one selective

university, Cornell University.13 Similarly, to optimally frame financial
                                                  institutionally based inf or—
aid policies, university decision—makers need

ination on the elasticity of average quality
                                                with respect to the number

admitted for the various categories of applicants they
                                                           face. The second

part of the section shows how these parameters can be estimated, again

using data for Cornell University freshmen applicants.


 A. The Probability of Enro1lmet,DeçiOfl
        Consider applicant k who has been admitted at one selective university,
                                                                 which
 s, and also at an alternative university, o. The decision as to

 university to enroll at presumably is based upon a comparison of the rtet

 utility, V, that the applicant would receive from each option, with the

 net utility in each option depending upon observable characteristics of the

 individual (Xk) the net costs to the applicant of the two options (N,N),

 other characteristics of the two options (Z,Z0), and random variables
                                                                                      13




             that represent unobservable differences in tastes that the

individual   has for the two options. Hence


                                            + e sk
      (17)   V
                 sk
                      = V(X
                             k,Ns,Zs)
             Vk
                      =
                          V(Xk,N   ,Z) + ek
and
                                                       —                + (eSk_eOk)
      (18) H = Vk     V(,N,Z) —
                                  Vk
                                       =
                                                           V(Xk,NoZo)

              Hkl if H>O
                      = 0     otherwise.



            *
      Here Hk is an unobservable continuous variable that represents the net
utility individual k would obtain from choosing to enroll at university s

rather than at the alternative. Although it is unobservable, we can arbitrarily

scale its cutoff value so that when it is greater than zero we observe

                                                                1).   Conversely, if it is
individual k enrolling at university s (Bk =

less than zero, the applicant will turn down the offer of admission from s

and enroll elsewhere (Hk =                 0).   If we further assume that the ek and
                                                            that are uncor—
eok can be treated as normally distributed random variables
 related with the explanatory variables in the model, equation (18) represents

 a probit model of the determinants of the probability of enrollment at the

 selective university)4 Put another way, estimates of it can be used to

 generate the yield curve faced by the university                 (F(S) in (2)).

      Variants of equation (18) are used below to obtain estimates of the

 determinants of the probability of enrollment for freshmen applicants who
                                                                         14




were admitted to Cornell University for the year that began in September of

1981 (the class of 1985). Cornell is a selective Ivy League university that

has approximately 6,000 graduate and 11,000 undergraduate students. The

latter attend its seven undergraduate divisions —— the Colleges and Schools

of Arts and Sciences, Architecture, Art and Planning, Engineering, Hotel

Administration, Agriculture and Life Sciences, Human Ecology, and Industrial

and Labor Relations.

     A unique institutional feature of Cornell is that it is partially

privately supported and partially State supported. The first four divisions

mentioned above are in the private part of the university and are referred

to as the endowed sector. The latter three are operated by Cornell under

contract with the State of New York and have some relationship with the

State University of New York; these are referred to as the statutory sector.

Because tuition charges differ substantially between the sectors, as does

the subject matters taught, and because the statutory sector draws students

primarily from New York State, all of the estimates below are done separately

for the endowed and statutory sectors.'5

     The data required to conduct,the study came from a variety of sources.

The university's admissions file had data for all freshmen applicants on the

division the student applied to, objective measures of student ability (SAT

scores, rank in class), characteristics of the student (e.g., race, sex,

alumni parents, region of the country), the admission decision, and, if

admitted, the applicant's enrollment decision. The university's financial

aid management information file had information for all admitted financial

aid applicants on family income, and the financial aid package offered the

applicants from Cornell and other sources (grants or scholarships, loans,

academic year earnings opportunities).16 A university admissions research
                                                                         15




questionnaires mailed to all admitted freshmen applicants and returned

by approximately 60 percent of them, yielded data on the name of the other

college the applicant was considering (or enrolled at), the distance of

both that college and Cornell from the applicant's honre, and the financial

aid package offered to the applicant at the other college.17 Finally,

once the name of the other college was known, published sources provided

data on the total costs of attending the other college and the average

SAT scores of the entering freshman class there.
                                                     for both the endowed and
     Tables 1 presents probit enrollment equations

statutory college financial aid applicants.    The explanatory variables corres-

                                     the applicant's net costs of attendance at
pond to applicant characteristics,
                                          characteristics of Cornell and the
Cornell and the other option, and other
                                                                 while some
option. Definitions of all of the variables appear in the table,

descriptive statistics for various subgroups of applicants appear in Appendix

Table A2.

      These estimates conform quite well to what one would expect from a model
                                       The enrollment decision does depend upon
 of individual enrollment decisions.
                                                                     indicated
 the characteristics of the option; the better the other college, as
                                     (endowed) or by its being an Ivy League
 by its average freshman SAT score
                                                               will enroll at
 college (both), the less likely that. financial aid applicant
                                                                       for,
 Cornell. Minority students, who other selective universities compete
                                with alumni relatives (in the endowed sector)
 are less likely and applicants
                                Cornell. Cornell is also less likely tO attract
 are more likely to enroll at
                                               as measured by SAT scores or class
  its highest "quality" admitted applicants,

  standing; these students tend to find their way into even more prestigious

  universities.
                                                                        16




    Financial aid and cost variables at both Cornell and the other option

are also seen to play an important role. Other things equal, a $500

increase in the scholarship offer at Cornell will raise the yield on

accepted applicants by roughly 6½ to 8 percent in the endowed sector and

7 to 10 percent in the statutory sector.18 The loan the student can get

if he or she attends Cornell also marginally (in a statistical sense)

appears to matter, in the endowed sector, although not unexpectedly its

marginal effect is less than that of the Cornell grant)9 Similarly, other

things equal, increasing the size of the scholarship elsewhere decreases the

probability of attending Cornell while increasing the total cost of the other

college increases the probability of attending Cornell. Finally, while the

provision of employment opportunities at Cornell does not seem to influence

the enrollment decision, the provision of a loan or employment opportunities

elsewhere does reduce the probability of attending Cornell.

     How sensitive are these results' to the specification chosen?   Additional

estimates, not reported here for brevity, suggest that allowing family income

to nonlinearly influence the enrollment probabilities or including the region

of the country that the applicant is from in the model does not alter the

other results. The results are also quite similar between the two specifica-

tions ((1) and (2)) reported in Table 1; in the latter the coefficients of

the Cornell total cost and scholarship offer are constrained to be equal and

opposite in sign, as are the analogous coefficients for the other college.20

     Since a key parameter is the sensitivity of different applicant groups

 to the Cornell net cost of attendance, attempts were made to ascertain if

 the probit coefficient of the net cost variable varied with four sets of

 characteristics that the university might use to define applicant groups.
                                                                      17



These are the SAT range that the applicant falls in, the family income class
he or she is from, whether the applicant has an alumni parent, and whether
he or she is a minority applicant in Cornell's minority admissions program
(COSEP).21 The results are reported in Appendix Table A3; the interactions
with only one set of characteristics at a time (columns (1) to (4)) would

be relevant if the university's financial aid policy was to vary along only

one dimension, while the interactions with all sets simultaneously (column

(5)) would be relevant if the university's financial aid policy was to con-

sider all of the factors.

     Most strikingly, the probit coefficient of the Cornell net cost variable

does not appear to vary with the applicant's SAT score, nor does it vary

significantly with the applicant's parent alumni status.   In the endowed

sector, however, the response of yield to net cost does appear to be lower

for minority applicants and there is some evidence that it is higher for

applicants in the $18,000—$36,000 family income range than it is for appli-

cants from lower—income families.

     Table 2 summarizes the implicatIons of these results for the elasticities

of the probabilities of enrollment with respect to Cornell's net cost; the

variable that is analogous to c In our model. Elasticities are calculated

for the probit net cost model without interactions (Col. 1), the model with

one type of interaction at a time (Col. 2) and the model with all four sets

of interactions occurring simultaneously (Col. 3), Because most of the

 interactions in the latter specifications proved to be statistically Insig—

nificant, most attention should be directed to the results in the first

 column.
                                                                        18




                                                  it appears that the
     In both the statutory and endowed sectors,

elasticity is lowest for the lowest income class of finaucal aid recipients.22
                                        the endowed sector, that the elasticity
There also is evidence, especially in
                                               than for other applicants, and
is higher for applicants with alumni parents
                                             applicants (as measured by SAT
that it is highest for the highest quality
                                         the endowed sector, there is evidence
scores). Finally, again especially in
                                            applicants than it is for non—
that the elasticity is lower for minority

minority applicants.

     This latter result may not square with some readers' a prior expec-
                                        at selective unversities for minority
tations given the intense competition
                                                                Cornell's
students and probably warrants some explanation. Applicants to
                                   who enroll at Cornell receive academic
minority admission program (COSEP)
                          that seeks to provide them with study skills,
support through a program
                                        for large freshman required courses
remedial teaching, tutorial services
                                       The COSEP program is an extremely well—
and a pre—freshmen summer program.
                                                                   often
regarded one. In addition, given their "computed need", applicants
                                   financial aid in the form of grants than
receive a greater share of their
                                  of these two factors, it is quite plausible
 do non—COSEP students. Because
                             enrollment decisions less responsive at the margin
 to find COSEP applicants'

 to scholarship offers than the decisions of nonminorities.


                               pp1iCantSn. the
                                               Number Admitted
 B. The Average ualityO
                                                                        with
                                       of average quality of applicants
      The estimation of the elasticity
                                                             An objective measure
 respect to the number admitted is more straightforward.
                             constructed from admission committee rankings,
 of average quality can be
                                                             Applicants can then
                                 or data on rank in class.
 scores on standardized tests,
                             of quality and the average quality for the top X
 be ordered by the measure
                                                                             19




                                         then estimate for each category of
applicants (q) computed. One can
applicants equations of the form,



               =
                   q(X)
                                                        X =   1,2...
     (19)



                                   number of applicants in a category, to
where A represents the total

obtain estimates of the elasticities of average quality.

     For our Cornell case study we have used the sum of an applicant's

verbal and quantitative SAT scores as the measure of quality. For

simplicity, we have considered only two functional forms f or q, the
                                           which yields the estimating equation
constant elasticity form q(X) =      q0f

      (20)     log q(X) =   log   q0 + nlog X,




 and the form q(X) =      ee1X     which yields the estimating equation




      (21)     log q(X)= n + n1X


                                                   by n and in the latter case
 In the former case the elasticity is given

 by n1X.
                                                                         and
      Estimates of (20) and (21) are found in Table 3 for all applicants
                                              aid applicants. SAT scores are
 for the subsample of admitted financial
                                     and separate estimates are presented for
 expressed in hundreds of points
                                                 for five family income classes of
 the three ability groups of applicants,
                                                               and non—
 applicants, for COSEP and non—COSEP applicants and for alumni
                                         elasticities one obtains from the two
 alumni applicants. The pattern of
                                                                    recall in
  specifications ((20) and (21)) is virtually identical (one should
                                       elasticities at a given number of applicants).
  the latter case we are comparing
                                                                            20




    Among the different ability classes, the elasticity of average quality

with respect to the number of applicants admitted is lowest in absolute
                                                                        <
value for applicants in the middle (for Cornell) ability range (1150

SATSUN <   1300) and, in most cases, highest for applicants in the high ability

range. Among the different income classes the elasticity tends to decline

in absolute value as family income increases, although for statutory appli-

cants it levels out rapidly after an initial decline.23 Finally, the

elasticity of average quality with respect to the number of applicants

admitted is much larger for minority (COSEP) applicants than it is for non—

minority applicants and, in some specifications, it is larger for applicants

from alumni families than it is for other applicants.24



IV. CONCLUSIONS AND IKPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH


     What are the implications of the results presented so far for the

optimal financial aid policy of one selective institution, Cornell University.

Subject to the proviso that all of our results should be considered preliminary
                                                           until it is shown
and that one should not seriously recommend any policies
                                                  roughly constant across
that the pattern of relevant parameters remains
                                               tentative conclusiOnS are in
categories over several years, the following

order.

     The model of optimal financial aid policies that we presented in

 Section II suggested that, other things equal, financial aid packages should

 be more generous for groups that the university considers relatively more

 attractive (i.e., that have greater weight in the utility function), for

 groups that have lower propensities to enroll, for groups that have higher

 elasticities of the probability of enrollment (i.e., the yield) with

 respect to the universitys share of costs, and for group.s with higher
                                                                        21




(in absolute value) elasticities of average quality with respect to the

number of applicants admitted. Table 4 summarizes the implied effect of

each of these parameters for four classes of appUcants, those with alumni

relatives, minorities, those from low—income families (defined here to he

less than $18,000) and those who are from the highest ability class (SAT

scores that exceed .1300). We arbitrarily assume, for expository purposes

that the university finds applicants from each of these groups relatively

more attractive than the average Cornell freshman applicant.25

     Our results unambiguously suggest that the highest ability students

should receive above—average financial aid packages, since they tend to

have a lower propensity to enroll, a higher than average elasticity of

yield (in the endowed sector) and higher than average elasticities of
                                  the number admitted. A financial aid policy
average quality with respect to
                                             class, appears to make sense for
based on scholarly merit, within each need

the university.
                                         minorities should receive larger aid
     They also support the notion that

packages, other things equal, because, in addition to being relatively

 attractive to the university, minorities have a lower propensity to enroll
                                                The optima]-ity of such a policy
 and a higher elasticity of average quality.

 of more generous financial aid for minorities is not unambiguous, however,
                                                                          in
 because minorities have a relatively low elasticity of yield, especially

 the endowed sector.

     Results for applicants who are relatives of alumni and for applicants

 from low—income families are more ambiguous.    While alumni applicants are

 assumed to be relatively attractive to the university and there is some

 evidence that they have higher elasticities of average quality and of yield,

 their high propensity to enroll in the endowed sector may offset these
                                                                         22




effects. Similarly, while   applicants   from low—income families have high

elasticities Of average quality, which call for larger aid packages they

also have low estimated elasticities of yield, which call for less—generous

packages.26 On balance, then, the model probably yields no unambiguous

implications for these groups.27

     Numerous extensions and implications for future research are suggested

by our paper. In addition to the ones we have discussed so far, one might

note that our optimal financial aid model takes the financial aid packages

at other universities as given. At the theoretical level one might attempt

to model optimal financial aid policies for interdependent selective

universities, using either a cartel framework or a framework that incor-

porated competitors' reaction functions and seeks to ascertain the "market

equilibrium". Such a framework would make the yield functions in equation

(2) explicitly dependent upon the costs and financial aid packages at other

universities; a generalization already incorporated into our empirical work.

At the empirical level one could use the empirical results to simulate the

effects of simultaneous changes in both the institution's and its competitors'

financial aid policies.

     Finally, we must stress that one's ability to apply the theoretical

model to particular institutional settings hinges on the stability of the

relative ranking of key parameters across categories of applicants over time

at an institution. For example, are the quality elasticity for minorities

and the sensitivity of yield to net price for high quality applicants both

always relatively high vis—a—vis the comparable parameters for other appli-

 cants. While we have pointed out the tentative implications of our current

 results for the financial aid policies at one selective institution,
                                                                      23




obviously repeated replication of the empirical estimates at individual

institutions are required before the institutions should seriously consider

implementing policies based on such studies. This is especially true in a

period like the early 1980's when the external environment facing

universities is changing so rapidly.
                                                                        24




                                References


John Abowd. "An Econoiietric Model of the U.S. Market for Higher Education"

     (mimeo, 1977).

John Bishop. "The Effects of Public Policies on the Demand for Higher

     Education," Journal of Human Resources, Summer 1977.
                                                 Education: An Analysis of
Randall C. Chapman. "Buyer Behavior in Higher

     College Choice Decision Making Behavior" (unpublished Ph.D. disserta-

     tion, Carnegie—Mellon University, 1977).
                                         "Sequential Unordered Logit Applied
Donald Elliot and Jerry Hollenhorst.
                                                              viorSciflCe, 26,
     to College Selection with Imperfect Information,"

     October 1981, 366—378.
                                                                Economic
Winship Fuller, Charles Manski and David Wise. "New Evidence on

     Determinants of Post—SecondarY Schooling    Choices," HUml
     Resources (forthcoming).
                                   Specification Error," EconometriCa, 47,
 James Heckman. "Sample Bias as

      January 1979, 153—162.
                                    Allocation of Subsidies to Higher Education,"
 Stephen Hoenack. "The Efficient

      American Economic Review, 61, June 1971, 02—311.

 David Hopkins and William Massy.

      (Stanford, Cal.: Stanford University Press, 1981).

 Gregory Jackson. "Financial     Aid and Student Enrollment," ofHi

      Education, 49, 1978(6), 548—574.
                               Weathersby. "Individual Demand for Higher
 Gregory Jackson and George

      Education: A Review and Analysis of Recent Empirical Studies,"
                                      46, 1975(6), 623—652.

                              and David Mundel. "An Empirical vestigati0fl
 Heir Kohn, Charles Manski

      of Factors Which Influence College—Going

       and Social Measurement, 5, Fall 1976, 391—420.
                                                                        25



Charles Manski and Stephen Lerman. "The Estimation of Choice Based Proba—

     bilities From Choice Based Samples," Econometrica, 45, November

     1977-4978.

Roy Radner and Leonard Miller.   Demand and Supply in U.S. Higher Education

     (New York, N.Y.: Carnegie Commission on Higher Education, 1975).

James Scannell. "The Development of Optimal Financial Aid Strategies"

     (unpublished Ed.D. dissertation, Boston College, 1980).
                                                                             2€)




                                 Footnotes

                                                       respects is a generali-
        1. The model presented in this section in some

zation and extension of the   model presented   in Stephen Hoenack (1971)

Floenack did not distinguish, however, between
                                                 the applicant acceptance and

enrollment decisions, nor did he allow applicant quality to decline with

the number admitted. As will become apparent, these are key features of our

work.

        2. There is, of course, the danger that announcing lower standards

might cause some of the "better" potential applicants to self—select them-

selves out of the applicant pool.

        3. Actually, we are assuming that the applicant pool is sufficiently
                                    it to choose the number to admit.       In some
large in each category, to allow
                                        low—income applicants this may not
cases, for example for minorities or
                                        first expends resources to attract
always be true unless the university
                                                                   recruit-
applicants. One obvious extension of our model is to build in such
                                             the marginal cost per student which
ment costs directly, possibly by allowing
                                                 The marginal cost might also vary
 is defined below to vary across categories.

 across categories, if the propensity to choose different majors varies across

 categories, Since certain types of education (e.g., chemistry) may be more

 expensive than others (e.g., economics).
                                                       student costs, so C — P.
         4. Stated university tuitions rarely cover

 will typically exceed the reported scholarship that an applicant receives.
                                                    equal the actual tuition and
 Indeed, for some public universities, P may

 there may be no reported scholarship but C —      P   will be large because of

                                                                  absolute
 public subsidies. What is relevant to applicants is the share or
                                                      not the stated tuition and
 level of the total èosts they will have to pay,

  scholarship per se.
                                                                           27




     5. Allowing the average quality function to also depend on Si is

another generalization that we do not pursue here.

    6.   If increases in X. led to proportionately greater reductions in

q., it would always be in the university's best interests to reduce

to zero. To avoid this, we make the innocuous assumption that total quality

units of type i applicants never decrease with the number admitted; this

requires that the elasticity of average quality with respect to the number

admitted, n. (=q!X./q1) always be greater than minus one (—1 <    n.   <   0).
     7. Alternatively, one could model the university as maximizing the

indicated utility function subject to constraints that (a) its total enroll-

ment not exceed a specified capacity and (b) that the difference between

its total student costs and the net revenue the students actually provide

not exceed the available revenue from nonstudent sources.   With a constant

marginal cost per student, unless the enrollment constraint is binding, the

two models would yield the same form of solution.

     8. There is no general agreement on how one measures the adequacy

of endowments, either over time for a given university, or across universities

at a point in time (references will be added here). Equation (7) suggests

that, at least for the former, a reasonable measure is r,    the total number

of students the university can enroll if it bears the entire cost of educa-

tion, perhaps computed as a fraction of its actual enrollment.

     9. For later reference, note that a constant elasticity of average

quality function has the form q(X) = q0X'   where q0 > 0    and —1 < n      <   0.

Higher values of q0 imply higher average quality at each applicant level.

A function that satisfies n' < 0   is q(X) =   qeCX   where q0 > 0, q1 < 0.

For this function n = q1X.
                                                                              28



                                             yield function has the form F = kSL
      Similarly, a constant elasticity of
where 0 <     k   1   and c >   0. Given this function, no    applicants would
enroll if the university bore none of the costs (S           0) and the fraction

k would enroll if the university bore the full, cost (S = 1). Finally,

a function that satisfies c' < 0 is F = eK0h/ with 0 < K0—       < K1

For this function, c(S) equals K1/S and the yield is again zero if the
                                           K0 _K
university bears none of the costs and is e      if the university bears

all of the cost. Moreover, provided that K1 is less than 2, the yield

curve is ttSfl shaped, increasing first at an increasing and then at a

decreasing rate as the share of the costs borne by the university increases.

      10. One could, of course, consider alternative forms for the utility
                                                         N
function such as the additive utility function U =            ®(F..Xq) where
                                                   i=1
Of represents the constant relative attractiveness to the university of

category i applicants, or the constant elasticity of substitution utility

function u =[j(Fjxiqj)_B]_(1/ where —l < B and a = 1/(1+B)                         is

the elasticity of substitution between different applicant categories.

Table Al in the appendix summarizes the differences in the results that occur

if   these   alternative utility functions are used.

       11. Although we do not pursue it here, the model can also be used to

generate results concerning the effects of increases in nonstudent forms of

revenue, such as income from endowment (R). For example, in the Cobb—

Douglas utility function case, with c = c. = constant           and n. the same

function as ii., one can show that the level of nonstudent income effects

only the share of costs that the university bears and not the number of

 students to be admitted.       Other things equal, increases in R leave the

 ratios of the share hf costs the university should bear across categories

 constant, lowering the net price faced by all categories in       the   following
                                                                             29



manner ——    (P./R)/(P./R))     = (C—P.)/(C—P.) .    Of   course, since decreasing
net prices   will increase yields, the number of enrolled students will

increase    in each category.
     12. Examples include Winship FuUer, Charles Manski, and David Wise
(forthcoming), John Abowd (1977), John Bishop (1977), Meir Kohn, Charles
Manski, and David Mundel    (1976), Roy Radner and   Lawrence Miller (1980),

and Gregory Jackson (1978).
     13. There have been several earlier institutionally based studies.

See, for example, Donald Elliot and Jerry Hollenhorst (1981), Randall Chapman

(1977), James Scannell (1980) and David Hopkins and William Massy (1981), Ch. 8.

None of their models are as general as ours, for example none contain data on

the characteristics of the other institution the applicant is considering

including the explicit financial aid package offered to him or her there.

     14. One complication is that an individual's being observed in the sample

is conditional on his or her having applied to Cornell and been admitted.

Because of this, the error terms in (17) and (18) may not be uncorrelated

with the explanatory variables and we may confound the effects of an explana—

tory variable on the yield, with its effect on the probability of being

observed in the sample. This is nothing more than the now standard "selection

bias problem" (see James Heckman (1979)), complicated by our not observing

the characteristics of individuals who fail to apply to Cornell. We leave

it to future research in the area to address this problem.

     We should also stress that different assumptions about the distribution
                                                                 statistical models
of error terms (e.g., log—normal) would lead to different

 (e.g., logit). While in most cases, conclusions derived from the two methods

 are quite similar, individuals applying the model in future applications

 might want to test for the sensitivity of their      results   to the functional

 form estimated.
                                                                         30



                                                        curve to vary with
     15. We also al low the intercept term of the yield
                                                                       would
    Cornell college or school to which the student applied. While it
the
                                         curves for each of the seven Cornell
be desirable to estimate separate yield
                                                            to permit this.
         and schools, the sample sizes are not large enough
colleges
                               mechanicallY computed by the College Scholar-
      16. Financial "need", as

                    also available but its inclusion never significantlY
ship Service, was
                             that followed. it would have been desirable to
altered any of the results
                               factors that, in addition to income, influence
have data on th underlying
                                            such as wealth, family size, and
 a family's ability to pay for education,
                                                          such data was unavail—
 number of other college—age
                               students. Unfortunately,

 able for the class of 1985.
                                                                      enrolled at
                                         for students that actually
      17. The return rate was greater
                                  obvious choice—based sampling problem (see
 Cornell and this introduces an
                             Lerman (1977)) which we ignore here.
 Charles Nanski and Steven
                                                           of a unit ($1,000) change
       18. To obtain estimates of the marginal effect
                                                  coeffiCient for the Cornell
                  scholarship offer, the probit
  in the Cornell
                                                         the Cornell net cost
                                   in column (1) or for
  scholarshiP variable (CCRAT)
                                                Cornell less the scholarship offer
  variable (CNCOST =   total cost of attending
                                                  factors described in footnote a
                   multiplied by the adjustment
  at Cornell) are
                                                    by .5 to reflect a $500 change.
                               are then multiplied
  of Table 4. The products
                                                             and Wise, have not
                                 including Fuller, Manski,
        19. Previous studies,
                                 opportunities as forms of financial aid. Our
   treated loans or employment
                                               omissions. We must caution, however,
   findings in Table I   do not support  these
                                                                   can.reCeive below
                             only to the extent that applicants
   that loans are relevant
                                                                           first by
                                 Changes in federal loan programS faced
   market rates of interest.
                                                                    and tightened
                        reduced the size of the implicit subsidy
    the class of 1966,
                                                                         31




eligibility   restrictions. As such, one might expect that the marginal effect

of the loan package on enrollments would be smaller for classes subsequent

to the class of 1985.

     20. While Table 1 suggests that the latter constraints may    not   be

formally valid, imposing them facilitates our testing for interactions below.

     21. We include interactions with SAT scores because Cornell University

adopted a financial aid policy for the class of 1986 in which the share of

the aid package in the form of grants was higher for more tattractiveU

applicants. Attractiveness was to be determined by the individual college

admissions committees and the criteria to be applied were intentionally

left to the colleges' discretion. However, it was understood by everyone

that academic quality would play a major role. Since the ranking scheme

was not in effect for the class of 1985, the data which we have analyzed,

we use SAT score as a proxy for the ranking scheme.

     22. Previous researchers have often found that students from low—

income families have larger elasticities of enrollment with respect to net

cost than do students from higher—income families (see Gregory Jackson and

George Weathersby (1975) for a review of the evidence).    These studies,

however, are typically not institutionally based and refer to the decision

to attend any college.

     Numerous possible explanations exist as to why the elasticity might be

lowest for lower—income applicants. One is that they may apply to fewer

colleges and have fewer and/or less attractive alternatives. The data in

Table A2, however, suggest that this is not the case.     Lower—income students

do not apply to fewer colleges (Col. 4), do not have fewer alternatives at

which they are accepted (Col. 5), and are equally as likely to have the

option of going to another Ivy League college (Col. 6).
                                                                            32




       On   the other hand, the data also suggest that the scholarship packages
received by lower—income   applicants at Cornell are relativel.y more attractive

vis—a--vis the other college's offer than they   are   for other   income classes

of   applicants. Contrasting the Cornell net cost (Col. 2) with the net cost

of the alternative (Col. 3), one observes that Cornell is substantially

"cheaper" for the lowest income applicants ($5,000 in the endowed and $4,200

in the statutory) than the alternative college. The differential for other

income classes of aid applicants is much smaller; in some cases the Cornell

net cost proves to be higher.

        Given that Cornell has chosen to be more generous to its lower—income

applicants than other colleges, it is not surprising t1iat their applicants'

net cost elasticity is lower. Two factors enter in here. First, a 10 per-

cent increase in their Cornell net cost represents a uiuch smaller absolute

increase in costs than it does a comparable percentage increase for higher—

income applicants (Col. 2). Second, such a percentage increase in the Cornell

net cost would hardly influence the gap between the net cost at Cornell and

the alternative, for lower—income applicants, while it would virtually

eliminate the gap for other income classes of applicants.

        23. Family income data is available only for accepted financial aid

 applicants and hence the elasticities by income class cannot be computed

 for the larger sample.

        24. One statistical issue should be noted here.      Since the SAT score

 of the th applicant is used in the construction of the average quality

 score for the first m applicants, for all m great.er than n — 1,
                                                                              it is


 likely that a complicated form of serial correlation is introduced into the

 residuals implicit in (20) and (21). Because of this, the reported standard

 errors in Table 3 probably overstate the precision of the estimates in the

 table.
                                                                         33




     One way around this problem, suggested to us by our colleague Bob

Hutchens, is to try to estimate the parameters of the average quality functic'ri

from data on themarginal quality of each applicant. For example, suppose

the quality of the th ranked applicant is given by


     (i)                  or log q. = log       + n log j
                  cl0j



In this case, the average quality of the first j applicants is


     (ii)    q(j) =   - f qdX = -- JcL0XdX =          in   or




     (iii)   log q(j) =   log   (cz0/n+l) + n log j


But (iii) is nothing more than (20) in the text and hence estimation of (i)

will allow one to recover estimates of n, without worrying about the serial

correlation problem.

     When this was done, the pattern of results proved to be virtually identical

to those reported in the text. Since not all average quality equations

correspond to easily estimable marginal quality equations, we have chosen to

emphasize the former in the text.

     25. Children of alumni might be considered relatively more attractive

because of the belief that failure to admit them will result in reduced

alumni giving. To our knowledge, there is no evidence on this point, however.

      26. Note that if the elasticity of the yield curve had been greater

for low—income students, as previous studies suggest (see footnote 22),

unambiguously it would be optimal to give low—income students more generous

 financial aid packages. Moreover, one should recall that we have argued

 (see footnote 22) that it is the university's relatively generous financial
                                                                          34



aid policies for these students that in fact leads to their less elastic
yield curve.
      27.   One could, of course, obtain unambiguous implications   for each of
the   categories if one were willing to adopt explicit functional forms for

all of the equations in the model, including the weight each category should

receive in the utility function. Hoenack (1971) adopted such a strategy.
                                                  Table 1

                                 Probit Enrollment Equations for the
                                Class of 1985 Financial Aid Applicants
                                    (absolute value t statistic)
                                Statutorya                                Endowed3
                       (iS)                     (2S)               (1E)                 (2E)
ILR                  .342 (1.2)               .425 (1.4)
HIJMEC              —.025 (0.1)              .001 (0.0)
HOTEL                                                          .413 (1.1)             .504 (1.3)
ARCH                                                           .136 (0.3)             .175 (0.4)
ENGR                                                          —.027 (0.3)            —.037 (0.4)
COSEP               —.773 (2.6)          —.903 (3.1)          —.258 (1.6)            —.337 (2.1)
LEGACY              —.082 (0.4)          —.035 (0.2)           .256 (1.8)             .286 (2.0)
SEX                 —.361 (2.0)          —.356 (2.0)          —.002 (0.0)            —.027 (0.3)
SATSUM              —.046 (0.6)          —.073 (1.0)          —.204 (4.7)            —.202 (4.7)
STAND               5.121 (2.9)          5.391 (2.9)          1.369 (1.9)            1.369 (1.9)
DISTCU              —.023 (1.1)          —.023 (1.2)          —.006 (1.0)            —.003 (0.4)
DISTOTH              .026 (1.4)               .024 (1.3)       .002 (0.2)            —.002 (0.3)
IVY                 —.981 (3.7)          —1.169 (4.5)         —.701 (6.4)            —.781 (7.2)
OTHSAT              —.014 (0.1)          —.100 (1.0)          —.248 (4.0)            —.359 (6.3)
CGRANT               .222 (2.2)                                .256 (9.4)
CLOAN                .031 (0.2)               .036 (0.3)       .063 (0.9)             .100 (1.4)

CWORX               —.163 (0.9)          —.239 (1.4)          —.029 (0.3)            —.107 (0.2)
OGRANT              —.219 (4.3)                               —.196 (8.5)
OLOAN                .105 (1.0)          —.178 (2.1)           .091 (1.7)            —.161 (3.9)

OWORK                .096 (0.5)          —.437        (2.8)    .061 (0.7)            —.262 (3.6)
CCOST               —.213 (1.8)
CNCOST                                   —.162 (2.5)                                 —.210 (8.5)

ONCOST                                        .103 (2.6)                              .117 (6.7)

PARINC               .031 (0.4)               .023 (0.3)       .012 (0.3)             .028 (0.8)


LOG L               —161.15                  —167.02          —553.58                —564.77
x2 (DOF)             136.40 (24)              124.66 (22)      376.98 (24)            354.60 (23)

C                         491                   491                1094                1094

All variables are defined below. An intercept term and dummy variables for non—
reporting of the applicant's SAT scores, the applicant's class standing, and the average
SAT score of freshmen in the applicant's alternative college are also included in the
equations.
Log L — log of the likelihood function
      — chi—square statistic to test the hypothesis that the entire vector of probit
         coefficients, except for the intercept, is zero ——   with   DOF degrees of freedom

aTo    obtain slopes of the conditional mean function at the regression means (i.e., the
    marginal effect of a unit change in an explanatory variable on the probability of
    enrollment) multiply the probit coefficients by the following:
            (iS)   .896                (1E) .634
            (2S) .891                  (2E) .626
                                           Table 1 (continued)

where:
                                                                                       Ag & Life
            —                                                                          Sciences is the
ILR             1=applicant   to School of Industrial & Labor Relations, O=other
                                                                                       reference group
HUMEC       —
                1=appllcant   to College of Human Ecology, O=other                     for the statutory
                                                                                   J   sector
HOTEL           1=applicant to Hotel College, O=other
                                                                                      Arts & Science is
ARCH        — 1=applicant to College of Architecture, Art and Planning,               the reference
                Oother                                                              ( group
                                                                                            for the
            —                                                                       I endowed sector
ENGR            1=applicant to College of Engineering, O=other                     )
COSEP       —   1=minority admissions program applicant, O=other
LEGACY      —   1parett,    grandparent, or sibling is a Cornell alumnus, O=other
SEX         — 1=male, O=female
SATSIJM     — sum of applicant's score on math and verbal SAT tests (in hundreds)
STAND       — applicant's percentile class ranking In high school (O=highest,
              llowest)
DISTCU      — distance from applicant's hone to Cornell in miles (hundreds)
DISTOTH — distance from applicant's home to best alternative or college he
                enrolled in miles (hundreds)
IVY         —   1=best alternative or college applicant actually enrolled in is an
                Ivy League school, O'o
OTHSAT      — sum of the average math and verbal SAT scores of freshmen at the best
                alternative or college that the applicant actually enrolled in (in hundreds)
CGRANT      —   total   scholarship at Cornell, from Cornell and all other sources (in thousands)
CLOAN       —   total   loan package at Cornell (in thousands)
CWORK       —   total   work—study and other employment opportunities at Cornell (in thousands)
OGRANT      —   total   scholarship at the alternative (in thousands)
OLOAN       —   total   loan package at the alternative (in thousands)
OWORK       —   total   employment opportunities at the alternative (in thousands)
CCOST       —   total cost of attending Cornell (tuition and fees, books and supplies,
                room and board, and personal expenses) (in thousands)
OCOST       —   total cost of attending the alternative (including an estimate of average
                travel costs) (in thousands)
CNCOST      —   total   cost of attending Cornell less scholarship offer at Cornell (in thousands)
ONCOST      —   total cost of attending the alternative less the scholarship offer there
                (in thousands)
                                                                     -

PARINC      —   parents'   income (in ten thousands)

Sources of Data:
(1) Cornell University Admissions Office "Admissions File" — HOTEL, ARCH, ENGR. COSEP,
        LEGACY, SEX, SATSIJM, STAND.

(2) Cornell University Financial Aid Office "Financial Aid Management Information
     System File" — CGRANT, CLOAN, CWORK, PARINC.

(3) Cornell. University Admissions Office "Admissions Research Questionnaire File" —
     DISTCU, DISTOTH, IVY, OGRANT, OLOAN, OWORK.

(4) College Entrance Examination Board, The College Cost Book, 1981—82 edItion (plus
     telephone interviews).

(5)    Case and Birnbaum's, Guide to Colleges (1981 edition) — OTHSAT.
                                              Table 2

                            Implied Elasticities of the Probability of
                          Enrollment with Respect to Cornell's Net

                                             Statutory                   Endowed

                                      (1)       (2)(3)(1) (2)                       (3)


                                     —1.07      —.92     —1.18   —1.65    —1.46    —1.64
0 < SATSUN < 1150

1150 < SATSUN< 1300                  —1.03     —1.01     —1.22   -1.78    -1.73     0.59

                                     —1.06     —1.03     —1.42   —1.84    —1.87    —2.03
1300 < SATSUM


                                      —.54      —.60      —.58    —.92     —.75     —.78
0 < PARINC         <   18,000
                                                —.51      —.48   —1.20    —1.62    —1.18
18,000 < PARINC < 28,000              —.92

                                                —.53      —.51   —1.69    —2.00    —1.39
28,000 < PARINC < 36,000              —.99

                                                —.63      —.90   —1.71    —1.95    —1.42
36,000 < PARINC < 44,000             —1.25

                                     —1.11      —.05      +.06   —2.08    —2.26    —2.25
44,000 < PARINC


                                     —1.09     —1.04     —1.20   —1.87    —1.90    —2.04
COSEP = 0

                                      —.95      —.95      —.88   —1,59     —.95    —1.52
COSEP =    1



                                     —1.06      —.94     —1.22   —1.69    —1.79    —1.64
LEGACY = 0

                                     —1.05     —1.60     —1.61   —1.95    —2.87    —2.33
LEGACY =       1



                                     —1.06                 ——    —1.83
Overall

aComputed using the mean values of the relevant variables for each subsample
 and the estimated coefficients from

     (1) the probit net cost model without interactions (Table 1)
                                                                      time
     (2) the probit net cost models with one type of interaction at a
         (Appendix Table A3)
     (3) the probit net cost model with all four types of interactions
         occurring together (Appendix Table A3)

 For (2) and (3) the only interactions that prove to be even marginally
 statistically significant are those for the endowed colleges for COSEP and
 family incomes in the $18,000—$28,000 and $28,000 — $36,000 ranges.
                                                               Table 3
                              Average Quality as a Function of Number of Accepted Applicants
                                                     (standard errors)

                                            Elasticity of Average Quality
                                                                                           Coefficient of Applicant Rank
                                            WET the Number of Enrollees:
                                                                                           Variable Elasticity SpecificatiOfla
                                            Constant Elasticity Specification
         Accepted
         Applicant
                        Total
                        Sanple                   (1)        ..-.---- .---.--   C')              (1)                   (2)         —
Group
ENDOWED                                                                                                      —.002 (.0000)
                                                                      —.025 (.0003)        —.046 (.0007)
0 < SATSUM < 1150 [181/4377)                —.021 (.0012)
                                                                                           —.012 (.0001)      —.001 (.0000)
                                            —.012 (.0004)             —.014 (.0001)
1150 <    SATSUM < 1300     (378/4733]                                                                        —.003 (.0000)
                                                                      —.028 (.0001)        —.016 (.0002)
                                            —.027 (.0003)
1300 < SATSUM        (555/3243]
                                                                                           —.171 (.0024)
0 < PARINC < 18,000 [110]                   —.056 (.0019)
                                                                                           —.095 (.0014)
18,000 < PARINC < 28,000         [161]      —.044 (.0012)
                                                                                           —.080 (.0010)
28,000 < PARINC <        36,000 (174)       —.041 (.0011)
                                                                                           —.074 (.0008)
36,000 < PARINC <        44,000 [176]       —.038    (.0010)
                                                                                           —.055 (.0006)
44,000 < PARINC [228]                       —.036 (.0009)
                                                                                           —.013 (.0001)      —.001 (.0000)
                                            —.036 (.0004)              —.053 (.0002)
COSEP —    0     (929/14,388]                                                                                 —.017 (.0000)
                                                                       —.076 (.0007)       —.116 (.0016)
           1 [185/15291
                                             —.064 (.0014)
COSEP
                                                                                            —.015 (.0001)     —.002 (.0000)
                                             —.040 (.0005)             —.053 (.0002)
LEGACY       0 j998/11029]                                                                                    —.014 (.0000)
                                                                       —.052 (.0002)        —.127 (.0021)
               1 (116/13301
                                             —.044 (.0014)
LEGACY                                                                                                        .

 STATUTORY
                                                                                            —.042 (.0007)     —.005 (.0000)
                                             —.018 (.0010)                       (.0004)
 0 < SATSUM 1150 [171/21301
                                                                                            —.026 (.0001)         —.005 (.0000)
                                             —.015 (.0006)                       (.0002)
 1150 < SATSUM c 1300 [220/1381]                                       .0l7                                       —.020 (.0003)
                                             —.026 (.0006)             —.028 (.0002)        —.081 (.0020)
 1300 < SATSUM (103/449]

 0 < PARINC < 18,000 (44)                    —.058 (.0045)
                                             —.050   (.0018)                                —.022 (.0040)
 18,000 < PARINC <        28,000 (76]
                                             —.049 (.0016)                                  —.018(.0035)
 28,000 < PARINC <        36,000 [901
                                             —.043 (.0017)                                  —.019 (.0033)
 36,000 < PARINC <        44,000 [76]
                                             —.049 (.0017)                                  —.018 (.0028)
 44,000 < PARINC (891
                                                                                            —.038 (.0003)         —.006 (.0000)
                                             —.046 (.0007)              —.058 (.0003)
 COSEP — 0 [425/35601
                                                                                            —.340 (.0082)         —.065 (.0006)
                                             —.074 (.0024)               —.075 (.0012)
 COSEP —     1    (69/4021
                                                                         —.059 (.0003)      —.041 (.0003)         —.006 (.0000)
                 0 [408/3359]                —.048 (.0083)
 LEGACY
                                                                         —.065 (.0001)      —.219 (.0048)         —.037 (.0003)
 LEGACY — 1 (82/6051                         —.057 (.0017)


 (1) Accepted applicant sample.
 (2) Total applicant sample.
 *Coefficient and standard error have been multiplied by 100.
                                  Table 4

            Implied Effects of Characteristics on the Size
                of the "Optimal" Financial Aid Package

                               Effect Operating Through
                    Assumed Relative    Propensity   Elasticity    Elasticity of
Characteristic      Attractiveness      to Enroll    of Yield      Average Quality

ENDOWED

Alumni Relatives          +                               + or 0        0 or +

                           +                 +                           +
Minority

Low Family Income          +                  0                          +

                           +                  +             +            +
High Ability


STATUTORY

Alumni Relatives           +                  0           + or 0         +
                           +                  +           — or 0          +
Minority

Low Family Income          +                  0           — or 0          +

                           +                  +             0             +
High Ability
                                                          Appendix

                                        PROOF OF PROPOSITIONS



       This appendix provides a proof of all of the propositions presented

in the text, as well as a table that indicates how the results differ

when alternative utility functions are used.

                                   Suppose e. =                            = c and n            is the same function
          Propositiofli
                                                               =               and hence        Xj =           Thus (16)
as n.. From (12), we require n                                     n                                    X.
                                                           (a./ct.).           But since        c is a constant
becomes (S.Fj(S)/SF(Sj)) =

 j
F =        ii
          K S.C and F. =
                               3
                                   K.S.E.
                              1> (P./P.)
                                        33
                                                     <
                                                          Hence (S./S.)'
                                                          1.
                                                                  13     = (cIcz) (K./K).                              Recall


that (s./S) >                                                                                                 Q.E.D.

          Proposition 2: Suppose c. >                          c.,             both are constants, and that n is

the same function as n.. From (12), we require in equilibrium

                                    Since n(X) = n.(X)                              and n' < 0,         this requires that
[(1+n.)/(1+n1)] < 1.
                                                                                      >                  Substituting for
      >
          X1.
                    From (16) then                                                        (ct/ct).
                                                                                                                 Now suppose,
p1 and F.                 this becomes (S./S.)CJSE1CJ > (ct./cz.)(K/K1).

 as is done in the text, that                                              and K. =       K.,    then equilibrium requires

                                                                                                            < 1.       Hence
 that (S /S.)63Si                            >       i.    If c.. > C.,              1          —<   1,V 5.
                                                                                                          1—
                i3                                                              3

 S >S and P <P..
  i         i  3                                                   .                                          Q.E.D.
                                                                                                                                at
          position3 Suppose c
                                                                           =   c, and n.1 is greater than n.3
                                                                       3

                                                                   Suppose also, as is assumed in the text,
 the same X (j is more elastic).

                    = a       and K. =       K..           From (12), we require ni =                    n.     at equilibrium
 that           i                   1            3
                      j

 and, since n' <               0, we need X < X. From (16) then (s1/S)' = (X,/X1).
 Hence          S <            or P >        P.
                          S                                                                                    Q.E.D.
                                                                                           A2




    Proposition 4: Suppose n. n n and F(S.) is the same function
as F(S.). From (12) we require c. = c. and hence S. =                      S..      From (6) it
immediately follows that
          -                  (X.1 /X.)   = (ci. /ci .)
                                               1
                                    J
                                                                           Q.E.D.

     Proposition   5: Suppose n, > n.              so that j    is more elastic and

both are constants and that c.1          is the same function as c.. From (12)
                                                                           3

we require (l/c) >      (1/ct)    and hence c. < c..•          Since c. =      c.    at the

same S and c' < 0,        it immediately follows that S. < S.                  or P. > P..
                                                                  1    3              1         3

                                                                           Q.E.D.
     Proposition 6: Suppose n = n. = n                   and c. is greater than                     at

the same S. If Si = S.           than c. > c.,•          But from (12), we require c =               c.

and, since c' <    0,   this implies that S. > S.              and hence P. <        P..
                                           1               3                   1      3

                                                                           Q.E.D.
                                                                                                     A3




                                                     Table A—i

                                                 Summary of Results:
                                            Alternative Utility Functions


Case/Utility Function                          Cobb—Douglas                   Additive _____

1. 6.
    1
             6. = £                            Other things equal——lower
              3                                price to group with
            same function as
                                               a) greater weight in utility
                                               b) lower propensity of          same*           same
                                                  enrolling
                                                                                                     same
2. c. >
    1
              c.,
               J
                      both constant            Lower price to group whose
                                                                               same *
                                                                                           a -   1

                                               elasticity of yield w.r.t.
   n same function as n.                       university's share of cost                  a <   1   ambiguous
    i                   3
   same weights in utility                     is higher (i)
   same propensity of
   enrolling
                      =                        Lower price to group whose
3. c =
              c           C
                                               elasticity of quality w.r.t.     **                   **
   n >        fl,, at             same X       admissions is higher (j)
   (j is more elastic)
   same weights in utility
   same propensity of
   enrolling

4. n. =       n. = n                           Relative number admitted
    1          3                               equals relative weights in                        same***
                                                                               same
   F(S) is                the same             utility. Both charged the
   function as F(S)                            same price

5. n >        n.,         both constant        Lower price to group whose
                                                                               same              same
                                               elasticity of quality .r.t.
    (j is more elastic)                        admissions is higher (j)
    c   same function as e.
      1
6. n =        rL. = n                          Lower price to group whose
        i         3                            elasticity of yield w.r.t.       same             same
    c > c.                at same S            university's share of costs
     1            3
                                               higher

 *Propensity              of enrollment not matter in (1) nor are equal ones required in (2).

 **Ambiguous without further assumptions about the form of the                       q(X) functions.

 ***Also              >       1   (o < 1)   increase in (q./q0) increases (decreases) XIX3.
                                                Table A2
                                         Descriptive   Statistics

Group                                  (1)    (2)      (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)(7)        (8)

Endowed
Overall                                .590   8.03     8.15   4.55   3.45   .247   .181   .237

O < PARINC <            18,000         .615   4.01     9.09   4.74   3.50   .284   .136   .419

                             28,000                    6,26   4.14   3.24   .266   .150   .244
18,000    <       PARINC <             .605   5.70
28,000 < PARINC < 36,000               .584   7.13     6.95   4.43   3.37   .212   .179   .219

36,000 < PARINC <            44,000    .577   8.09     7.70   4.74   3.72   .206   .200   .204

44,000 < PARINC                        .540   9.69     8.47   4.76   3.64   .247   .215   .177

O < SATSUI"l < 1150                    .765   6.99     6.92   4.45   3.36   .169   .273   .227

1150 < SATSUM< 1300                    .650   7.84     7.87   4.40   3.35   .217   .194   .237

1300 < SATSUN                          .494   8.58     8.76   4.73   3.56   .293   .136   .241

COSEP =       1                        .603   6.57     6.78   4.75   3.86   .318   .168   .218

COSEP = 0                              .588   8.37     8.31   4.52   3.39   .236   .183   .240

LEGACY =          1                    .702   8.83     8.79   3.93   2.87   .242   .196   .250

LEGACY = 0                             .567   7.92     8.02   4.68   3.57   .248   .178   .235


Statutory
                                       .834   5.94     6.70   3.65   3.03   .097   .419   .189
Overall
                                                       7.07   3.64   3.00   .099   .422   .333
O < PARINC < 18,000                    .867   2.80
                                                       6.22   3.02   2.59   .095   .351   .217
18,000 < PARINC < 28,000               .838   5.11
                                                       6.11   3.36   2.95   .112   .486   .182
28,000 < PARINC <            36,000    .850   5.86
                                                              3.80   3.12   .067   .371   .163
36,000 < PARINC < 44,000               .773   6.54     6.79
                                       .870   6.65     7.08   4.10   3.30   .190   .420   .120
44,000 < PARINC
                                              5.55     6.26   3.56   2.92   .067   .437   .182
0 < SATSUN< 1150                       .862
                                              6.14     6.66   3.59   2.99   .072   .445   .196
1150 < SATSUM< 1300                    .859
                                       .733   6.12     7.80   4.14   3.44   .211   .273   .186
1300 < SATSUN
                                       .675 .4.89      6.53   4.15   3.36   .218   .309   .184
COSEP =       1

                                              6.14     6.73   3.58   2.99   .079   .435   .189
COSEP = 0                              .856
                                              6.05     6.75   3.07   2.59   .076   .458   .215
LEGACY =          1                    .867
                                                       6.69   3.78   3.13   .101   .410   .184
LEGACY = 0                             .826   5.91

where:            (1)   proportion of accepted applicants that enrolls (yield)
                  (2)   mean Cornell net cost
                  (3)   mean other net cost
                  (4)   mean number of other colleges applied to
                  (5)   mean number of other colleges accepted at
                  (6)   fraction with another Ivy school as best alternative
                  (7)   fraction with a public university as best alternative
                  (8)   mean ratio of Cornell net cost/family income
                                                                              Table A3

                                             Testing for the Effects of Applicant Characteristics on the Sensitivity
                                                         of Enrollment Decisions to Financial Variables
                                                                  (absolute value t   statistics)
                                           Statutory                                                                   Endowed
                                              (3)           (4)           (5)              (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)
                (1)           (2)
CNCOST     —.144 (1.7)   —.194 (1.7)      —.184 (2.4)   —.149 (2.2)   —.191 (1.4)     —.218 (7.8)     —.164 (3.8)     —.232 (8.1)   —.206 (7.9)   —.186 (4.1)

                                                                      —.060 (0.1)        .024 (0.8)                                                .017 (0.4)
CNSAT1     —.011 (0.2)
           —.017 (0.4)                                                —.012 (0.3)        .009 (0.6)                                                .002 (0.1)
CNSAT2
                           .106 (1.2)                                  .110 (1.3)                     —.058 (1:6)                                 —.056 (1.5)
CNINC1
                .          .107                                        .110   (1.2)                   —.057 (1.5)                                 —.054 (1.4)
CNINC2                            (1.2)
CNINC3                     .054 (0.5)                                  .062 (0.6)                     —.035 (0.9)                                 —.031 (0.8)

CNINC4                     .185 (1.4)                                  .196 (1.5)                     —.026   (0.6)                               —.019 (0.4)

CNCOSP                                     .060 (0.5)                  .039 (0.3)                                      .074 (1.8)                  .072 (1.7)
                                                                                                       .
CNLEGY                                                  —.120 (0.7)   —.071 (0.4)                                                   —.072 (1.2)   —.065 (1.1)


where:   CNCOST — applicant's estimated cost of attending Cornell less scholarship offer at Cornell (in thousands)
         ONCOST — applicant's estimated cost of attending the other college less scholarship offer there (in thousands)
         CNSATI — CNCOST if applicant's SAT score is less than 1150, 0 = otherwise         1150   SAT   1300 is the omitted class
         CNSAT2 — CNCOST if applicant's SAT score is greater than 1300, 0    otherwise      J
         CNINC1 — CNCOST if applicant's family income lies in the $18,000—$28,000 range, 0    otherwise '
         CNINC2 — CNCOST if applicant's family income lies in the $28,000—$36,000 range, 0    otherwise           fa
                                                                                                               1y income < $18,000 is the omitted class
         CNINC3 — CNCOST if applicant's family income lies in the $36,000—$44,000 range, 0 — otherwise
         CNINC4 — CNCOST if applicant's family income exceeds $44,000, 0    otherwise                   j
         CNCOSP — CNCOST if applicant is a COSEP student, 0 — otherwise
         CNLEGY — CNCOST if applicant is a legacy student, 0 — otherwise
