                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            GOVERNANCE AND BANK VALUATION

                                              Gerard Caprio
                                               Luc Laeven
                                               Ross Levine

                                          Working Paper 10158
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10158


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2003




Caprio and Laeven: World Bank; Levine: University of Minnesota and the NBER. We thank Sugato
Bhattacharyya, Thorsten Beck, Stijn Claessens, Patrick Honohan, Jack Kareken, Rafael La Porta, Phil Strahan
and seminar participants at the University of Minnesota’s Carlson School of Management for helpful
comments. This paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Gerard Caprio, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Governance and Bank Valuation
Gerard Caprio, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 10158
December 2003
JEL No. G21, G34, K22, G28

                                           ABSTRACT

Which public policies and ownership structures enhance the governance of banks? This paper

constructs a new database on the ownership of banks internationally and then assesses the

ramifications of ownership, shareholder protection laws, and supervisory/regulatory policies on bank

valuations. Except in a few countries with very strong shareholder protection laws, banks are not

widely held, but rather families or the State tend to control banks. We find that (i) larger cash flow

rights by the controlling owner boosts valuations, (ii) stronger shareholder protection laws increase

valuations, and (iii) greater cash flow rights mitigate the adverse effects of weak shareholder

protection laws on bank valuations. These results are consistent with the views that expropriation

of minority shareholders is important internationally, that laws can restrain this expropriation, and

concentrated cash flow rights represent an important mechanism for governing banks. Finally, the

evidence does not support the view that empowering official supervisory and regulatory agencies

will increase the market valuation of banks.

Gerard Caprio                                         Ross Levine
World Bank                                            Finance Department, Room 3-257
Washington, DC 20433                                  Carlson School of Management
gcaprio@worldbank.org                                 University of Minnesota
                                                      321 19th Avenue South
Luc Laeven                                            Minneapolis, MN 55455
World Bank                                            and NBER
Washington, DC 20433                                  rlevine@csom.umn.edu
llaeven@worldbank.org
                                              I. Introduction

        Research suggests that well-functioning banks promote growth.1 When banks efficiently

mobilize and allocate funds, this lowers the cost of capital to firms and accelerates capital

accumulation and productivity growth. Furthermore, banks, as major creditors and in some countries as

major equity holders, play an important role in governing firms. Thus, if bank managers face sound

governance mechanisms, this enhances the likelihood that banks will raise capital inexpensively,

allocate society’s savings efficiently, and exert sound governance over the firms they fund.

        Nevertheless, stunningly little is known about which laws, bank supervisory strategies, and

bank regulations enhance the governance and functioning of banks. Virtually all countries adopted the

Basle Committee’s original recommendations on capital regulations and official supervision, and most

have indicated their intention to adopt the much more detailed set of recommendations contained in

Basel II. Yet, there exists no cross-country evidence regarding the impact of capital standards and bank

supervision and regulation on the market value of banks. Regarding shareholder protection laws, La

Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2002, henceforth LLSV) examine the impact of these

laws on corporate valuations. Yet, there is no evidence on whether shareholder protection laws

influence the corporate governance of opaque, heavily regulated banks differently from other

industries.2 Given the importance of banks in the economy, it is crucial to understand which laws and

regulations improve the governance of banks.

        This paper assesses the impact of shareholder protection laws, bank supervision and regulation,

and the ownership structure of banks on bank valuations. By examining valuations, we directly analyze

banks’ cost of capital and indirectly assess the market’s assessment of the governance of banks. That
1
  See, King and Levine (1993a,b), Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998), Levine and Zervos (1998), Rajan and Zingales
(1998), Beck, Levine, and Loayza (2000), Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000), Wurgler (2000), Claessens and Laeven (2003),
and reviews by Levine (1997, 2004).
2
  Akerloff and Romer (1993) and La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Zamarripa (2003) examine the expropriation of bank
resources by bank insiders in the United States and Mexico respectively.


                                                          1
is, holding other things constant, governance mechanisms that both reduce the ability of insiders to

expropriate bank resources and promote bank efficiency tend to boost the market value of banks.

         In terms of shareholder protection laws, research suggests that strong legal protection of small

investors increases firm valuations (Claessens, et al., 2000; LLSV, 2002). In short, investors pay more

for equity when legal institutions effectively protect their rights. From this perspective, investor

protection laws may provide the tools for small shareholders to stop large shareholder from

expropriating bank resources. We define expropriation broadly to include theft, transfer pricing, asset

stripping, the hiring of family members, the allocation of credit in a manner that enriches bank insiders

but hurts the bank as a whole, and other “perquisites” that benefit bank insiders but hurt the bank.

         In the particular case of banks, however, not everyone agrees that shareholder protection laws

will effectively thwart expropriation.3 Many view banks as extraordinarily complex and opaque

(Morgan, 2003). Thus, investor protection laws alone may not provide a sufficiently powerful

corporate governance mechanism to small shareholders. Put differently, even with strong investor

protection laws, small stakeholders may lack the means to monitor and govern complex banks.

Furthermore, bank regulations may be sufficiently pervasive that they render shareholder protection

laws superfluous, or bank regulations may supersede standard investor protection laws. Thus, the

impact of investor protection laws on banks may differ from their impact on non-bank corporations.

This paper provides the first examination of the impact of shareholder protection laws on bank

valuations under different bank supervisory and regulatory regimes.

         In terms of bank supervision and regulation, official oversight of banks may arise in part to stop

bank insiders from expropriating bank resources (Caprio and Levine, 2002). Thus, effective

supervision and regulation may increase investor confidence regarding expropriation and boost market

3
  Also, Coasians argue that legal systems that effectively enforce private contracts will allow sophisticated financial market
participants to custom design a vast array of private contracts to ameliorate complex agency problems better than
standardized shareholder protection laws (Coase, 1960; Glaeser, et al. 2001).


                                                              2
valuations. Of course, bank supervision and regulation arise for reasons other than reducing

expropriation. Especially in the presence of deposit insurance, supervision and regulation may arise to

reduce excessive risk-taking by bank owners and protect depositors. In this context, supervision and

regulation could actually reduce bank valuations by forcing bank risk below what equity holders would

choose in the presence of government insurance. In this paper, we provide the first cross-country

assessment of the impact of supervision and regulation on bank valuations.

       While not mutually exclusive, shareholder protection laws and official supervision/regulation

emphasize very different roles for the government, and our analysis, therefore, speaks directly to

ongoing debates regarding the Basel Committee’s recommendations on bank supervision/regulation.

The official supervision/regulation mechanism focuses on capital regulations and empowering official

supervision and regulation of banks, which compose the first two pillars of Basel II. In contrast, the

shareholder protection mechanism focuses on empowering the private sector, which is related to Basel

II’s third pillar on private monitoring. We provide some evidence on the influence of each of these

corporate governance mechanisms on bank valuations.

       To draw precise inferences regarding the impact of legal protection and regulations on bank

valuations, we need to consider ownership structure since ownership structure is an additional, and

perhaps interrelated, mechanism for exerting corporate control. A crucial agency problem is the ability

of controlling owners to expropriate – often legally -- corporate resources. The incentives of the

controlling shareholders to expropriate resources from the corporation, however, depend on their cash

flow rights. As their cash-flow rights rise, expropriation involves a greater reduction in their own cash

flow. Since expropriation is costly, increases in the cash flow rights of the controlling owner will

reduce incentives to expropriate resources from the corporation holding other factors constant (Jensen

and Meckling, 1976, and Burkart, Gromb, Panunzi, 1998). Besides the direct impact of concentrated




                                                    3
ownership on bank values, concentration may also influence the impact of legal protection on bank

valuations (LLSV, 2002; Shleifer and Wolfenzon, 2002). These models suggest that a marginal

improvement in legal protection may have less of an impact on bank valuations when there is a

controlling shareholder. Or, put differently, these models predict that with effective legal protection of

minority shareholders, having a controlling shareholder is less important for stemming the

expropriation of the minority shareholders’ wealth.

         One contribution of this paper is to assemble and analyze detailed data on the ownership of

banks around the world. Are banks widely held, or do they tend to have controlling owners? If they

have a controlling owner, who tends to control banks? LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999,

henceforth LLS) show that the widely held corporation is the exception rather than the norm

internationally. Rather, they show that families or the State typically control firms. While there are

financial institutions in LLS’s (1999) sample, they do not focus on detailing the ownership structure of

banks in each country and their coverage of commercial banks is limited.4 In this paper, we construct a

new database covering 244 banks across 44 countries and trace through the ownership of banks to

identify the ultimate owners of bank capital and the degree of voting rights and cash flow rights

concentration. As defined in greater detail below, an owner’s voting rights will exceed the owner’s

cash flow rights when the owner controls votes through various affiliated parties without having the

rights to all cash flows received by those affiliated parties.

         Thus, we provide information on three questions concerning ownership. First, we assess

whether banks are widely held or whether they have a controlling owner with significant control and

cash flow rights. We find that banks are generally not widely held. In our average country, only about

25 percent of the banks are widely held, i.e., they do not have a shareholder that owns at least 10


4
  Similarly, while LLS (2002) and Barth, et al. (2001, 2003) provide statistics on the degree of State ownership of banks,
these papers do not provide detailed information on the ownership structure of banks.


                                                             4
percent of the voting rights. Second, we provide information on the identity of the controlling

shareholder. For banks with a controlling shareholder, we find that the controlling owner is a family

more than half of the time in the average country, while we identify the State as the controlling owner

of banks 19 percent of the time. Finally, we assess whether laws regarding the protection of minority

shareholders and bank supervisory and regulatory practices are associated with the degree of control

rights and cash flow rights concentration. The data indicate that stronger legal protection of

shareholders is positively connected with countries having more widely held banks.

       Given this information on bank ownership, we examine the legal and regulatory determinants

of bank valuations. Specifically, using bank-level data, we evaluate the impact of the legal protection

of minority shareholders, bank supervisory and regulatory policies, and ownership structure on bank

valuations. To measure valuation, we use both Tobin’s q and the ratio of the market value of equity to

the book value of equity. We also test whether ownership concentration affects the impact of laws on

bank valuations.

       There are four key results on the governance of banks. First, stronger legal protection of

minority shareholders is associated with more highly valued banks. This suggests both that

expropriation of minority shareholders is important in many countries and that legal mechanisms can

restrict expropriation of bank resources.

       Second, bank regulations and supervisory practices have little impact on bank valuations.

Specifically, empowering the public sector through strong supervisory agencies does not influence

bank valuations and regulatory restrictions on bank capital or bank activities in securities markets,

insurance, and real estate do not boost bank values. Also, even when we dissect the different channels

through which supervision/regulation may influence the governance of banks, we find no evidence that

supervision/regulation induces a positive impact of bank valuations by reducing expropriation and a




                                                    5
countervailing negative impact on bank valuations by reducing bank risk below the level desired by

shareholders. The findings on laws and supervision/regulation are consistent with the view that legal

empowerment of small, private investors is a more efficacious governance mechanism that boosts bank

valuations than official supervision and regulation of banks.

       Third, the degree of cash flow rights of the largest owner enters the bank valuation equation

positively. The evidence is consistent with theoretical predictions that concentrated ownership reduces

incentives for insiders to expropriate bank resources, and this boosts valuations.

       Fourth, large cash flow rights reduce the impact of legal protection on valuations. Thus, a

marginal improvement in legal protection has less of an impact on a bank’s valuation as the controlling

owner’s cash flow rights increases. Put differently, a marginal increase in ownership concentration has

a particularly large impact on valuations when legal protection of minority shareholders is weak. These

last two findings shed a skeptical light on regulatory strategies that seek to minimize ownership

concentration, especially in environments with weak legal protection of minority shareholders.

       This paper is related to a number of influential bodies of research. First, there is a large

literature on the impact of ownership structure on valuations. Some explicitly model the expropriation

of minority shareholders by those exploiting “benefits of control” (Grossman and Hart, 1988; Stulz

1988; Burkart, Gromb, and Panunzi, 1997, 1998; and Bennedsen and Wolfenzon, 2000). Others seek to

explain the equilibrium structure of ownership and firm valuation under different shareholder

protection environments (Zingales, 1995; Shleifer and Wolfenzon, 2002). Empirically, researchers

examine the impact of managerial ownership on corporate valuations (Demsetz and Lehn, 1985;

Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1988; McConnell and Servaes, 1990; and Holderness, Kroszner, and

Sheehan, 1999). Work also finds that weaker shareholder protection increases the premium associated

with corporate control (Lease, McConnell, and Mikkelson, 1983; DeAngelo and DeAngelo, 1985;




                                                     6
Zingales, 1994). In this paper, we focus on how legal protection of minority shareholders, bank

supervisory and regulatory practices, and ownership concentration interact to influence bank

valuations. Most directly, our paper extends LLS’s (1999) examination of corporate ownership around

the world and LLSV’s (2000) examination of corporate valuations to the case of commercial banks

while also assessing the impact of bank supervisory and regulatory policies on bank valuations

           The paper also contributes to the debate on banking sector policies. Basic theories of regulation

suggest that if small stakeholders lack the means to monitor banks, then government supervision can

improve welfare (Atkinson and Stiglitz, 1980). But, theory also suggests that government agencies will

act in their own interests, not necessarily in the interests of society (Becker and Stigler, 1974; Stigler,

1972, 1975). Empirically, Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2004) find that bank development is (a)

positively associated with policies that empower private monitoring and (b) negatively associated with

powerful supervisory agencies. They also find no evidence that powerful supervisors promote bank

stability. Furthermore, Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003) find that (a) firms in countries with

powerful supervisory agencies tend to face greater external financing obstacles, but (b) national

policies that empower private monitoring of banks ease corporate financing obstacles.5 This paper

contributes to the debate on which public policies enhance the governance of banks.

           Section 2 discusses the data. Section 3 analyses bank ownership around the world. Section 4

examines bank valuations. Section 5 provides extensions and robustness tests and Section 5 concludes.




5
    LLSV (2003) find that securities laws that empower private agents work better than official disciplinary powers.


                                                               7
                                         II. Data and Variables
A. Sample

        To conduct our analyses, we build a database on bank ownership, bank valuations, and other

bank-specific and country characteristics. As discussed below, information on bank ownership is

particularly difficult to construct. Data permitting, we collect data on the 10 largest publicly listed

banks (as defined by total assets at the end of 2001) in those countries for which LLSV (1998)

assembled data on shareholder rights. For many countries, we have data on fewer than 10 banks

because of missing ownership data, valuation data, or because there are less than 10 listed banks.6 The

final sample consists of 244 banks across 44 countries.

        Focusing on the largest banks enhances comparability across countries. Also, the largest banks

tend to have the most liquid shares, reducing concerns that liquidity differences drive the results. As

noted by LLSV (2002) focusing on the largest corporations should bias the results against finding a

relationship between the formal legal protection of minority shareholders and valuations because larger

corporations face alternative governance mechanisms, such as public scrutiny, foreign shareholders,

and listings on international exchanges.7




6
  There are five countries for which LLSV (1998) collected data on shareholder protection laws but which do not have
sufficient information on bank ownership or the market valuation of banks to included in our analyses (Belgium, Ecuador,
New Zealand, Nigeria, and Uruguay). Also, we examine the ownership of the bank holding company, not the bank itself,
because bank holding company shares are publicly traded and bank holding companies control virtually all of the shares of
their banks. For example, we examine Citigroup, not Citibank. If a bank is cross-listed in more than one exchange, we use
market valuations from the exchange where the bank (or bank holding company) is registered.
7
  Recent work on the ownership of non-financial corporations has focused on the 10 or 20 largest firms for the same reasons
(LLS, 1999; LLSV, 2002). Since there are significantly fewer banks than non-financial firms, our 10-banks-per-country
criterion is comparable to this research.



                                                            8
B. Sources

           Banking data come from two major sources. BANKSCOPE, maintained by Bureau Van Dijk,

contains financial and ownership information for about 4,000 major banks. BANKERS ALMANAC,

published since 1847, also contains a wealth of data, including detailed ownership data.8

           To obtain ownership information of banks, we also use annual reports, 20-F filings for

companies with American Depositary Receipts, proxy statements, and country-specific publications.

Also, many individual banks and national institutions (e.g., Central Banks, regulatory authorities)

maintain websites that we used to compile ownership data.

           Since (1) non-financial institutions own bank shares, (2) BANKSCOPE and the BANKERS

ALMANAC only have information on financial institutions, and (3) we seek to trace bank ownership

through corporations back to individuals, we need information on the ownership of non-financial

institutions. WORLDSCOPE contains ownership data of firms. Thus, we use WORLDSCOPE, along

with 20-F filings, company reports, and filings with national stock exchanges and securities regulations

to identify the ultimate owners of corporations that own shares in banks. The ownership data are from

2001 except in a few cases, where we use 2000 data. Because ownership patterns are very stable, this

should neither induce problems, nor bias the results.

C. Control rights

           We classify a bank as having a controlling owner if the shareholder has direct and indirect

voting rights that sum to 10 percent or more. If no shareholder holds 10 percent of the voting rights, we

classify the bank as widely held. Since 10 percent voting rights is frequently sufficient to exert control,

this cut-off is used extensively (e.g., LLS, 1999; LLSV, 2002). When we use a 20 percent criterion,

however, we obtain the same conclusions as those discussed below.



8
    Reed Business Information, which is part of Anglo-Dutch Reed Elsevier, maintains Bankers Almanac.


                                                            9
       While direct ownership involves shares registered in the shareholder’s name, indirect

ownership involves bank shares held by entities that the ultimate shareholder controls. Since the

principal shareholders of banks are frequently themselves financial institutions or corporate entities,

we find the major shareholders in these financial institutions or corporate entities. Often, we need to

trace this indirect ownership chain backwards through numerous corporations to identify the ultimate

controllers of the votes. Thus, to construct data on control rights of banks, we follow LLS’s (1999) and

LLSV’s (2002) procedure for examining the ownership of firms. Lang and So (2002) also construct

data on bank ownership. They do not, however, examine the impact of shareholder protection laws,

bank supervision and regulation, and cash flow rights on bank valuations.

       Mechanically, we first identify all major shareholders who control over 5 percent of the votes.

We use 5 percent because (1) it provides a significant threshold and (2) most countries do not mandate

disclosure of ownership shares below 5 percent. Given these major shareholders, we then begin our

search for indirect chains of control.

       Next, if these major shareholders are themselves (financial or non-financial) corporations, we

find the major shareholders of these financial or non-financial corporations. We continue this search

until we find the ultimate owners of the votes. For example, a shareholder has x percent indirect

control over bank A if she controls directly firm B (i.e., if she holds at least 10 percent of the voting

rights of firm B) that, in turn, directly controls x percent of the votes of bank A. As another example, a

shareholder has x percent indirect control over bank A if she controls directly firm C that, in turn,

controls directly firm B, which directly controls x percent of the votes of firm A. The control chain

from bank A to firm C can be a long sequence of firms, each of which has control (greater than 10




                                                     10
percent voting rights) over the next one. When multiple shareholders have over 10 percent of the votes,

we pick the largest controlling owner.9

        After going through this search process, we divide banks into six categories. First, widely held

banks do not have a controlling owner, i.e., no legal entity owns 10 percent or more of the voting

rights. Second, there are then five distinct categories of controlling owners who own a minimum of 10

percent of the voting rights of the bank: (1) a family (or individual), (2) the State, (3) a voting trust,

foundation, etc. (4) a widely held (non-financial) corporation, and (5) a widely held financial

institution. We use separate categories for widely held corporations and financial institutions since

these two ownership forms may be of separate interest.

        It is not entirely clear whether banks controlled by widely held (financial or non-financial)

corporations should be classified as having a controlling owner, which is what we do. A bank

controlled by a widely held corporation can either be considered as controlled by the corporation’s

management or widely held since the management of the corporation is not accountable to an ultimate

owner. We follow LLSV (2002) and classify banks as having a controlling owner if the ultimate

owners is a widely held financial or non-financial. Moreover, we confirm the results when using

alternative classifications of a controlling owner as reported below.

        We now define the specific variables associated with control as follows, which are also

described in Table I. Table II provides summary statistics.

        WIDELY is a dummy variable that equals one if no legal entity owns 10 percent or more of the

voting rights, and zero otherwise.

        CONTROL equals the fraction of the bank’s voting rights, if any, owned by its controlling

shareholder.


9
 As a sensitivity check, we did the analyses while also including an indicator of whether a bank has multiple controlling
owners. This does not change this paper’s results.


                                                            11
       FAMILY is a dummy variable that equals one if an individual or family is the controlling

shareholder, and zero otherwise.

       STATE is a dummy variable that equals one if the state (or a foreign state) is the controlling

shareholder, and zero otherwise.

       FIN is a dummy variable that equals one if a widely held financial corporation is the controlling

shareholder, and zero otherwise.

       CORP is a dummy variable that equals one if a widely held non-financial corporation is the

controlling shareholder, and zero otherwise. Note, “widely-held” means that there is no owner with 10

percent or more of the voting rights.

       OTHER is a dummy variable that equals one if the controlling owner is a trust, foundation, etc.

For example, the largest Dutch bank, ABN AMRO Bank N.V., falls into the category OTHER,

because the majority of its voting rights are held by a foundation (“Stichting” in Dutch).

D. Cash flow rights

       We also compute the direct and indirect cash-flow rights of the controlling shareholder. The

shareholder may hold cash flow rights directly and indirectly. For example, if the controlling

shareholder of bank A holds the fraction y of cash flow rights in firm B and firm B in turn holds the

fraction x of the cash-flow rights in Bank A, then the controlling shareholder’s indirect cash-flow

rights in bank A are equal to the product of x and y. If there is a chain of controlling ownership, then

we use the products of the cash-flow rights along the chain. To compute the controlling shareholder’s

total cash flow rights we sum direct and all indirect cash flow rights.

       CF equals the fraction of the bank’s cash flow rights owned directly and indirectly by its

controlling shareholder. CF equals zero if the bank is widely held. As robustness check we also

computed the wedge, which equals the difference between control rights and the cash flow rights, and




                                                    12
included this in the regressions. The wedge does not enter significantly, nor does it change any of the

results reported below.

E. Bank valuations and loan growth

       We use two indicators of bank valuation. Table II provides summary statistics and Table III

lists the averages for each country’s banks.

       TOBIN’S Q is the traditional measure of valuation and is calculated as the ratio of the market

value of equity plus the book value of liabilities to the book value of assets.

       MARKET-TO-BOOK equals the ratio of the market value of equity to the book value of

equity. We use this because banks are highly leveraged.

       LOAN GROWTH equals the growth rate of the bank’s loan portfolio over the last three years.

As discussed below, we use this to control for cross-bank differences in growth, which may influence

bank valuations. As robustness checks, we also include contemporaneous loan growth, as well as

lagged and contemporaneous growth of assets and revenues.

F. Shareholder rights, supervision, and regulation

       This paper examines the impact of the legal protection of shareholders and official bank

supervisory and regulatory practices on bank valuations.

       RIGHTS is the LLSV (1998) index of the legal protection of shareholders across countries.

This index ranges from zero to six, where larger values indicate greater legal protection of shareholder

rights. Table I gives a detailed definition and Table II provides summary statistics.

       To study the supervisory and regulatory environment, we use an assortment of indicators from

the Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001, 2004) database. A growing number of papers use the information

contained in this dataset to examine the impact of bank supervision and regulatory policies on bank

performance, stability, and corporate finance (e.g., Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine, 2003a,b;




                                                     13
Demirguc-Kunt, Laeven, and Levine, 2003, and citations therein). Table II gives summary statistics

and the values for each country are reported in Table III.

        OFFICIAL is an index of the power of the commercial bank supervisory agency. As specified

in Table I, OFFICIAL includes information on the rights of the supervisory agency to meet with,

demand information from, and take legal action against auditors, to force a bank to change its internal

organizational structure, management, directors, etc., to oblige the bank to provision against potential

loses, suspend dividends, bonuses, management fees, and to supersede the rights of shareholders and

intervene a banks and/or declare a bank insolvent. We include this variable since greater bank

supervisory/regulatory power may reduce insiders from exploiting minority investors in the bank.10

        RESTRICT is an index of regulatory restrictions on the activities of banks. This index

measures regulatory impediments to banks engaging in (1) securities market activities (e.g.,

underwriting, brokering, dealing, and all aspects of the mutual fund industry), (2) Insurance activities

(e.g., insurance underwriting and selling), (3) Real estate Activities (e.g., real estate investment,

development, and management), and (4) the ownership of nonfinancial firms. Limiting the range of

activities in which banks can participate is one potential mechanism for limiting the ability of insiders

to expropriate bank resources (Boyd, Chang, and Smith, 1998).

        CAPITAL is an index of regulatory oversight of bank capital. As described in Table I, this

index includes information on whether the source of funds that count as regulatory capital can include

assets other than cash or government securities, borrowed funds, and whether the authorities verify the

sources of capital. CAPITAL also includes information on the extent of regulatory requirements



10
  We also conduct the analyses using components of OFFICIAL that focus only on the disciplinary powers of the
supervisory agency. That is, we include information on the power of the supervisory agency to force a bank to change its
internal organizational structure, management, directors, etc., to oblige the bank to provision against potential loses,
suspend dividends, bonuses, management fees, and to supersede the rights of shareholders and intervene a banks and/or
declare a bank insolvent. We confirm all of our findings with this alternative indicator.


                                                            14
regarding the amount of capital banks must hold. One rationale for imposing strict capital regulations

is to improve governance.

       INDEPENDENCE is an index of the independence of the supervisory authority. Beck,

Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003) find that an independent supervisory agency reduces political

capture of the regulatory authority. This may enhance the governance of banks. We assess this

hypothesis below.



                      III. Bank Ownership Around the World

A. Ownership of publicly traded banks

       Table III provides information on (1) the extent to which banks are widely held and (2) the

identity of the controlling owner if the banks is not widely held. Panel A provides country averages.

Thus, the data indicate that although more than 90 percent of the banks in Canada, Ireland, and the

United States (in our sample) are widely held, 21 out of 44 countries do not have a single widely held

bank (among their largest banks). Overall, the cross-country average for widely held is only 25

percent, so that in the average country, 75 percent of the largest, listed banks have a controlling

shareholder.

       Besides indicating that widely held banks are the exception rather than the rule, the data also

suggest that family ownership of banks is very important across countries (Table III). In the average

country, a family is the controlling owner in 52 percent of those banks with a controlling owner. In 17

countries, families (FAMILY) control 50 percent or more of the banks in our sample.

       Further, note that the State is an important owner of banks in some countries. While the State is

not a controlling owner in any bank in 29 countries, the State is the controlling owner in more than half




                                                    15
of the sampled banks in Egypt, Greece, India, Indonesia, and Thailand. Given the potentially enormous

impact of state ownership, we examine this specifically below.

       Panels B and C of Table III provide information on differences in the ownership patterns of

banks across (i) national differences in the legal protection of shareholders and (ii) cross-country

differences in bank supervision and regulation. Specifically, for shareholder rights, we split the sample

into countries with above median shareholder rights and below median shareholder rights. Then Panel

B provides means for these sub-groups, while Panel C tests whether the ownership patterns differ

between high and low shareholder rights countries. We follow the same pattern for the regulatory

variables: we first split the sample according to each supervisory/regulatory variable and then test for

cross median differences in bank ownership patterns.

       The Panel C results in Table III indicate that countries with below median legal protection of

shareholders have a significantly lower fraction of widely held banks than countries with above median

legal protection. This is consistent with the view that greater legal protection of shareholders makes

potential investors confident that insiders will not exploit them and hence facilitates more dispersed

ownership of banks. These same patterns emerge when using a 20 percent cut-off for classifying a

bank as having a controlling owner.

       The results also indicate that countries with above median official supervisory power and

capital restrictions do not have a larger fraction of widely held banks. This does not support the notion

that greater supervisory power and stricter capital regulations make small investors confident that

insiders will not exploit them.




                                                    16
B. Control rights and cash flows of banks

       Table III also provides summary statistics on the control and cash flow rights of banks around

the world. The control rights variable (CONTROL) equals the percentage of voting rights held by the

controlling owner. Cash flow rights equals the cash flow rights of the controlling owner.

       Panel A of Table III advertises the importance of incorporating the degree of ownership

concentration in our analyses of the governance of banks. There is enormous cross-country variation in

the average degree of control rights and cash flow rights in our sample of 244 banks. In 14 out of 44

countries, the controlling owner averages more than 50 percent of the voting shares. But, in Australia,

Canada, Ireland, the United Kingdom, and the United States, there either is no bank with a controlling

owner or the average degree of voting rights control is less than five percent. In terms of cash flow

rights, half of the countries have banks systems where the controlling owner, if any, holds 25 percent

or more on average of the bank’s cash flow rights.

       Table III’s Panels B and C provide information on the how control rights and cash flow rights

differ across different legal and regulatory regimes. The results indicate that countries with below

median legal protection of shareholders have banks where, on average, the controlling owner holds a

significantly larger fraction of the voting and the cash flow rights than in countries with above the

median legal protection of shareholders. Indeed, the voting rates of the controlling owners are nearly

twice as large in countries with below median shareholder rights. This is consistent with the view that

weak legal protection of shareholders makes potential small investors insecure about their rights and

hence fosters more concentrated ownership of banks.

       The Table III Panel C results further show that countries with above median official

supervisory power and capital restrictions do not have lower control and cash flow rights, which does

not support the view that supervisory power and capital requirements reduce the ability of insiders to




                                                     17
exploit outsiders. The data do, however, indicate that regulatory restrictions on banks and low

supervisory independence are associated with greater control and cash flow rights. These results

certainly do not support the view that tighter government regulation of banks will increase the

confidence of small investors in the governance of banks.



  IV. Legal Protection, Supervision, Ownership & Bank Valuation

A. Preliminary results on bank valuation

       Before turning to the regression results, we first summarize the association between measures

of the market valuation of banks and indicators of (i) the legal protection of minority shareholders and

(ii) bank regulation and supervision. Table IV Panel A presents country averages of these key

variables. Panel B and C provide information on the how the bank valuation measures differ across

different legal and regulatory regimes. As discussed above, we split the sample into countries with

above median shareholder rights and below median shareholder rights and analyze bank valuations.

Similarly, for each bank regulatory and supervisory indicator, we split the sample into countries with

above median values and below median values for these indicators. Panel B provides summary

statistics and Panel C tests whether bank valuation differs significantly across these legal and

regulatory characteristics.

       Table IV Panel C indicates that countries with low levels of shareholder rights have

significantly lower bank valuations as measured by both market-to-book value and by Tobin’s Q. This

is consistent with the view that investors in countries with weak shareholder rights are willing to pay

less for banks than potential shareholders in countries with strong shareholder rights.

       Also, Table IV Panel C tests indicate that bank valuations do not differ significantly across high

and low levels of both official supervisory power and capital restrictions. These summary statistics do



                                                    18
not indicate that investors in countries with powerful supervisory agencies or stringent capital

requirements are willing to pay more for banks than countries with weaker supervisory agencies and

less stringent capital requirements. This initial look at the data also does not support the view that

powerful official supervision increases fears that the government will expropriate bank resources with

adverse implications on bank valuations. Interestingly, countries with fewer restrictions on bank

activities tend to have higher bank valuations than countries that impose greater regulatory restrictions

on bank activities. Also, supervisory independence is positively associated with bank valuations.

Finally, while unreported, reduced form regressions of bank valuations on shareholder rights and the

bank supervisory/regulatory variables indicate a strong positive relationship between bank valuations

and shareholder rights, but no link between bank valuations and the supervisory/regulatory indicators.

B. Regression results

       To assess the impact of governance mechanisms on bank valuations, we regress bank valuation

on the legal protection of minority shareholders, bank supervision and regulation policies, the cash

flow and control rights of controlling shareholders, bank-specific traits, and various interaction terms.

       We estimate all regressions using country random effects. Fixed effects are not feasible in our

setup given that there is no within-country variation in the shareholder rights and bank

supervision/regulation variables. Below, however, we control for an array of country-specific

characteristics such as the level of economic and institutional development, differences in legal system

design, the level corruption, and differences in deposit insurance policies. The random effects

specification is supported by Breusch and Pagan (1980) Lagrange multiplier tests, which strongly

reject the null hypothesis that errors are independent within countries. The random effects estimator

does not treat banks within a country as independent observations and therefore adjusts the standard

errors to reflect the cross-correlation produced by common country components.




                                                    19
        We control for net loan growth (LOAN GROWTH) and state ownership in the regressions. Net

loan growth proxies for growth opportunities. Also, to test for robustness, we include an assortment of

other bank-specific controls that we describe below. In many countries, government owned banks play

a large role in the banking sector. If the state controls the bank, it may exert different influences over

the bank from those exerted by a private controlling owner (LLS, 2002). We therefore add a dummy

variable that equals one if the state is the controlling owner of the bank, and zero otherwise.

        Table V examines the relationship between bank valuation (MARKET-TO-BOOK) and

shareholder rights (RIGHTS), cash flow rights (CF), the interaction between shareholder rights and

cash flow rights (CF*RIGHTS), while controlling for net loan growth (LOAN GROWTH) and

whether the state is the controlling shareholder (STATE).11 Due to missing observations on LOAN

GROWTH, we have a maximum of 42 countries and 213 banks in the Table V regressions.

        The Table V regressions provide three key results on the links between bank valuation, bank

ownership, and the legal protection of minority shareholders. First, higher levels of cash flow rights by

a controlling shareholder boost bank valuations. This is consistent with theories predicting that the

incentives for controlling owners to exploit the benefits of control diminish as cash flow rights

increase. Second, greater legal protection of minority shareholders rights improves the valuation of

banks. This is consistent with the view that weak protection of minority shareholders will induce the

marginal small investor to pay less for bank equity. Third, greater cash flow rights by a controlling

shareholder is particularly positive for the valuation of banks in countries with weak legal protection of

minority shareholder rights. Thus, the interaction term (CF*RIGHTS) enters negatively and highly

significantly. Put differently, high levels of cash flow rights are less important for the valuation of

banks in countries with strong minority shareholder rights. While the first two results are consistent

11
   Some suggest that the State controls banks when the State owns more than 50 percent of the shares (LLS, 2002; Barth, et
al., 2003). Thus, we conducted the analyses using this definition as a control variable in the regressions. This does not
change the results.


                                                           20
with LLSV’s (2002) finding on non-financial corporations, the strong, robust results on the interaction

term are consistent with the theory in LLSV (2002) but more robust than their empirical findings for

non-financial corporations. The loan growth and state ownership variables do not enter significantly,

and we obtain qualitatively very similar results if we exclude LOAN GROWTH or STATE from the

regressions.

          Economically, the direct impact of cash flow concentration and shareholder protection on bank

valuations can be very large. For instance, using regression 4 in Table V, the direct (i.e., excluding the

interaction term) impact of a one-standard deviation increase in shareholder protection laws (1.25)

equals 0.28, which is 21 percent of the mean value of the market-to-book value in our sample of banks.

Similarly, the direct impact of a one-standard deviation increase in cash flow rights (0.27) equals 0.42,

which is 31 percent of the mean value of the market-to-book value. When accounting for the

interaction term, there exist circumstances when a marginal increase in shareholder protection laws or

cash flow rights will decrease the market to book value. For example, if shareholder protection laws

are high (4), then a one-standard deviation increase in CF will induce a drop in the market-to-book

value of 0.21, which is 15% of the mean value of the market-to-book value in our sample of banks.

          In Table VI, we also include the supervision/regulation variables. Thus, we assess whether

commercial bank regulations and supervisory strategies influence bank valuations. By adding the

supervision/regulation variables, we also test the robustness of the earlier findings on the legal rights of

minority shareholders, cash flow rights, and the interaction between cash flow rights and shareholder

rights.

          First, the Table VI results indicate that the earlier findings on shareholder rights and cash flow

rights are robust to including indicators of bank supervision and regulation. Including supervision and

regulation indicators does not change the earlier results at all.




                                                      21
       Second, the bank supervision and regulation variables do not enter significantly (Table VI).

That is, the power of the supervisory agency to discipline and monitor banks, the stringency of capital

requirements, regulatory restrictions on bank activities, and independence of the supervisory authority

do not influence bank valuations. These findings are inconsistent with the view that powerful

supervisory authorities, stringent capital standards, and regulations on bank activities reduce the fears

that investors have about buying bank equity. Looked at differently, the findings are also inconsistent

with the view that powerful supervision provides mechanisms for governments to expropriate bank

resources with negative ramifications on bank valuations. Rather, the Table VI results emphasize the

importance of shareholder protection laws in boosting the confidence of shareholders.

                            V. Extensions and Robustness

A. Supervision/Regulation: Expropriation, Risk-Reduction, and Institutions

       This sub-section presents three extensions of the results on official supervision and regulation

of banks to examine whether bank supervision and regulation influence bank valuations under specific

conditions.

       First, as discussed in the Introduction, supervision and regulation may influence bank

valuations through at least two channels. Effective supervision/regulation may reduce fears of

expropriation and thereby exert a positive influence on bank valuations. A second channel may also

operate, however. Especially in the presence of deposit insurance, supervision/regulation may reduce

bank risk below the level desired by shareholders and thereby exert a negative influence on bank

valuations. Put differently, with government sponsored deposit insurance, bank shareholders will tend

to want banks to assume greater risk than depositors or official supervisors/regulators do. Under these

conditions, effective supervision/regulation will push bank risk below the level sought by shareholders

with adverse implications on bank valuations.



                                                    22
       Although empirically Section IV found that the net impact of supervision/regulation on bank

values is negligible, the net results may hide the separate impacts of supervision/regulation on

expropriation and risk taking. Thus, supervision/regulation might effectively impede expropriation and

reduce risk-taking but empirically we may be aggregating away these positive and negative effects on

valuations.

       To address this concern, we examine an alternative econometric specification that allows

supervision/regulation to exert a direct positive impact on valuations (to capture the expropriation

channel) and an indirect negative impact on bank valuations (to capture the risk-reducing channel). In

particular, we include an indicator of the generosity of the deposit insurance regime that was

constructed by Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2003) and is termed MORAL HAZARD. Plus, we

include the interaction term of MORAL HAZARD with the supervision/regulation variables. If the

risk-reducing channel is important, then effective supervision/regulation should exert a more negative

impact on valuations in the presence of a more generous, government-sponsored deposit insurance

regime. Thus, if the risk-reducing channel is important, then the interaction term of MORAL

HAZARD with the supervision/regulation variables should enter negatively. At the same time, if

supervision/regulation effectively impedes expropriation, then the supervision/regulation variables

should enter positively. Thus, we allow for both channels to operate.

       As shown in Table VII, even when we allow supervision/regulation to operate through both the

expropriation and risk-reduction channels, we find no evidence that supervision/regulation induces a

positive impact of bank valuations by reducing expropriation, nor do we find any evidence that the

supervision/regulation exerts a negative impact on bank valuations by reducing bank risk below the

level desired by shareholders. Moreover, we continue to obtain the same conclusions on shareholder

protection laws, cash-flow rights, and the interaction between shareholder protection laws and cash-




                                                   23
flow rights. While not capturing all mechanisms through which supervision/regulation may positively

and negatively influence bank valuations, these results confirm and extend the paper’s initial results.

       The second extension of the results on bank supervision and regulation focuses on broad,

national institutions. Perhaps supervision and regulation only improve the corporate governance of

banks when there are good national institutions, such as low levels of government corruption,

efficiently operating bureaucracies, or responsive political systems. To assess this possibility, we

added an institutional indicator along with the interaction between the institutional indicator and the

relevant supervisory/regulatory variable to the regressions in Table VI. As an institutional indicator,

we used Kaufman, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobaton (1999) aggregate institutional development index, which

is calculated as the average of six indicators: voice and accountability in the political system, political

stability, government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, and the absence of official

corruption. In no case did the bank supervision/regulation variables or the interaction term between

institutional development and the bank supervision/ regulation variables enter significantly. Moreover,

in no case did adding these variables alter the results on cash-flow rights, shareholder rights, or the

interaction of shareholder rights and cash-flow rights.

       Third, it might be suggested that supervisory power, supervisory independence, regulatory

restrictions on bank activities, and capital restrictions enhance the corporate governance of banks and

thereby boost bank valuations only when shareholder protection laws (SRIGHTS) are weak. We tested

this by adding the interaction term SRIGHTS multiplied by the relevant supervisory/regulatory

variable to each regression in Table VI. In no case do we find that the supervisory/regulatory variable

or the interaction term enters significantly. Moreover, adding these interaction terms did not alter this

paper’s other findings.




                                                     24
B. Endogeneity

       We have assumed that cash flow rights are exogenous. As argued by LLSV (2002), ownership

patterns are very stable and largely determined by the particular histories of the corporations.

Nevertheless, as shown, cash flow rights vary systematically across countries, depending on national

legal and regulatory systems. We address potential concerns about the endogeneity of cash flow rights

in two ways.

       First, we use bank-level instrumental variables for cash flow rights (CF). It is difficult to

construct instruments that both explain a bank’s cash flow rights but that are not affected by

innovations in bank valuations. For each bank, we use the average cash flow rights of the other banks

in the country as an instrument for cash flow rights. Thus, to the extent that there are industry and

country factors that explain cash flow rights, this instrument will capture these influences. At the same

time, an innovation in the valuation of a particular bank will not necessarily influence the cash flow

rights of other banks. In practice, this instrument enters the first-stage regression for cash flow rights

significantly at the five percent level. Since the standard regressions also include the interaction term,

CF*Rights, we instrument for this term as well. We include the interaction term of Rights with the

average cash flow of the other banks in the instrument set. This interaction term enters the first-stage

regression for CF*Rights significantly at the five percent level. We conduct the instrumental variables

analyses without loan growth in the regressions since loan growth is a bank-level variable and may

also be subject to endogeneity concerns. Moreover, adding loan growth to the regressions does not

qualitatively alter our conclusions, and as above, loan growth does not enter the regressions

significantly. We also exclude countries with only one bank from the instrumental variable regressions,

because we can only compute the cash flow instruments for countries with more than one bank. The




                                                     25
instrumental variables results are based on the Baltagi (1981) two-stage least square random-effects

estimator.

       The Table VIII instrumental variable results confirm our earlier results: (i) the cash flow rights

variable enters positively and significantly, (ii) the shareholder rights variable enters positively and

significantly, (iii) the interaction term between cash flow rights and shareholder rights enters

negatively and significantly, and (iv) the supervision/regulation variables do not enter significantly.

       As a second approach to endogeneity concerns, we can reduce potential endogeneity problems

by focusing only on with-in country variation in cash flow rights. Thus, we de-mean the cash flow

rights variable by the country mean to focus only on cross-bank differences in cash flow rights and

abstract from cross-country differences in cash flow rights. Using de-meaned cash flow, we confirm

our earlier findings. De-meaned CF (CFD) and the interaction term (CFD*RIGHTS) continue to enter

with significantly positive and negative coefficients respectively. When using CFD, the results on

RIGHTS weaken somewhat, implying that the inclusion of the cross-country component of CF is

important for the significance of RIGHTS when including the interaction term between CFD and

RIGHTS. In sum, these results with de-meaned CF suggest that our earlier findings that (i) greater cash

flow rights boost bank valuations and (ii) stronger shareholder protection laws mitigate the need for

concentrated cash flow rights do not seem to be driven by simultaneity bias since the findings hold

when focusing solely on the within-country variation.

       Finally, we examine whether endogeneity is biasing the results on RIGHTS. We were

concerned that a country-specific factor could be driving both the country-specific component of

banks’ market valuations and the country’s shareholder protection laws. Consequently, we follow

LLSV (1998) in using the legal origin of each country’s Commercial/Company law as an instrumental

variable for RIGHTS. These instrumental variable results, however, confirm the paper’s findings.




                                                     26
C. Controlling for other country-level and bank-level factors

       To assess whether the shareholder rights variable is proxying for some other country trait, we

assess the robustness of the results to controlling for other country specific characteristics. Specifically,

we include each country’s level of real per capita Gross Domestic Product (PER CAPITA INCOME),

an index of contract enforcement (ENFORCE), and index of the degree of official corruption in the

economy (where higher values indicate less corruption) (CORRUPT), an index of the law and order

tradition of the country (LAW), and dummy variables for whether the country has a French legal origin

(FRENCH LO) or an English legal origin (ENGLISH LO). We include these indicators to control for

the level of economic and institutional development and the design and operation of the legal system

beyond specific shareholder protection laws. If RIGHTS is simply proxying for “good” country

specific traits that boost bank valuations, then these control variables should drive out the significance

of RIGHTS in the valuation regressions. Furthermore, we include an indicator of the generosity of the

deposit insurance regime (MORAL HAZARD) since more generous deposit insurance policies may

increase moral hazard and distort bank values. As shown in Table IX, we obtain the same results when

including these country-specific characteristics.

       We further assess the robustness of the result to controlling for additional bank-specific

characteristics. In particular, bank size may influence valuations, so we include the logarithm of each

bank’s total assets (SIZE). Furthermore, while we have controlled for average net loan growth over the

three years prior to the valuation date (LOAN GROWTH), we also assess the robustness to including

net loan growth during the year in which bank valuation is measured as well as current and lagged




                                                     27
values of asset growth and revenue growth. Including these additional bank-level traits does not

change any of this paper’s results.



D. Re-defining variables and altering the sample

       In this subsection, we examine the sensitivity of the results to altering the definition of some of

the key variables and to changing the sample of countries and banks.

       First, as noted above, some may argue the banks controlled by widely held financial or non-

financial corporations should be classified as widely held, not as having a controlling shareholder.

Thus, as a robustness check, we reclassified banks. Banks were classified as having a controlling

owner only if the controlling owner is a family or the state. Then, we use a dummy variable for state

control in the regressions. This alternative definition of a controlling owner confirms the paper’s

findings.

       Second, we examine control rights instead of cash flow rights. Note theory focuses on cash

flow rights. As cash flow rights increase, expropriation by the controlling owner increasingly involves

self-theft, so that stronger shareholder rights will exert less of a positive impact on bank valuations as

the cash flow rights of the controlling owner rises (Shleifer and Wolfenzon, 2002; and LLSV, 2002).

Due to differences in control rights and cash flow rights, control rights per se are logically not as

directly linked to valuations. The results are consistent with these concepts. While shareholder rights,

control rights, and the interaction term continue to enter with the same signs as the earlier results with

cash flow rights, the significance level is now weaker, especially on the interaction term between

control rights and shareholder rights. Thus, as expected, the relationships among valuations,

shareholder rights, and cash flow rights are stronger than those with control rights.




                                                    28
       Third, instead of using ten percent of a bank’s voting rights as the minimum level necessary to

be classified as having a controlling owner, we use twenty percent. This classifies more banks as

widely held. The results with this alternative minimum control limit confirm the paper’s findings.

       Fourth, we examine Tobin’s Q as an alternative dependent variable instead of the simple

market-to-book value of banks and obtain similar results.

       Fifth, we test whether the results hold when restricting the sample to only those banks with a

controlling owner. Thus, we eliminate widely held banks from the analysis; we eliminate banks where

CF equals zero. We confirm all conclusions using this sub-sample of banks.

       Sixth, we were concerned that some countries have many banks while others have few banks.

Thus, we did the analyses excluding countries with only one bank. This did not change any of the

results. Also, we did the analyses using weighted least squares, where we weighted observations by the

inverse of the number of banks from the country in the sample. Again, this did not alter this paper’s

findings.

                                        V. Conclusions

       This paper first constructed new data on the ownership of 244 banks in 44 countries and then

(1) documented the ownership structure of banks around the world and (2) assessed different theories

about the ramifications of ownership, shareholder protection laws, and bank supervisory and regulatory

policies for bank valuations.

       On ownership, we find that except in a few countries with very strong shareholder protection

laws, banks are not widely held. Rather, banks tend to be controlled by a family or the State.

       On valuations, we find that (i) larger cash flow rights by the controlling owner boosts

valuations, (ii) weak shareholder protection laws lower bank valuations, and (iii) greater cash flow

rights mitigate the adverse effects of weak shareholder protection laws on bank valuations. These



                                                   29
results are consistent with the views that expropriation of minority shareholders in banks is important

internationally, that laws can play a role in restraining this expropriation, and concentrated cash flow

rights also represents an important mechanism for governing banks. These results are robust to an array

of checks, including controls for numerous country-specific and bank specific characteristics, the use

of different definitions for ownership control and bank valuations, and the re-estimation using different

samples of countries and banks. The public policy implications of this research should be treated

cautiously, however. For example, just because legal institutions can restrain expropriation does not

necessarily mean that changing statutes will reduce expropriation. As the institutional economics

literature has stressed, the impact of simple changes, such as stroke-of-the-pen alterations to laws or

regulations, depends on deeper institutional characteristics.

       Finally, we assess the relationship bank supervision and regulation and the governance of

banks. In contrast to Basel II’s first two pillars on capital requirements and official supervision, we do

not find robust evidence that the stringency of capital requirements or official supervisory power

influence bank valuations, nor do we find that regulator restrictions on bank activities affect the

market’s valuation of banks. Furthermore, we find no evidence that official supervision and regulation

induce a positive impact of bank valuations by reducing fears of expropriation and a countervailing

negative impact on bank valuations by reducing bank risk below the level desired by bank

shareholders. Rather, consistent with Basel II’s third pillar, the results emphasize the importance of

shareholder protection laws in explaining bank valuations.




                                                    30
References:

Akerlof, George A. and Paul Romer, 1993, Looting: The economic underworld of bankruptcy for
       profit, Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics 2, 1-73.

Atkinson, Andrew B. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1980, Lectures on Public Economics, London: McGraw-
       Hill.

Baltagi, Badi H., 1981, Simultaneous equations with error components, Journal of Econometrics 17,
       189-200.

Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio, Jr., and Ross Levine, 2001, The regulation and supervision of banks
        around the world: a new database, In: Brooking-Wharton Papers on Financial Services, Eds:
        Litan, Robert E. and Richard Herring, Washington, DC, Brookings Institution, 183-250.

Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio, Jr., and Ross Levine, 2004, Bank supervision and regulation: What
        works best?, Journal of Financial Intermediation forthcoming.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli. Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine, 2003a, Bank supervision and corporate
       finance, NBER Working Paper 9620, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli. Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine, 2003b, Bank concentration and crises, NBER
       Working Paper 9921, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and Norman Loayza, 2000, Finance and the sources of growth, Journal
       of Financial Economics 58, 261–300.

Becker, Gary and George Stigler, 1974, Law enforcement, malfeasance, and the compensation of
       enforcers, Journal of Legal Studies 3, 1-18.

Bennedsen, Morten and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2000, The balance of power in closely held corporations,
      Journal of Financial Economics 58, 113-139.

Berle, Adolf and Gardiner Means, 1932, The Modern Corporation and Private Property (MacMillan,
       New York, NY).

Boyd, John H., Chun Chang, and Bruce D. Smith, 1998, Moral hazard under commercial and universal
       banking, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 30, 426-468.

Burkart, Mike, Denis Gromb, and Fausto Panunzi, 1997, Large shareholders, monitoring, and fiduciary
       duty, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 693-728.

Burkart, Mike, Denis Gromb, and Fausto Panunzi, 1998, Why higher takeover premia protect minority
       shareholders, Journal of Political Economy 106, 172-204.




                                                 31
Caprio, Gerard Jr., and Ross Levine, 2002, Corporate governance in finance: Concepts and
       international observations, In: Financial Sector Governance: The Roles of the Public and
       Private Sectors, Eds. Robert E. Litan, Michael Pomerleano, and V. Sundararajan, Washington,
       DC: Brookings Institution Press, pp. 17-50.

Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Larry H.P. Lang, 2000, The separation of ownership and
       control in East Asian corporations, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 81-112.

Claessens, Stijn and Luc Laeven, 2003, Financial development, property rights, and growth, Journal of
       Finance, forthcoming.

Coase, Ronald, The problem of social cost. Journal of Law and Economics 3, 1-44.

DeAngelo, Harry and Linda DeAngelo, 1985, Managerial ownership of voting rights, Journal of
     Financial Economics 14, 33-69.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Enrica Detragiache. 2003, Does deposit insurance increase banking system
      stability? An empirical investigation. Journal of Monetary Economics.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. 2003, Regulations, market structure, institutions,
      and the cost of financial intermediation. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, forthcoming.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Vojislav Maksimovic, 1998, Law, finance, and firm growth, Journal of
      Finance 53, 2107-2137.

Demsetz, Harold and Kenneth Lehn, 1985, The structure of corporate ownership: Causes and
      consequences, Journal of Political Economy 93, 1155-1177.

Grossman, Sanford and Oliver Hart, 1988, One share one vote and the market for corporate control,
      Journal of Financial Economics 20, 175-202.

Glaeser, Edward, Johnson, Simon, Andrei Shleifer, 2001. Coase versus the coasians. Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 116, 853-899.

Holderness, Clifford, Randall Kroszner, and Dennis Sheehan, 1999, Were the good old days that good?
      Changes in managerial stock ownership since the great depression, Journal of Finance 54, 435-
      470.

Jensen, Michael and William Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm, managerial behavior, agency costs
       and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.

Kaufmann, D., A. Kraay, and P. Zoido-Lobaton (1999), “Governance Matters”, Policy Research
      Working Paper 2196, World Bank.

King, Robert G. and Ross Levine, 1993a, Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right, Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 108, 717-38.



                                                 32
King, Robert G. and Ross Levine, 1993b, Finance, entrepreneurship, and growth: Theory and
       evidence, Journal of Monetary Economics 32, 513-542.
Lang, Larry H.P. and Raymond W. So, 2002, Bank ownership structure and economic performance,
       Chinese University of Hong Kong mimeo.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership around
       the world, Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2002, Government ownership of
       commercial banks, Journal of Finance 57, 265-301.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, What works in securities
       laws?, Harvard University mimeo.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1998, Law and
       finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 2002, Investor
       protection and corporate valuation, Journal of Finance 57, 1147-1170.

La Porta, Raphael., Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Guillermo Zamarripa, 2003, Related lending,
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 231-268.

Lease, Ronald C., John McConnell, and Wayne Mikkelson, 1983, The market value of control in
       publicly traded corporations, Journal of Financial Economics 11, 439-471.

Levine, Ross, 1997, Financial development and economic growth: Views and agenda, Journal of
       Economic Literature 35, 688-726.

Levine, Ross, 2004, Finance and growth: Theory, evidence, and mechanisms, In Handbook of
       Economic Growth. Eds. P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, Amsterdam: North-Holland Elsevier
       Publishers, forthcoming.

Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza, and Thorsten Beck, 2000, Financial intermediation and growth:
       Causality and causes,” Journal of Monetary Economics.

Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos, 1998, Stock markets, banks, and economic growth, American Economic
       Review 88, 537-558.

McConnell, John and Henri Servaes, 1990, Additional evidence on equity ownership and corporate
     value, Journal of Financial Economics 27, 595-612.

Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1988, Management ownership and market
      valuation: An empirical analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 20, 293-315.




                                                 33
Morgan, Donald, 2003, “Judging the Risk of Banks: Why Can’t Bond Raters Agree?” American
      Economic Review, forthcoming.

Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Financial dependence and growth, American Economic
       Review 88, 559-586.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, A survey of corporate governance, Journal of Finance
       52, 737-783.

Shleifer, Andrei and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2002, Investor protection and equity markets, Journal of
       Financial Economics 66, 3-27.

Stigler, George, 1971, The theory of economic regulation, Bell Journal of Economics and Management
        Science 2, 3-21.

Stigler, George, 1975, The Citizen and the State: Essays on Regulation, Chicago: University of
        Chicago Press.

Stulz, Rene, 1988, Managerial control of voting rights: Financial policies and the market for corporate
        control, Journal of Financial Economics 20, 25-54.

Wurgler, Jeffrey, 2000, Financial markets and the allocation of capital, Journal of Financial Economics
      58, 187-214.

Zingales, Luigi, 1994, The value of the voting right: A study of the Milan stock exchange, The Review
       of Financial Studies 7, 125-148.

Zwiebel, Jeffrey, 1995, Block investment and partial benefits of corporate control, Review of Economic
      Studies 62, 161-185.




                                                  34
                                                       Table I
                                               Description of Variables

This table describes the variables collected for the 44 countries included in our sample. We present the description and the
sources of each variable.
Variable                   Description
Rights                     Index of anti-director rights for the country. Formed by adding one when: (1) the country
                           allows shareholders to mail their proxy vote, (2) shareholders are not required to deposit
                           their shares prior to the General Shareholders’ Meeting, (3) cumulative voting or
                           proportional representation of minorities on the board of directors is allowed, (4) an
                           oppressed minorities mechanism is in place, (5) the minimum percentage of share capital
                           that entitles a shareholder to call for an Extraordinary Shareholders’ Meeting is less than or
                           equal to 10 percent (the sample median), or (6) when shareholders have preemptive rights
                           that can only be waived by a shareholders meeting. The range for the index is from zero to
                           six. Source: La Porta et al. (1998).
Market-to-book             The ratio of the market value of equity to the book value of equity. Source: Bankscope
                           (2003).
Tobin’s Q                  The ratio of the market value of equity plus the book value of liabilities to the book value
                           of assets. Source: Bankscope (2003).
Control                    Fraction of the bank’s voting rights, if any, owned by its controlling shareholder. To
                           measure control, we combine a shareholder’s direct (i.e., through shares registered in her
                           name) and indirect (i.e., through shares held by entities that, in turn, she controls) voting
                           rights in the banking firm. A bank in our sample has a controlling shareholder if the sum of
                           her direct and indirect voting rights exceeds 10 percent. When multiple shareholders meet
                           our criteria for control, we assign control to the shareholder with the largest voting stake.
                           Source: Authors’ calculations based on Bankscope, Worldscope, the Bankers Almanac, 20-
                           F filings, and company websites.
CF                         Fraction of the firm’s ultimate cash flow rights, if any, owned by its controlling
                           shareholder. CF values are computed as the product of all the equity stakes along the
                           control chain. Source: Authors’ calculations based on Bankscope, Worldscope, the Bankers
                           Almanac, 20-F filings, and company websites.
Wedge                      The difference between control rights and cash flow rights. Source: Authors’ calculations.
Widely                     Equals one if there is no controlling shareholder, and zero otherwise. Source: Authors’
                           calculations.
Family                     Equals one if an individual or family is the controlling shareholder, and zero otherwise.
                           Source: Authors’ calculations.
State                      Equals one if a (foreign or domestic) state is the controlling shareholder, and zero
                           otherwise. Source: Authors’ calculations.
Fin                        Equals one if a widely held financial corporation is the controlling shareholder, and zero
                           otherwise. Source: Authors’ calculations.
Corp                       Equals one if a widely held non-financial corporation is the controlling shareholder, and
                           zero otherwise. Source: Authors’ calculations.
Other                      Other equals one if the controlling owner is not widely held, nor family-owned, nor state-
                           owned, or nor widely held by a financial or non-financial corporation, and zero otherwise.
                           Source: Authors’ calculations.
Loan growth                The bank’s average net loan growth during the last 3 years. Source: Bankscope.
State                      Dummy variable that indicates whether the state is a major shareholder in the bank. Source:
                           Authors’ calculations
Official                   Index of official supervisory power. Adds one for an affirmative response to each for the
                           following 14 questions: 1.Does the supervisory agency have the right to meet with external
                           auditors to discuss their report without the approval of the bank? 2.Are auditors required by
                           law to communicate directly to the supervisory agency any presumed involvement of bank
                           directors or senior managers in elicit activities, fraud, or insider abuse? 3.Can supervisors
                           take legal action against external auditors for negligence? 4.Can the supervisory authority
                           force a bank to change its internal organizational structure? 5.Are off-balance sheet items



                                                             35
Variable       Description
               disclosed to supervisors? 6. Can the supervisory agency order the bank's directors or
               management to constitute provisions to cover actual or potential losses? 7. Can the
               supervisory agency suspend the directors' decision to distribute: a) Dividends? b)
               Bonuses? c) Management fees? 8.Can the supervisory agency legally declare-such that this
               declaration supersedes the rights of bank shareholders-that a bank is insolvent? 9.Does the
               Banking Law give authority to the supervisory agency to intervene that is, suspend some or
               all ownership rights-a problem bank? 10.Regarding bank restructuring and reorganization,
               can the supervisory agency or any other government agency do the following: a) Supersede
               shareholder rights? b) Remove and replace management? c) Remove and replace directors?
               Source: Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2003).
Restrict       Index of regulatory restrictions on banks ability to engage in securities market activities,
               the insurance business, conduct real estate activities, or own non-financial firms. Source:
               Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2003).
Supindep       The degree to which the supervisory authority is independent from the government and
               legally protected from the banking system. Source: Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2003).
Capital        Regulatory restricts on bank capital. Index that includes information on the following
               questions. 1. Is the minimum capital-asset ratio requirement risk weighted in line with the
               Basel guidelines? 2. Does the minimum ratio vary as a function of market risk? 3. Are
               market value of loan losses not realized in accounting books deducted from capital? 4. Are
               unrealized losses in securities portfolios deducted? 5. Are unrealized foreign exchange
               losses deducted? 6. What fraction of revaluation gains is allowed as part of capital? 7. Are
               the sources of funds to be used as capital verified by the regulatory/supervisory authorities?
               8. Can the initial disbursement or subsequent injections of capital be done with assets other
               than cash or government securities? 9. Can initial disbursement of capital be done with
               borrowed funds? Source: Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2003).
Moral hazard   Indicator of the generosity of the deposit insurance regime in the country. Source:
               Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2003).




                                                  36
                                                      Table II
                                                   Summary statistics

This table reports summary statistics for the main variables. Market-to-book is the market-to-book value of the bank’s
equity. Tobin’s Q is the bank’s Tobin’s q. Control is the fraction of the bank’s voting rights, if any, owned by its controlling
shareholder. CF is the fraction of the bank’s ultimate cash flow rights held by the controlling owners and zero if there is no
controlling owner. Widely held is a dummy variable that equals one if there is no controlling shareholder. Family is a
dummy variable that equals one if an individual or family is the controlling shareholder. State is a dummy variable that
indicates whether the state is the controlling shareholder in the bank. Widely held financial is a dummy variable that equals
one if a widely held financial corporation is the controlling shareholder. Widely held non-financial is a dummy variable that
equals one if a widely held non-financial corporation is the controlling shareholder. Other is a dummy variable that equals
one if the bank has another controlling owner. Rights is an index of anti-director rights for the country. Official is an index
of official supervisory power. Restrict is an index of regulatory restrictions on banks ability to engage in non-banking
activities or own non-financial firms. Independence is a measure of the degree to which the supervisory authority is
independent from the government and legally protected from the banking system. Capital is a measure of regulatory
restrictions on capital. Size is the logarithm of the bank’s total assets. Loan growth is the bank’s average net loan growth
during the last 3 years. Current loan growth is the bank’s net loan growth during the current year. Panel A reports summary
statistics and panel B reports the correlation matrix for the main regression variables. Table I defines and gives the sources
of the variables.
Variable                       Mean        Standard deviation Minimum Maximum Number of observations
Market-to-book                 1.341             0.760             0.216         3.946                244
Tobin’s Q                      1.020             0.060             0.859         1.373                244
Control                        0.326             0.308             0.000         1.000                244
CF                             0.260             0.274             0.000         1.000                244
Widely                         0.303             0.461             0.000         1.000                244
Family                         0.344             0.476             0.000         1.000                244
State                          0.180             0.385             0.000         1.000                244
Fin                            0.070             0.255             0.000         1.000                244
Corp                           0.012             0.110             0.000         1.000                244
Other                          0.094             0.293             0.000         1.000                244
Rights                         3.156             1.251             1.000         5.000                244
Official                       9.833             2.472             3.000        14.000                216
Restrict                       9.277             2.404             5.000        14.000                223
Independence                   2.579             1.101             1.000         4.000                216
Capital                        3.067             1.230             0.000         5.000                223
Size                           16.404            1.991             11.161       20.773                244
Loan growth                    0.055             0.138             -0.436        0.988                213




                                                              37
                                                                        Table III
                                                              Ownership and Control of Banks

This table reports statistics on the ownership and control of publicly traded banks. Panel A presents country-averages for each ownership variable. We use 10
percent as the criteria for control for a sample of the ten largest publicly traded banks in terms of total assets in each country at the end of December 2001, when
available. Control is the fraction of the bank’s voting rights, if any, owned by its controlling shareholder. CF is the fraction of the bank’s ultimate cash flow rights
held by the controlling owners and zero if there is no controlling owner. We use 10 percent as the criteria for control. Widely held equals one if there is no
controlling shareholder, and zero otherwise. Family equals one if an individual or family is the controlling shareholder, and zero otherwise. State equals one if
the state is the controlling shareholder, and zero otherwise. Fin equals one if a widely held financial corporation is the controlling shareholder, and zero
otherwise. Corp equals one if a widely held non-financial corporation is the controlling shareholder, and zero otherwise. Other equals one if the bank has another
controlling owner, and zero otherwise. N indicates for each country the number of banks in our sample. The sample includes the ten largest publicly traded banks
in terms of total assets in each country at the end of December 2001, when available. Panel B classifies countries according to their ranking in shareholder rights
or the bank supervision variables (above or below the sample median). Panel C reports test of means for low versus high values for shareholder rights and the
bank regulatory variables. Table I defines the variables. * Significant at 10 percent level. ** Significant at 5 percent level. *** Significant at 1 percent level.
Country                                  Control         CF           Widely       Family         State         Fin        Corp       Other            N
                                        Panel A:        Means
Argentina                                 94.00         47.00          0.00          1.00          0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00            1
Australia                                  1.11          1.11          0.89          0.11          0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00            9
Austria                                   55.33         40.00          0.00          0.00          0.00        0.33         0.00       0.67            3
Brazil                                    82.86         41.86          0.00          0.57          0.29        0.00         0.00       0.14            7
Canada                                     0.00          0.00          1.00          0.00          0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00            8
Chile                                     53.00         24.00          0.00          1.00          0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00            4
Colombia                                  45.50         40.50          0.25          0.50          0.00        0.00         0.25       0.00            4
Denmark                                   20.22         17.11          0.22          0.11          0.00        0.22         0.00       0.44            9
Egypt                                     27.00         17.25          0.00          0.25          0.75        0.00         0.00       0.00            4
Finland                                   57.00         57.00          0.00          0.00          0.00        0.00         0.00       1.00            1
France                                    40.33         40.33          0.50          0.00          0.00        0.50         0.00       0.00            6
Germany                                   12.00          8.68          0.33          0.33          0.00        0.33         0.00       0.00            3
Greece                                    33.00         33.00          0.13          0.38          0.50        0.00         0.00       0.00            8
Hong Kong                                 52.33         39.50          0.00          0.67          0.33        0.00         0.00       0.00            6
India                                     66.33         62.33          0.00          0.00          1.00        0.00         0.00       0.00            9
Indonesia                                 72.63         72.63          0.00          0.25          0.63        0.13         0.00       0.00            8




                                                                                  38
Country          Control    CF     Widely   Family   State   Fin    Corp   Other   N
Ireland           0.00      0.00    1.00     0.00    0.00    0.00   0.20   0.00     5
Israel           43.00     43.00    0.00     0.63    0.25    0.00   0.00   0.13     8
Italy            15.56     14.44    0.33     0.11    0.00    0.22   0.00   0.33     9
Japan            11.20     11.20    0.80     0.00    0.00    0.20   0.00   0.00     5
Jordan           25.29     23.00    0.00     0.71    0.29    0.00   0.00   0.00     7
Kenya            18.00     18.00    0.25     0.25    0.25    0.00   0.00   0.25     4
Korea Rep. Of    28.63     27.13    0.25     0.13    0.25    0.25   0.00   0.13     8
Malaysia         39.00     30.60    0.00     1.00    0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00     5
Mexico           60.00     58.00    0.00     1.00    0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00     1
Netherlands      56.00     16.50    0.00     0.00    0.00    0.00   0.00   1.00     2
Norway            5.33      5.33    0.89     0.00    0.11    0.00   0.00   0.00     9
Pakistan         40.00     40.00    0.00     1.00    0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00     1
Peru             61.33     55.00    0.33     0.33    0.00    0.00   0.33   0.00     3
Philippines      40.60     29.10    0.10     0.80    0.00    0.10   0.00   0.00    10
Portugal         43.50     17.67    0.17     0.83    0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00     6
Singapore        27.00     27.00    0.00     1.00    0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00     2
South Africa     28.00      9.00    0.00     0.75    0.00    0.25   0.00   0.00     4
Spain            31.60     17.90    0.20     0.40    0.10    0.00   0.00   0.30    10
Sri Lanka        18.60     13.80    0.40     0.00    0.40    0.20   0.00   0.00     5
Sweden           17.67      8.67    0.00     0.33    0.00    0.00   0.00   0.67     3
Switzerland      55.00     31.50    0.25     0.50    0.00    0.25   0.00   0.00     4
Taiwan           24.60     22.50    0.40     0.20    0.40    0.00   0.00   0.00    10
Thailand         52.00     52.00    0.00     0.43    0.57    0.00   0.00   0.00     7
Turkey           62.29     58.71    0.00     0.86    0.00    0.00   0.00   0.14     7
United Kingdom   1.67      0.17     0.83     0.17    0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00     6
United States     1.10      0.40    0.90     0.10    0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00    10
Venezuela        29.00     29.00    0.50     0.50    0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00     2
Zimbabwe         26.00      6.00    0.00     0.00    0.00    0.00   0.00   1.00     1
Country mean     35.79     27.45    0.25     0.39    0.14    0.07   0.02   0.14    244




                                            39
Country                        Control       CF         Widely     Family         State      Fin       Corp    Other     N
                               Panel B: Group means
Low rights                      39.13       32.20        0.17       0.38          0.21       0.10      0.01    0.13      150
High rights                     22.01       16.19        0.52       0.29          0.14       0.02      0.01    0.03      94
Low official                    30.94       26.21        0.26       0.27          0.22       0.09      0.01    0.15      117
High official                   34.08       25.87        0.34       0.41          0.14       0.05      0.02    0.05      127
Low restrict                    28.17       21.03        0.35       0.31          0.11       0.11      0.02    0.12      123
High restrict                   37.05       31.12        0.26       0.38          0.26       0.03      0.01    0.07      121
Low independence                39.27       31.94        0.15       0.37          0.24       0.10      0.00    0.13      107
High independence               27.34       21.42        0.42       0.32          0.13       0.04      0.02    0.07      137
Low capital                     33.42       26.96        0.27       0.37          0.19       0.08      0.01    0.08      139
High capital                    31.45       24.80        0.34       0.30          0.17       0.06      0.01    0.11      105
                               Panel C: Test of means
Low versus high rights          ***4.45       ***4.83   ***-5.90           1.51       1.40   ***2.74      0.19 ***3.05   244
Low versus high official          -0.80          0.09      -1.25        **-2.26       1.62      1.42     -0.51 ***2.60   244
Low versus high restrict        **-2.27      ***-2.91       1.59          -1.17   ***-3.10    **2.25      0.57    1.50   244
Low versus high independence    ***3.07       ***3.02   ***-5.00           0.85     **2.20     *1.72    *-1.74   *1.67   244
Low versus high capital            0.49          0.60      -1.16           1.13       0.31      0.68      0.35   -0.91   244




                                                                   40
                                                 Table IV
                            Valuation, shareholder rights, and bank supervision

This table classifies countries according to their ranking in shareholder rights. Panel A presents medians by country of the
index of shareholder rights, the bank regulatory variables, market-to-book value and Tobin’s Q ratio. The sample includes
the ten largest publicly traded banks in terms of total assets in each country at the end of December 2001, when available.
The number of banks is 244. Panel B reports group medians for low and high values for shareholder rights and the bank
regulatory variables. Panel C reports test of medians for low versus high values for shareholder rights and the bank
supervision variables. Table I defines the variables. * Significant at 10 percent level. ** Significant at 5 percent level. ***
Significant at 1 percent level.
Country                             Rights     Official   Restrict Independence Capital Market-to-book Tobin’s Q

                                                                     Panel A: Medians

Argentina                              4          11          9            1           3            0.94           0.99
Australia                              4          11          8            4           3            2.04           1.08
Austria                                2          13          5            1           5            1.34           1.02
Brazil                                 3          14         10            1           5            1.53           1.04
Canada                                 5           6          7            4           4            1.44           1.02
Chile                                  5          10         11            1           3            2.28           1.10
Colombia                               3                                                            0.97           1.00
Denmark                                2           8          8            1           2            0.98           1.00
Egypt                                  2          12         13            4           3            0.73           0.98
Finland                                3           8          7            1           4            1.06           1.00
France                                 3           7          6            3           2            1.19           1.01
Germany                                1          10          5            4           1            0.73           0.99
Greece                                 2          10          9            1           3            1.84           1.07
Hong Kong                              5                                                            0.92           0.99
India                                  5          8          10            3           3            0.49           0.97
Indonesia                              2          12         14            2           5            0.88           0.99
Ireland                                4          9           8            4           1            1.69           1.04
Israel                                 3           8         13            2           3            0.75           0.99
Italy                                  1          6          10            2           4            1.15           1.01
Japan                                  4          12         13            3           4            1.30           1.01
Jordan                                 1                     11                        5            1.07           1.01
Kenya                                  3          14         10            2           4            0.51           0.90
Korea Rep. Of                          2           9          9            2           3            1.04           1.00
Malaysia                               4          11         10            3           3            1.24           1.03
Mexico                                 1           9         12            1           4            0.97           1.00
Netherlands                            2           8          6            4           3            1.73           1.03
Norway                                 4                                                            0.67           0.97
Pakistan                               5                                                            0.66           0.98
Peru                                   3          12          8            3           3            0.54           0.96
Philippines                            3          11          7            1           1            0.73           0.95
Portugal                               3          13          9            4           3            1.38           1.02
Singapore                              4           3          8            3           1            1.56           1.06
South Africa                           5           4          8            2           4            1.62           1.04
Spain                                  4          9           7            3           4            2.21           1.07
Sri Lanka                              3          11          7            2           0            0.39           0.97


                                                              41
Country                        Rights    Official   Restrict Independence Capital Market-to-book Tobin’s Q

                                                               Panel A: Medians

Sweden                           3           6          9              3         3        1.70       1.03
Switzerland                      2          13          5              3         3        2.39       1.05
Taiwan                           3           8         12              2         2        0.89       0.99
Thailand                         2          10          9              2         4        1.24       1.01
Turkey                           2          11         12              4         1        1.49       1.03
United Kingdom                   5          11         5               4         3        2.34       1.06
United States                     5         13         12              4         4        2.14       1.09
Venezuela                         1         13         10              3         3        0.86       0.98
Zimbabwe                         3                                                        3.60       1.18
Country mean                    3.09       9.84       9.03            2.55      3.05      1.30       1.02

                             Panel B: Group medians

Low rights                       2                                                        1.00       1.00
High rights                      5                                                        1.47       1.03
Low official                                 8                                            1.22       1.01
High official                               12                                            1.18       1.01
Low restrict                                            8                                 1.43       1.02
High restrict                                          12                                 0.98       1.00
Low independence                                                       2                  1.00       1.00
High independence                                                      4                  1.41       1.02
Low capital                                                                      3        1.10       1.01
High capital                                                                     4        1.24       1.02

                             Panel C: Test of Medians (z-statistic)

Low versus high rights       ***-13.49                                                     ***-3.86 ***-4.31
Low versus high official               ***-12.78                                              -0.15     0.23
Low versus high restrict                         ***-12.94                                  ***3.71 ***3.14
Low versus high independence                                      ***-13.14                ***-3.29 ***-3.13
Low versus high capital                                                       ***-12.99       -0.94    -1.01




                                                        42
                                                  Table V
                             Investor protection and valuation of banking firms
Sample of 10 largest listed banks in the country in terms of total assets, if available. Dependent variable is market-to-book
value of the bank’s equity of a bank. Loan growth is the bank’s average net loan growth during the last 3 years. Rights is
an index of anti-director rights for the country. CF is the fraction of the bank’s ultimate cash flow rights held by the
controlling owners and zero if there is no controlling owner. State is a dummy variable that indicates whether the state is
the controlling shareholder in the bank. We use 10 percent as the criteria for control. All bank-level data are for the year
2001. Columns (1)-(2) are estimated using OLS. Columns (3)-(4) are estimated using random country-effects. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses. The Breusch-Pagan (1980) test is a Lagrange multiplier test of independent errors
within countries. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
                                        (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
Loan growth                             0.266              0.269              0.086              0.076
                                        (0.379)            (0.364)            (0.325)            (0.326)
Rights                                  0.308***           0.304***           0.218***           0.217**
                                        (0.055)            (0.056)            (0.085)            (0.085)
CF                                      2.267***           2.318***           1.515***           1.553***
                                        (0.596)            (0.602)            (0.566)            (0.572)
CF * Rights                             -0.889***          -0.864***          -0.580***          -0.577***
                                        (0.153)            (0.164)            (0.182)            (0.182)
State                                                      -0.165                                -0.070
                                                           (0.125)                               (0.137)

Breusch-Pagan test: χ2-statistic                                           47.25              45.50
Breusch-Pagan test: p-value                                                0.000              0.000
Observations                          213                213               213                213
R-squared                             0.20               0.21              0.20               0.20
Number of countries                   42                 42                42                 42




                                                             43
                                              Table VI
                Investor protection, bank supervision, and valuation of banking firms
Sample of 10 largest listed banks in the country in terms of total assets, if available. Dependent variable is market-to-book
value of the bank’s equity of a bank. Loan growth is the bank’s average net loan growth during the last 3 years. Rights is
an index of anti-director rights for the country. CF is the fraction of the bank’s ultimate cash flow rights held by the
controlling owners and zero if there is no controlling owner. State is a dummy variable that indicates whether the state is
the controlling shareholder in the bank. We use 10 percent as the criteria for control. Official is an index of official
supervisory power. Restrict is an index of activity restrictions. Independence is an index of overall supervisory
independence. Capital is an index of capital regulation. All bank-level data are for the year 2001. Regressions are
estimated using random country-effects. Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%.

                               (1)                 (2)                  (3)                  (4)
Loan growth                    -0.113              -0.043               -0.143               0.001
                               (0.349)             (0.335)              (0.348)              (0.336)
State                          -0.197              -0.138               -0.200               -0.166
                               (0.156)             (0.147)              (0.156)              (0.145)
CF                             1.929***            1.893***             1.954***             1.734***
                               (0.624)             (0.601)              (0.624)              (0.603)
Rights                         0.296***            0.282***             0.279***             0.283***
                               (0.085)             (0.080)              (0.089)              (0.077)
CF * Rights                    -0.689***           -0.682***            -0.688***            -0.644***
                               (0.202)             (0.196)              (0.202)              (0.195)
Official                       0.018
                               (0.033)
Restrict                                           -0.036
                                                   (0.035)
Independence                                                            0.053
                                                                        (0.085)
Capital                                                                                      0.100
                                                                                             (0.067)

Observations                   187                 194                  187                  194
Number of countries            36                  37                   36                   37




                                                             44
                                                    Table VII
                                           Controlling for moral hazard
Sample of 10 largest listed banks in the country in terms of total assets, if available. Dependent variable is market-to-book
value of the bank’s equity of a bank. Loan growth is the bank’s average net loan growth during the last 3 years. Rights is
an index of anti-director rights for the country. CF is the fraction of the bank’s ultimate cash flow rights held by the
controlling owners and zero if there is no controlling owner. State is a dummy variable that indicates whether the state is
the controlling shareholder in the bank. We use 10 percent as the criteria for control. Official is an index of official
supervisory power. Restrict is an index of activity restrictions. Independence is an index of overall supervisory
independence. Capital is an index of capital regulation. Moral hazard is an index of the generosity of the deposit insurance
regime in the country. All bank-level data are for the year 2001. Regressions are estimated using random country-effects.
Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

                                  (1)                   (2)                  (3)                   (4)
Loan growth                       -0.158                -0.190               -0.185                -0.174
                                  (0.359)               (0.351)              (0.354)               (0.357)
State                             -0.136                -0.067               -0.139                -0.131
                                  (0.186)               (0.187)              (0.186)               (0.186)
CF                                1.679***              1.719***             1.711***              1.695***
                                  (0.630)               (0.624)              (0.627)               (0.639)
Rights                            0.272***              0.238***             0.266***              0.268***
                                  (0.088)               (0.092)              (0.088)               (0.086)
CF * Rights                       -0.653***             -0.653***            -0.667***             -0.662***
                                  (0.207)               (0.205)              (0.205)               (0.209)
Moral hazard                      -0.051                -0.245               -0.093                -0.058
                                  (0.143)               (0.182)              (0.097)               (0.115)
Official                          0.025
                                  (0.034)
Official * Moralhazard            0.000
                                  (0.014)
Restrict                                                -0.059
                                                        (0.040)
Restrict * Moralhazard                                  0.020
                                                        (0.018)
Independence                                                                 -0.009
                                                                             (0.093)
Independence * Moralhazard                                                   0.018
                                                                             (0.034)
Capital                                                                                            0.018
                                                                                                   (0.090)
Capital * Moralhazard                                                                              0.004
                                                                                                   (0.035)

Observations                      155                   155                  155                   155
Number of countries               31                    31                   31                    31




                                                              45
                                                     Table VIII
                                               Instrumental variables
Sample of 10 largest listed banks in the country in terms of total assets, if available. Dependent variable is market-to-book
value of the bank’s equity of a bank. CF is the fraction of the bank’s ultimate cash flow rights held by the controlling
owners and zero if there is no controlling owner. State is a dummy variable that indicates whether the state is the
controlling shareholder in the bank. We use 10 percent as the criteria for control. Official is an index of official
supervisory power. Restrict is an index of activity restrictions. Independence is an index of overall supervisory
independence. Capital is an index of capital regulation. All bank-level data are for the year 2001. Regressions are
estimated with instrumental variables using the Baltagi (1981) error component two-stage least square random-effects
estimator. As instrument for CF we use the average CF of other banks in the country. We exclude countries with one
bank. Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
                           (1)                     (2)                       (3)                     (4)
State                      -0.112                  -0.078                    -0.111                  -0.109
                           (0.153)                 (0.144)                   (0.153)                 (0.143)
CF                         1.719***                1.747***                  1.737***                1.673***
                           (0.639)                 (0.614)                   (0.636)                 (0.614)
Rights                     0.277***                0.264***                  0.257***                0.263***
                           (0.081)                 (0.076)                   (0.083)                 (0.075)
CF * Rights                -0.636***               -0.646***                 -0.634***               -0.628***
                           (0.213)                 (0.206)                   (0.213)                 (0.206)
Official                   0.022
                           (0.032)
Restrict                                           -0.035
                                                   (0.033)
Independence                                                                 0.054
                                                                             (0.081)
Capital                                                                                              0.085
                                                                                                     (0.063)

Observations              213                     220                     213                      220
R-squared                 0.22                    0.21                    0.21                     0.23
Number of countries       35                      36                      35                       36




                                                             46
                                                    Table IX
                                        Additional country-level controls
Sample of 10 largest listed banks in the country in terms of total assets, if available. Dependent variable is market-to-book
value of the bank’s equity of a bank. Loan growth is the bank’s average net loan growth during the last 3 years. Rights is
an index of anti-director rights for the country. CF is the fraction of the bank’s ultimate cash flow rights held by the
controlling owners and zero if there is no controlling owner. State is a dummy variable that indicates whether the state is
the controlling shareholder in the bank. We use 10 percent as the criteria for control. Per capita income is the log of GDP
per capita. Enforce is an index of enforcement of contracts. Corrupt is an index of corruption. Law is a measure of law
and order tradition. French legal origin is a dummy variable that takes value of one if the country has a French legal
origin, and zero otherwise. English legal origin is a dummy variable that takes value of one if the country has an English
legal origin, and zero otherwise. Moral hazard is a measure of the generosity of the deposit insurance regime. All bank-
level data are for the year 2001. Regressions are estimated using random country-effects. Standard errors in parentheses. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
                            (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)
Loan growth                 0.071           0.055             0.093           0.073            0.091           -0.178
                            (0.325)         (0.332)           (0.327)         (0.324)          (0.328)         (0.352)
State                       -0.045          -0.077            -0.061          -0.056           -0.063          -0.130
                            (0.137)         (0.143)           (0.137)         (0.136)          (0.138)         (0.183)
CF                          1.482***        1.514**           1.535***        1.510***         1.531***        1.727***
                            (0.572)         (0.608)           (0.573)         (0.570)          (0.574)         (0.621)
Rights                      0.206**         0.215**           0.216**         0.200**          0.245**         0.272***
                            (0.086)         (0.089)           (0.086)         (0.086)          (0.100)         (0.083)
CF * Rights                 -0.544***       -0.545***         -0.561***       -0.547***        -0.577***       -0.673***
                            (0.183)         (0.199)           (0.184)         (0.183)          (0.183)         (0.203)
Per capita income           0.098
                            (0.065)
Enforce                                     0.070
                                            (0.046)
Corrupt                                                       0.075
                                                              (0.099)
Law                                                                           0.060*
                                                                              (0.036)
French legal origin                                                                            0.169
                                                                                               (0.238)
English legal origin                                                                           -0.020
                                                                                               (0.271)
Moral hazard                                                                                                   -0.046
                                                                                                               (0.035)

Observations              213              207             213              213             213              155
Number of countries       42               41              42               42              42               31




                                                            47
