                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           CORPORATE EARNINGS TRACK THE COMPETITIVE BENCHMARK

                                             Robert E. Hall

                                         Working Paper 10150
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10150


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2003




This research was supported by the National Science Foundation under grant SOC SBR-9730341 and is part
of the research program on Economic Fluctuations and Growth of the NBER. I am grateful to Andrew Abel,
John Heaton, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comment. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Robert E. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Corporate Earnings Track the Competitive Benchmark
Robert E. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 10150
December 2003
JEL No. E22, G10

                                           ABSTRACT

Earnings are the flow of value created by corporations. I concentrate on the concept called EBITDA

– earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization. This measure captures the results

of the substantive non-financial activities of corporations and corresponds to the rental price of

capital multiplied by the quantity of capital. I measure earnings per dollar of capital for all U.S.

corporations and in 5 selected industries. I develop a competitive benchmark for the level of

earnings, which takes account of adjustment costs, taxes, depreciation, and the financial opportunity

cost of funds. I find that aggregate corporate earnings track the benchmark reasonably closely,

leaving a relatively small unexplained component. Thus evidence of the flow of value gives little

help in explaining the large discrepancies found in earlier work in the level of the market value of

claims on corporations relative to the replacement cost of the capital stock. At the industry level, I

find more volatility of both actual and benchmark earnings, with a high correlation between the two

in 3 of the 5 industries.

Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
rehall@stanford.edu
I.    Introduction

       Earnings are the flow of value accruing to a claimant. In standard corporate
accounting, the claimant is the body of shareholders. The value of the claims of the
shareholders—reflected in the corporation’s value in the stock market—is the present
value of future shareholder earnings. Those earnings are the net flow after satisfying the
claims of debt holders. In addition, as recent experience has shown, shareholder earnings
are buffeted by changes in the value of the financial claims of the corporation on other
businesses. Where the market values of those claims are in doubt, there is corresponding
doubt about shareholder earnings.
       A great deal of business analysis of earnings cuts around most of these problems by
adopting, implicitly, a different accounting framework. That framework considers all of the
financial claims on a business rather than focusing just on the shareholders’ residual claim.
In particular, the measure called EBITDA—earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation,
and amortization—is a popular measure of business performance. It isolates the
substantive results of business activities from changes in the firm’s financial portfolio. The
isolation cannot be completely successful. In particular, it is almost impossible in banks
and other financial institutions whose business activities involve operating portfolios. In
addition, borderline activities such as the sale of services or software to business partners
often cannot be cleanly divided between operating and financial activities. Nonetheless,
EBITDA is a useful measure. This paper is about the economics of EBITDA.
       The first step is to measure earnings at the level of all U.S. corporations. The
National Income and Product Accounts are the natural starting point for this exercise. The
NIPA concept of profit is the residual from the sale of goods and services less costs of
current inputs—it excludes the portfolio flows that complicate shareholder earnings. To
bring profit up to EBITDA, I add corporate interest payments, taxes, and depreciation




                                              1
(NIPA profit makes no deductions for amortization). I state earnings as a ratio to the
estimated reproduction cost of corporations’ tangible capital—plant, equipment, and
inventories. Thus the earnings concept is earnings per dollar of tangible capital.
       The second step is to develop a competitive benchmark for earnings. In a
competitive economy, tangible capital services are supplied perfectly elastically to a
corporation at a flow price that depends on taxation, depreciation, and risk. That is, the
corporation must cover the costs of taxes and depreciation and repay the suppliers of
finance for bearing risk. With perfect competition, earnings will equal the supply price of
capital services. My benchmark considers risk as it is measured in modern financial
economics as a determinant of the average value of earnings. The benchmark also
incorporates adjustment costs. In the presence of adjustment costs, earnings include
scarcity rents when the capital stock is growing. The benchmark uses an estimate of the
coefficient relating Tobin’s q to the growth of the capital stock to take these rents into
account.
       The third step is to compare measured earnings with the benchmark. I find that the
benchmark accounts for most of the movements of the actual ratio of earnings to the
replacement cost of the capital stock. This finding contrasts with my earlier work, which
found a large gap between the market value of corporations and the value of their
measured capital. The two findings are not strictly contradictory, however, because
measured earnings are affected in two ways by intangible capital, and the two effects could
be largely offsetting. On the one hand, earnings include the flow of value that corporations
enjoy from their stocks of intangibles. On the other hand, earnings deduct the current cost
of forming new intangibles.




                                            2
II.   Measuring Earnings

       The Data Appendix describes the calculations and sources more fully. The
complete details of all the calculations in the paper are in a set of spreadsheets available
from Stanford.edu/~rehall.
       The starting point for earnings is corporate profits before tax for domestic business
of U.S. corporations. To this I add interest paid and capital consumption allowances. The
result is the nominal flow of domestic corporate EBITDA. To calculate the value of
corporate plant and equipment, pK ,t Kt , I use data from the Fixed Assets Tables compiled

by the Bureau of Economic Analysis in conjunction with the NIPA. This source reports the
net value at current prices of corporate equipment, software, and structures. I have not
found a source for the value of corporate inventories, pV ,tVt . I take private business

inventories from the NIPA and multiply by the ratio of corporate to total capital
consumption allowances to estimate the corporate component of inventory value.
       I measure earnings as the residual of total revenue, Yt , over payments to non-

capital factors, Wt , divided by the value of the capital stock at the end of the period:

                                                    Yt − Wt
                                     rC ,t =                      ,                         (2.1)
                                               pK ,t Kt + pV ,tVt


Figure 1 shows the result of these calculations, stated as the ratio of earnings to tangible
capital value. Annual earnings averaged about 16 percent of capital value over the period
since 1948. They reached a maximum in the mid-1960s above 18 percent, declined to a
trough of about 12 percent in the early 1980s, and have grown since then, through the last
reported year, 2001 (because the earnings data are based on income tax records, they are
reported with a considerable lag).




                                                  3
 0.20

 0.18

 0.16

 0.14

 0.12

 0.10

 0.08

 0.06

 0.04

 0.02

 0.00
      47

             50

                    53

                           56

                                  59

                                         62

                                                65

                                                       68

                                                              71

                                                                     74

                                                                            77

                                                                                   80

                                                                                          83

                                                                                                 86

                                                                                                        89

                                                                                                               92

                                                                                                                      95

                                                                                                                             98
    19

           19

                  19

                         19

                                19

                                       19

                                              19

                                                     19

                                                            19

                                                                   19

                                                                          19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                        19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                           19
Figure 1. Ratio of Corporate Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and
Amortization to Value of Corporate Tangible Capital, 1947-2001




III. The Competitive Benchmark

        The competitive benchmark asks what level of earnings would just cover the cost
of supplying capital services. More precisely, when earnings are at the benchmark level,
the return to holding a unit of capital is worth, in present value, exactly the cost of
acquiring the capital. This discussion covers much of the same ground as Hall and
Jorgenson [1967]. The competitive benchmark is a relative of the rental or service price of
capital, developed in the investment literature. For the moment, I will consider only one
type of capital; later I will add inventories. I let rK be the expected earnings of a machine




                                                               4
and let p% K be the purchase price of that machine. I then write the competitive benchmark

                  rK
for earnings as        . Absent factors such as earnings of intangibles, the actual earnings
                  p% K
ratio presented in the previous section would have the same expected value as the
benchmark.
       The flow benchmark developed here is a close relative of the value benchmark
considered in my earlier paper (Hall [2001]). The benchmark in the earlier paper for the
total value of all financial claims on a corporation is the value of the capital stock held by
the corporation. A direct arbitrage argument shows that the value of financial claims
should equal the benchmark, as a corporation can issue claims and buy capital profitably if
the claims are worth more than the capital, or an outsider can buy claims to obtain the
underlying capital if the claims are worth less than the capital. The paper extended this
principle to take account of adjustment costs. Consequently, my earlier paper did not
examine the present value of earnings as a benchmark for corporate value.
       The flow benchmark turns out to be more complicated than the value benchmark
because production takes time. The firm chooses factor inputs in one period and sells the
resulting output in the next period. The decision takes into consideration the financial risk
of the funds tied up in capital and inventories while production occurs. Where the value
benchmark is a single number—the current replacement value of the capital stock—the
flow benchmark is a random variable. The fundamental condition defining the flow
benchmark is stochastic.

A.     Derivation of the flow benchmark
       Under constant returns to scale, the value of a corporation per unit of capital is
independent of its scale. Thus, without loss of generality, one can examine the value of a
corporation that starts with one unit of capital in year t and allows it to depreciate without

replacement. At a depreciation rate δ , the firm will hold 1 − δ units a year later, (1 − δ )
                                                                                                2


after two years, and so on. I take consumption goods as numeraire, so all prices are in real




                                            5
terms. Let rK ,t be the earnings per dollar of capital value. Consider a firm that uses one

unit of capital in year t, 1 − δ in period t+1, and so on. For the moment, I abstract from
complications involving taxation and adjustment costs. Then the value of the firm at the
beginning of period t ′ is

                                       ∞
                                          mt ′+τ +1
                                                    (1 − δ )t t +τ rK ,t′+τ pK ,t′+τ ,
                                                             ′−
                         vt ′ = Et ′ ∑                                                                           (3.1)
                                      τ =0 mt ′


where m is the stochastic pricing kernel—marginal utility in some general sense. Cochrane
[2001] provides a thorough treatment of finance from this perspective. The present value
relation implies the recursion,

                                             m                             
                                     vt = Et  t +1 ( rK ,t pK ,t + vt +1 )  .                                  (3.2)
                                              mt                           

                                                                      t ′−t
       If the value benchmark holds, then vt′ = (1 − δ )                      pK ,t ′ for all t and t ′ . Thus


                                        m                                           
                             pK ,t = Et  t +1  rK ,t pK ,t + (1 − δ ) pK ,t +1   .                         (3.3)
                                         mt                                         


Consequently, any random variable, rˆK ,t , satisfying


                                        m rˆK ,t pK ,t + (1 − δ ) pK ,t +1 
                                1 = Et  t +1                                                                   (3.4)
                                        mt             p K ,t             


could serve as a benchmark. The second factor inside the expectation is the return ratio,
Rˆ K ,t , corresponding to the benchmark earnings variable. Thus the criterion for the

benchmark takes the compact form,




                                                       6
                                                  m             
                                           1 = Et  t +1 Rˆ K ,t                         (3.5)
                                                   mt           


This property of return ratios is the bedrock principle of modern finance. It is useful to
rewrite it as

                                         m                 m 
                   E
                       mt +1 ˆ
                        mt
                                                                         (      )
                             RK ,t = Cov  t +1 , Rˆ K ,t  +  E t +1  ERˆ K ,t = 1 ,   (3.6)
                                          mt               mt 

I define the risk premium as

                                                       mt +1 ˆ 
                                       φ = −Cov             , RK ,t                     (3.7)
                                                       mt           

and the return ratio, R f , for a hypothetical risk-free one-period real bill as


                                                         1
                                               Rf =            ,                          (3.8)
                                                         mt +1
                                                       E
                                                          mt

so


                                           (               )
                                         E Rˆ K ,t − R f = φ R f                          (3.9)


This equation states the implications of equation (3.4) in the form of a Capital Asset
Pricing Model. Expected return is a positive function of risk.
        Equation (3.9) suggests two approaches to measuring the return to capital. One is to
take the realized actual return over an appropriate period. The other is to measure the risk
premium from the covariance of the realized return with an empirical stochastic discounter
and apply the premium to the risk-free rate, according to the right-hand side of the
equation. Economists who study securities markets have a strong preference for the second




                                                      7
procedure, because the variance of realized returns for equities is high. Consequently,
measures of average returns are unreliable but measures of covariances are adequately
reliable. As I will explain shortly, the variance of the returns to capital is nowhere near as
high as the variance of the returns to equity, so I use the realized average, RK . I will refer
to this quantity as the financial cost of capital.
          With these ingredients, I can provide a characterization of the benchmark more
operational than the general definition in equation (3.4). A benchmark return ratio is
related to the benchmark earnings by

                                                                      p
                                           Rˆ K ,t = rˆK ,t + (1 − δ ) K t +1 .                   (3.10)
                                                                       p K ,t


Consequently,

                                                               pK ,t +1 
                                       (      )
                        E ( rˆK ,t ) = E Rˆ K ,t − (1 − δ ) E 
                                                               p         = RK − (1 − δ ) π .   (3.11)
                                                               K ,t 


Here π is the unconditional expectation of the rate of growth of the price of capital goods,
  pK ,t +1 
E
  p         .
    K  , t  
          I summarize in


          Flow Valuation Theorem: Under constant returns to scale and with a
          financial cost of capital RK , among earnings distributions rˆK ,t , those that

          satisfy the valuation condition of equation (3.1) have unconditional mean
          RK − (1 − δ ) π .




                                                          8
       The theorem provides a two-step process for checking an observed time series of
earnings against the flow valuation criterion. First, determine the financial cost of capital,
RK . Second, compare rK ,t to the benchmark mean, RK − (1 − δ ) π . Notice that the use of

the realized average return to measure the financial cost of capital means that the
comparison cannot show that the average of rK ,t departs from the benchmark. The two are

equal by construction. Rather, the comparison shows if there are briefer episodes of
earnings above or below the benchmark.

B.     Returns with adjustment costs, taxation, and inventories
       I take account of adjustment costs by reinterpreting the price of capital goods, pK .
That price is the market price for newly produced capital goods in the absence of
adjustment costs and is the internal shadow value of installed capital in the presence of
adjustment costs. In the latter case, pK is the purchase price, p% K , multiplied by Tobin’s q
(this is just the definition of q). I measure Tobin’s q from the first-order condition for
quadratic adjustment costs,

                                                 Kt − Kt −1
                                    qt − 1 = γ              .                         (3.12)
                                                   Kt −1

The evidence across the industries considered in Hall [2003] suggests that a typical value
for γ is about one, the value I adopt here. The results would be similar across a range of
values consistent with that evidence and with other work on estimating adjustment costs
from the Euler equation.
       To take account of inventories, I let

                                              pK K
                                      ω=                                              (3.13)
                                           pK K + pV V




                                               9
be the value share of fixed capital. The firm buys one dollar’s worth of capital at the
beginning of the period, divided with weights ωt and 1 − ωt between fixed capital and
inventories. At the end of the period, the firm receives tax benefits (investment tax credit
                                                                                                  xK ,t
and depreciation deductions) attributable to the first period of ωt                                       from fixed capital
                                                                                                   qt

and (1 − ωt ) xV ,t from inventories. The division by qt reflects the fact that tax benefits for

plant and equipment are awarded per dollar of acquisition cost, not per dollar of value. At
the end of the period, the firm receives revenue of yt , pays wt for its other inputs, and

pays tax on the difference. Thus the firm’s after-tax earnings are (1 − τ t )( yt − wt ) . For the

remainder of the paper, I consider the case where depreciation varies over time but is
determined by the date when capital is installed. Thus the remaining value of the fixed
                           pK ,t +1                                                 pV ,t +1
capital is ωt (1 − δ t )              and of the inventories (1 − ωt )                         . Accordingly, the return
                            pK ,t                                                     pV ,t

ratio for the one dollar investment is:

                                                                      xK ,t
                            RC ,t = (1 − τ t )( yt − wt ) + ωt                + (1 − ωt ) xV ,t
                                                                       qt
                                                                                                                    (3.14)
                                             pK ,t +1                 pV ,t +1
                            +ωt (1 − δ t )              + (1 − ωt )
                                              pK ,t                     pV ,t


The literature on measuring the return to capital—notably Poterba [1998]—has not always
included the last two terms, representing capital gains on capital goods. The rate of return
without those terms is the own rate on capital, rather than the real rate based on treating
consumption goods as numeraire. As a practical matter, the difference is small, because the
prices of capital and consumption goods generally move together.




                                                           10
C.     Measuring the return to investment
       The formulation in equation (3.14) clarifies the role of risk in the determination of
earnings. Risk arises from uncertainty about earnings per unit of capital and about the price
of capital goods next period. In the simplest case, where consumption goods are perfect
substitutes for output and capital goods, there is no uncertainty about capital goods prices
and the risk premium arises only from uncertainty about output per unit of capital. On the
other hand, the price of fixed capital goods fluctuates in the presence of adjustment costs.
The risk premium is likely to be positive in this case—favorable events raise the shadow
value and lower marginal utility, so the covariance of the return with the pricing kernel is
negative and the risk premium, φ , correspondingly positive. Similarly, if the adjustment
costs are external, arising in the industries supplying capital goods, pK ,t is the observed

price, which is likely to be negatively correlated with marginal utility, and again the risk
premium is positive.
       The standard approach in modern finance is to measure the risk of a security’s
return from equation (3.7) and then to apply equation (3.9) to infer its expected return—see
Cochrane [2001]. The reasons are twofold: First, persuasive evidence shows that expected
returns vary over time (Campbell and Shiller [1998]). Second, realized returns have high
dispersion with thick tails, so that estimates of expected returns from the sample mean of
historical returns have large sampling errors while estimates of covariances are adequately
precise.
       I think the balance tips in the opposite direction for the return to corporate tangible
capital. The dispersion of returns to capital is far less than for returns to the S&P 500. The
standard deviation of the return to capital is 0.028 as against 0.150 for the S&P (return
calculated from data from Robert Shiller’s website). The standard error of the estimated
mean for the return to capital is 38 basis points as against 207 basis points for the S&P. To
put the difference most dramatically, it would take 1559 years of data for the S&P to




                                            11
measure its unconditional expected return with the same precision obtained here from 54
years of data for the return to capital.
        The precision of estimation of the mean of the realized return to capital is sufficient
to explore for variations over time. There is statistically unambiguous evidence of a
slightly lower return in the second half of the sample period, from the mid-1970s onward.
This was a period of rising real returns to debt, so a financial model such as the standard
Capital Asset Pricing Model that portrays risky returns as the sum of a time-varying return
to risk-free debt plus a constant risk premium would contradict the evidence from the mean
of the realized return.
        The compelling reason to avoid an inference of the expected return from a risk
premium and a risk-free return, as in equation (3.9), is that finance has yet to resolve
fundamental puzzles about measuring the stochastic discounter in equation (3.7) in a way
that rationalizes the pricing of securities. The stochastic discounter needs to have extreme
volatility to rationalize the equity premium (Hansen and Jagannathan [1991]) but the
marginal rate of substitution from any but the most exotic preferences falls far short of that
volatility (Campbell and Cochrane [1999]). Without much guidance about how to
construct the stochastic discounter in practice, I am thrown back on the simple calculation
of the mean of the realized return.

D.      Components of the benchmark
        The earnings shown in Figure 1 are earnings per dollar of capital valued at
acquisition price. The corresponding benchmark stated in terms of the conditional
expectation and qt is


                                  (ωt qt + 1 − ωt ) Et ( yt − wt ) .                   (3.15)


From equation (3.14), the conditional expectation of the return to capital is




                                                12
                                                                  xK ,t
                      Et RC ,t = (1 − τ t ) Et ( yt − wt ) + ωt           + (1 − ωt ) xV ,t
                                                                   qt
                                                                                              .   (3.16)
                                        p                   p        
                      + Et ωt (1 − δ t ) K ,t +1 + (1 − ωt ) V ,t +1 
                                        pK ,t               pV ,t 


For the reasons discussed earlier, I will approximate the conditional expected return by its
unconditional value, RC . I allow for time variation in the conditional expectation of
revenue. In addition, as equation (3.16) indicates, the tax rate and the rate of depreciation
vary over time. As a result, the earnings benchmark does vary over time, even though the
return to capital is taken to be constant over time.
       I solve equation (3.17) for the conditional expectation of earnings per dollar of
capital value:

            Et ( yt − wt ) =
                      xK ,t                                   p                   p        
            RC − ωt       − (1 − ωt ) xV ,t − Et ωt (1 − δ t ) K ,t +1 + (1 − ωt ) V ,t +1  .   (3.17)
                       qt                                     pK ,t               pV ,t 
                                                1 −τt

Thus the benchmark for earnings per dollar of capital measured at acquisition price is:

           r%C ,t = (ωt qt + 1 − ωt ) Et ( yt − wt ) = (ωt qt + 1 − ωt ) ×
                      xK ,t                                   p                   p        
            RC − ωt       − (1 − ωt ) xV ,t − Et ωt (1 − δ t ) K ,t +1 + (1 − ωt ) V ,t +1  .   (3.18)
                       qt                                     pK ,t               pV ,t 
                                                1 −τt


With zero weight for inventories ( ωt = 1 ), this equation is close to the discrete-time version
of Hall and Jorgenson’s [1967] rental price of capital, but is not exactly the same because it
is the expected value of the realized income, not the rent that would be set in advance in a
competitive market for rental contracts. The latter would command a risk premium not




                                                    13
included here—specifically, the conditional expectation of the ratio of the future to the
current capital goods price would be replaced by the conditional expectation of the product
of the pricing kernel and the price ratio.
       The final step is to provide empirical counterparts to the conditional expectations of
                                                                          pK ,t +1            pV ,t +1
the growth ratios of the real prices of capital goods, Et                            and Et              . Although an
                                                                             pK ,t             pV ,t

econometric fishing expedition might turn up some variables with forecasting power, I
believe that the most reasonable measures are the unconditional expectation, π K = 0.990

and π V = 0.989 (both types of capital have become cheaper relative to consumption

                                                                                                  pK ,t +1
because of the rising relative price of services). The serial correlation of                                 is slightly
                                                                                                   pK ,t

negative, but the confidence interval contains zero comfortably. Thus the benchmark is

                                              xK ,t
                                    RC − ωt           − (1 − ωt ) xV ,t − ωt (1 − δ t ) π K − (1 − ωt ) πV
                                               qt
       r%C ,t = (ωt qt + 1 − ωt )                                                                             . (3.19)
                                                                    1 −τ t

       The final step in the derivation of the benchmark is to relate the annual equivalents
of tax benefits, xK ,t and xV ,t , to actual tax provisions. Under the U.S. corporate income

tax, in some years corporations received, in effect, a negative excise tax on some fixed
capital in the form of an investment tax credit. In all years, corporations were entitled to
depreciation deductions based on lifetimes that have varied substantially over time.
       In principle, calculating the first-year equivalent of the investment tax credit and
depreciation deductions is an intricate task, because the optimal pattern of ownership may
involve tax-motivated transactions in each machine at various ages. Most of these are
blocked by tax-benefit-recovery provisions in the law. I believe that a reasonable
approximation can be based on a simple smoothing model. I calculate xK ,t from the




                                                         14
                                                                                      t +τ
hypothesis that the flow associated with a given machine, xK ,t (1 − δ t ) π K            has a

present value equal to the present value of the actual tax credit and depreciation
deductions. Let the latter be Ct and Dt . Then


                            xK ,t = 1 − RB−1 (1 − δτ ) π  ( Ct + Dt ) .                    (3.20)
                                                         


Here RB−1 is the real discount ratio appropriate for the tax benefits, which have low
financial risk. U.S. corporate tax law has always kept depreciation deductions constant in
nominal terms, so the present value Dt projects changes in real deductions associated with
changes in the price level. Also, the value of depreciation deductions depends on the tax
rate prevailing when the deductions are taken, so Dt in principle involves expectations of
future corporate tax rates, though these are probably little different from the rate prevailing
at time t.
        For inventories, U.S. tax law provides no depreciation or other incentive, but does
impose an implicit capital gains tax because of the tax rule that firms deduct the cost of
inventories only when the goods are sold. Thus

                                       xV ,t = −τ t ( ft − 1) .                              (3.21)


where ft is the rate of growth of the nominal inventory price.
        The rate of return from equation (3.14) averages 4.46 percent with a standard error
of 0.38 percentage points. This corresponds reasonably closely to Poterba’s [1998]
estimate of 5.1 percent. Poterba does not decompose total corporate taxes as in equation
(3.14), but rather simply treats all taxes paid as a deduction from the return.




                                                15
IV. Comparison of Actual to Benchmark Earnings

         Figure 2 compares the actual earnings from Figure 1 with the benchmark of
equation (3.19). The two agree reasonably closely. Of course, the agreement on overall
level is by construction, as I chose the constant after-tax real return to capital to equal its
average over this period. The benchmark captures the lack of trend in earnings through
1972, some of the decline from then until 1982, and most of the increase since then. The
primary feature of actual earnings that eludes the benchmark is the bulge during the mid-
1960s.

  0.20


  0.18


  0.16


  0.14


  0.12                                                 Earnings
                                                       Benchmark
  0.10


  0.08


  0.06
      47

             50

                    53

                           56

                                  59

                                         62

                                                65

                                                       68

                                                              71

                                                                     74

                                                                            77

                                                                                   80

                                                                                          83

                                                                                                 86

                                                                                                        89

                                                                                                               92

                                                                                                                      95

                                                                                                                             98
    19

           19

                  19

                         19

                                19

                                       19

                                              19

                                                     19

                                                            19

                                                                   19

                                                                          19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                        19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                           19




Figure 2. Actual and Benchmark Earnings


         Figure 3 shows the contributions of five variables in the benchmark: the rate of
depreciation, δ t , the corporate tax rate, τ t , Tobin’s qt , the tax incentives xK ,t and xV ,t ,




                                                              16
and the inventory mix, ωt . The contribution is measured as the difference between the
benchmark and a recalculation of the benchmark with the variable held constant at its
average over the period.

  0.10                           Depreciation                                      Tax rate
  0.08                           Tobin's q                                         Tax incentives
  0.06                           Inventory mix
  0.04

  0.02

  0.00

 -0.02

 -0.04

 -0.06

 -0.08

 -0.10
      47

             50

                    53

                           56

                                  59

                                         62

                                                65

                                                       68

                                                              71

                                                                     74

                                                                            77

                                                                                   80

                                                                                          83

                                                                                                 86

                                                                                                        89

                                                                                                               92

                                                                                                                      95

                                                                                                                             98

                                                                                                                                    01
    19

           19

                  19

                         19

                                19

                                       19

                                              19

                                                     19

                                                            19

                                                                   19

                                                                          19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                        19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                           19

Figure 3. Components of Benchmark Earnings                                                                                        20


       Depreciation rises on a steady trend. An important part of the rise in the benchmark
and, presumably, in actual earnings after 1982 comes from higher depreciation rates. These
reflect the shift in the composition of corporate capital away from plant and toward
equipment, and, within equipment, toward shorter-lived computers. On the other hand, the
corporate tax rate has generally contributed a component trending downward, with upward
spikes in the Korean War and before the tax reform of 1986. Tobin’s q makes only
transitory contributions to the benchmark. With relatively low adjustment costs, the




                                                              17
contributions are quite small. Tax incentives and the inventory mix make relatively small
contributions.
       The aggregate data displayed in Figure 2 leave relatively little unexplained about
earnings. In particular, there is little sign in the 1990s of any flow of earnings from
intangibles or other factors that might explain the extraordinary level that the stock market
reached during the 1990s. The contrast is striking between the small discrepancies
separating actual and benchmark earnings in Figure 2, on the one hand, and the huge
discrepancies separating the value of the stock market and other financial claims and its
benchmark, the reproduction cost of the capital stock, in my earlier work on the stock
market (Hall [2001]), on the other hand.
       The results in Figure 2 support my earlier findings of low adjustment costs. If the
residuals between actual earnings and the benchmark arose from rents earned from high
adjustment costs, the residuals would be persistent. The serial correlation of the residuals is
0.62, far below the level that would correspond to high adjustment costs and completely
consistent with the movements that would occur from random, transitory influences other
than responses to adjustment costs.



V.    Industry Earnings

       The NIPAs do not provide detail to carry out calculations for corporations at the
industry level. I am limited to calculations for all forms of business. The NIPA accounting
system does not separate the earnings of capital from the earnings of labor for non-
corporate entities, which are mainly proprietorships and partnerships. Logical methods for
imputing earnings result in puzzlingly low returns to capital for non-corporate business—
see Moskowitz and Vissing-Jørgensen [2002]. To avoid this problem, I limit the
calculations to industries with small non-corporate sectors. The only measure that the
NIPAs report for corporate and non-corporate businesses separately is capital consumption




                                             18
allowances. Further, the NIPAs do not provide consistent detail for fine industry
breakdowns. Two key variables, inventories and net interest, are available only at roughly
the 1-digit SIC level. Table 1 shows the corporate fraction measured by capital
consumption allowances for the finest industry detail for industries that are at least 90
percent corporate.



                                       Percent
Industry
                                      corporate
Manufacturing durables                   97
Manufacturing non-durables               98
Communication                            92
Utilities                                94
Wholesale trade                          94

Table 1. Ratio of Corporate to Total Capital Consumption Allowances by Industry, 1987


           In these industries, I inflated corporate profits slightly to account for the fact that all
other variables are measured at the total business level—I divided corporate profits by the
counterpart of the percentage shown in Table 1, for each year. In all other respects, the
calculations at the industry level are the same as those for total corporate business
discussed earlier.
           Figure 4 compares actual earnings per dollar of capital to the benchmark for the
five industries. In three of the industries—non-durables, communication, and utilities—the
agreement of actual and benchmark is striking. The match is even closer than for total
corporate earnings. In durables and wholesale trade, actual earnings were well above the
benchmark in the 1950s, fell below in the 1980s, and then recovered toward the benchmark
in the 1990s.




                                                  19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Earnings per dollar of capital                                                                                   Earnings per dollar of capital




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                          19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                                                                                                            48                                                                                                           48
                                                                                                                                                                                                          19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                                                                                                            51                                                                                                           51
                                                                                                                                                                                                          19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                                                                                                            54                                                                                                           54
                                                                                                                                                                                                          19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                                                                                                            57                                                                                                           57
                                                                                                                                                                                                          19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                                                                                                            60                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                          19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                                                                                                            63                                                                                                           63
                                                                                                                                                                                                          19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                                                                                                            66                                                                                                           66
                                                                                                                                                                                                          19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                                                                                                            69                                                                                                           69
                                                                                                                                                                                                          19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                                                                                                            72                                                                                                           72




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Earnings
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Durables




                                                                                                                                                                                                          19                                                                                                           19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Benchmark
                                                                                                                                                                                                            75                                                                                                           75
                                                                                                                                                                                                          19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Manufacturing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Communication




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Earnings
                                                                                                                                                                                                            78                                                                                                           78




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Benchmark
                                                                                                                                                                                                          19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                               Earnings per dollar of capital                                               81                                                                                                           81
                                                                                                                                                                                                          19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                                                                                                            84                                                                                                           84




                                                                                                          0.00
                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                        0.10
                                                                                                                                0.15
                                                                                                                                       0.20
                                                                                                                                              0.25
                                                                                                                                                     0.30
                                                                                                                                                            0.35
                                                                                                                                                                       0.40
                                                                                                                                                                               0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.50
                                                                                                  19                                                                                                      19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                     48                                                                                                     87                                                                                                           87
                                                                                                  19                                                                                                      19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                     51                                                                                                     90                                                                                                           90
                                                                                                  19                                                                                                      19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                     54                                                                                                     93                                                                                                           93
                                                                                                  19                                                                                                      19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                     57                                                                                                     96                                                                                                           96
                                                                                                  19                                                                                                      19                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                     60                                                                                                     99                                                                                                           99
                                                                                                  19
                                                                                                     63
                                                                                                  19
                                                                                                     66
                                                                                                  19
                                                                                                     69
                                                                                                  19




20
                                                                                                     72
                                                                                                  19




                                                                                                                                                                   Earnings
                                                                                                     75




                                                                                                                                                                   Benchmark
                                                                                                  19
                                                                                                     78




                                                                                                                                                                                      Wholesale Trade
                                                                                                  19
                                                                                                     81
                                                                                                  19
                                                                                                     84                                                                                                                                Earnings per dollar of capital                                                                                    Earnings per dollar of capital
                                                                                                  19
                                                                                                     87
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.35




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.12




                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                  19                                                                                                       48                                                                                                             48
                                                                                                     90
                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                  19                                                                                                       51                                                                                                             51
                                                                                                     93
                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                  19                                                                                                       54                                                                                                             54
                                                                                                     96
                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                  19                                                                                                       57                                                                                                             57
                                                                                                     99
                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                                                                                                           60                                                                                                             60
                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                                                                                                           63                                                                                                             63
                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                                                                                                           66                                                                                                             66
                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                                                                                                           69                                                                                                             69
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Utilities




                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                                                                                                           72                                                                                                             72
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                                                                                                           75                                                                                                             75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Benchmark




                                                                                                                                                                                                        19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19
                                                                                                                                                                                                           78                                                                                                             78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Non-Durables
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Manufacturing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Benchmark




                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                                                                                                           81                                                                                                             81
                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                                                                                                           84                                                                                                             84
                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                                                                                                           87                                                                                                             87
                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                                                                                                           90                                                                                                             90
                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                                                                                                           93                                                                                                             93
                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                                                                                                           96                                                                                                             96
                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                                                                                                           99                                                                                                             99




     Figure 4. Actual and Benchmark Earnings per Dollar of Capital for Five Selected Industries
           To investigate the nature of the departures of actual from benchmark earnings, I
estimated the following descriptive regression:

                                   rC ,t                   1
                                           = a + bqt +          εt .                          (5.1)
                                   rB ,t                 1− ρ L


Here L is the lag operator, ρ is the serial correlation of the disturbance, and ε t is the
innovation in the disturbance. Table 3 shows the results.



                                                      Standard        Serial       Standard
Industry                         q coefficient, b       error     correlation, ρ     error
Manufacturing durables                 1.39              (0.47)        0.65         (0.08)
Manufacturing non-durables             0.01              (0.55)        0.47         (0.21)
Communication                          -0.64             (0.47)        0.85         (0.13)
Utilities                              -1.04             (0.54)        0.75         (0.19)
Wholesale trade                         1.10             (0.44)        0.71         (0.04)

Table 2. Regressions of the Ratio of Actual to Benchmark Earnings on q, with Autoregressive
Error


           The unexplained component is positively correlated with Tobin’s q in the two
industries with large departures of actual from benchmark earnings, durables and
wholesale trade. The coefficient of the regression on q is about 1.5. This correlation does
not imply an understatement of the adjustment-cost coefficient, γ , that I used to form q.
The value of γ that resulted in zero correlation with the unexplained component would be
a cousin of the least-squares estimate of γ in the framework of Hall [2003]. Because there
are good reasons to use the instrumental-variables estimate of γ , there is no reason to
expect a zero correlation. Further, even if one did choose a higher adjustment cost, γ , in
order to make q and the unexpected component of earnings uncorrelated, the resulting
unexpected components would be quite similar to the ones shown in Figure 4. The figure




                                                 21
would look hardly different if the fluctuations in q were multiplied by two, because the
volatility of q is so low (see Figure 3).
           I conclude that the movements of earnings not explained by the benchmark do not
arise from rents associated with scarce capital, on the upside, or depressed earnings from
capital surpluses, on the downside. The fluctuations associated with those rents can be
identified by their correlation with the rate of growth of the capital stock, measured by q.
Instead, the movements come from other sources. Some of the unexplained components
are likely the results of problems in the data. The estimates of the serial correlation
parameter are 0.65 or higher for all industries but non-durables. Thus the forces that cause
the discrepancies are quite persistent—the role of surprises in earnings or in capital prices
must be relatively small.
           Figure 4 shows noticeable differences in the level of earnings per dollar of capital
across industries. These differences are reflected in the underlying rates of return, to the
extent that differences in depreciation rates and other determinants do not account for
them. Table 3 shows that the differences in rates of return are substantial. Some of the
differences may result from variations in financial risk—manufacturing and wholesale
trade may be riskier than communication and utilities, in the sense of having returns more
negatively correlated with the stochastic discounter of equation (3.7).



                                   Rate of return (dollars per year
Industry
                                     per dollar of capital value)
Manufacturing durables                           8.0
Manufacturing non-durables                      11.7
Communication                                    2.7
Utilities                                        4.2
Wholesale trade                                  7.2

Table 3. Rates of Return to Capital by Industry, 1948-2001




                                                 22
VI. Contribution of Earnings Discrepancies to Valuation
Discrepancies

       The value of a corporation includes the present value of the earnings it enjoys in
excess of the benchmark. Let dt be the discrepancy in year t between actual and
benchmark earnings. If the risk of the discrepancy is the same as the risk of earnings in
general, then the earnings discrepancy contributes

                                               ∞
                                    v%t = Et ∑ RC−τ dt +τ                           (6.1)
                                              τ =0


to the value of the corporation. If the discrepancy follows a univariate AR(1) process with
parameter ρ , the corresponding value component is

                                               RC
                                      v%t =          dt .                           (6.2)
                                              RC − ρ


The AR coefficient ρ has the value 0.62 for total corporate earnings. Higher-order AR
processes contributed nothing meaningful to the fit.
       Figure 5 compares the present value of the earnings discrepancy, v%t , to the
discrepancy between the market value of claims on corporations and the estimated value of
their tangible capital, from Hall [2001]. The latter is measured by imputing Tobin’s q for
plant and equipment from equation (3.12) and dividing the resulting measure of plant and
equipment value, together with the value of inventories, into the market value of corporate
securities and other financial claims from my earlier work. Note that this measure is for
non-financial corporations while my work in this paper on earnings is for all corporations.
I have not found detailed data on financial claims for any sector that matches a sector for
which I can carry out the NIPA-based earnings calculations. Figure 5 shows that the
present value of the earnings discrepancy is tiny in comparison to the valuation




                                               23
discrepancy. Further, the two are only slightly positively correlated, with a correlation
coefficient of 0.22. I conclude that the small earnings discrepancies uncovered in this paper
do not help in understanding the volatility of the stock market.

  1.6

  1.4
                       Valuation
  1.2                  discrepancy
  1.0
                       PDV of Earnings
                       Discrepancy
  0.8

  0.6

  0.4

  0.2

  0.0

 -0.2

 -0.4

 -0.6
    1947 1951 1955 1959 1963 1967 1971 1975 1979 1983 1987 1991 1995 1999


Figure 5. Comparison of Valuation Discrepancy and Present Value of Earnings Discrepancy


        My earlier paper hypothesized that the valuation discrepancies arose from
accumulation of intangibles. The finding that earnings discrepancies are not part of the
explanation of the valuation discrepancy does not dispose of that hypothesis. When a
corporation invests in intangibles, the amount of the investment is subtracted from earnings
because it is treated as a current expense. Small earnings discrepancies may result from the
offsetting effects of the earnings of intangibles—which are included in earnings—and the
deduction of investment in intangibles. Let Gt be the stock of intangibles and suppose, for
simplicity, that the price of intangibles in consumption units is a constant, normalized at




                                            24
one. Further assume that the risk of the earnings of intangibles is the same as the risk of
earnings in general. Let the depreciation rate of intangibles be θ . Then the per-unit
earnings of intangibles will be RC + 1 − θ , according to equation (3.11). The amount

mistakenly deducted from earnings is Gt − (1 − θ ) Gt −1 , gross investment in intangibles.

The condition for exact cancellation is

                                          Gt = RC Gt −1 .                            (6.3)

That is, smooth growth of the flow of investment and thus of the stock of intangibles at a
rate equal to the cost of capital will result in zero discrepancy between actual reported
earnings and the benchmark based on tangible capital alone. Intangibles will be invisible in
earnings.
       The valuation discrepancy in Figure 5 does not follow a path of constant growth.
Some other factor is at work. Consider the following possibility: Each period, the stock of
intangibles rises or falls by a random amount gt , unrelated to the formation of new

intangibles. Assume that the present value of gt as of period t–1 is zero. From equation

(3.3), one can see that gt will not appear in the earnings benchmark for intangibles.

Further, gt does not have any effect on reported earnings. Consequently, the law of
motion of the stock of intangibles that leaves no trace on recorded earnings is

                                     Gt = RC Gt −1 + gt .                            (6.4)

Figure 6 shows the random increment to intangibles, calculated as Gt − RC Gt −1 and
expressed as a percent of total corporate value.




                                               25
  150



  100



   50



    0



   -50



 -100



 -150
     1946 1950 1954 1958 1962 1966 1970 1974 1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998


Figure 6. Increments to Intangibles—Quarterly Changes at Annual Rates, as a Percent of
Total Market Value


         These increments come very close to satisfying the condition of unpredictability—
not surprisingly, because they are close to being capital gains on securities, which are
known to be essentially unpredictable. But the increments are large, sometimes exceeding
100 percent at annual rates. The view that intangibles account for broad swings in
corporate value, despite being invisible in corporate earnings, is at best at the borderline of
credibility.




                                             26
VII. Concluding Remarks

       This paper on the flow of value created by corporations has close connections, both
in approach and in conclusions, with my earlier paper (Hall [2001]) on the market values
of corporations. Both use the same accounting framework, placing financial claims on one
side and substantive business activities on the other side. Both take explicit account of
rents from adjustment costs, either in the sense of flows of rents or the market values of
those flows. But the two papers reach quite different substantive conclusions. Here I find
that standard determinants of the flow of value—taxes, depreciation, and adjustment
costs—account for most of the observed movements in the aggregate flow. In my earlier
paper, I found large movements, not explained by adjustment costs, in market value per
dollar of capital. I suggested that intangible capital is a potential explanation for the large
discrepancy, though I noted that intangibles could not explain the negative discrepancy in
the decade centered around 1980. The earnings of intangibles are not visible in recorded
earnings, but that finding may be the result of cancellation of their earnings and the costs
of forming the intangibles. It takes large random additions to and subtractions from the
stock of intangibles to reconcile the high amplitude of variations in the stock market with
the low amplitude of variations in earnings.




                                             27
References

Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane. 1999. “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-
     Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political
     Economy 107(2): 205-251. April.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller. 1998. “Valuation Ratios and the Long-Run Stock
     Market Outlook,” Journal of Portfolio Management 24(2):11–26. Winter.
Cochrane, John H. 2001. Asset Pricing. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Hall, Robert E. 2001. “The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation,” American Economic
       Review 91(5): 1185-1202. December.
_____________. 2003. “Measuring Factor Adjustment Cost,” http://Stanford.edu /~rehall.
      September.
_____________, and Dale W. Jorgenson. 1967. “Tax Policy and Investment Behavior,”
      American Economic Review 57(3): 391-414. June.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Ravi Jagannathan. 1991. “Implications of Security Market Data
      for Models of Dynamic Economies,” Journal of Political Economy 99(2): 225-262.
      April.
Moskowitz, Tobias J., and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen. 2002. “The Returns to
     Entrepreneurial Investment: A Private Equity Premium Puzzle?” American
     Economic Review 92(4): 745-778. September.
Poterba, James M. 1998. “The Rate of Return to Corporate Capital and Factor Shares: New
       Estimates Using Revised National Income Accounts and Capital Stock Data,”
       Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 48: 211-246. June.




                                          28
Data Appendix
       Total corporate earnings for Figure 1. Corporate profits before tax and corporate
interest from NIPA Table 1.15. Corporate capital consumption allowances from NIPA
Table 6.22. Corporate earnings are the sum of the three components.
       Corporate capital for Figure 1. Corporate fixed capital from NIPA Fixed Asset
Table (FAT) 4.1. Business inventories from NIPA Table 5.12. I approximate the corporate
fraction as the ratio of corporate capital consumption allowances to corporate plus non-
corporate capital consumption allowances, NIPA Table 6.13. Total corporate capital is
corporate fixed capital plus the approximate corporate share multiplied by total business
inventories.
       Plant and equipment depreciation rate for Figure 2. Calculated as the ratio of
corporate depreciation, FAT 4.4, to corporate fixed capital, FAT 4.1.
       Corporate tax rate for Figure 2. Calculated as the ratio of federal corporate income
and excess profit taxes, IRS, NIPA Table 8.25, line 20, to total receipts less deductions,
IRS, same table, line 1.
       Price index for plant and equipment, Figure 2. Calculated as the ratio of nominal
corporate fixed capital, FAT 4.1, to the corresponding quantity index, FAT 4.2.
       Price index for inventories, Figure 2. From NIPA Table 7.16, implicit price
deflators for private inventories.
       Price index for consumption, Figure 2. From NIPA Table 7.1, implicit price
deflator for consumption.
       Tobin’s q, Figure 2. Calculated from equation (3.12), with plant and equipment
stock from FAT 4.2; adjustment cost coefficient γ = 1 .
       6-month Treasury bill rate, Figure 2. 1947-1958, imputed as the commercial paper
rate, from the Economic Report of the President, less 0.138 percent. 1959-2001, Economic
Report of the President.




                                           29
       Investment tax credit, Figure 2. Ratio of dollar amount of credit, line 25, NIPA
Table 8.25, to nominal business fixed investment, NIPA Table 1.1.
       Depreciation rate for corporate tax purposes, Figure 2. Inferred from IRS
depreciation, NIPA Table 8.22, and investment in structures and equipment, NIPA Table
                                                           τ
                                  Dt − ∑ dt −τ (1 − dt −τ ) It −τ
1.1, from the recursion dt =                                        , with the restriction .05 ≤ dt ≤ .15 .
                                                It
                                                                                                   dt
       Present value of depreciation deductions, Figure 2. Calculated as
                                                                                              dt + rt + .02
where r is the 6-month Treasury bill rate.
       x for plant and equipment, Figure 2. Calculated from equation (3.20), with real
                           1
discount rate RB−1π =         .
                         1.03
       x for inventories, Figure 2. Calculated from equation (3.21), with inventory price
from NIPA Table 7.16.
       Weight for plant and equipment in total capital, ω , Figure 2. See sources for total
corporate capital, Figure 1.
       Total and corporate capital consumption allowances, Table 1. Corporate from
NIPA Table 6.22, non-corporate from NIPA Table 6.13.
       Value of plant and equipment, Figure 4. From FAT 3.1ES.
       Value of inventories, Figure 4. From NIPA Table 5.12.
       Corporate profits before tax, Figure 4. From NIPA Table 6.17
       Net interest, Figure 4. From NIPA Table 6.15.
       Corporate capital consumption allowances, Figure 4. From NIPA Table 6.22.
       Non-corporate capital consumption allowances, Figure 4. From NIPA Table 6.13.
       Depreciation, Figure 4. From FAT 3.4ES.
       Plant and equipment price, Figure 4. Nominal capital from FAT 3.7 divided by
real capital, FAT 3.8.
       Inventories price, Figure 4. From NIPA Table 7.16.




                                                     30
       Valuation discrepancy, Figure 5. From backup materials for Hall [2001],
Stanford.edu/~rehall, total value of securities of the non-financial corporate sector divided
by the sum of the calculated values of plant, equipment, and inventory, less one.




                                            31
