NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO DROPOUTS DROP OUT TOO SOON?
INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE FROM CHANGES
IN SCHOOL-LEAVING LAWS
Philip Oreopoulos
Working Paper 10155
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10155
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

I am very grateful to Steve Machin, Josh Angrist, Enrico Moretti, and staff members from the UK Data
Archive, for providing me with necessary data for this project. Seminar and conference participants at
Berkeley, LSE, the Chicago Federal Reserve, Royal Holloway, Duke, McGill, Queens, NBER Summer
Institute, IZA/SOLE Transatlantic Meetings, and the universities of Toronto, British Columbia and Guelph
provided helpful discussion. I am especially thankful to George Akerlof, Alan Auerbach, David Autor,
Michael Baker, Gregory Besharov, David Card, Liz Cascio, Stacey Chen, Botond Koszegi, John Quigley,
Marco Manacorda, Rob McMillan, Justin McCrary, Costas Meghir, Mathew Rabin, Jesse Rothstein,
Emmanuel Saez, Aloisious Siow, Alois Stutzer, Jo Van Biesebroeck, Ian Walker, and two anonymous
referees for many helpful comments and discussions. I am solely responsible for this paper’s contents. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research
©2003 by Philip Oreopoulos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Dropouts Drop Out Too Soon? International Evidence From
Changes in School-Leaving Laws
Philip Oreopoulos
NBER Working Paper No. 10155
December 2003
JEL No. I20, I21, I28
ABSTRACT
This paper studies high school dropout behavior by estimating the long-run consequences to leaving
school early. I measure these consequences using changes in minimum school leaving ages n often
introduced to prevent dropping out n and compare results across the United States, Canada, and
the United Kingdom. Students compelled to stay in school experience substantial gains to lifetime
wealth, health, and other labor market activities for all three countries, and these results hold up
against a wide array of specification checks. I estimate dropping out one year later increases present
value income by more than 10 times forgone earnings and more than 2 times the maximum lifetime
annual wage. The one-year cost to attending high school would have to be extremely large to offset
these gains under a model that views education as an investment. Other, sub-optimal, explanations
for why dropouts forgo these benefits are considered.
Philip Oreopoulos
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
Canada
and NBER
oreo@economics.utoronto.ca

I. Introduction

A common approach to explain why some students finish school earlier than others treats
education as an investment. Students invest time, forgo earnings, and endure stress to attend school, but
only if anticipated gains from doing so are large enough to offset these costs. For high school students, an
investment decision involves weighing expected rewards from obtaining a degree to effort required in
getting it. Those that dropout drop out because they detest school, lack motivation, or anticipate little
reward from graduation [Eckstein and Wolpin, 1999]. But whatever the reason, viewing education as an
investment presupposes dropouts choose what’s best for them under the circumstances.
While an investment model of school choice considers a dropout decision ex ante optimal, many
view such an event as unfortunate. Many policymakers, educators, and researchers (and parents) feel that
individual decisions to leave secondary school before graduation lead to sub-optimal lifetime outcomes.
This view is no more apparent than from the motivation behind wanting to introduce, maintain, or update
compulsory school laws. Such laws have been around for more than a hundred years, and continue to
exist in virtually every industrialized country. Motivation for introducing them, or for updating them,
often relates to assumptions that children who would have left school earlier are, in fact, better off from
staying on.1 Viewing education as investment leads to exactly opposite conclusions. In the absence of
positive externalities, compulsory schooling restricts choice and should lower welfare among individuals
wanting to leave sooner [e.g. Wolf, 2002, Rickenbacker, 1974, Gatto, 2002, Machan, 2000].2
This paper is the first to estimate lifetime opportunity costs from leaving high school using
changes in compulsory school laws. Quantifying the overall consequences from dropping out offers
1

In North Carolina, for example, the State Superintendent wants to raise the minimum school-leaving age from 16
to 18, an age, he says, “that better reflects the maturity required to make such an important and life-changing
decision” [http://www.ncpublicschools.org/news/01-02/020502.html]. Thomas Upson, a Connecticut Senator
expressed similar arguments: “Too many people regret the reckless decisions they made when they were 16 and
decided to drop out. Our goal is to try to prevent that” [http://home.comcast.net/~majerus-collins/dropout.htm].
2
While not advocating support for or against compulsory schooling, Chiswick (1969) notes, ‘while those compelled
to over-invest [in school] experience an increase in their annual post-investment income, they experience a decrease
in their marginal and average internal rates of return”.

1

important perspective for evaluating theories of school attainment. Knowing what dropouts give up is
essential for understanding why they do it. If rewards to high school are particularly high, such findings
could indicate families of school leavers are financially constrained or that the psychological costs from
attending are extremely high. But if additional evidence suggested these explanations were unlikely, such
findings could also suggest other reasons for leaving school – cultural or peer influences may
predominate adolescent decision-making, youths may underestimate the rewards from staying in school
or ignore future consequences of their decisions.
Minimum school-leaving laws are ideal instruments for measuring forgone benefits from leaving
school because they identify gains for would-be-dropouts without changing incentives or costs. If the
instruments are valid, we can estimate counterfactual gains from additional school for students that would
otherwise have left sooner.

Several previous papers estimate causal effects of education using

compulsory school laws as instruments and find strikingly similar results. But none of these papers use
their results to discuss implications for explaining dropout outcomes. Angrist and Krueger (1991) use
differences in school-entry laws to identify students dropping out with less education because they were
born just after the entry cut-off date as opposed to just prior. Students that finished their schooling with a
year less of class because of these laws experienced on average 9.2 percent lower adult earnings than
those dropping out later. Acemoglu and Angrist (2000) use differences in school-leaving laws across the
United States and over time to identify adults made to stay in school for different periods before having
the option to drop out. Students compelled to take an extra year experienced an average increase of 10.3
percent in adult earnings. Harmon and Walker (1995), examine the effect on earnings from changes in
minimum school-leaving ages in the United Kingdom. They estimate adult earnings rose an average of
15.3 percent for each additional year of school a student had to take.
Other studies examine non-pecuniary outcomes.

Lochner and Moretti (2003) find school

compulsion lowers the likelihood of committing crime or ending up in jail. And Lleras-Muney (2001)

2

uses compulsory attendance laws to examine the effect of education on mortality. She estimates an
additional year of education substantially lowers the probability of dying among elderly people.
We cannot begin to discuss these results without first establishing their sensitivity and credibility.
It is important to establish that changes in curriculum or economic conditions were not the main reasons
underlying subsequent changes in education attainment and outcomes. Several earlier studies assess the
effectiveness of compulsory school laws on education attainment, including Schmidt (1995), LlerasMuney (2002), Lochner and Moretti (2003) and Goldin and Katz (2003). Lochner and Moretti and
Lleras-Muney examine extensively whether changes in compulsory school laws simply reflect underlying
region-specific trends in school attainment. Both conclude school attendance laws raise attainment and
not the other way around.
To address these issues further, I demonstrate consistency across countries in finding similar
effects of compulsory schooling for the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom. The crosscountry comparison provides an opportunity to examine estimates under very different circumstances,
different institutions, and for different time periods. The large datasets available and the nature of these
policies also allow for several robustness analyses. I also show graphically the discontinuity in education
attainment and earnings for adults that entered high school just before or just after an increase in the
school leaving age.
The main findings suggest one year of compulsory schooling raises subsequent annual earnings
by 10 to 14 percent for youths from all three countries (similar to previous studies). I also find large gains
to health, chances of employment, and other labor market activities. Using the pecuniary results and
predicted wage profiles, I estimate one additional year of high school raises present value earnings by
about 2 to 3 times a dropout’s maximum lifetime annual wage. These results hold remarkably well
against a wide array of specification checks. Whether or not the possibility of non-pecuniary benefits
from education are taken into account, the main conclusion of this paper is that the one year cost to attend
school would have to be extremely large to offset these gains, under the education investment model. I

3

offer alternative explanations that could rationalize compulsory schooling policies.

These include

temporarily high discount rates, underestimating expected gains, and social pressures that predominate
adolescent concerns.
Next section describes the paper’s methodology. Section III presents the paper’s cross-country
data and describes the school leaving laws used for the U.S., Canada, and the U.K. Section IV shows the
estimated impact these laws had on overall education attainment and examines the robustness of these
findings. Section V presents the main results. Section VI discusses what the results suggest about
dropout behavior, and Section VII concludes.

II. Methodology

The main regression model analyzes how school leaving laws affect subsequent outcomes –
earnings in particular. Since changes in these laws vary by region (state, province, Britain/N.Ireland) and
time, not at the individual level, all initial data extracts, with individual observations, are first aggregated
into cell means. This procedure explicitly removes within region heterogeneity and reduces computation
time substantially. When the sample includes both males and females, the data are also categorized into
cells by gender. The U.S. sample also groups cells by race.
Define y jkl as the average outcome for members among birth cohort j , from high school region

k , and surveyed in year l . The equation of interest (weighted by cell group population size) is:

(1)

y jkl = δS jkl + βX jkl + e j + ek + el + e jkl ,

where S jkl is the average education attainment for members among birth cohort j , from high school
region k , and surveyed in year l , X jkl includes additional birth cohort, region, and survey year controls,

4

e j , ek , and el represent fixed effects for birth cohort, region, and survey year respectively, and e jkl
represents the statistical residual. All regressions in the paper compute robust standard error estimates
using Huber-White correction methods, clustering by region and birth cohort. In addition to region
specific controls for economic and demographic conditions at the time birth cohorts were age 14, X jkl
includes quartic age controls for each birth cohort (from different survey years) to estimate age-earnings
profiles. Multiple years of cross-sectional data allow for simultaneous age, birth cohort, and survey year
effects by assuming two birth cohort effects are the same. Alternative age effects, or dropping the age
controls all together does not affect estimates of δ by very much.
The underlying first stage of the instrumental variable regression is:

(2)

S jkl = γ jk + αX jkl + v j + vk + vl + v jkl ,

where γ jk is the minimum school leaving age faced by birth cohort j from high school region k , v j ,

vk , and vl are fixed effects for birth cohort, region, and survey year respectively, and v jkl represents the
statistical residual. Equation (2) uses more than time discontinuities to identify the effects from schoolleaving laws. Time trends in the outcome variable are controlled for with birth cohort and region fixed
effects. Identifying the effects from school-leaving laws comes from differences in the timing of these
laws across regions. The analysis is therefore similar to difference-in-difference estimation, but with
more than one intervention and more than one treatment group. The schooling effect, δ , is not identified
if unobserved region specific factors that affect the outcome variable also change at the same time school
leaving laws change. Several specification checks are carried out to examine this possibility.

5

III. Data3

This section provides an overview of the micro datasets and school leaving laws used in this study.
Wherever possible, I tried to maintain consistency in sample selection, school laws, and variable
definitions across all three countries. The main analysis focuses on all 25 to 64 year old males and
females who were aged 14 in the years that the school leaving ages were available.

A. The United States

Most of the U.S. analysis uses an extract of native-born individuals aged 25 to 64 from the six
decennial Census microdata samples between 1950 and 2000.4 All Censuses contained individual wages,
poverty status and labor force participation, but only the 1990 and 2000 datasets contained disability
outcome measures. The initial sample size among those with positive wages was 2,814,203. After
collapsing into cell means, there were 29,804 cells by state, birth cohort, census year, and gender, and
15,003 cells among males. Hawaii and Alaskan born respondents were excluded.
I coded the schooling variable for individuals in the 1950 to 1980 data as highest grade
completed, capped at 17 to impose a uniform topcode across censuses. Following Acemoglu and Angrist
(2000), average years of schooling were assigned to categorical values in the 1990 and 2000 Censuses
using the imputation for males and females in Park (1994). The earnings variable, log weekly wage, was
calculated by dividing annual wage and salary income by weeks worked, and taking logs.

3

The STATA codes for generating the U.S. extracts and results are available on my web site. The U.S. Censuses are
available through the Minnesota Population Center [http://www.ipums.umn.edu/usa/]. The U.K. data are available
through UK Data Archive [http://www.data-archive.ac.uk/]. The Canadian Census data used for this paper are not
available outside Statistics Canada. However, while the precision was smaller, I found little difference in the results
when working with the Public Use Microdata files. These data are available through Statistics Canada
[http://www.statcan.ca].
4
The specific datasets used were the 1950 General 1/330 sample (limited to those with long-form responses), the
1960 General 1 percent sample, the 1970 Form 2 State 1 percent sample, the 1980 Metro 1 percent sample, the 1990
1 percent unweighted sample, and the 2000 1 percent unweighted random sample.

6

The cell groups were assigned a minimum school leaving age according to the year a birth cohort
was 14 years old and the state they were born.5 Figure 1 shows the school leaving ages, enacted between
1915 and 1975, used for the U.S. analysis. I measured each school leaving age as the minimum between
a state’s legislated dropout age and the minimum age required to obtain a working permit.6 A few states
during this period had no laws in place. I grouped the 2.2 percent of the sample that faced school-leaving
ages less than 14 into one category (school leaving age < 14). All others faced dropout ages of 14, 15, or
16. The laws changed frequently over this period, both across states and within states over time. About
one-third of the variation in the school leaving age is across-states and two-thirds from within. Not all
changes were positive.
I also generated control variables for state economic and demographic conditions in the year the
laws were in place. For each Census between 1910 and 1980, I calculated the fraction of the population
in each state living in an urban city, the fraction living on a farm, black, in the labor force, in the
manufacturing industry, and average age. Values between decades were generated by linear interpolation.

B. Canada

The data extract for Canada comes from the 33 percent sample of the 1971 Census, and the five
20 percent samples of the 1981 to 2001 censuses.7 The main extract contained 25 to 64 year olds, born in
a Canadian province, who were 14 years old between 1925 and 1975. While provincially legislated
school leaving ages were available for a wider range of years, I chose this span because the cohorts aged
5

The analysis assumes that Americans went to school in their state of birth, Canadians went to school in their
province of birth, British born residents went to school in Britain, and Northern Irish residents went to school in
Norethen Ireland. Some individuals will be mismatched. If mobility across regions is unrelated with law changes,
this measurement error will not bias our estimates. Lleras-Muney (2001) concludes this seems to be the case for the
U.S.
6
Acemoglu and Angrist (2000), Lleras-Muney (2001) and Goldin and Katz (2003) find working permit restrictions
were often more binding than school leaving age restrictions. The results are not sensitive to using just the dropout
age as the compulsory school law variable, or the predicted mandatory number of school years, used by Acemoglu
and Angrist and Lochner and Moretti (2003).
7
The 1976 Census excludes earnings information and was omitted.

7

14 before 1925 were older than 55 in the 1971 census, and compulsory school laws were often minimally
enforced at the beginning of the century. The initial sample size among those with positive wages was
enormous: 8,208,030. After collapsing into province, birth cohort, gender, and census groups, the cell
sample size was 4,120 among males and females, and 2,060 among males.
The education variable used for the Canadian analysis was highest grade attained in a primary or
secondary school. This measure was asked in addition to highest degree completed. An individual could
report attaining less than 12 years of high school while still graduating from college or university.

A

complication with this measure arises because some provinces offered a senior matriculation year with
Grade 13 and some provinces allowed graduation in high school after Grade 11. I therefore top-coded the
grade attainment measure to 11. This recoding did not affect the ability to identify would-be-dropouts
compelled to take additional schooling. Dropouts that entered school at age 6 and advanced a grade every
year were still able to leave school before Grade 12.8 I used the log of annual wages and salaries as the
earnings variable for the Canadian data. I did not convert this variable to weekly earnings because a
considerable number of full time workers excluded their paid vacations or sick leave when reporting
number of weeks last year worked, contrary to Census instructions.
Figure 2 displays the minimum school leaving ages legislated by province, between 1925 and
1975. These laws were compiled directly from provincial Statues and Revised Statutes containing the
Acts of legislation and amendments since inception. In a previous study, I documented the history of
these changes and other compulsory school laws extensively [Oreopoulos, 2003b]. A few provinces in
the first half of the century legislated different dropout ages depending on whether youths attended
schools in urban or rural areas. For these cases I recorded the dropout age as that for rural areas, since
most often that period, the majority of residents lived in rural areas. All provinces except British
Columbia experienced legislated increases. Working permit exceptions below the school leaving age
8

See Oreopoulos (2003b) for alternative assumptions to this variable, and alternative choices for the education
attainment variable. In general I find, while this topcoding generates the most precise estimates, alternative coding
does not change the main findings.

8

were rarely applied. Less than 12 percent of the sample faced a school leaving age of 16. I chose to
group individuals facing a school leaving age of either 15 or 16, since the effect on grade attainment from
raising the school leaving age to 16 from 15 was not significantly different from zero but was imprecisely
measured. Including an indicator for facing a school leaving age equal to 16 did not alter the second stage
estimates.
Similar to the U.S. extract, I also generated control variables for provincial economic and
demographic conditions using historical Census tabulations and linear interpolation. I calculated control
variables for the fraction of the population in each province in urban areas, in the manufacturing sector,
female, and the average age.

C. The United Kingdom

The U.K. analysis combines 15 U.K. General Household Surveys (GHHS), from 1983 to 1998
(the 1997 GHS was cancelled), to 14 Northern Ireland Continuous Household Surveys, from 1985 to
1998. I refer to both as General Household Surveys, since both questionnaires were almost identical. The
major difference was that earnings from the UK GHHS were coded exactly, while earnings from the
Northern Ireland GHSS were coded by category. Average earnings were assigned for Northern Irish
individuals within grouped earnings categories. An advantage of the UK data is that education is
recorded as the age an individual completed full time education. This measure corresponds exactly with
the school leaving age laws. The U.S. and Canadian measures of education record grade attained or
completed, and miss the full effect of compulsory schooling when high school students remain longer in
school from these laws, but do not advance a grade. The combined dataset contains 65,098 individuals
aged 32 to 64, who were 14 between 1935 and 1965 (the data only go back to 1983, so we cannot use
respondents younger than 32 for this analysis). The data include British born adults and all extracted
respondents from the Northern Ireland surveys because foreign-born were not identified. The data were

9

aggregated into cell groups by survey year, gender, birth cohort, and region (Britain or Ireland). The
remaining number of cells was 1,492, and half this for males.
There were only 2 changes to the school leaving age in Britain and Northern Ireland between
1935 and 1965, but they were both remarkably effective and influential. Legislation from Great Britain’s
1944 Education Act led the school leaving age in England, Scotland, and Wales to rise in 1947 from 14 to
15 years.9 Figure 3A displays the effect this legislative change had on early school-leavers. Before 1947,
a very high fraction of children left full-time school at age 14 (or less). Over just three years however –
between 1945 and 1948 – the portion of 14 year-olds leaving schools falls from about 57 percent to less
than 10 percent.10 The ability to accommodate the massive rise in enrolment was possible through a
concerted, almost military-like, national operation that expanded the supply of teachers, buildings, and
furniture within the three-year span. The 1947 change seems to have little effect on the fraction of
children dropping out at age 15 or less – it appears virtually everyone that would have left school at age
14, left at age 15 after the change. 11
The 1947 Education Act in Northern Ireland was closely modeled on the British one. The rise in
the school-leaving age, from 14 to 15, however, was not implemented until 1957 due to political
stonewalling. Figure 3B charts the proportion of youths aged 14 dropping out, and the proportion

9

For a more detailed analysis of the history of British education and the 1944 Education Act in particular, see
Halsey, Heath and Ridge (1980). The authors argue, “the 1944 Act put a legislative stamp on forty years of progress
towards separate, competitive, and free secondary education for all”. Although other reforms were included in the
Act, the changing of the school-leaving age in 1947 had, by far, the most sudden and influential impact on students.
10
The finding that some adults reported finishing school at age 14, even after the school-leaving age had changed,
likely reflects measurement error, noncompliance, or delayed enforcement.
11
The term ‘dropout’ is something of a misnomer in the UK, since the those that failed to advance to secondary
school were expected to leave at the earliest opportunity. For those wanting to advance in school beyond age 14
prior to 1947, the process typically involved moving from elementary to secondary school at age 12. Elementary
schools offered education past age 11, but usually students that stayed did so until reaching age 14. Pupils
transferred to secondary school at age 11, at no cost, on the basis of competitive examinations. The proportion of
free places began in 1907 at 25 percent of total attendance, and rose to more than 50 percent by 1931. The other half
entered by paying fees that were subsidized more than two-thirds by the state. The 1944 Education Act removed
these fees, in addition to making the first year of secondary school compulsory. For a discussion of the history of
British and Irish education over the period of analysis, see Halsey at al. [1980], Barnard [1961], Dent [1954, 1957,
1970, 1971], Gosden [1969] and Durcan [1972]. I shall occasionally refer to UK school leavers as dropouts for
convenience.

10

dropping out at 15 or less. A clear break occurs for the portion of early school-leavers in 1957. The
influence on school attainment from the change in the school-leaving age is clearly visible.12

IV. The Effect of School-Leaving Laws on School Attainment

Table 1 presents the first-stage effects of the school leaving age changes on education attainment,
specified as in equation (2), and the corresponding reduced form effects of the school leaving age on
earnings. The estimates for the U.S. are listed first. Recall that the data are initially aggregated into cell
means and weighted by population size. All regressions include fixed effects for birth year, region,
survey year, gender, race, and a quartic in age, and additional regional demographic and economic
controls according to when cohorts were aged 14.
Column 1 shows a monotonic relationship in the effect from raising the school leaving age on
the total number of years of completed schooling. For the full sample, years of schooling is .24 years
higher for those that faced a dropout age of 14 compared to those that faced a smaller dropout age, or
none at all. Average school attainment increases by .023 years from raising the dropout age to 15, and
another .20 years from raising it to 16 (no state in the period examined enforced a dropout age higher than
16). We can easily reject that the coefficients on the laws are zero, with an F-statistic of 87.8.13 Column
2 shows similar estimated effects if we restrict the sample to only those with less than 12 years of
completed schooling (and then collapse the data into cell means). Focussing on this sample zeros in on
the individuals most likely to be affected by the dropout age changes. The estimated effects from facing

12

An earlier version of this paper [Oreopoulos, 2003a] includes the change in the school leaving age from 15 to 16
in 1973 for both Britain and Northern Ireland. Since the change occurred at the same time for both Britain and
Northern Ireland, this paper’s methodology cannot identify the impact from the change. The previous analysis
included data from the Republic of Ireland, whose minimum school leaving age changed once, from 14 to 15 in
1972. The Eurobarometer surveys contain data for these three regions, and categorical family household income
data. Using these surveys, I estimate returns to compulsory schooling using the 5 school leaving age changes and
find similar results compared to those presented here.
13
The R2 for this regression that uses population weighted cell means is .9258, and .9242 if we leave out the dropout
age indicators.

11

different dropout ages when young are about the same, as we would expect if those compelled to take
additional schooling from changes in these laws still dropped out, but dropped out later.14
Compulsory school laws affect those intending to leave high school at early grades. If changes to
these laws do not cause students to attain post-secondary schooling, the estimated effects of facing
different dropout ages among those with at least some post-secondary schooling should be zero.15 If other
state specific policies or economic conditions improved at the same time dropout ages increased, we
might expect the dropout age changes to correlate with education attainment among the post-secondary
school sample. Column 3 shows this is not the case. For the sample with more than 12 years of
schooling, none of the dropout ages are related to their education attainment.
The last three columns show the reduced form estimates for the effects of these dropout ages on
log weekly earnings. The main purpose of showing these results is to demonstrate that changes in the
dropout ages do not affect earnings among the post-secondary sample. Just as we should not expect these
laws to impact post secondary schooling attainment, we should not expect these laws to affect outcome
variables for the higher educated sample. If we did observe this, we might concern that other factors that
affected both dropouts and graduates underlie the correlations in Table 1. While the laws are strongly
related to earnings among dropouts, Column 6 shows no noticeable relationship between dropout ages
faced when young and earnings for the post-secondary school sample. I also interpret these results as
suggesting no state-specific externalities from raising high school education attainment on the same birth
cohorts that attained post secondary school.
Table 1 also presents parallel results for Canada. The results are similar to those from the U.S
extract. High school grade attainment is .41 grades higher, on average, for those that faced a dropout age
14

The results also suggest changes in U.S. school-leaving laws influenced would-be dropouts to graduate. If we
restrict the initial sample to those with 12 or less years of completed schooling, the findings are very similar to those
from using the full-sample.
15
Lang and Kropp (1986) suggest that individuals intending to complete one or two additional years of schooling
after the minimum age required may obtain additional education after the dropout age is changed to avoid signalling
to employers they are in the same category as those who leave school at soon as possible. If this influence caused a
significant number to obtain post-secondary schooling, we might expect the coefficients to be positive.

12

of 14, compared to those that faced a lower age limit. Grade attainment is .23 years higher on top of that,
for the group of Canadian youths that faced a dropout age of 15 or 16. Again, we easily reject the
coefficients on the school leaving law indicators are zero. Column 2 shows very similar point estimates
for the dropout age effects after restricting the same to only those that attained less than 12th Grade.
Virtually everyone in the sample that attained some post secondary schooling reported attaining Grade 11
or more. To examine whether dropout age changes in Canada affected higher levels of education, I used a
different school attainment variable since the one used in the first two columns, grade attained, only goes
up to great 12. The dependent variable in column 3 for the Canadian data is an indicator for post
secondary schooling. Similar to the U.S. results, I find no evidence that changes in dropout ages in
Canada affected post secondary education attainment among the sample that completed Grade 11 or
more. The reduced form results from the Canadian extract in columns 4 to 6 also show no effect from
dropout age changes on annual wages among the higher educated sample.
The increase in the minimum school leaving age from 14 to 15 in Britain and in Northern Ireland
has the largest estimated effect on education attainment. This is not surprising, considering the striking
discontinuities in figures 3A and 3B. Raising the school leaving age from 14 to 15 increased the average
age students left full-time school by more than half a year for the sample that left when less than 17 years
old. The F-statistic for rejecting that the coefficient for the higher dropout age is zero is 358.5, for the
early school leaver sample. I find no significant evidence that the higher school leaving age affected
those that left school at age 18 or more. Raising the school leaving age to 15 increased annual wages
overall by about 5.1 percent among early high school leavers, but had no discernable impact on wages for
more educated workers.
To further address the concern that region-specific trends underlie the dropout age and education
relationship, I present evidence that future dropout age changes do not correlate with current dropout
decisions. In Table 2, I follow Lleras-Muney (2002) in matching individuals to future school leaving
ages, based on their region of birth and year when aged 14. Columns 1 and 2 show the results from

13

regressing education attainment on a birth cohort’s own dropout age faced at age 14, and the dropout age
that later birth cohorts one or two years after. Each row of these two columns shows results from separate
regressions.16 The same state/cohort/time fixed effects and controls used for last table’s analysis are
included here.
For Canada and the U.S., the current school leaving age significantly affects education
attainment, while future school leaving ages have small or no effects. For the U.K., an immediate future
change to the dropout age is negatively related with school attainment. Those in high school in Britain
just before the 1947 increase in the school leaving age and those in Northern Ireland just before the 1957
change were more likely to leave school early relative to other birth cohorts. I have little explanation for
this finding, but the negative relationship is opposite to what we would have expected if other factors
around the time of the law change affected education attainment. The finding only reinforces the U.K.
results.17
We can carry out the same validity tests using earnings as the outcome variable instead of
education attainment. We should not expect future dropout age changes to affect earlier dropouts’
earnings, except if raising overall education attainment leads to positive externalities for everyone.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 2 show the regressions of log earnings on current and future dropout ages, plus
the usual fixed effects and regional controls. In every case, the reduced for effects of a cohorts’ own
dropout age affects their earnings. We also observe zero or small effects on earnings from future dropout
ages. Such findings indicate no evidence that the first-stage or reduced-form results are chiefly driven by
other immediate factors.
Another way to control for conditions surrounding the law changes is to include upcoming
dropout ages as control variables themselves.

The first row in column 5 shows the U.S. return to

16

These regressions use a single variable for the dropout age instead of the indicator variables used for Table 1 and
for the main results in Section V. Cohorts that faced a dropout age less than 14 were assigned a value of 13 for both
the U.S. and Canadian samples.
17
The coefficients become insignificant and close to zero when using a wider sample of birth cohorts, aged 14
between 1935 and 1985 instead of the sample between 1935 and 1965.

14

compulsory schooling estimate from regressing log weekly earnings on schooling, fixed effects for year
of birth, state, Census year, gender, race, a quartic in age, and control variables for fraction of state living
in urban areas, fraction black, in the labor force, in the manufacturing sector, female, and average age
based on when a birth cohort was aged 14. Schooling is instrumented by a single variable for a cohort’s
own dropout age. I estimate an additional year of compulsory schooling raises earnings by about 15.1
percent. Rows 2 and 3 show how this estimate changes when adding controls for upcoming dropout
changes. The point estimate falls slightly with the inclusion of this control, but not by any significant
amount. The inclusion of upcoming dropout age changes while facing a dropout decision also has little
effect on overall estimates of compulsory schooling for Canada and the U.K.
Figure 3 demonstrates graphically the discontinuity in average education attainment and earnings
at the time of a law change. Each panel shows estimates of coefficients on lead and lag indicators for
whether compulsory schooling increases. I selected the high school dropout samples for each country and
aggregated the data by region and birth cohort groups. The dependent variables are schooling and log
earnings. Lags include years –12 to –3. Leads include years +3 to +12. The regression also includes
region and birth cohort controls fixed effects.
Figure 3 shows clearly identification of the effects of compulsory school laws comes from
changes to education attainment and earnings immediately or soon after school leaving age changes and
not before. In Panel A, average years of completed schooling and average log weekly earnings among
U.S. cohorts show no noticeable trend leading up to the dropout age increase. Between cohorts 3 years
before and 3 years after an increase, average years of completed schooling rises .150 years. Log weekly
earnings rises over the same period by .025 points. If we divide the earnings increase by the schoolings
increase, we arrive at a return to compulsory schooling estimate of 16.7 percent, which is not much higher
than the full-sample estimates displayed below.
Earnings increases appear to occur more gradually for birth cohorts exposed to more restrictive
compulsory school laws. Such results could indicate adjustment costs for cohorts compelled to stay in

15

school immediately after a change, or that legislated changes took some time to become fully enforced.
Even as education attainment subsequently rises after a law change, earnings also subsequently rises. The
graphs show earnings and education moving roughly in tandem immediately following a law increase,
and after controlling for region and year of birth. The figures are important because they suggest that
dropout age increases raise education attainment and subsequent earnings, and not that they simply
respond to underlying trends in schooling.
To summarize, the findings indicate no evidence that the first-stage and reduced-form results are
chiefly driven by factors other than a causal effect from compulsory schooling. For all three countries, I
estimate strong effects on education attainment from raising the minimum school leaving age on a sample
of high school dropouts, and virtually no effect on a sample with post secondary schooling. I find little
influence that changes in dropout ages to later birth cohorts impacted education attainment for earlier
cohorts. Plotting education attainment and earnings by cohorts exposed to more or less restrictive school
laws shows a clear discontinuity in attainment at the time laws increased.

V. The Effect of Compulsory Schooling on Adult Outcomes

A. Earnings

Instrumental variable estimates of equation (1) with log earnings as the outcome variable are
shown in Table 3. All regressions include fixed effects for birth cohort, region, survey year, gender, and a
quartic in age. The U.S. results also include a dummy variable for race and state controls for fraction of
state living in urban areas, fraction black, in the labor force, in the manufacturing sector, female, and
average age based on when a birth cohort was age 14. Similar province controls for Canada include
fraction in urban areas, fraction in the manufacturing sector, female, and average age. Data are grouped
into means by birth year, region, gender, race (for the U.S.) and survey year. Huber-White standard

16

errors are shown from clustering by region and birth cohort. Column 2 shows these estimates for the full
country samples. Column 3 shows the results using only individuals with less than post-secondary
schooling. Column 1 shows corresponding least squares (OLS) estimates using data grouped into means
by education attainment, birth year, region, gender, race, and survey year.
I estimate that dropouts compelled to take an additional year of high school earn about 10 to 14
percent more than dropouts without the additional year. The returns to compulsory schooling estimates
are remarkably consistent across all countries, whether restricting the initial sample by gender or race (for
the U.S.). The estimates from the smaller sample of high school dropouts vary little from the full sample,
as we would expect if compulsory school laws have minimum impact on enrolment beyond high school
and on outcomes of those with post secondary schooling. The U.S. and Canadian results are measured
precisely, with standard errors between .01 and .02, while the U.K. results have wider confidence regions
around similar point estimates (ranging from .073 to .158). The IV estimates try to identify gains from
schooling among dropouts wanting to leave earlier, whereas the OLS estimates include possibly
heterogeneous gains from schooling at different levels and among individuals with different family
background and circumstances.18 I restricted the OLS estimates to the high school sample in order to
narrow the heterogeneity among groups identified in the OLS and IV results. The OLS estimates of the
gains to schooling are similar for the Canadian and U.K. samples, but lower for the U.S. sample – a
common finding from previous studies using compulsory school law instruments. I view these results to
suggest the marginal gains from schooling among individuals wanting to leave school as soon as possible
may be higher relative to the marginal gains for other early school leavers.

B. Health, Employment, and Poverty

18

Angrist, Imbens and Rubin (1996) (and others) point out an instrumental variables approach identifies only the
average treatment effect for the group impacted by the instrument.

17

The results in Table 4 show other effects from compulsory schooling. Health outcomes are
strongly associated from the minimum school-leaving age changes, corroborating with Lleras-Muney’s
(2002) finding that schooling lowers mortality. The 1990 and 2000 U.S. Censuses ask questions about
physical and mental health limitations. Among all individuals in the sample aged 25 to 74, 9.2 percent
claim a physical or mental health disability that limits personal care. I estimate an additional year of
compulsory schooling lowers the likelihood of reporting such disability by 1.7 percentage points, similar
to the OLS estimate. A year of compulsory schooling also lowers the likelihood of reporting a disability
that limits daily activity by 2.5 percentage points.

For the U.K., the GHHS questionnaire asks

respondents to self report whether they are in good, fair, or poor health. A one-year increase in schooling
lowers the probability of reporting being in poor health by 3.2 percentage points, and raises the chances of
reporting being in good health by 6.0 percentage points.
Schooling also affects many labor market outcomes in addition to earnings. In all three countries,
I find compulsory schooling lowers the likelihood of respondents being in the labor force and looking for
work. The magnitude of the effect is similar across countries, and similar compared to corresponding
OLS estimates.

Compulsory schooling also lowers the likelihood of receiving welfare and being

classified as poor. Dropouts that drop out one year later are 6 percentage points less likely to fall below
the U.S. Poverty Line and 3 percentage points less likely to fall below Canada’s Low-Income-Cut-Off.19

C. Present Value Gains From Dropping Out One Year Later

To predict present value financial gains from an extra year of compulsory high school, I reestimate equation (1) using the samples of male dropouts for each country and include respondents aged
15 to 64 to help predict the shape of a dropout’s wage profile over his entire working period. Figure 5

19

A household falls below the Low Income Cut-off if they spend more than 20 percentage points above the average
comparative household on food, clothing, and shelter.

18

shows projected earnings of 15 and 16 year old dropouts for each country using quartic age coefficients,
returns to compulsory schooling estimates, and a baseline wage of $7,525 for 15 year old dropouts at age
15 (the average wage among 17 year old male dropouts working 50 hours or more in the 2000 U.S.
Census).20 It makes no difference what starting wage we choose as the base for calculating the annual
values, as long as we compare present value gains relative to the wage profiles used to calculate them
(e.g. the maximum or initial wage).
The profiles take the usual shape, rising initially with age, levelling off around 40, and falling at
late ages. They exclude initial earnings year for 15 year-old dropouts. I consider this amount later when
discussing foregone earnings. For the U.S., a male dropout that left school at age 16 earns 15.4 percent
more, each year, on average, compared to a dropout that left school at age 15. The corresponding gains
for male dropouts in Canada and the U.K. are 12.9 percent and 13.7 percent respectively. Note that the
shape of the profiles does not depend crucially on the underlying initial choice of country, earnings
measure, starting age, or education attainment sample (everyone or everyone with less than high school).
The shape also does not depend on assuming a constant returns to compulsory schooling over the profile.
Table 5 converts the annual earnings differences for each country to present value (to age 15),
using discount rates of 3, 5, and 7 percent. The appropriate rate, discussed more below, depends on
relative risk assumptions. If dropping out a year later increases expected earnings but also increases the
probability of ending up with particularly low wages, we may want to consider higher discount factors
above the risk-free rate. If dropping out later improves the chances of always doing no worse than before

20

In order to estimate wage profiles for earlier ages in the U.K., I widen the sample to those 14 between 1935
and 1985, and include an indicator for whether a cohort faced a dropout age of 16 after the change in
Britain and Northern Ireland in 1973. To identify the effects of this change, I drop the birth cohort fixed
effects from the instrumental variable regression and include only a quartic in age, a Northern Ireland
indicator, and fixed effects for survey year. Many multiple survey years help reduce average birth cohort
trend effects, but cannot remove them with certainty as with the other previous regressions. Finding
similar results, however, shows the U.K. results are not determined by diverging earnings and education
trends in Britain and Northern Ireland. Harmon and Walker (1995) use this approach to estimates returns
to compulsory schooling in Britain. Results are similar working only with the more accurate British
earnings data.

19

(so that the wage distribution for 16 year-old dropouts stochastically dominates the distribution for 15
year-old dropouts), the appropriate rate to use for discounting is, at most, the risk-free rate. With an
annual log earnings gain of .154 for the U.S. projections, Column 1 shows the average present value gain
from dropping out a year letter is $103,593 under a 3 percent discount rate. That amount exceeds
foregone earnings by a factor of 13.8 and peak annual lifetime wages by a factor of 3.0. If foregone
earnings were the only costs incurred while attending school, the implicit rate of return from the
additional year would be 29.5 percent.
The comparisons do not change much with alternative discount rates or annual rates of return
from compulsory schooling. Even with a 7 percent discount rate, the PV gain in Column 1 exceeds
forgone earnings by 6.4 and peak annual wages by 1.4. Supposing that the individual annual earnings
gains are lower, at 7 percent, PV earnings are still 4.0 times foregone earnings and almost the same as one
year of peak annual wages under a 5 percent discount rate. Results for Canada and the U.K. are very
similar.

VI. Interpretation

A. Compulsory School Laws Should Go

One way to frame the discussion in interpreting the above results is whether compulsory school
laws should exist at all. Treating education as an investment, students, whether financially constrained or
not, forego earnings and endure possible psychological costs to attend school if the expected overall
future gains from doing so are large enough to offset these costs. If not, the optimal choice is to leave.
Compulsory schooling prevents that option. If students already choose optimally when to leave, then
imposing a longer stay in school makes them worse off, on average, than before.

20

The results from last section suggest the average gains from schooling, among would-be
dropouts, are very large. Some of these gains may be attributable from positive externalities generated
from increasing a regions’ enrolment and we should not include these gains when considering an
individual’s dropout decision. But Table 2 finds increases to school leaving ages for cohorts born a few
years later did not lead to significant differences in the gains estimated for earlier cohorts. Even if we
allow one-third or more of the financial gains to compulsory schooling to come from externalities, Table
5 shows the remaining amount still substantially exceeds forgone earnings. Accounting for possible nonpecuniary benefits from education (such as utility gains from higher life expectancy or lower chances of
displacement) simply reinforces this conclusion.
If average gains from an additional year of high school exceed forgone earnings many times over,
what could explain dropout behavior within an investment model? I offer four possibilities. The first is
that dropouts abhor school. Poor classroom performance and condescending attitudes from students and
teachers may make students want to leave as soon as possible, even at the expense of forgoing large
monetary sums. Removing reasons for school distaste could go a long way in reducing dropout rates [Lee
and Burkam (2003)]. The level of distaste among would-be dropouts in the 1990 Eurobarometer Youth
Survey, however, seems small. Just over 90 percent of British 15 year-olds expecting to leave school at
age 16 report being satisfied or very satisfied with their overall lives, compared to 94 percent of British 15
year-olds expecting to leave later. For the sample aged 16 and not in school, the fraction reporting life
satisfaction actually falls to 80 percent, while the fraction for 16 year-olds that did not leave remains at 91
percent.21
A second possibility is that students or parents are financially constrained. They cannot borrow
off of higher expected future earnings to prevent low levels of consumption while attending school.

21

The Eurobarometer Surveys are available through UK Data Archive. They began in 1970 to track opinions and
attitudes among members of the European Community. 1990 Eurobarometer Youth Survey asks a nationally
representative sample of 15 to 24 year olds questions about school choice decisions and life satisfaction. The
question posed was, “On the whole, are you very satisfied, fairly satisfied, not very satisfied, or not at all satisfied
with the life you lead?”.

21

Students may desire to leave home, or parents may not be able to support their children another year. If
financial constraints matter, policies that provide monetary support to youths at risk of dropping out may
help them stay on to realize larger rewards. For example, Dearden, et al. (2003) examine a pilot
experiment in Britain that paid 16 to 18 year-olds from low-income families £30 per week, plus retention
bonuses, for remaining in school past Grade 11. Comparing with a randomized control group, the
program reduced early dropout rates by 5.9 percentage points, from 34.5 percent to 28.7 percent. This
result may not necessarily be driven from relaxing credit constraints. Of those who dropped out, more
than half were not working. Similarly, among 17 year-olds not in school in the 2000 U.S. Census, 90.4
percent lived with parents, and 45 percent were not in the labor force.
A related third explanation for dropout behavior is that youths want to invest in additional
education but parents are not willing to bear the costs – not because they are credit constrained but
because they cannot be sure of recovering those costs. The argument relates to a recent literature
explaining the rationale behind child labor law policies in developing countries. Baland and Robinson
[2000], for example, point out, “if children could borrow when they were young, they could transfer
resources to their parents and compensate them for reduced child labor, even if parents subsequently
planned to leave no bequests. Alternatively, children could enter into a contract with their parents
involving a transfer of future income in exchange for a current reduction in child labor. However, such
contracts are in general neither self-enforcing nor legally enforceable”. Institutional arrangements that
compensate parents for their investment with future resources from children may make all better off.
A fourth explanation why dropouts choose not to invest in education is that the risks are too high.
A better depiction of the school-choice decision involves deciding between alternative earnings
distributions. If a student is risk-averse, higher expected returns from additional schooling may not be
enough to offset higher probabilities of earning particularly low wages [Levhari and Weiss, 1974, Chen,
2002].

Judd (2002) applies the Capital Asset Pricing Model to determine whether the risk-return

relationship for education is similar to that for comparable assets. He concludes that the risk associated

22

from an education investment is much lower than the risk associated with other assets with similar
expected returns. Furthermore, it seems unlikely a student would end up significantly worse off from
staying in high school than from dropping out. More likely, the alternative distribution from staying on
stochastically dominates.

B. Compulsory School Laws Should Stay

I provide below three additional explanations for dropout behavior. Unlike the previous ones,
these imply compulsory school laws may increase welfare, at least on average.
The first alternative explanation to dropout behavior is that students ignore future consequences
of present decisions. A high time preference rate leads students to place more weight on the immediate
attendance costs of school and less weight on future outcomes such as health and earnings (that cannot be
transferred to the present).22 Discounting future consequences from immediate actions does not imply
myopic behavior unless such discounting occurs temporarily. Students that temporarily downplay future
consequences (as considered by Laibson (1997) and O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999)) may prefer dropping
out to staying on but later prefer staying on to dropping out. For example, when asked whether leaving
high school was a good decision, 52.9 percent of dropouts from the U.S. High School and Beyond Survey
said no.23 Compulsory school laws are often motivated by wanting to prevent these types of responses.
A second alternative explanation to dropout behavior considers influences from social or cultural
identity. A central theme from the works of Akerlof and Kranton (2000,2002), Coleman (1961), Cusick
(1972), Everhart (1983), Gordon (1957), Hall (1904), Hollingshead (1975), Jackson (1968), Roderick

22

A high time preference rate does not affect dropout behavior without the presence of credit constraints
or non-pecuniary costs or benefits from schooling. If none of these cases are present, students that prefer
to consume more in the present can simply borrow off of future earnings. [see Oreopoulos, 2003].

23

The question, “On the whole, do you feel that leaving school was a good decision for you?” was asked to 2,208
respondents who left high school without graduation in the dropout questionnaire of the third follow-up to the
sophomore High School and Beyond Survey [ICPSR, 2003]. 37.7 percent responded yes, 42.4 percent responded
no, 19.9 percent did not respond or said ‘Don’t Know’.

23

(1993), and Willis (1977) is that adolescent concerns about self-image or peer acceptance predominate
adolescent behavior. Lack of emotional support or acceptance may exacerbate students’ distaste for
continuing school beyond the minimum age. Raising the school leaving age would obviously remove this
distaste, since parents or peers can no longer attribute the higher attainment outcome to a student’s choice.
A student’s same-aged peers would also face the higher age restrictions, removing any disutility from
being in school while others are not. Combining the first and second alternative explanations, students
may place temporarily high weight on immediate social or cultural considerations, while downplaying
these factors only after a choice is made.
A final consideration is that students may simply mispredict. They may make incorrect present
value calculations of future returns, or underestimate the real gains from school. Dominitz and Manski
(2000) find substantial variation among high school students in earnings expectations conditional on a
bachelor degree. While expectations about the returns from a degree were positive, it seems questionable
whether would-be-dropouts can anticipate lifetime gains from one more year of school. Guidance from
parents who themselves dropped out or peers that do not care for school may also lead to misinformation.

VI. Conclusion

This paper uses changes in school leaving laws to measure forgone benefits from dropping out. I
compare results across the U.S., Canada, and the U.K. Changes to these laws in all three countries lead to
remarkably similar effects. Students compelled to take an extra year of schooling experienced an average
increase of 10 to 14 percent in wages. I also find significant gains from education to health measures,
employment, and poverty status. The results hold up against many specifications checks and are entirely
consistent with previous studies.
The main conclusion of this paper is that the opportunity cost to dropping out is very large. My
estimates range from about 2 to 3 times a dropouts’ peak lifetime annual wage or 6 to 12 times a

24

dropouts’ forgone earnings. The results offer important perspectives for evaluating school leaving
decisions. Knowing what forgone benefits are from dropping out helps quantify a cost-benefit analysis of
the dropout decision and narrow down possible explanations for leaving.
In the absence of significant positive externalities, viewing education as an investment suggests
compulsory schooling laws should not exist, since the laws place constraints on individuals already
optimizing. As an investment, the results imply school attendance costs would have to be extremely large
to explain dropout decisions. If true, addressing these costs could mitigate dropout behavior.
On the other hand, it seems reasonable to suggest the possibility that a dropout’s one-year
attendance costs are not enough to offset this paper’s predicted gains from staying on. Perhaps other
explanations would be better suited for explaining dropout behavior. There is no a priori reason to prefer
an investment model of school attainment over the many other possibilities – cultural or peer pressures
may predominate adolescent decision-making; youths may underestimate the rewards from staying in
school; they may temporarily ignore longer-term consequences of their decisions; or parents may not be
able to recover costs off of their children’s gains. Each explanation carries vastly different policy
implications. The potential to improve a large set of social and economic outcomes certainly seems to
merit further investigation.

25

References

Acemoglu, Daren and Joshua Angrist. “How Large Are Human Capital Externalities? Evidence from
Compulsory Schooling Laws,” NBER Macroannual, 2000, pp. 9-59.
Akerlof, George and Rachael Kranton, “Identity and Schooling: Some Lessons for the Economics of
Education,” Journal of Economic Literature, No. 40, Vol. 4 (December), 2002, pp. 1167-1201.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan Krueger. “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect Schooling and
Earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 106, No. 4, pp. 979, 1014, 1991.
Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens and Donald B. Rubin, “Identification of Causal Effects Using
Instrumental Variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 1996.
Baland, Jean-Marie, and James A. Robinson, “Rotten Parents,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 84,
2002, pp. 341-356.
Barnard, H.C. “A History of English Education,” University of London Press, Bungay, Suffolk, 1961.
Chen, Stacey H. “Is Investing in College Education Risky?”, mimeo, Department of Economics, State
University of New York at Albany, 2002.
Chiswick, Barry R. “Minimum Schooling Legislation and the Cross-Sectional Distribution of Income,”
The Economic Journal, Vol. 79, No. 315. (Sep., 1969), pp. 495-507.
Coleman, James S. “The Adolescent Society,” The Free Press, New York, 1961.
Cook, Philip J. and Jens Ludwig. “Weighing the ‘Burden of ‘Acting White’’: Are There Race Differences
in Attitudes Towards Education?”, Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 256278, 1997.
Cusick, Philip. “Inside High School,” Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York, 1972.
Dearden, Lorraine, Carl Emmerson, Christine Frayne, and Costas Meghir, “The Impact of Financial
Incentives on Educational Choice,” Institute for Fiscal Studies Mimeo, 2002.
Dent, Harold C. “Growth in English Education: 1946-1952,” Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1954.
Dent, Harold C. “The Education Act: 1944,” University of London Press, London, 1957.
Dent, Harold C. “1870-1970 Century of Growth in English Education,” Longman Group Limited,
London, 1970.
Dent, Harold C. “The Educational System of England and Wales,” University of London Press, 1971.
Dominitz, Jeff, and Charles F. Manski. “Using Expectations Data to Study Subjective Income
Expectations,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92, No. 439, pp. 855-867, 2000.

26

Durcan, Thomas J. “History of Irish Education from 1800,” Dragon Books, Bala, North Wales, 1972.
Eckstein, Zvi, and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “Why Youths Drop Out of High School: The Impact of
Preferences, Opportunities, and Abilities,” Econometrica, Vol. 67, No. 6, 1999, pp. 1295-1339.
Everhart, Robert B. “Reading, Writing and Resistance: Adolescence and Labor in a Junior High School,”
Routledge and Kegan Paul, Boston, 1983.
Gatto, John Taylor, “Dumbing Us Down: The Hidden Curriculum of Compulsory Schooling,” Gabriola
Island, B.C.: New Society Publishers, 2002.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz, “Mass Secondary Schooling and the State: The Role of State
Compulsion in the High School Movement,” NBER Working Paper #10075, 2003
Gordon, Wayne C. “The Social System of the High School,” The Free Press, Chicago, 1957.
Gosden, P.H.J.H. “How They Were Taught,” Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1969.
Halsey, A.H., A.F. Heath, and J.M. Ridge, Origins and Destinations, Clarendon Press, Oxford, U.K.,
1980.
Hall, Stanley G. “Adolescence,” Appleton, New York, 1904.
Halsey, A.H., A.F. Heath and J.M. Ridge. “Origins and Destinations: Family, Class, and Education in
Modern Britain,” Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1980.
Harmon, Colm, and Ian Walker. “Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling for the United
Kingdom,” American Economic Review, December 1995, pp. 1278-86.
Jackson, Philip. “Life in Classrooms,” Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York, 1968.
Judd, Kenneth L. “Is Education as Good as Gold? A Portfolio Analysis of Human Capital Investment,”
Stanford Economics Department Mimeo, 2000.
Laibson, David. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
112(2), 1997, pp. 443-77.
Lang, K. and Kropp, D. “Human Capital vs. Sorting: The Effect of Compulsory Attendance Laws,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 101 (August 1986): 609-624
Lee, Valerie E., and David T. Burkam, “Dropping Out of High School: The Role of School Organization
and Structure,” American Educational Research Journal, Vol. 40, No. 2 (Summer), 2003, pp. 353-393.
Levhari, David and Yoram Weiss. “The Effect of Risk on the Investment in Human Capital,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 64, No. 6, pp. 950-63, 1974.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana. “The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in the United States,”
NBER Working Paper No. 8986, 2002.

27

Lleras-Muney, Adrianna, “Were Compulsory Attendance and Child Labor Laws Effective? An Analysis
from 1915 to 1939,” Journal of Law and Economics Vol. 45 (October), 2002, pp. 401-35.
Lochner, Lance, and Enrico Moretti. “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from Prison Inmates,
Arrests, and Self-Reports,” American Economic Review, forthcoming, 2003.
Loewenstein, George, Ted O’Donoghue, and Mathew Rabin, “Projection Bias in Predicting Future
Utility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming, 2003.
Machan, Tibor R., “Education in a Free Society,” Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press, Stanford
University, 2000.
O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. “Risky Behavior among Youths: Some Issues from Behavioral
Economics,” in Risky Behavior Among Youths, Gruber, Jonathan (ed.), University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, 2001, pp. 29-68.
Oreopoulos, Philip. “Do Dropouts Drop Out Too Soon? Evidence Using Changes in School-Leaving
Laws,” Institute for Policy Analysis Working Paper No. 145, 2003a.
Oreopoulos, Philip. “The Compelling Effects of Compulsory Schooling: Evidence from Canada,” Mimeo,
University of Toronto, 2003b.
Park, Jin Heum, “Estimation of Sheepskin Effects and Returns to Schooling Using the Old and New CPS
Measures of Educational Attainment,” Princeton Industrial Relations Section Working Paper No. 338,
December, 1994.
Rickenbacker, Willian F. (ed.), “The Twelve-year Sentence,” LaSalle, III., Open Court, 1974.
Roderick, Melissa. “The Path to Dropping Out,” Auburn House, WestportMA, 1993.
Schmidt, Stefanie, “School Quality, Compulsory Education Laws, and the Growth of American High
School Attendance, 1915-1935,” MIT Ph.D. Dissertation, 1996.
Willis, Paul. “Learning to Labour,” Saxon House, Westmead, 1977.
Wolf, Alison, “Does Education Matter?” Milken Institute Review, December 2002.

28

Figure 1
Minimum School Leaving Ages in the U.S. by State
1915 - 1975
AR

AZ

CA

CO

CT

DC

DE

FL

GA

IA

ID

IL

IN

KS

KY

LA

MA

MD

ME

MI

MN

MO

MS

MT

NC

ND

NE

NH

NJ

NM

NV

NY

OH

OK

OR

PA

RI

SC

SD

TN

TX

UT

VA

VT

WA

WI

WV

WY

16
14
12
18
16
14
12
18
16
14
12
18
16
14
12

AGE

18

12

14

16

18

12

14

16

18

12

14

16

18

AL

15

25

35

45

55

65

75

15 25

35

45

55

65

75

Graphs by state abbreviation

15

25

35

45

55

65

75

15

25

35

45

55

65

75

15

25

35

45

55

65

75

15

25

35

45

55

65

75

15

25

35

45

55

65

75

Figure 2
Minimum School Leaving Ages in Canada by Province
1925 – 1975
british columbia

manitoba

new brunswick

newfoundland

nova scotia

ontario

pei

14
12

1920

saskatchewan

14

16

18

quebec

12

AGE

16

18

12

14

16

18

alberta

1920

1940

1960

Graphs by provname

1980 1920

1940

1960

1980

1940

1960

1980

1920

1940

1960

1980

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

.8

.9

Figure 3A
Fraction Left Full-Time Education by Year Aged 14 and 15
Great Britain

35

40

45

50
yearat14

Frac. Left FT School by Age 14

55

60

65

Frac. Left FT School by Age 15

Notes: The lower line shows the proportion of British-born adults aged
16 to 64 from the 1983 to 1998 General Household Surveys who report
leaving full-time education at, or before, age 14. The upper line shows
the same, but for age 15.

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

.8

.9

Figure 3B
Fraction Left Full-Time Education by Year Aged 14 and 15
Northern Ireland

35

40

45

50
yearat14

Frac. Left FT School by Age 14

55

60

65

Frac. Left FT School by Age 15

Notes: The lower line shows the proportion of Northern Irish adults
aged 16 to 64 from the 1985 to 1998 Continuous Household Surveys
who report leaving full-time education at, or before, age 14. The upper
line shows the same, but for age 15.

Figure 4A
Adult Education Attainment and Earnings for Cohorts Aged 14
Before and After Increases in the Minimum School Leaving Age

.1
.08

Years of Schooling (Normalized)
Log Weekly Earnings (Normalized)

-.06

-.05

0

.05

0

.1

.02

.15

.2

.04

.06

.35

USA

-14 -12 -10

-8

-6 -4 -2
0
2
4
6
8
Years After Dropout Age Increase...

10

12

14

Notes: The U.S. high school dropout data extract discussed in Section III was aggregated
into state and birth cohort cell means, weighted by population size. Average total years of
schooling and log weekly earnings were regressed on indicators for the number of years
between an increase in a state’s minimum school leaving age and the year a cohort was 14,
plus state and birth cohort fixed effects. The time indicator coefficients are shown,
normalized to zero for the group that was 14 years-old 12 years before an increase.

Figure 4B
Adult Education Attainment and Earnings for Cohorts Aged 14
Before and After Increases in the Minimum School Leaving Age

.08
0
.02
.04
.06
Log Annual Earnings (Normalized)

Grade Completed (Normalized)
Log Annual Earnings (Normalized)

0

-.06

Grade Completed (Normalized)
.2
.4
.6

1

Canada

-14 -12 -10 -8

-6 -4 -2 0
2
4
6
8
Years After Dropout Age Increase...

10

12

14

Notes: The Canadian high school dropout data extract discussed in Section III was aggregated
into province and birth cohort cell means, weighted by population size. Average high school
grade attainment and log annual earnings were regressed on indicators for the number of years
between an increase in a province’s minimum school leaving age and the year a cohort was 14,
plus province and birth cohort fixed effects. The time indicator coefficients are shown,
normalized to zero for the group that was 14 years-old 12 years before an increase.

Figure 4C
Adult Education Attainment and Earnings for Cohorts Aged 14
Before and After Increases in the Minimum School Leaving Age

.3

Years of School (Normalized)
Log Annual Earnings (Normalized

-.35

-.1 0

.2

.4

-.1

.6

0

.8

.1

.2

1.4

United Kingdom

-14 -12 -10

-8

-6 -4 -2
0
2
4
6
8
Years After Dropout Age Increase...

10

12

14

Notes: The U.K. high school dropout data extract discussed in Section III was aggregated into
region (Britain/N.Ireland) and birth cohort cell means, weighted by population size. Cell means
were calculated using the sample of 25 to 64 year-olds who were age 14 between 1935 and 1985.
Average high school grade attainment and log annual earnings were regressed on indicators for the
number of years between an increase in a region’s minimum school leaving age and the year a
cohort was 14, plus region and birth cohort fixed effects. The time indicator coefficients are
shown, normalized to zero for the group that was 14 years-old 12 years before an increase.

Figure 5
Projected Annual Earnings Profiles for Males Leaving School at Ages 15 and 16
(2000 U.S. Dollars)

C. United Kingdom

16

20

25

30

35

40
age

Left at 15

45

50
Left at 16

55

60

64

40000
30000
20000
10000

10000

10000

20000

20000

30000

30000

40000

40000

50000

50000

B. Canada

50000

A. United States

16

20

25

30

35

40
age

Left at 15

45

50
Left at 16

55

60

64

16

20

25

30

35

40
age

Left at 15

45

50

55

60

Left at 16

Notes: Each figure uses quartic age coefficients, returns to compulsory schooling estimates, and a baseline wage of $7,525 for 15-year old dropouts at age 15 (the average wage
among 17 year old male dropouts working full-time in the 2000 U.S. Census) to generate the profiles. For the U.S. and Canada, the coefficients were generated using the same
results in Table 3 for male high school dropouts, except that the regression samples included dropouts aged 15 to 64 not in school instead of dropouts age 25 to 64. For the U.K.,
the sample included all 15 to 64 year-old males in the 1983 to 1998 GHHS that left full-time school before age 18. Log annual earnings were regressed on years of schooling,
instrumented by the minimum leaving age faced when in school, a quartic in age, and fixed effects for survey year, and whether living in Northern Ireland. the manufacturing
sector, female, and average age. Data were grouped into means by birth year, Northern Ireland, sex, and survey year and weighted by cell population size. See text for more
details.

64

Table 1
First Stage Effects of Compulsory Schooling on Education Attainment and Earnings
for the U.S., Canada, and the U.K.
(1)

(2)

(3)

1st Stage Effects of Dropout Ages on Schooling

Full Sample

Sample with
< High School

Sample with
> High School

(4)

(5)

(6)

Reduced Form Coefficients on Earnings

Full Sample

Sample with
< High School

Sample with
> High School

United States [1901 - 61 Birth Cohorts aged 25-64 in the 1950 - 2000 Censuses]
Dependent Variable
Number of Years of Schooling

Log Weekly Wage

School Leaving Age = 14

0.236
[0.0316]***

0.253
[0.0370]***

-0.014
[0.0175]

0.033
[0.0076]***

0.027
[0.0090]***

-0.013
[0.0113]

School Leaving Age = 15

0.260
[0.0314]***

0.168
[0.0465]***

-0.023
[0.0160]

0.054
[0.0076]***

0.022
[0.0104]**

-0.005
[0.0104]

School Leaving Age = 16

0.458
[0.0369]***

0.451
[0.0428]***

-0.003
[0.0188]

0.060
[0.0085]***

0.045
[0.0109]***

-0.007
[0.0121]

Initial Sample Size

2,814,203

727,789

1,173,880

87.8

51.8

2.3

F-Test: Coefficients on laws are zero

Canada [1911 - 61 Birth Cohorts aged 25-64 in the 1971 - 2001 Censuses]
Dependent Variable
Highest Grade Attended

Log Annual Wage

School Leaving Age = 14

0.405
[0.0425]***

0.345
[0.0616]***

0.033
[0.0189]*

0.037
[0.0059]***

0.044
[0.0126]***

-0.012
[0.0100]

School Leaving Age >= 15

0.643
[0.0544]***

0.657
[0.0730]***

-0.004
[0.0178]

0.054
[0.0065]***

0.086
[0.0126]***

-0.007
[0.0115]

Initial Sample Size

8,208,030

4,177,800

4,030,230

70.2

42.5

4.6

F-Test: Coefficients on laws are zero

United Kingdom [1921 - 51 Birth Cohorts aged 32-64 in the 1983 - 98 GHHS]
Dependent Variable
Age Left Full-Time Education

Log Annual Wage

0.425
[0.0313]***

0.487
[0.0309]***

0.062
[0.0785]

Initial Sample Size

66,185

47,584

13,760

F-Test: Coefficients on laws are zero

184.9

358.5

0.6

School Leaving Age = 15

0.058
[0.0198]***

0.052
[0.0242]**

0.005
[0.0369]

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for birth year, region (state, province, Britain/N.Ireland), survey year, sex, and a quartic in age. The U.S. results also include a dummy variable for
race and state controls for fraction living in urban areas, fraction black, in the labor force, in the manufacturing sector, female, and average age based on when a birth cohort was age 14. Similar
province controls for Canada include fraction in urban areas, fraction in the manufacturing sector, female, and average age. Data are grouped into means by birth year, nation, sex, race (for the
U.S.) and survey year and weighted by cell population size. Huber-White standard errors are shown from clustering by region and birth cohort. Single, double, and triple asterix indicate
significant coefficients at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels respectively. The ommited variable indicates whether able to drop out at age 13 or less for the U.S. and Canada, and 14
or less for the U.K. Samples include all adults aged 25 to 64. Dependent variable in Column 3 for Canada is 1 = some post secondary schooling, 0 otherwise. See text for more data specifics.

Table 2
Estimated Effects of Own School Leaving Age and Later Birth Cohorts'
School Leave Age on Education Attainment and Earnings
(1)

(2)

(3)

United States
Lead Year for
School Leaving Age
Faced by Later Birth
Cohort

(5)

(6)

[1901 - 61 Birth Cohorts aged 25-64 in the 1950 - 2000 Censuses]

First Stage Dep. Var.
Years of Schooling
School Leaving
Age

(4)

Reduced form Dep. Var.
Log Weekly Earnings

Later School
Leaving Age

School Leaving
Age

Later School
Leaving Age

0.015
[0.0015]***

IV: Estimates of
Returns to Comp. Schooling
Years of
Schooling

Later School
Leaving Age

none

0.099
[0.0067]***

2 years

0.114
[0.0099]***

-0.016
[0.0077]**

0.016
[0.0021]***

-0.001
[0.0015]

0.141
[0.0147]***

0.001
[0.0011]

3 years

0.103
[0.0088]***

-0.005
[0.0072]

0.014
[0.0019]***

0.001
[0.0014]

0.139
[0.0160]***

0.001
[0.0013]

Canada
Lead Year for
School Leaving Age
Faced by Later Birth
Cohort

[1911 - 61 Birth Cohorts aged 25-64 in the 1971 - 2001 Censuses]

First Stage Dep. Var.
Highest Grade Attended
School Leaving
Age

0.151
[0.0130]***

Future School
Leaving Age

Reduced form Dep. Var.
Log Annual Earnings
School Leaving
Age

Future School
Leaving Age

0.051
[0.0092]***

IV: Estimates of
Returns to Comp. Schooling
Highest Grade
Attended

Future School
Leaving Age

none

0.374
[0.0489]***

2 years

0.355
[0.0601]***

0.034
[0.0563]

0.044
[0.0098]***

0.012
[0.0107]

0.124
[0.0187]***

0.007
[0.0071]

3 years

0.358
[0.0554]***

0.037
[0.0535]

0.042
[0.0094]***

0.019
[0.0111]*

0.118
[0.0175]***

0.014
[0.0074]*

United Kingdom
Lead Year for
School Leaving Age
Faced by Later Birth
Cohort

First Stage Dep. Var.
Highest Grade Attended
School Leaving
Age

Future School
Leaving Age

0.135
[0.0181]***

[1921 - 51 Birth Cohorts aged 32-64 in the 1983 - 98 GHHS]
Reduced form Dep. Var.
Log Annual Earnings
School Leaving
Age

Future School
Leaving Age

0.058
[0.0198]***

IV: Estimates of
Returns to Comp. Schooling
Highest Grade
Attended

Future School
Leaving Age

none

0.425
[0.0313]***

0.158
[0.0491]***

2 years

0.484
[0.0380]***

-0.100
[0.0393]**

0.072
[0.0233]***

-0.023
[0.0257]

0.176
[0.0577]***

-0.011
[0.0233]

3 years

0.477
[0.0318]***

-0.119
[0.0342]***

0.073
[0.0192]***

-0.032
[0.0223]

0.179
[0.0463]***

-0.017
[0.0202]

Notes: Each row in columns 1 and 2 show the first stage coefficients from regressing own school leaving age and a later cohort's school leaving age on
education attainment. Columns 3 and 4 show the reduced form coefficients from regressing own school leaving age and a later cohort's school leaving age
on earnings. Columns 5 and 6 show the coefficients from the instrumental variables estimate of the returns to compulsory schooling and the lead school
leaving age control. All regressions include fixed effects for birth year, region (state or province), survey year, sex, and a quartic in age. The U.S. results
also include a dummy variable for race and state controls for fraction of state living in urban areas, fraction black, in the labor force, in the manufacturing
sector, female, and average age based on when a birth cohort was age 14. Similar province controls for Canada include fraction in urban areas, fraction in
the manufacturing sector, female, and average age. Data are grouped into means by birth year, region sex, race (for the U.S.), and survey year and
weighted by population size. Huber-White standard errors are shown from clustering by region and birth cohort. Single, double, and triple asterix
indicate significant coefficients at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels respectively. See text for more data specifics.

Table 3
OLS and IV Estimates of the Returns to Compulsory Schooling
for the U.S., Canada, and the U.K.
(1)

(2)

(3)

OLS
<HS Sample

IV
Full Samp.

IV
<HS Sample

United States [1901-61 Birth Cohorts aged 25-64
Dependent Variable
Log Weekly Earnings (all workers)

Log Weekly Earnings (males)

Log Weekly Earnings (black males)

in the 1950 - 2000 Censuses]
0.079

0.133

0.095

[0.0005]***

[0.0118]***

[0.0224]***

0.070

0.122

0.157

[0.0004]***

[0.0141]***

[0.0252]***

0.074

0.158

0.140

[0.0004]***

[0.0132]***

[0.0207]***

Canada [1911-61 Birth Cohorts aged 25-64
in the 1971-2001 Censuses]

Log Annual Earnings (all workers)

Log Annual Earnings (males)

0.088

0.084

0.132

[0.0008]***

[0.0103]***

[0.0145]***

0.107

0.106

0.138

[0.0010]***

[0.0121]***

[0.0152]***

United Kingdom [1921-51 Birth Cohorts aged 32-64
in the 1983 - 1998 GHHS]

Log Annual Earnings (all workers)

Log Annual Earnings (males)

0.147

0.158

0.074

[0.0058]***

[0.0491]***

[0.0420]*

0.134
[0.0071]***

0.094
[0.0568]

0.073
[0.0516]

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for birth year, region (state, province, Britain/N.Ireland), survey year, sex (for the full
sample only), and a quartic in age. The U.S. results also include a dummy variable for race (except for the regression for black
males) and state controls for fraction of state living in urban areas, fraction black, in the labor force, in the manufacturing sector,
female, and average age based on when a birth cohort was age 14. Similar province controls for Canada include fraction in urban
areas, fraction in the manufacturing sector, female, and average age. Data are grouped into means by birth year, nation, sex, race
(for the U.S.) and survey year. Huber-White standard errors are shown from clustering by region and birth cohort. Single, double,
and triple asterix indicate significant coefficients at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels respectively. See text for more
data specifics.

Table 4
OLS and IV Estimates for Effects of Compulsory Schooling on Health
and Other Social-Economic Outcomes
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Mean
<HS Sample

OLS
<HS Sample

IV
Full Sample

IV
<HS Sample

Country (Schooling Variable)
Health Outcomes (ages 25 - 84)
United States (Total Years of Schooing)
Physical or mental health
disability that limits personal care

0.092

Disability that limits mobility

0.128

-0.014

-0.025

-0.029

[0.0003]***

[0.0058]***

[0.0126]**

-0.020

-0.043

-0.031

[0.0004]***

[0.0070]***

[0.0191]

United Kingdom (Age Left Full Time Education)
Self Reported Poor Health

Self Reported Good Health

0.150

0.564

-0.037

-0.032

-0.019

[0.0016]***

[0.0113]***

[0.0085]**

0.065

0.060

0.025

[0.0021]***

[0.0155]***

[0.0115]**

Other Social-Economic Outcomes (ages 25 - 64)
United States (Schooling Variable: Total Years of Schooing)
Unemployed

Receiving welfare

Below poverty line

0.064

0.067

0.220

-0.004

-0.005

-0.026

[0.0002]***

[0.0040]

[0.0103]**

-0.013

-0.011

-0.020

[0.0002]***

[0.0024]***

[0.0068]***

-0.023

-0.064

-0.085

[0.0002]***

[0.0085]***

[0.0151]***

Canada (Highest Grade Attended)
Unemployed; looking for work

Below low-income cut-off

0.062

0.227

-0.009

-0.010

-0.013

[0.0004]***

[0.003]***

[0.004]***

-0.038

-0.026

-0.019

[0.0004]***

[0.0038]***

[0.0068]***

United Kingdom (Age Left Full Time Education)
In labor force; looking for work

Receiving income support

0.110

0.066

-0.030

-0.032

-0.020

[0.0044]***

[0.0150]**

[0.0166]

-0.025

-0.059

-0.031

[0.0024]***

[0.0259]**

[0.0150]**

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for birth year, region (state, province, Britain/N.Ireland), survey year, sex, and a quartic in age. The U.S. results also
include a dummy variable for race and state controls for fraction of state living in urban areas, fraction black, in the labor force, in the manufacturing sector,
female, and average age based on when a birth cohort was age 14. Similar province controls for Canada include fraction in urban areas, fraction in the
manufacturing sector, female, and average age. Data are grouped into means by birth year, nation, sex, race (for the U.S.) and survey year. Huber-White standard
errors are shown from clustering by region and birth cohort. Single, double, and triple asterix indicate significant coefficients at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1
percent levels respectively. See text for more data specifics.

Table 5
Average Financial Gain from Dropping Out One Year Later,
Measured in Present Value (2000 U.S. dollars)
(1)

(2)

(3)

Annual Retun

Discount Rate

(4)

(5)

Baseline
Forgone Earnings

Peak Income
for Early Dropout

United States
0.154

0.11

0.07

(at Age 54)

0.03

103,593

72,485

45,200

7,525

34,243

0.05

68,472

47,911

29,876

7,525

34,243

0.07

48,236

33,751

21,046

7,525

34,243

0.295

7,525
Canada
0.129

0.11

0.07

(at Age 47)

0.03

82,572

69,616

43,411

7,525

30,827

0.05

55,029

46,395

28,931

7,525

30,827

0.07

38,972

32,857

20,489

7,525

30,827

0.252

7,525
United Kingdom
0.137

0.11

0.07

(at Age 52)

0.03

120,354

95,035

59,261

7,525

43,490

0.05

79,513

62,785

39,151

7,525

43,490

0.07

55,785

44,050

27,468

7,525

43,490

0.308

7,525
* estimated annual return

Notes: Projected wage profiles among 15 and 16 year-old dropouts between the ages of 16 and 64 are shown in Figure 5.
Column 1 shows the estimated annual returns to compulsory schooling from the instrumental variable regressions used to
create these profiles. Column 1 also converts the annual profile differences to present value at age 15. Columns 2 and 3
show present value gains assuming alternative annual returns to compulsory schooling (.11 and .07 rspectively). The
baseline wage for a 15 year old dropout at age 15 is $7,525. The fourth row for each country shows the discount factor
needed to generate present value gains equal to this amount. Column 5 displys the projected peak earnings for a 15-yearold dropout.

