                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          ESTIMATING THE EFFECTS OF GLOBAL
                       PATENT PROTECTION IN PHARMACEUTICALS:
                         A CASE STUDY OF QUINOLONES IN INDIA

                                         Shubham Chaudhuri
                                         Pinelopi K. Goldberg
                                               Panle Jia

                                         Working Paper 10159
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10159


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2003




Comments welcome. We would like to thank Isher Ahluwalia, former Director, Indian Council for Research
on International Economic Relations for providing us with access to the primary data used in this study. We
also thank seminar participants at Yale and the 2003 NEUDC conference for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Shubham Chaudhuri, Pinelopi K. Goldberg, and Panle Jia. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating the Effects of Global Patent Protection in Pharmaceuticals: A Case Study of
Quinolones in India
Shubham Chaudhuri, Pinelopi K. Goldberg, and Panle Jia
NBER Working Paper No. 10159
December 2003, Revised July 2006
JEL No. O34, D12, D4, L65, F13

                                           ABSTRACT

Under the TRIPS agreement, WTO members are required to enforce product patents for
pharmaceuticals. The debate about the merits of this requirement has been extremely contentious.
Many low income economies claim that patent protection for pharmaceuticals will result in
substantially higher prices for medicines, with adverse consequences for the health and well-being
of their citizens. On the other hand, research-based global pharmaceutical companies, argue that
prices are unlikely to rise significantly because most patented products have therapeutic substitutes.
In this paper we empirically investigate the basis of these claims. Central to the ongoing debate is
the structure of demand for pharmaceuticals in poor economies where, because health insurance
coverage is so rare, almost all medical expenses are met out-of-pocket. Using a detailed product-
level data set from India, we estimate key price and expenditure elasticities and supply-side
parameters for the fluoroquinolones sub-segment of the systemic anti-bacterials (i.e., antibiotics)
segment of the Indian pharmaceuticals market. We then use these estimates to carry out
counterfactual simulations of what prices, profits, and consumer welfare would have been, had the
fluoroquinolone molecules we study been under patent in India as they were in the U.S. at the time.
Our results suggest that concerns about the potential adverse welfare effects of TRIPS may have
some basis. We estimate that in the presence price regulation the total annual welfare losses to the
Indian economy from the withdrawal of the four domestic product groups in the fluoroquinolone
sub-segment would be on the order of U.S. $305 million, or about 50% of the sales of the entire
systemic anti-bacterials segment in 2000. Of this amount, foregone profits of domestic producers
constitute roughly $50 million. The overwhelming portion of the total welfare loss therefore derives
from the loss of consumer welfare. In contrast, the profit gains to foreign producers in the presence
price regulation are estimated to be only around $19.6 million per year.
Shubham Chaudhuri                 Department of Economics           Yale University
Department of Economics           Yale University                   panle.jia@yale.edu
Columbia University               37 Hillhouse Avenue
sc301@columbia.edu                P.O. Box 208264
                                  New Haven, CT 06520-8264
                                  and NBER
                                  penny.goldberg@yale.edu

                                  Panle Jia
Pinelopi K. Goldberg              Department of Economics
1. Introduction

Under the Agreement on Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)–finalized during the
Uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations in 1995–nations must, as a condition of member-
ship in the World Trade Organization (WTO), recognize and enforce product patents in all fields of
technology, including pharmaceuticals. At the time the TRIPS agreement went into eﬀect, many low
and middle income countries made an exception for pharmaceuticals, even if they recognized prod-
uct patents in other areas, because low-cost access to life-saving drugs and essential medicines was
deemed to be an overriding public policy priority. To meet their obligations under TRIPS however
these countries had to introduce or amend their patent legislation to include pharmaceutical product
patents, with the transition- and least-developed economies having until 2005 to do so.
    The negotiations leading up to TRIPS, and in particular the provisions relating to pharmaceuticals,
were highly contentious. Though more than 10 years have passed since TRIPS was finalized, there con-
tinues to be considerable controversy and debate regarding its merits. The main point of contention is
the claim made by governments of many poor developing economies that unqualified patent protection
for pharmaceuticals will result in substantially higher prices for medicines, with adverse consequences
for the health and well-being of their citizens. Countering this claim, research-based global pharma-
ceutical companies, which have potentially lost billions of dollars because of patent infringement by
Third World firms that have reverse-engineered their products, argue that the introduction of product
patents is unlikely to significantly raise prices because most patented products have many therapeutic
substitutes. Moreover, they claim that the absence of patent protection has served as a disincentive
to engage in research on diseases that disproportionately aﬄict the world’s poor, implying that patent
protection for pharmaceuticals will actually benefit less-developed economies by stimulating innovation
and transfer of technology.
    Given the scope of TRIPS and the intensity of the accompanying debate, it is remarkable how
sparse the evidence is, on which these divergent claims are based.1 Apart from the findings of a small
number of studies that we refer to in more detail below, little is known about the extent to which
pharmaceutical prices in less-developed economies might increase with the introduction of product
patents, and the magnitude of the associated welfare losses.2 Past empirical studies on the impact of

   1
     There is a sizeable theoretical literature on the welfare impact of patent protection that generally finds that the
eﬀects of patents in a multi-country setting are substantially more complicated than their respective eﬀects in a single
closed economy where both innovating firms and innovation beneficiaries (i.e., consumers) are of the same nationality
(see Nordhaus (1969), Chin and Grossman (1990), Diwan and Rodrik (1991), Deardorﬀ (1992), Helpman (1993), and
Grossman and Lai (2003) for related arguments). Empirical work in this area is however still in its infancy.
   2
     Even less is known about the other central questions relevant to the TRIPS debate, namely the extent to which
pharmaceutical research and product development priorities are likely to shift as a result of TRIPS, and how large the
welfare benefits of any therapeutically innovative drugs that result from this shift are likely to be. The only paper that
has carefully addressed such questions is Lanjouw and Cockburn (2001).
patents on prices and innovative activity in various sectors, including pharmaceuticals, have focused
almost exclusively on developed economies. Aside from the fact that none of these studies estimate
welfare eﬀects, the conclusions from these studies are not directly pertinent to the TRIPS debate
because the structure of demand for pharmaceuticals in less-developed economies diﬀers from that in
developed economies in several critical respects3 .
       Any assessment of the potential price and welfare eﬀects of TRIPS needs therefore to be based
on a better empirically-grounded understanding of the characteristics of demand and the structure of
markets for pharmaceuticals in poor developing economies. To what extent are consumers willing to
trade oﬀ lower prices for older, possibly less eﬀective therapies? How does this vary across diﬀerent
therapeutic segments? Are consumers willing to pay a premium for the pedigree and brand reputation
of products marketed by subsidiaries of foreign multinationals? How competitive are pharmaceutical
markets? The welfare of consumers depends on the pricing strategies and decisions of pharmaceutical
firms. But these in turn derive from the firms’ assessment of the structure of market demand. If
consumers are unwilling to pay substantially more for newer patented drugs for which there exist older,
possibly slightly less eﬀective generic substitutes, the ability of patent-holders to charge a premium
will be limited. As mentioned above, there have been a few studies that carefully considered these
issues and used explicit models of consumer and firm behavior to simulate the welfare losses implied
by patent protection4 . However, their findings are ultimately limited by the fact that the simulations
that are used to evaluate the potential impact of patents are in each instance based on assumptions
about demand characteristics and market structure, rather than on actual estimates of the relevant
parameters.
       This paper takes a first step towards filling this gap. We provide the first rigorously-derived esti-
mates of the possible impact of pharmaceutical product patents on prices and welfare in a developing
economy. Using detailed product-level data on monthly pharmaceutical prices and sales over a two
year period from January 1999 to December 2000, we estimate key price and expenditure elastici-
ties and supply-side parameters for the fluoroquinolone (quinolone henceforth5 ) segment of systemic
anti-bacterials (i.e., antibiotics) in the Indian pharmaceuticals market. We chose this segment both
because it contains several products that were still under patent in the U.S. during our sample period,
and because antibiotics are important from a public health policy point of view (compared to let’s
say Prozac, Viagra, or other life-style drugs that were also under patent protection in the U.S. during
this period). We then use our estimates to carry out counterfactual simulations of what prices, profits

   3
     For a representative example of estimation of pharmaceuticals demand in developed countries see Ellison, Cockburn,
Griliches and Hausman (1997).
   4
     See for instance, Challu (1991), Fink (2000), Maskus and Konan (1994), Nogues (1993), Subramanian (1995), and
Wattal (2000).
   5
     Technically, the term “fluoroquinolones” refers to the latest generation of quinolones. However, older quinolones
(e.g., nalidixic acid) have market shares close to zero.


                                                          2
(of both domestic firms and subsidiaries of foreign multinationals) and consumer welfare would have
been, had the quinolone molecules we study been under patent in India as they were in the U.S. at
the time. The presence of many therapeutic substitutes within the antibiotics segment, make this
product category ideal for investigating the claim that the presence of close substitutes will prevent
drug prices from rising once patent protection is enforced. Of course, to the extent that our estimates
refer to antibiotics, they are not directly applicable to other pharmaceutical product categories that
may have diﬀerent demand structures. For example, a finding of large substitution eﬀects towards
non-patented products would not necessarily apply to a market segment with only few, or possibly
no therapeutic substitutes. Still, a finding of limited substitution towards other drugs and associated
large price increases, would suggest that the eﬀects of patent enforcement in other pharmaceutical
segments with fewer therapeutic substitutes might be even larger.
   India provides a natural setting for our analysis for a number of reasons. It is a leading example of
a low-income country that did not recognize pharmaceutical product patents at the time the TRIPS
agreement went into eﬀect. In fact, during the Uruguay round of negotiations, India led the opposition
to the TRIPS articles mandating pharmaceutical product patents. In terms of the structure of demand,
India is a prototypical example of a low-income country with a large number of poor households who,
because health insurance coverage is non-existent, have to meet all medical expenses out-of-pocket.
Moreover, the disease profile of the Indian population mirrors that of many other low-income countries
and is considerably diﬀerent from that of most developed economies. Lastly, the domestic Indian
pharmaceutical industry, which as of 2002 was the largest producer of generic drugs in the world in
terms of volume, is typical of that in many middle-income countries with large numbers of small and
medium sized firms with significant imitative capabilities producing and marketing drugs domestically
that are under patent elsewhere.
   During the period covered by our data, several molecules in the quinolone family were still under
patent in the U.S., but products containing these molecules were being produced and distributed in
India by both a number of domestic firms and a number of local subsidiaries of foreign multinationals.
We aggregate these products into a number of mutually exclusive product groups where, within each
product group all products contain the same quinolone molecule (e.g., ciprofloxacin or norfloxacin,
etc.), and are produced by firms with the same domestic or foreign status. We then estimate a two-
level demand system employing the Almost Ideal Demand System (AIDS) specification of Deaton and
Muellbauer (1980) in both levels. The higher level corresponds to the allocation of expenditures to
various sub-segments within the systemic anti-bacterials segment of the market. At the lower level we
estimate the parameters relevant for the allocation of expenditures within the quinolone sub-segment to
the various product groups within this sub-segment (e.g., foreign ciprofloxacin, domestic ciprofloxacin,
domestic norfloxacin, etc.).



                                                   3
   With these estimates in hand we turn to the counterfactuals. The basic counterfactual scenarios
we consider all involve the withdrawal of one or more of the domestic quinolone product groups from
the market. The idea here is that had U.S. patents for, say, ciprofloxacin, been recognized in India, all
domestic products containing ciprofloxacin would not be present in the market. That would leave only
the foreign ciprofloxacin product group in the market. Using our estimates of the own, cross-price,
and expenditure elasticities of the various product groups, as well as estimates for the upper and lower
bounds of marginal costs of production, we are able to simulate the prices and market shares that
would obtain under each of the scenarios. Moreover, using the expenditure function associated with
the higher-level AIDS specification we are able to calculate the welfare loss–measured in terms of
the compensating variation, i.e., the additional expenditure that the representative Indian consumer
would need to incur to maintain her utility level in the face of the domestic product withdrawal(s)
and the accompanying price and market share changes–under each of the counterfactual scenarios.
   Apart from the fact that our counterfactual simulations are based on estimated rather than assumed
parameter values, this paper builds upon the earlier studies in two substantive, and (it turns out)
empirically important, ways.
   First, by accommodating the possibility that consumers may diﬀerentiate between domestic and
foreign products even when these products contain the same patentable molecule, we allow for an
additional channel through which the introduction of product patents and the consequent withdrawal
of domestic products may adversely aﬀect consumers; and that is through the loss of product variety.
In contrast, previous studies on developing countries assume that consumers are indiﬀerent between
foreign and domestic products that contain the same molecule. What this implies is that any adverse
welfare eﬀects are only realized through increased prices. The diﬀerence is most evident if we consider
a scenario under which domestic products are forced to withdraw from the market because of the
introduction of product patents, but strict price regulations maintain prices at pre-patent levels. In
our approach consumers would still experience a welfare loss, whereas in the framework adopted in
earlier studies, such a scenario would entail no loss of welfare.
   Empirically, the component of the consumer welfare loss attributable to the reduction of variety
from the withdrawal of domestic products turns out to be significant. We interpret this component
as capturing primarily an “ease of access” eﬀect: due to diﬀerences in the marketing and distribution
networks, domestic products are more readily available to Indian consumers than products produced
by foreign subsidiaries. From a policy perspective, this suggests a possible role for compulsory licensing
in addition to or in lieu of price regulation, since the latter, by itself, will not alleviate the welfare loss
due to loss of variety. Alternatively, one could argue that - to the extent that the loss we attribute to
the reduction of product variety is due to the fact that the current product portfolios and distribution
networks of foreign producers are limited - it is purely a transitional phenomenon, and should thus not



                                                      4
be included in the welfare calculations. This is a controversial point that we discuss in detail in the
results section. If foreign firms respond to patent enforcement by investing in distribution networks
or by using licensing agreements with domestic firms to make their products more readily available to
Indian consumers, the “ease of access” eﬀect would indeed diminish in importance in the longer run,
though of course it could be significant in the first years after patent enforcement. However, whether
these investments will materialize, is open to debate. If TRIPS is accompanied by price regulation in
order to limit price increases in poor developing countries, the incentives of multinationals to invest
in marketing and distribution in these countries may diminish. At any rate, to take into account the
possibility that the welfare loss due to the reduction of variety is a temporary phenomenon, we also
present a more conservative welfare loss estimate, by subtracting the “product variety” component
from our total loss estimate. This gives us a lower bound estimate that is due to price increases alone.
Though only about a third of our upper bound estimate, in absolute terms this lower bound estimate
is still very large, representing 24% of antibiotic sales in 2000.
   A second, and perhaps even more important methodological diﬀerence between this paper and
earlier studies is that we allow for and flexibly estimate a range of cross-product-group and cross-
molecule substitution eﬀects. In contrast, cross-price eﬀects are ignored in earlier studies. To see why
cross-price eﬀects are likely to significantly alter estimated welfare eﬀects in this context, imagine a
scenario where the introduction of patents leads to monopoly pricing in the market for a particular
patentable molecule. If the markets for potential substitutes are imperfectly competitive, then the
increase in price in the original patentable market will lead to corresponding upward price adjustments
in the related markets as producers of substitute products reoptimize in the face of the increased
demand for their products. The magnitude of any upward adjustments will naturally vary with the
degree of competition in related markets, and with the strength of the cross-price eﬀects. But as long
as the cross-price eﬀects are positive, and related markets are not perfectly competitive, the loss of
consumer surplus because of monopoly pricing in one market will be multiplied through the ripple
eﬀects of upward price adjustments in related markets.
   If this were just a theoretical possibility it would not be of much interest. However, these multiplier
eﬀects turn out to be substantial in our counterfactual scenarios. Most strikingly, the estimated loss of
consumer welfare from the simultaneous withdrawal of all four domestic product groups–the scenario
that most closely resembles what is likely to happen under TRIPS–is more than two times the sum of
the estimated losses from the four separate scenarios in each of which only one of the domestic product
groups is withdrawn. What this very clearly indicates is that past studies that have estimated the
aggregate eﬀects of patent protection by adding up the losses, estimated separately in each of a number
of patentable markets, may have substantially underestimated the magnitude of the consumer welfare
losses from the introduction of pharmaceutical product patents.



                                                     5
       In absolute terms, we estimate that in the absence of any price regulation the prices of foreign
patented products would rise between 100% and 400%. In the more realistic case of some form of
price regulation that would keep drug prices fixed at their pre-TRIPS level, the total annual welfare
losses to the Indian economy from the withdrawal of all four domestic product groups in the quinolone
sub-segment would be on the order of Rs. 13.70 billion, or about 50% of the sales of the entire systemic
anti-bacterials segment in 2000. At the then prevailing exchange rate this translates into a figure of
U.S. $305 million. Of this amount, foregone profits of domestic producers constitute roughly Rs. 2.3
billion or U.S. $50 million. The overwhelming portion of the total welfare loss therefore derives from
the loss of consumer welfare.
       The welfare loss we estimate represents only the static costs of patent enforcement arising from
pricing distortions and reduction in product variety. Our approach does not address the potential
dynamic benefits of innovations that may result from international property rights protection. Never-
theless, we believe that estimating these static costs is important whenever there is a radical change in
policy - which TRIPS represents for a good part of the developing world. Even if there is the potential
for long-term benefits, knowledge of the short-run costs is important for designing an appropriate
policy response that will potentially mitigate the adverse short-run impact. Having said that, it is
worth noting that according to our estimates, the total profit gains of patent enforcement to foreign
producers in the absence of any price regulation would be only about U.S. $53 million per year. With
price regulation that would keep the prices of drugs supplied by multinational subsidiaries at their
pre-TRIPS level, the profit gains become only U.S. $19.6 million per year.
       The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section we lay out the essential
features of the Indian pharmaceuticals market, provide more detail about the segments that we focus
on in the empirical analysis, and briefly describe the primary data we use. Section 3 describes the
analytic framework and the econometric strategy we use to estimate the relevant parameters and
construct the counterfactual scenarios. We discuss our results in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.


2. The setting and the data

Between April 1972, when the Indian Patents Act (1970) became eﬀective, and March 2005, when
India’s parliament passed the 3rd Amendment of the Patents Act, India did not recognize product
patents for pharmaceuticals. The Indian Patents Act (1970), which replaced the inherited British colo-
nial law regarding intellectual property rights, specifically excluded pharmaceutical product patents
and only admitted process patents for a period of seven years. In contrast the latest amendment
recognizes patents on end products that under the new regime will remain in force for twenty years.6

   6
    Indian companies that are now producing drugs for which patent applications were submitted between the signing
of the TRIPS agreement in 1995 and January 1, 2005 will be allowed to continue producing if they pay a royalty to the


                                                         6
    The two stated objectives of the 1970 act were: the development of an indigenous pharmaceuticals
industry; and the provision of low-cost access to medicines for Indian consumers. Consistent with these
objectives, and with the broader leftward tilt in policy, a number of other measures were introduced–
drug price controls, restrictions on capacity expansion, limits on multinational equity shares, etc.–that
in the years since have, on the one hand, kept pharmaceutical prices low, and on the other encouraged
the development of the Indian pharmaceutical industry. Many of these regulations and restrictions
have been lifted or eased since the mid-1980s with marked acceleration in the pace of liberalization
during the 1990s.
    Over the last twenty years the Indian pharmaceutical industry has grown rapidly to the point
where it is now the world’s largest producer of formulations in terms of volume, and one of the world’s
largest producers of bulk drugs.7 The structure of the industry has also evolved. In 1970 the industry
was dominated by multinational subsidiaries; by 2001, Indian-owned firms were not just the leading
players in the industry, many had also become major exporters.
    The data we use in this paper are from the retail pharmaceutical audits of ORG-MARG, India’s
premier market research and consulting firm. The audit provides detailed product-level information–
estimates of monthly retail sales in each of the four geographic zones of India, price, dosage form, launch
date, brand name, chemical name, therapeutic categorization, etc.–on all pharmaceutical products
sold in India by about 300 of the largest firms, representing roughly 90% of domestic retail sales of
pharmaceuticals. The coverage of the audit is extensive, reaching a representative panel of thousands
of retail chemists in over 350 cities and towns. The data collected, which provide the only real source
of disaggregate information on the Indian pharmaceutical market, are used by both the government
of India in formulating pricing policy and other decisions, and the Indian pharmaceutical industry in
determining pricing and marketing strategies. We have information at a monthly frequency for the
period of January 1999 to December 2000. Tables 1-3 provide a set of descriptive statistics that are
essential for understanding the focus of our analysis and interpreting our results.
    As noted earlier, the characteristics of demand for pharmaceuticals in India are likely to diﬀer
considerably from those in developed economies. With a share of 23%, the anti-infectives segment
ranks second in India, whereas in the world market it is fifth and has a share of only 9.0%. Hence,
anti-infectives are important in India not only from a health-public-policy point of view, but also as a
source of firm revenue.
    With this in mind, we focus in this paper on one particular sub-segment of anti-infectives, namely

patent holder.
   7
     Bulk drugs are the therapeutically relevant active pharmaceutical ingredients that are combined with a variety of
inactive ingredients to make the formulations that are ultimately consumed by patients. Firms in the pharmaceutical
sector can be of one of three types: bulk drugs producers, pure formulators, or integrated firms, which produce both
bulk drugs and market formulations.



                                                          7
the quinolone sub-segment. Quinolones fall into the systemic anti-biotics and anti-bacterials segment
of the Indian pharmaceuticals market, which generates over three-quarters of the revenues in the anti-
infectives segment8 . The systemic anti-bacterials segment includes all of the original miracle drugs
that first sparked the growth of the global research-based pharmaceutical industry in the post-World
War II period, as well as later generations of molecules that have been introduced in the last four
decades.
       Among systemic anti-bacterials, quinolones are the latest generation molecules available in India.
We focus our analysis on quinolones for several reasons. First, quinolones are the drug of choice for
a large number of bacterial infections, some of which are also treated by alternative drugs (see Table
A1 in the Appendix, which outlines the spectrum of activity for each molecule family within the anti-
bacterials segment). Hence, if there were one product group for which we would expect to have many
substitutes readily available, this would be quinolones. Second, with a share of 20% in the sales of
systemic anti-bacterials, quinolones represent one of the largest sub-segments within this therapeutic
category. Finally, several molecules within the quinolone sub-segment were still under patent in the
U.S. at the time of our investigation.           This is shown in Table 2 that details the basic information
about the four quinolone molecules that are the focus of our analysis. The first row shows the year of
U.S. patent expiry; this ranges from 1998 for norfloxacin, to 2010 for sparfloxacin. Quinolones include
in principle four more molecules that are listed at the bottom of Table 1; however, the market shares
of these molecules are negligible, so that we exclude these molecules from our analysis.
       Table 2 reveals several other interesting facts about competition in the quinolone market in India.
First, note the large number of firms operating in this sub-segment. The large number of domestic firms
is perhaps not that surprising given that pharmaceutical product patents were not recognized in India.9
What is more surprising is the number of foreign firms selling patented products (e.g., ciprofloxacin);
the fact that multiple foreign firms sell a patented product indicates that such firms often “infringe”10
patent laws in India, while complying with them in developed world countries. The last two rows
of Table 2 further indicate that domestic products often sell at a premium. With the exception of
ofloxacin, the average prices of products oﬀered by Indian firms are higher than the prices of products
oﬀered by foreign subsidiaries. This preliminary evidence suggests that Indian consumers do not place
a premium on the brand name and reputation of big multinational pharmaceutical concerns. Moreover,
the higher price of domestic products does not seem to prevent domestic companies from capturing a
large market share. This is most evident in the case of ciprofloxacin, where domestic firms have, with

   8
     In addition to anti-bacterials, this segment contains also anti-virals.
   9
     Accordingly, the common distinction between “branded” and “generic” products is irrelevant here.
  10
     We emphasize here that the word "infringe" belongs in quotes: Because patent laws do not currently exist in India,
infringement in the legal sense is not possible. It is however striking that the same firms that accuse Indian producers of
“piracy” sell in India products that are patented in the U.S., and for which the patent is held by a diﬀerent multinational
corporation.


                                                            8
53%, the largest share in the total sales of quinolones; and this despite the fact that the average price
of these products is 10% higher than the price of foreign products containing the same molecule.
       Table 3 provides additional summary statistics for our data, broken down by region. The first
two rows of the table report the average annual household expenditure on quinolones and antibiotics
respectively. Note that in both cases the average expenditure is higher in North and West; these regions
include states with higher per-capita incomes, and tend to be more industrialized and urbanized than
those in the East and South. Pharmaceutical products are available in multiple presentations, that is
combinations of dosage forms (capsule, tablet, syrup, etc.), strength (100 milligrams, 500 milligrams,
etc.), and packet sizes (50 capsule bottle, 100 tablet bottle, etc.). The various presentations in which
a product is available are often referred to as stock-keeping units or SKUs.11 The number of SKUs for
each product group within quinolones is reported at the top of Table 3. As with the more aggregate
numbers on firms and products reported in Table 2, the diﬀerence between domestic and foreign
products is striking. The number of SKUs oﬀered by Indian firms is consistently larger than the
number oﬀered by subsidiaries of foreign multinationals. The number of SKUs varies slightly across
regions, but, more importantly, it varies across time, as some SKUs disappear, while new ones get
introduced during our sample period.
       Many pharmaceutical products in India are subject to price controls.12 While the specifics of the
price regulation are too complex for any economic model to adequately capture, the main concern for
the empirical analysis is that price controls may lead to a lack of price variation over time, so that the
demand function cannot be identified. Prices at the most disaggregate, SKU, level are relatively stable
over time; there are variations due to occasional changes in the estimated cost (due for example to
changes in exchange rates that aﬀect the cost of imported materials or bulk drugs), but such variations
tend to be infrequent and small in magnitude. The degree of time variation is however substantially
larger once one aggregates to the product level. This variability stems not only from the fact that the
SKUs over which we aggregate may experience changes in their respective prices at diﬀerent points in
time, but also from the fact that the range of SKUs oﬀered in the market does not remain constant
over time. The entry and exit of presentations within the same product group that have diﬀerent
prices eﬀectively aﬀects the price that consumers face for this drug in each period.
       The middle portion of Table 3 reports the mean price and standard deviation for each product
group by region. Prices vary by region, though there is no clear pattern emerging from the table
with regard to the cross-regional variation (in the sense of some regions being systematically more

  11
     For instance, a 100 capsule bottle of 100 milligram capsules of a particular branded drug, and a 50 capsule bottle of
100 milligram capsules of the same branded drug would be identified as two separate SKUs.
  12
     The details of the procedures for price fixation can be found in the oﬃcial government website:
http://www.nppaindia.nic.in/index1.html, under the link “Drug Price Control Order 1995”. A new pharmaceutical
policy was introduced in 2002, but our data were collected before that year.



                                                            9
expensive than others). To examine what portion of the total price variation is due to time versus
regional variation, we conducted an analysis of variance of prices that we report in Table 4. The
table is based on separate regressions for each product group (pooling data across groups with big
diﬀerences in their average prices is not particularly informative, as most of the price variation is
accounted for by product group dummies). The last two columns of the table show the fraction of
price variation that is accounted for by region and time dummies respectively. As evident from the
table, a significant fraction of the total variance in prices can be attributed to time variation. In the
demand estimation we include a full set of product group-specific regional dummies, so that the price
parameters are identified entirely based on this time variation within each product group. The time
variation of product group prices is driven primarily by compositional changes within each group: the
revenue shares of the individual SKUs that comprise each product group change over time (see the
related discussion in section 3.3), while in each period, there is entry and exit of SKUs into the sample.
To check whether this pattern reflects genuine entry and exit, as opposed to sampling variation, we
examined the revenue shares of the SKUs that leave the sample relative to the ones that remain during
the entire period. The results are reported in Table 5. While the SKUs that exit tend to be smaller
(their average share is 1% as opposed to 3.4% for those SKUs that are present during the entire sample
period), the shares of the two groups do not seem orders of magnitude apart13 . In addition, our data
cover only the 300 largest firms selling in the Indian market, so that firms with very small shares are
not included in our sample.


3. The analytic framework and estimation approach

Patent enforcement in the Indian pharmaceutical market will have the eﬀect of eliminating domestic
products whose active pharmaceutical ingredients are protected by (foreign) patents. Thus, assessing
the eﬀects of patent enforcement is tantamount to assessing the eﬀects of withdrawing domestic prod-
ucts from the market. This task is the converse of evaluating new product introduction; accordingly,
the conceptual framework we use to address the questions of interest is similar to the one developed
in the literature for the valuation of new goods.14
    We start by estimating demand for quinolones. Given that the market is characterized by imperfect
competition, the counterfactual analysis requires that we also model the supply side, as removal of
one product will aﬀect the prices of other products, especially those that are close competitors. The
existence of price regulation in the Indian pharmaceutical market imposes potential constraints on

  13
     While we cannot completely rule out the possibility that some of the exit is due to sampling variation, note that
the latter should be reflected in low precision of the demand parameter estimates. However, the demand parameters are
precisely estimated.
  14
     See Trajtenberg (1989), Hausman (1994), and Bresnahan (2004) for representative examples and a discussion of the
relevant issues.


                                                         10
firms’ maximization problem. Given these constraints and the complexity of the price regulation
process, the typical approach of deriving estimates of actual marginal costs and markups by exploiting
the first order conditions of profit maximizing firms does not seem particularly promising. Instead, we
use our demand estimates to place upper and lower bounds on marginal costs and markups.
   With demand elasticities and upper and lower bounds for marginal costs in place, we then con-
duct counterfactual simulations. We consider several alternative scenarios depending on the number
of domestic products that are aﬀected by patent enforcement. For each scenario, we compute the
counterfactual prices, and use them to assess the eﬀects of domestic product withdrawal on consumer
welfare (as measured by the compensating variation), firm profits, and social welfare. As with the
valuation of new products, the big conceptual problem facing this part of the analysis is that we need
to extrapolate from the region of the data to the point at which demand for the products that exit
the market becomes zero. This conceptual issue is present in any attempt to evaluate a major policy
change for which no historical precedent exists, like the enforcement of patent laws in India. One
advantage of the present study is that we have a limited set of price data for Pakistan, a country with
similar demographics as India, but with a market structure that resembles the one that would emerge
in India under patent enforcement (monopoly of multinational subsidiaries). By comparing the prices
of products oﬀered by multinationals in Pakistan to those we compute in our counterfactual simula-
tions for the products that would be oﬀered by multinationals in India if patent laws were enforced,
we can get a sense of how plausible our counterfactual estimates are.

3.1. Demand

The demand modelling is based on the multi-stage budgeting approach. Our primary motivation for
adopting this approach was a practical one. In the multi-stage budgeting approach the dependent
variable is defined as a revenue share, which is appealing here given that the products we include
in the analysis contain diﬀerent molecules (i.e., active pharmaceutical ingredients, or APIs).   Even
though we do have data on the quantity of the relevant API (e.g., 100 milligrams of ciprofloxacin)
contained in each product, converting the revenue shares to physical shares is extremely diﬃcult, if
not infeasible, in the case of anti-biotics. Because such drugs are “systemic” by nature, they are used
to treat a large number of infections, and the dosage of each drug depends on the particular infection
it is supposed to address (for example the dosage will diﬀer depending on whether the anti-biotic is
used to combat an ear-infection or tuberculosis). This particular feature of anti-biotics complicates
the conversion of revenue to physical shares.
   The basic idea of the multi-stage budgeting approach is to use the therapeutic classification of
a product–i.e., the therapeutic segment and sub-segment the product belongs to–to organize all
products in the systemic anti-bacterials segment into a hierarchical taxonomy, consisting of two lev-


                                                  11
els. At the higher level are the various sub-segments of systemic anti-bacterials. The first stage of
budgeting corresponds to the allocation of expenditures across the sub-segments in this upper level of
the taxonomy.
       In the second stage of the budgeting process, corresponding to the lower level of the taxonomy,
a flexible functional form is adopted to model how the expenditures allocated to each sub-segment
are distributed across the products within that sub-segment. In particular, to model demand at the
second stage we employ the “Almost Ideal Demand System” (AIDS) specification proposed by Deaton
and Muellbauer (1980).15
       While the two-stage demand estimation approach oﬀers functional form flexibility, its application
to the Indian systemic antibiotics market poses a couple of problems. The first one is that due to
entry and exit, many SKUs and even products in our sample are not present in every period. AIDS
does not have a good way of dealing with a varying number of products, as it was developed with
broad commodity categories in mind, which are consumed by all consumers every period. To solve this
problem, we aggregate within each sub-segment (e.g., quinolones) SKUs into product groups, where
within each product group, all SKUs contain the same molecule and are produced by firms with the
same domestic/foreign status. Specifically, let a SKU k be indexed by its molecule (or API) M , its
domestic/foreign status DF indicating whether it is produced by a domestic (Indian) or a subsidiary
of a foreign (multinational) firm, a particular presentation s, and the particular firm f that produces
it. We aggregate SKUs over presentations and firms to obtain a newly defined product group i, which
is only indexed by molecule M and domestic/foreign status DF , and has revenue Ri = Σf,s Rk , with
i ∈ (M, DF ), k ∈ (M, DF, f, s), and price pi = Σf,s ω k pk , where ω k denotes the conditional (on M and
DF ) revenue share of this particular product, i.e.,:

                                                                Rk
                                                       ωk =                                                        (3.1)
                                                                Ri

In most cases, the resulting product groups are broad enough to be present every period16 .
       The usual concern with this aggregation procedure is that it may lead us to overstate firms’ market
power, as we ignore competition among firms with the same domestic/foreign status, producing the
same molecule. However, in the present application this concern is unlikely to be of great importance,
as the eﬀect of patent enforcement is to wipe out all domestic competition at once, while granting

  15
     Representative applications of the multi-stage budgeting approach include Ellison, Cockburn, Griliches and Hausman
(1997), Hausman (1994), and Hausman and Leonard (2002).
  16
     We are only missing 4 observations (i.e., month/region combinations), all for the drug group of Foreign Norfloxacin:
Aug. 1999 in the South, May 2000 in the West, Oct. 2000 in the South, and Nov. 2000 in the East. In these cases, we
set the revenue shares of Foreign Norfloxacin equal to zero. In general, with 0.1% of quinolone sales (see Table 1, row
2), Foreign Norfloxacin has a very small share of the market. This probably explains why the results pertaining to this
drug group are unreliable: it is the only drug group for which we do not obtain a significant price elasticity of demand,
while its cross-price elasticities with other foreign drug groups often have the wrong sign.


                                                           12
foreign firms monopoly power; hence, competition among firms for patented molecules becomes irrel-
evant. The aggregation according to the domestic/foreign status (within a particular molecule) thus
corresponds to the scope of our analysis and the particular questions of interest.
   The second problem is that for our approach to be useful in welfare analysis, the allocation of
total expenditures to group expenditures at the higher stage has to be modelled in a way consistent
with utility maximization. In general, the solution of this allocation problem requires knowledge of
all individual product prices. From an empirical point of view this is not particularly useful, as it
eliminates all computational advantages of the two-stage approach. To address this problem we adopt
an approximate solution to model the higher level expenditure allocation along the lines suggested by
Deaton and Muellbauer (1980b, pp. 131-132). This gives rise to a two-level AIDS specification.
   Consider the lower level estimation first, which refers to the allocation of a particular sub-segment’s
expenditure to the product groups within the sub-segment. In our application the relevant sub-segment
is quinolones, which we index with Q. Let the product groups within this sub-segment be indexed by
i = 1, ...N , pi be the price of product group i (where, as noted above, i refers to a particular molecule
and domestic/foreign status combination), and XQ the total expenditure on the quinolone segment.
The revenue share of each product group is given by:

                                                                        XQ
                                   ω i = αi + Σj γ ij ln pj + β i ln(      )                         (3.2)
                                                                        PQ

where ωi , the revenue share of product group i, is defined as:

                                           pi qi     xi
                                   ωi ≡            =    , with i, j ∈ Q                              (3.3)
                                          Σj pj qj   XQ

XQ is the overall expenditure on the quinolone sub-segment, and PQ is a price index given by:

                                                           1
                                                                  eij ln pi ln pj
                          ln PQ = a(p) = α0 + Σi αi ln pi + Σi Σj γ                                  (3.4)
                                                           2
   With a limited number of product groups and a suﬃciently large number of time-series observations,
the flexibility implied by the AIDS model does not impose too many demands on the data. However, in
the present application where the number of observations is limited, the AIDS model is not estimable
in this general form. To reduce the number of parameters that need to be estimated, we impose two
sets of restrictions.
   The first set of restrictions are implied by the theory of utility maximization. Specifically, these
restrictions are:

                                          ekj = 0, ∀j.
   • Adding-up: Σk αk = 1; Σk β k = 0; Σk γ

                     ejk = 0, ∀j.
   • Homogeneity: Σk γ

                                                     13
                             1
      • Symmetry: γ ij =     2 [e
                                γ ij    eji ] = γ ji . This last restriction by itself reduces the number of γ
                                       +γ
                         N(N+1)
        parameters to      2     .

      The second set of restrictions we impose aims at further reducing the number of γ parameters to be
estimated by exploiting our knowledge of this particular market. Specifically, for each product group
i, we allow one γ ij parameter for all product groups j that have diﬀerent molecules from product
group i and are produced by foreign firms, and one γ ij for product groups j with diﬀerent molecules
produced by domestic firms. We don’t impose any restrictions on the γ ij parameter when product
group j has the same molecule as product group i. (By construction, product groups i and j contain
products produced by firms with diﬀerent domestic/foreign status.)
      To better illustrate the nature of the restrictions we impose on the patterns of substitution across
products, some additional notation is needed. Let d(i, j) be an indicator of the degree of similarity (or
diﬀerence) between product group i and product group j, along the dimensions we are able to observe
(molecule M and domestic/foreign status DF ). For any two product groups, i and j, d(i, j) can take
on one of the following three values:17
                                             ⎧
                                             ⎪
                                             ⎨ (1, 0) if Mi = Mj , DFi =
                                             ⎪                          6 DFj
                                   d(i, j) =   (0, 1) if Mi 6= Mj , DFi = DFj                                          (3.5)
                                             ⎪
                                             ⎪
                                             ⎩ (0, 0) if M =
                                                          i 6 Mj , DFi 6= DFj


Let
                                                Diab = {j : d(i, j) = (a, b)}                                          (3.6)

the equation at the lower level becomes:

                         ω i = αi + γ ii ln pi + Σj∈D10 [γ i,10 ln pj ] + Σj∈D01 [γ i,01 ln pj ]                       (3.7)
                                                            i                       i
                                                                       XQ
                                   +Σj∈D00 [γ i,00 ln pj ] + β i ln(      )
                                            i                          PQ

Note that:

      • the parameter γ ii captures a product group’s own price eﬀect (note that there will be as many
        γ ii parameters as number of product groups).

      • the parameter γ i,10 captures the cross-price eﬀects across product groups containing products
        with the same molecule but produced by firms of diﬀerent nationality.

  17
     The sequence (1, 1) is not possible for two diﬀerent products; in this case the γ parameter corresponds to the product’s
own price eﬀect, that is γ ii .




                                                                14
       • the parameter γ i,01 captures the cross-price eﬀects of product groups containing products with
         diﬀerent molecules but produced by firms with the same nationality.

       • the parameter γ i,00 captures the cross-price eﬀects of product groups containing products with
         diﬀerent molecules produced by firms of diﬀerent nationality.

       Before we take the demand equation to the data, we make two modifications. The first one is to let
the product specific eﬀects αi vary by region r. The resulting product-specific regional eﬀects αir have
two interpretations: first, they control for the “quality” of each drug, with quality diﬀerences being
allowed to vary across regions; second, they proxy for demographics and other demand shifters, which
vary by region, and may aﬀect the demand of each product group diﬀerently18 . Note that by including
product-specific regional eﬀects in the demand specification, we estimate the price parameters based
on the within product group variation of prices in each region. In an earlier version of the paper we
also estimated the demand system without regional dummies and obtained similar results.
       The second modification that allows us to go from a deterministic to a stochastic specification of
the demand equation is to include an additive error term in (3.2). The latter takes into account the
fact that (3.2) is not expected to fit the data exactly. The error term εirt accounts for measurement
error (due to the fact that the product group prices pjrt we employ in the estimation are not exact
price indices, but approximations thereof) and (potentially region-specific) demand shocks that may
aﬀect the demand for a product in particular period. Examples of such shocks include an advertising
campaign for a particular product that temporarily increases the demand for this product; the outbreak
of a (potentially region-specific) epidemic, that calls for the use of a particular drug, etc. We discuss
the interpretation and properties of this error term in more detail in the next section.
       The final form of the equation we estimate at the lower level becomes (with subscript t denoting
month, and subscript r denoting region):

                  ω irt = αi + αir + γ ii ln pirt + Σj∈D10 [γ i,10 ln pjrt ] + Σj∈D01 [γ i,01 ln pjrt ]             (3.8)
                                                              i                          i
                                                                   XQrt
                             +Σj∈D00 [γ i,00 ln pjrt ] + β i ln(        ) + εirt
                                     i                             PQrt

       The analysis so far has conditioned on the expenditure allocated to the quinolone sub-segment
XQ. The upper level of the estimation considers the problem of allocating total expenditure across
the diﬀerent systemic anti-biotics sub-segments, one of which is quinolones. The upper level demand
function is given by:
                                                                                   X
                                         ωG = αG + ΣH γ GH ln PH + β G ln(           )                              (3.9)
                                                                                   P
  18
    Given the short time span of our sample, typical demand shifters, such as age distribution, income distribution,
education, etc., hardly change over our sample period. Such shifters are therefore absorbed by the region-specific product
fixed eﬀects αir


                                                           15
where all variables denoted by capital letters are defined as before, but now refer to sub-segments
(G, H, ...) rather than individual products within a sub-segment, and the total expenditures on systemic
anti-biotics X are deflated by the Stone price index log P = ΣH ω H log PH . When estimating the above
system we impose all the restrictions implied by utility maximization, as we do with the estimation
of the lower level AIDS. However, we do not impose any additional restrictions on the substitution
patterns at this stage, so that the cross-price eﬀects across segments remain relatively unconstrained.
   Estimation of the higher level AIDS allows us to obtain the unconditional own- and cross-price
elasticities that are used in the formulation of the supply problem and welfare analysis. These will be
given by the formula:
                                                       ∂ ln qi ∂ ln XQ ∂ ln PQ
                                εij = εij |XQ =XQ +                                              (3.10)
                                                      ∂ ln XQ ∂ ln PQ ∂ ln pj
with the conditional cross price elasticities given by:
                                              ⎡                                      ⎤
                                                                           X
                                                  γ ij − β i [ω j − β j ln( PQQ )]
                                εij |XQ =XQ = ⎣                                      ⎦
                                                                ωi

   As in the lower stage, we include sub-segment specific regional dummies in the specification of
the upper stage demand system, so that the final form of the estimating equation at the upper stage
becomes:
                                                                               Xrt
                        ωGrt = αG + αGr + ΣH γ GH ln PHrt + β G ln(                ) + εGrt      (3.11)
                                                                               Prt
   In sum, the demand system we take to the data is represented by equations (3.8) and (3.11), and
the associated parameter restrictions implied by economic theory.

3.2. Modelling the supply side of the market

Counterfactual simulations concerning the eﬀects of domestic product withdrawal require knowledge
of the marginal costs of pharmaceutical firms operating in the Indian market. These are unobservable.
The usual approach in the New Empirical Industrial Organization literature has been to exploit the
firm equilibrium conditions to infer marginal cost. For example, it is often assumed that the marginal
cost ci is constant and that the industry is an oligopoly engaging in Bertrand competition with
diﬀerentiated products. Assuming that firms myopically maximize profits each period, one can then
derive the firms’ first order conditions that correspond to the above assumptions about costs, market
structure, and firm behavior.
   We deviate from this procedure as the presence of price regulation renders the assumption of un-
constrained period-by-period maximization untenable. Ideally, one would like to explicitly incorporate
the price and other administrative controls into the firm’s optimization problem and derive the first
order conditions under the assumption of constrained maximization. However, the complexity of the

                                                       16
price regulation makes this approach infeasible.            Therefore we adopt an alternative approach that
does not rely on modelling the price setting process, but is instead based on deriving upper and lower
bound for marginal costs and markups.
      In particular, an upper bound for marginal costs and a lower bound for the markups (zero) can be
derived under the assumption of perfect competition. While this assumption is clearly unrealistic in
the pharmaceuticals market, it is useful in providing an upper bound for costs cU
                                                                                i , which will be given
by:


                                                       cU
                                                        i = pi                                                   (3.12)

On the other hand, a lower bound for marginal costs cL
                                                     i (and upper bound for markups) can be
derived by assuming that there is perfect collusion within each product group i (where i refers here to
a molecule/domestic-foreign combination)19 and ignoring price controls, so that prices are determined
by the first order condition of the jointly profit maximizing firms within product group i. Solving this
first order condition for the (lower bound of) marginal cost then gives:

                                                                    1
                                              cL
                                               i = pi ∗ (1 +                  )                                  (3.13)
                                                               εii(pi ,pj )

where εii(pi ,pj ) , the own- price elasticity of demand for product i, will depend on the product’s own
price pi , and all other products’ prices pj , with i 6= j.
      Once we have obtained the demand elasticities through estimation of the demand system, we can
calculate the upper and lower bounds for marginal costs and corresponding markups according to (3.12)
or (3.13). These will then be employed in the counterfactual simulations. While our counterfactuals
use both the lower and upper bounds for costs, most of our discussion will be based on using the lower
bounds for costs, since this is the more interesting case in the policy analysis: it gives us the largest
possible profits for pharmaceutical firms, and hence corresponds to the worst possible scenario facing
Indian firms and the best possible scenario facing multinationals under TRIPS.

3.3. Identification assumptions and estimation approach

The discussion of the demand system has so far abstracted from the issue of price endogeneity. The
usual premise in the Industrial Organization literature is that correlation of prices with the error term
in the demand equation arises by virtue of the first order conditions of profit-maximizing firms.20 As
we discuss in this section, this source of simultaneity bias is unlikely to be of major concern in the

  19
     The reason that this assumption will lead to an understatement of marginal costs (and hence overstatement of market
power) is that it assumes away competition among firms within each drug group.
  20
     See Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995) or Nevo (2001) for a related discussion.



                                                          17
present context because of the existence of price regulation. Our primary concern is instead with the
simultaneity bias that is implied by the particular way prices are constructed.
   To understand the sources of the simultaneity bias note first that the price of product group pi
we employ in the demand estimation should be thought of as a proxy for an exact price index that
we do not observe. As such, pi contains by definition measurement error, and it will be correlated
with the error term of the demand equation. Specifically, the demand equation we are interested
in estimating can be written in simplified form (suppressing the subscripts r and t, and ignoring
parameter restrictions for convenience) as:


                                             P                           XQ
                                ω i = αi +       γ ij ln pTj + β i ln(      ) + ςi
                                             j                           PQ

where pTj denotes the true (exact) price index for product group i, and ς i captures unobserved variables
that may aﬀect demand in a particular period (e.g., an advertising campaign, an epidemic, etc.). The
price index pTj depends on the SKU prices pk . Note that in the presence of SKU entry and exit into
the sample, the price index pTj will vary over time, even if the prices of the individual SKUs remain
stable, as the products (SKUs) that comprise each product group change each period.
   Ideally, we would like to compute the exact price index pTj for each group and employ these indices
in the demand estimation. Under the assumption of predetermined SKU prices each period, the
exact price indices would be uncorrelated with the error term, and the demand parameters could be
estimated by simple OLS. Unfortunately, this strategy is not feasible in the current context.
   To derive an exact price index for each product group it is necessary to model consumer’s choice
among SKUs conditional on the choice of the group. To this end, it is necessary to explicitly introduce a
third stage in the demand specification and estimate the parameters associated with the choice at that
stage. However, any specification based on 3-stage budgeting (that would require directly specifying a
demand function associated with the SKU choice at the third stage and imposing additive separability
at the higher stages) would be infeasible to estimate for three main reasons: First, there is a large
number of SKUs within some groups, so that the demand parameters cannot be estimated even if one
imposes parameter restrictions; second, the SKU prices exhibit little variation over time; lastly, the
choice sets at this lowest stage vary over time, rendering estimation of the price parameters associated
with SKUs that are not available in all periods infeasible. Alternatively, one could abandon the multi-
stage budgeting altogether, and adopt a discrete choice approach which is inherently better suited
to dealing with varying choice sets and limited price variation. A discrete choice approach would be
particularly appealing for modeling the SKU choice conditional on product group choice, given that
within each group, all SKUs contain the same molecule and are hence comparable. However, as noted
earlier, a discrete choice approach at the higher stages of the demand estimation requires converting


                                                       18
revenue to physical shares, which is challenging in the case of systemic drugs, such as anti-biotics, for
which the appropriate dosage is not well defined. Finally, a combination of a multi-stage budgeting
approach for the higher stages and a discrete choice approach for the lowest stage would be feasible
to estimate, but inconsistent with a model of utility maximization. For these reasons we have no
alternative but to adopt an approximation for measuring the price index for each product group.
     Let us denote this approximation by pA
                                          j , and let µj denote the proportional “approximation” error
associated with measuring the true price index for group j, so that ln pA       T
                                                                        j = ln pj +ln µj . The estimating
demand equation can then be written as:

                                       P                            XQ    P
                          ω i = αi +         γ ij ln pA
                                                      j + β i ln(      ) − γ ij ln µj + ς i
                                         j                          PQ    j

or

                                                 P                           XQ
                                 ω i = αi +           γ ij ln pA
                                                               j + β i ln(      ) + εi
                                                  j                          PQ
                                     P
where the new error term εi = −          γ ij ln µj + ς i is comprised of two components: the first one reflects
                                     j
“measurement” error due to the fact that the product group prices we employ are approximations
and not exact price indices; and the second one captures conventional demand shocks. The demand
equation as written above corresponds to the equation we take to the data.
     The particular proxy we use for the exact price index for each product group j is the revenue-
share-weighted average of the prices of multiple SKUs that are available within this group, that is:

                                                   pA
                                                    j = Σk∈j ω k pk


     The above notation illustrates the two source of price variation: variation in the SKU prices pk ,
and variation in the weights ω k .
     We are concerned with potential correlation of the so-constructed product group prices with both
components of the product group demand error term. The correlation between pA      j and the first
            P
component − γ ij ln µj , is independent of the particular way we construct pA
                                                                            j , and inherent in the
                j
fact that we measure the exact price index with error. The potential correlation between pA
                                                                                          j and the
second component of the product group demand error, the shock ς i , arises however because of the
specific way we construct the proxy pA
                                     j , and in particular because of the presence of the revenue share
weights ω k in pA
                j : since the SKU revenue share weights ω k will generally depend on the product group
expenditure, they are likely to be correlated with the product group demand shock ς i .
     To address the simultaneity bias we use instrumental variables. To this end, we need variables
that are correlated with the proxies pA
                                      j , but uncorrelated with the error term εi . We use the number
of SKUs within each product group j as an instrument, as it does justice to the idea that variation in

                                                            19
the product group price index stems in part from variation in the set of SKUs that are available each
period. It is clearly correlated with the average group prices pA
                                                                j , and plausibly uncorrelated with the
demand shock ς i . The assumption that the number of SKUs is uncorrelated with the conventional
demand error will however be violated if the introduction of a new SKU changes the perceived quality
of a drug21 , or if it is accompanied by promotional activities which will be reflected in ς i . Our hope is
that this is not too often the case. Assuming that the SKU number for each group j is also uncorrelated
                                                                         P
with the weighted sum of the measurement errors of all product groups       γ ij ln µj , it can be used as
                                                                                        j
an instrument for the product group price           pA
                                                     j
                                                       22 .   If one accepts the premise that prices at the SKU
level are exogenous, then SKU prices can also be used as instruments. The final list of instruments
we use hence includes: the number of SKUs in each group, the prices of the five largest SKUs for each
group, and all other exogenous variables in the demand estimation, such as regional/product dummy
interactions and the upper-level total expenditure on anti-biotics. Regressions of group prices on the
above instruments yield high R-squares, with most regressors highly significant, indicating that our
instruments are highly correlated with prices.23
    Our sample includes four molecules: ciprofloxacin, norfloxacin, ofloxacin and sparfloxacin. Except
for sparfloxacin, all other molecules are produced by both foreign and domestic firms.24 So we have
seven products (domestic ciprofloxacin, foreign ciprofloxacin, etc.), with 96 observations (two years of
monthly data, four geographical regions for each period) for each product. The parameters in the lower
level AIDS demand system as defined in equation (3.8) are: the product fixed eﬀects αi , the product-
regional dummy interactions αir , the own revenue-share price elasticities γ ii , the cross revenue-share
price elasticities γ i,10 , γ i,01 , γ i,00 and the revenue-share expenditure elasticities β i . In estimating the
parameters, we first regress prices on all instrumental variables, and then plug the predicted values
for prices in the constrained least-square regression (for a detailed explanation of the constraints see
the previous section).
    Given that we impose many cross-equation constraints and employ instrumental variables in the
estimation, it is diﬃcult to derive standard errors for the parameter estimates analytically. Our
error term interpretation in (3.8) implies that the error terms for each product group are likely to be
correlated across regions; for example, if a national advertising campaign increases the demand for a
relatively expensive presentation in one region, simultaneously increasing the aggregate demand and

  21
     Note that we already proxy for the quality of each product group through the product fixed eﬀects αi . In the actual
estimation we actually let these fixed eﬀects be region-specific (αir ), so that we allow quality to vary across regions.
  22
     If the measurement error increases in the number of included SKUs, this assumption will be violated. Unfortunately,
we have no way of checking the validity of this assumption.
  23
     Specifically the R-squares from the first stage regressions of product group prices on instruments range from 0.57 to
0.95, except for domestic ciprofloxacin, for which the R-square is 0.17.
  24
     Sparfloxacin is actually oﬀered by one foreign subsidiary in India (see Table 2). However, its revenue share is
miniscule. We therefore treat Sparfloxacin as being produced by domestic firms only.



                                                              20
price index for the corresponding product group in that region, it is likely that the same eﬀect will
be observed in other regions. In principle, we could exploit the cross-regional correlation in the error
terms to estimate the demand system using SUR. However, this would require us to analytically derive
the variance-covariance matrix of the parameters, which as noted above, is cumbersome in the current
context. Instead, we use the bootstrap method, choosing to remain agnostic about the structure of
the variance-covariance matrix. The potential disadvantage of this approach over SUR is a loss in
eﬃciency, but as will become apparent in the results section, the model parameters are fairly precisely
estimated. To maintain the market structure, we randomly sample the periods (with replacement)
and use the same periods for all products. Regarding the optimal number of bootstrap repetitions,
ideally one would follow the three-step method proposed by Andrews et al (2000). However, empirical
evidence suggests that one rarely needs more than 200 replications to estimate the standard errors25 .
To be safe, we generate 300 bootstrap samples (with replacement) based on the original data, and
estimate the standard errors using the standard errors of the bootstrap sample estimates.
       The estimation of the top level AIDS system is similar. The constraints imposed on this top-level
demand system are adding up, homogeneity and symmetry. Again bootstrapping is used to obtain
the standard errors of the parameter estimates.

3.4. The counterfactual scenarios

In assessing the eﬀects of patent enforcement we start by focusing on the most extreme case, in which
compulsory licensing is not an option, and foreign firms are not subject to price controls. We use the
results from the analysis of this case as a benchmark. In reality, the outcome of the WTO negotiations
is more likely to involve some constraints on the monopoly power of foreign firms selling patented
products in developing countries, such as price caps or compulsory licensing. Our framework can
easily accommodate these cases, as will become apparent in the next subsection.
       We now focus on the eﬀects of potential patent enforcement in the quinolone segment. We consider
several scenarios that vary in the number and size of domestic products that will be removed from the
market. In particular, we consider the following five scenarios:26

  25
    See Efron and Tibshirani (1993).
  26
    As Table 2 indicates, most of the patents for the drugs in the quinolone segment have expired by now, so that none
of the scenarios described in this section is going to materialize in practice. The reason we consider these alternative
scenarios in our counterfactual simulations is to get a sense of how the presence and extent of domestic competition
aﬀects welfare calculations. Such calculations may become relevant in the future in other therapeutic classes in which
patents have not expired yet, and where domestic firms compete with foreign patent holders. While the particular exit
scenarios will depend on the exact year of patent expiry of drugs in each therapeutic class and the specific way in which
patents will be enforced (e.g., whether or not certain domestic drugs will be grandfathered in), the general conclusion
that emerges from our calculations is that the consumer welfare loss is substantially smaller in cases where some domestic
competition remains present in the market. Hence, the particular way in which patent enforcement is implemented is
essential for assessing its welfare impact.



                                                           21
       • withdrawal of one large domestic product group only: domestic ciprofloxacin

       • withdrawal of one relatively small domestic product group only: domestic ofloxacin

       • withdrawal of three domestic product groups: domestic ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, and norfloxacin

       • withdrawal of three domestic product groups: domestic ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin and sparfloxacin

       • withdrawal of all four domestic quinolone product groups

       As the above list suggests, we proceed from analyzing the eﬀects of single product withdrawal
to the analysis of eliminating the entire domestic segment. This approach was motivated by early
empirical results that indicated that the existence and extent of competition from domestic firms has
a significant bearing on the predicted eﬀects of patent enforcement; that is, our predictions regard-
ing prices and welfare vary substantially depending on how many domestic products are aﬀected by
patent enforcement and on whether some domestic competition will remain present after TRIPS. In
addition, the size of the aﬀected domestic groups is relevant for the welfare predictions; accordingly,
we examine both scenarios in which a large domestic product group, such as domestic ciprofloxacin, is
eliminated from the market, and scenarios in which the eliminated domestic group is relatively small
(e.g., domestic ofloxacin). In all scenarios we maintain the assumption that the set of products oﬀered
by the remaining firms in the market does not change in response to patent enforcement.

3.5. Computation of virtual prices and new equilibrium prices

The first step in the counterfactual analysis is to derive the new equilibrium prices under patent
enforcement27 . In this context there are two sets of prices that are relevant. The first set consists of
the virtual prices of those (domestic) products that will not be available once TRIPS is put in eﬀect.
To calculate these virtual prices we set the expenditures of the relevant products equal to zero. The
second set of prices consists of the prices of those products that remain in the market. In deriving
these prices we start by assuming profit maximization without any form of price regulation: the firms
remaining in the market reoptimize in response to the policy change, and set new prices, taking the
prices of all other firms as given.28 Of course, at the equilibrium all prices change in response to the
fact that some domestic products are no longer present. The new equilibrium prices for products that

  27
     Of course, until product patents are in fact introduced, these prices will not be observable. Note also that we are
assuming here that the range of products that are available will not change with the introduction of patents.
  28
     As mentioned above, this first set of calculations abstracts from the existence of remaining price controls or other
government regulations that would impose constraints on the firms’ profit maximization problem. Accordingly, the
resulting numbers should be interpreted as a benchmark of what would happen if markets were completely unregulated.
To examine what the welfare eﬀects of TRIPS would be in the more realistic scenario of price regulation, we subsequently
consider a scenario in which regulation keeps the prices of the products provided by patent-holders at their pre-TRIPS
level. For a more detailed discussion see the results section.


                                                           22
remain in the market are thus computed by utilizing the first order conditions of profit maximizing
firms, into which the virtual prices of the eliminated products are substituted. Hence, to compute the
new equilibrium prices we solve an equation system of the following form:

   • For products i that are withdrawn from the market:

                                                                            0                  0
                      0 = αir + γ ii ln pVir + Σj∈Di10 [γ i,10 ln pjr ] + Σj∈Di01 [γ i,01 ln pjr ]                    (3.14)
                                                                       0
                                                    0                XQr
                               +Σj∈Di00 [γ i,00 ln pjr ] + β i ln(     0    )
                                                                      PQr

   • For products k that remain in the market:


                                      0                           1
                                     pkr = ckr ∗ (1 +                           )−1                                   (3.15)
                                                         εkk(p0     0    V
                                                               kr ,pjr ,pir )


In the above equations pVir denotes the virtual prices of the products that are removed from the market,
       0
while pjr denotes the updated prices of all other products. Note that when solving for the virtual prices
we account for the fact that both the price index for quinolones PQr , and the expenditure allocated
to this sub-segment XQr , need to be updated to reflect the fact that as a result of the price changes
                                                                                                                         0
there may be substitution away from this sub-segment. To obtain the new quinolone expenditure XQr
                           0
and the new price index PQr , we use the estimates and formulas for the higher level AIDS system. In
equation (3.15), ck refers to the marginal cost for product k that we have obtained from the previous
estimation stage. As mentioned in the previous sub-section, we conducted the simulations using both
the upper and lower bounds for marginal cost, cuk and cL
                                                       k respectively. The term εkk(p0                    0    V      refers
                                                                                                     kr ,pjr ,pir )
to the unconditional own price-elasticity for product k, which is a function of the eliminated products’
virtual prices and the remaining products’ new equilibrium prices. We conduct the counterfactual
simulations and welfare analysis at the regional level because the presence of region-specific product
eﬀects in the demand estimation implies region-specific demand elasticities, and hence region-specific
marginal costs and markups. The presentation and discussion of our results focus on national averages
of the relevant variables that we construct by computing weighted averages across regions, using the
population of each region as a weight.

3.6. Welfare assessment

The simulation of the new equilibrium under patent protection can provide important insights into
how consumers and firms will respond to the removal of domestic products in the market (for example,
towards which products consumers will substitute; which prices will increase the most, etc..). To get
a more precise idea of how people’s well-being will be ultimately aﬀected by TRIPS, we compute as a

                                                        23
last step in our analysis the welfare eﬀects of the policy change. Social welfare is defined as the sum of
domestic firm profits, and consumer welfare. The change in domestic profits can easily be calculated
by comparing the domestic firm (variable) profits at the pre-TRIPS prices to the profits these firms
will realize at the new simulated prices. Although foreign firm profits do not count in domestic welfare
calculations, we also compute the eﬀects of patent enforcement on foreign firm profits, to get an idea of
how large the expected benefits of TRIPS for these firms are. This provides in some sense an indirect
way of assessing whether the claims that patent enforcement in countries like India will lead to more
research on developing-country-specific diseases (such as malaria) have any validity; if, for example,
we find that the eﬀect of patent enforcement on the foreign firm profits realized in India is small in
magnitude, it is unlikely that foreign firms will engage in more developing-country-specific research
in response to TRIPS. It is important to note that in all these calculations we work with the lower
bound estimates for marginal costs, since these give rise to the highest possible markups. Hence, our
estimate of profit loss for domestic producers most likely overstates this loss.
   On the consumer side, we measure changes in consumer welfare by the compensating variation
(CV), defined as the additional expenditure that consumers need in order to achieve the same utility
level as before patent enforcement at the new prices. Specifically, let P 0 denote the price vector before
                       0
patent enforcement, P the simulated price vector post-TRIPS (that we obtained using the methods
described in the previous subsection), u0 the utility attained by consumers before TRIPS, and E(u, P )
the higher level expenditure function. Then the compensating variation is given by:

                                                    0
                                     CV = E(u0 , P ) − E(u0 , P 0 )                                (3.16)

Note that the CV as computed in (3.16) represents the combination of three eﬀects:

   • The pure product variety eﬀect; that is the eﬀect that arises because one or more products are
     not available to consumers anymore, holding the prices of all other remaining products, and the
     total expenditure on the quinolone sub-segment XQ constant.

   • The expenditure switching eﬀect; that is the eﬀect arising from substitution away from quinolones,
     and towards other sub-segments of the anti-biotics market, again holding the prices of all other
     remaining products constant.

   • The reduced competition eﬀect; that is the eﬀect that arises because the firms remaining in the
     market adjust (increase) their prices in response to the removal of domestic products.

   From both an analytical and a policy point of view, it is desirable to assess how large each of the
above eﬀects is. Accordingly, we decompose the total eﬀect on consumer welfare (the CV as given by
equation (3.16)), using the following procedure:

                                                   24
       To get the pure product variety eﬀect, we compute virtual prices for the products that are removed
from the market holding the quinolone expenditure XQ and the prices of all other products fixed.
Let us call the resulting price vector P 1 . Then the pure product variety eﬀect is represented by
E(u0 , P 1 ) − E(u0 , P 0 ).
       To compute the expenditure switching eﬀect, we compute another set of virtual prices, again
holding the prices of all remaining products fixed, but letting quinolone expenditure adjust in response
to the new price index for the quinolone segment (given that the prices of the remaining products
remain fixed, the change in the price index arises only because of the removal of one or more domestic
products). Note that this scenario most closely resembles the case in which patent laws are enforced,
but strict price regulation keeps the prices of the products oﬀered in the market at their pre-TRIP level.
Let us label the so-computed price vector P 2 . The expenditure switching eﬀect is then E(u0 , P 2 ) −
E(u0 , P 1 ).
       Finally, the reduced competition eﬀect arising from higher prices for the remaining products is com-
puted as the residual change in the compensating variation once the product variety and expenditure
                                                        0                                              0
eﬀects have been accounted for, that is E(u0 , P ) − E(u0 , P 2 ), where the price vector P is computed
according to the formulas (3.14) and (3.15) to reflect the adjustment of prices to the new regime.
       To compute the standard errors associated with the counterfactual simulations (that is the standard
errors for the counterfactual prices and welfare estimates), we again use bootstrapping: We first
bootstrap the original sample (sales and prices of all the drugs) 300 times. Next, we estimate the
AIDS model for each of these samples, and compute the counterfactual equilibrium prices and welfare
losses corresponding to each policy scenario for each of the 300 simulations. In the final step, we
compute standard errors29 .
       One limitation of our framework is that it does not allow for a heterogeneous response of consumers
to the policy change. Accordingly, our framework is not suited to addressing the question of how
diﬀerent groups in the population will be aﬀected by patent law enforcement.30 Along the same
lines, our framework does not accommodate the possibility of price discrimination, which might lead
to diﬀerent results regarding welfare losses and profit gains relative to uniform pricing31 . Still, we
believe that the results of the counterfactual simulations can provide important insights into the likely
aggregate response to patent enforcement and the factors that drive this response.

  29
     In cases some of the simulations do not converge, we compute the standard errors using only those simulations that
converged.
  30
     Addressing this question would require at a minimum micro data on consumer purchases as in Goldberg (1995). To
our knowledge such data do not exist for the Indian pharmaceutical market.
  31
     See Berndt (1994) for an extensive discussion of uniform pricing.




                                                            25
4. Results

4.1. The structure of demand

Tables A2 and A3 in the Appendix display the results from estimation of the lower- and upper-level
AIDS system respectively. For ease of interpretation, rather than discussing the coeﬃcient estimates,
we focus our discussion on the implied unconditional price and expenditure elasticities reported in
Table 6. Given that the region-specific product group eﬀects αir reported in the last four columns
of Tables A2 and A3 imply region-specific demand elasticities, we report separate elasticities for each
region in Tables 6(a) and 6(b). As evident from the comparison of these tables, the elasticities are
very similar across regions, so that we can focus the remaining discussion on the elasticities of one
region only, the Northern region, displayed in Table 6(a).
    The diagonal terms of Table 6(a) report the own price elasticities, which are, in all but one
case, negative and highly significant. The one exception is the foreign norfloxacin product group–
whose share of quinolone sales is 0.07%–for which we estimate a negative but insignificant own price
elasticity. For the remaining product groups, demand appears to be highly elastic, with the estimated
elasticities being lower than -2 in four out of the six cases. The magnitude of the own-price elasticities
matches the features of the Indian pharmaceutical market mentioned earlier, which would suggest
that Indian consumers are likely to be quite price-sensitive.32 The elasticities appear especially large
if one takes into account that they refer to product groups (such as domestic ciprofloxacin) and not
individual drugs oﬀered by particular firms. Their relative magnitudes are also intuitive: the drug with
the largest market share and a relatively high price (domestic ciprofloxacin) appears to be one of the
least elastic. In contrast, foreign ciprofloxacin is highly price elastic; this is plausible as ciprofloxacin
drugs oﬀered by subsidiaries of multinationals face the stiﬀest competition in this market segment
from approximately 75 Indian firms oﬀering the same molecule.
    The estimated expenditure elasticities appear in the last column. These are all positive, indicating
that the demand for all product groups is normal. The remaining cells display the estimated cross-
price elasticities. As one might perhaps expect for products within a therapeutic sub-segment, these
are mostly positive. Out of a total of 49 price elasticities we estimate, there are 6 that do not conform
to expectations; these are the cross-price elasticities between diﬀerent foreign product groups, that
are estimated to be negative and significant.33 Fortunately, these elasticities have negligible impact

  32
     In developed economies, elasticities of this magnitude have typically only been found for generic drugs (and even
then, only rarely) or among consumers who lack health insurance.
  33
     While these elasticities are clearly counterintuitive, they are not inconsistent with the underlying demand system,
which imposes no restrictions on the sign of the cross-price elasticities. We do not have a good explanation of why these
elasticities are estimated to be negative. A potential explanation is that the shares of the foreign products are very small;
given this, we observe very few consumers switching from one (very small) foreign group to another (very small) foreign
group, when the price of the first foreign group goes up, and hence the inference is not very reliable in this case.



                                                             26
on the welfare analysis: given that our counterfactuals focus on the eﬀect of withdrawing one or more
domestic products from the market, the most relevant elasticities are the ones which capture the
response of various product group shares to a change in the price of one or more domestic groups;
these elasticities are the cross-price elasticities between various domestic groups, and the ones between
domestic and foreign groups, which are plausible and precisely estimated34 .
    Regarding these elasticities, a striking aspect of our estimates is how large, positive and significant
the cross-price elasticities between diﬀerent domestic product groups are–in fact, for norfloxacin and
ofloxacin we estimate that domestic product groups containing diﬀerent molecules are closer substitutes
for one another than product groups that contain the same molecule but are produced by foreign firms.
In contrast, for ciprofloxacin (the molecule with the largest revenue share) we estimate a large positive
cross-price elasticity between the domestic and foreign versions.
    The fact that domestic products appear to be close substitutes for other domestic products that
contain diﬀerent molecules truly represents an “empirical” finding in the sense that we do not impose
it through any of our assumptions regarding the demand function. The question that naturally arises
then, is what might explain this finding. While we cannot formally address this question, anecdotal
accounts in various industry studies suggest that the explanation may lie in the diﬀerences between
domestic and foreign firms in the structure and coverage of retail distribution networks.
    Distribution networks for pharmaceuticals in India are typically organized in a hierarchical fashion.
Pharmaceutical companies deal mainly with carrying and forwarding (C&F) agents, in many instances
regionally based, who each supply a network of stockists (wholesalers). These stockists in turn deal
with the retail pharmacists through whom retail sales ultimately occur.35 The market share enjoyed
by a particular pharmaceutical product therefore depends in part on the number of retail pharmacists
who stock the product. And it is here that there appears to be a distinction between domestic firms
and multinational subsidiaries. In particular, the retail reach of domestic firms, as a group, tends to
be much more comprehensive than that of multinational subsidiaries (ICRA (1999)).36

  34
     The cross-price elasticities between foreign drug groups containing diﬀerent molecules will also have an eﬀect on
the welfare estimates, given that the withdrawal of domestic products will generally lead to changes in the prices of all
foreign products, and market shares will be reallocated from some foreign products to other foreign products based on
the new prices. However, this reallocation from “foreign to foreign” is truly second order in our case, compared to the
reallocation from “domestic to domestic”, and “domestic to foreign” products. In scenarios in which we consider patent
enforcement accompanied by strict price regulation, the cross-price elasticities between foreign product groups are in fact
completely irrelevant, as the prices of foreign products are not allowed to increase in these cases. Still, our welfare loss
estimates remain substantial, driven — as before — by the loss of product variety.
  35
     There are estimated to be some 300,000 retail pharmacists in India. On average stockists deal with about 75
retailers (ICRA (1999)). There are naturally variations in this structure, and a host of specific exclusive dealing and
other arrangements exist in practice. Pharmaceutical firms also maintain networks of medical representatives whose main
function is to market the company’s products to doctors who do the actual prescribing of drugs. In some instances, firms
do sell directly to the doctors who then become the “retailer” as far as patients are concerned, but these are relatively
rare.
  36
     These diﬀerences were also highlighted in conversations that one of the authors had with CEOs and Managing



                                                            27
    There appear to be two reasons for this. The first is that many of the larger Indian firms, because
they have a much larger portfolio of products over which to spread the associated fixed costs, typically
have more extensive networks of medical representatives. The second is simply that there are many
more domestic firms (and products) on the market. At the retail level this would imply that local
pharmacists might be more likely to stock domestic products containing two diﬀerent molecules, say
ciprofloxacin and norfloxacin, than they would domestic and foreign versions of the same molecule. To
the extent that patients (or their doctors) are willing to substitute across molecules in order to save
on transport or search costs (e.g., going to another pharmacy to check whether a particular foreign
product is in stock), in aggregate data we would expect to find precisely the substitution patterns that
we report in Table 6.
    Whether or not the particular explanation we provide above is the correct one, the high degree
of substitutability between domestic product groups turns out to have important implications for
the welfare calculations. We discuss these in more detail below when we present the results of the
counterfactual welfare analysis. Another elasticity with important implications for the counterfactuals
is the price elasticity for the quinolone sub-segment as a whole, which indicates how likely consumers
are to switch to other anti-biotics groups, when faced with a price increase for quinolones. This
elasticity is computed on the basis of the results in Table A3, and it is at -1.11 (standard error: 0.24)
large in magnitude, but — as expected — smaller in absolute value than the own-price elasticities of the
product groups within the quinolone sub-segment.
    The results in Tables 6(a) and 6(b) are based on our preferred specification discussed in Section 3.
In Tables A4-A6 in the Appendix we experimented with some alternative specifications. Tables A4(a)-
A4(c) correspond to a specification that includes in addition to product-group-specific regional fixed
eﬀects, product-group-specific (and for the upper level antibiotics-segment-specific) seasonal eﬀects.
We distinguish between 3 seasons: the Summer, Monsoon, and Winter, and report the unconditional
demand elasticities for the Northern region for each of these seasons. As evident from the tables in
the Appendix, our elasticity estimates are robust to the inclusion of seasonal eﬀects. The demand
elasticities in Table A5 are based on estimation of the demand system by OLS. Compared to the
elasticities obtained by IV, the OLS elasticities are smaller in absolute value implying that welfare
calculations based on the OLS estimates would produce larger welfare loss estimates. Nevertheless,
some of the patterns regarding the cross-price elasticities discussed earlier are also evident in the OLS
results; in particular, the cross-price elasticities between diﬀerent domestic product groups are all
positive, large, and significant, and in most instances larger than the cross-price elasticities between
drugs that contain the same molecule but are produced by firms of diﬀerent domestic/foreign status.
The close substitutability of domestic products indicated by both the OLS and IV estimates seems to

Directors of several pharmaceutical firms as part of a separate study.


                                                           28
be one of the most robust findings of the paper.

4.2. Cost and markup estimates

Table 7 displays the marginal costs, markups and profits implied by the price elasticity estimates
of Tables 6(a) and 6(b) for each of the seven product groups. Given that our regional eﬀects imply
diﬀerent price elasticities for each region, our marginal cost and markup estimates also diﬀer by region.
However, given that based on Tables 6(a) and 6(b) the price elasticities do not seem to substantially
diﬀer across regions, we report for ease of exposition only the national averages for marginal costs and
markups in Table 7.
   Table 7 has two parts. In the left part (first three columns) we report the lower bound for marginal
cost and the corresponding upper bound for markup, and upper bound for total annual profit for each
product group. These numbers are based on the price elasticities we obtained from estimating the
2-level AIDS demand system. Since we do not have a reliable estimate for the price elasticity of foreign
norfloxacin (the point estimate is negative, but less than 1 in absolute value, and insignificant), we
cannot compute the lower bound for marginal cost in this case. It is important to note that these esti-
mates do not reflect either the actual marginal cost or the actual markup for these drugs, both because
the existence of price regulation implies that the unconstrained first order conditions are unlikely to
hold each period, and because our aggregation across firms of the same domestic/foreign status sup-
plying the same molecule makes the interpretation of these estimates problematic. In particular, the
fact that we ignore competition among firms within each product group implies that our estimates
will tend to overstate market power. However, these numbers will prove useful in the counterfactual
simulations as they can give us a sense of how large the maximum profit gains for multinationals and
the maximum profit losses for domestic firms are likely to be under patent enforcement. The right
part of the table (last three columns) reports the upper bound for marginal cost which we obtain by
simply taking the marginal cost to be equal to the observed price. We do not report standard errors in
this case since the numbers are based on actual data. The markups corresponding to these marginal
cost upper bounds are of course zero. We conduct the counterfactual simulations using both the lower
and upper bounds for marginal costs.
   The (upper bounds for) markups on the left side of the table are generally plausible. The domestic
ciprofloxacin product group that dominates the quinolone sub-segment, and for which we documented
high prices, a high market share, and a relatively low elasticity of demand, enjoys one of the highest
markup upper bounds (60%) and accounts for nearly 70% of all profits derived within the sub-segment.
Foreign ciprofloxacin on the other hand, which faces the stiﬀest competition from domestic firms, and
for which we estimated a highly elastic demand, has the lowest markup upper bound (19%).




                                                   29
4.3. Counterfactual estimates of the impact on prices and welfare

With estimates of the key demand and cost parameters in hand, we turn to the counterfactuals. We
consider the five separate scenarios listed in the previous section. All of the scenarios involve the
withdrawal of one or more of the domestic product groups from the market. Table 8 displays our
estimates of the consumer welfare losses that result under the diﬀerent scenarios. The losses are
expressed in billion Rs. per year. All numbers presented in Table 8 and subsequent tables are based
on using the lower bounds for marginal cost and upper bounds for markup in the simulations. As
discussed earlier, these numbers are the more interesting to work with, since they give us an upper
bound for the changes in the profits of domestic and foreign firms that would result from patent
enforcement. In the Appendix we also present results based on using the upper bounds for marginal
costs in the simulations, in which case the pre-TRIPS profits of domestic and foreign firms are zero. In
all cases, marginal costs are assumed to be constant in output. While naturally the profit implications
diﬀer depending on whether one uses the upper or lower bounds for marginal costs (firm profits are
zero if one assumes the upper bound of marginal cost, in which case price equals marginal cost), the
estimated consumer welfare losses are similar in the two cases. We discuss these results at the end of
this section in more detail.
   The first column presents our estimates of the consumer welfare losses attributable to the pure
loss of product variety eﬀect, where we fix the prices of all remaining products as well as the overall
expenditure on quinolones while withdrawing one or more of the domestic product groups. Note that
had we not, in our initial specification of the demand system, allowed for the possibility that consumers
might diﬀerentiate between domestic and foreign products even when they contain the same molecule,
this particular component of the loss of consumer welfare would not have arisen.
   The estimates reported in the second column incorporate the expenditure switching eﬀect on top
of the loss of product variety. Here, based upon the price elasticity estimates from the higher-level
AIDS system, we adjust (downwards) the expenditures allocated to the quinolone sub-segment as the
composite price of quinolones eﬀectively increases as a consequence of the higher virtual prices of the
domestic product groups that are withdrawn from the market. Because the estimates in this column
are generated assuming that the prices of the products that remain in the market are not adjusted
upwards, they provide a sense of what consumer losses would be if the introduction of product patents
was coupled with strict price-regulation aimed at maintaining prices at pre-patent levels. Alternatively,
they can be thought of as the relevant welfare numbers if intense competition among firms within the
remaining product groups kept the prices of the products that were still oﬀered in the market close to
the firms’ marginal costs.
   The last column displays the estimated consumer welfare losses when both cross-segment expenditure-
switching and within-segment upward price adjustments are taken into account.


                                                   30
   If we compare the results across the first, second and third columns, all the counterfactual scenarios
produce qualitatively similar patterns, patterns that are consistent with what we would expect. Start-
ing from the initial loss of welfare attributable to the loss of product variety, the option of switching
expenditures out of the quinolone sub-segment to other sub-segments mitigates some of the initial
welfare loss. But if we then incorporate the upward price adjustments that result in response to the
reduced competition, the welfare losses are magnified.
   Of particular interest from a policy perspective are the relative magnitudes of these three eﬀects,
which are similar under all the counterfactual scenarios though the absolute levels vary considerably.
First, despite the fact that the demand for quinolones is quite sensitive to the composite price of
quinolones–the upper level price elasticity is -1.11–the cross-sub-segment expenditure switching ef-
fects are, in all the cases, small (in absolute value terms) relative to the other two eﬀects. For instance,
under the scenario where all the domestic quinolone product groups are withdrawn from the market,
the overall consumer welfare loss of Rs. 17.81 billion per year can be decomposed into an initial loss of
Rs. 11.76 billion (66%) attributable to the loss of product variety, a slight reduction in this initial loss
of Rs. 0.41 billion (-2%), from Rs. 11.76 billion to Rs. 11.35 billion, because of expenditure switching,
and a subsequent additional loss of Rs. 6.46 billion (36%), from Rs. 11.35 billion to Rs. 17.81 billion,
because of the reduced competition and consequent price increases.
   The basic claim made by proponents of TRIPS is that any adverse impacts on consumer welfare
from the introduction of a product patent in a particular market will be mitigated by the availability of
close therapeutic substitutes. The relatively minor role that cross-sub-segment expenditure switching
appears to play suggests that for this claim to be valid, there need to be unpatented (i.e., patent-
expired) substitutes available within fairly narrowly defined therapeutic categories. Since the extent
to which this is true will vary across therapeutic segments, the impact of TRIPS is likely to be
correspondingly variegated, a point emphasized by Maskus (2000, p.163).
   Price regulation and compulsory licensing are two of the most widely mentioned post-TRIPS policy
options available to governments of developing economies. There is an ongoing debate about how much
leeway governments should have to introduce these options and about the relative eﬃcacy of the two
options in limiting price increases. The magnitude and importance of the welfare losses we estimate
from the loss of product variety suggest that there may be an independent role for compulsory licensing
in addition to or in lieu of price regulation for the sole purpose of mitigating the loss of product variety.
   Turning next to a comparison of the consumer welfare losses under the diﬀerent scenarios the most
striking result is that the estimated loss of consumer welfare (Rs. 17.81 billion) from the simultaneous
withdrawal of all four domestic product groups–the scenario that most closely resembles what is
likely to happen under TRIPS–is more than two times the sum of the estimated losses from the four




                                                     31
separate scenarios in each of which only one of the domestic product groups is withdrawn.37 What this
very clearly indicates is that past studies that have estimated the aggregate eﬀects of patent protection
by adding up the losses, estimated separately, in each of a number of patentable markets may have
substantially underestimated the magnitude of the consumer welfare losses from the introduction of
pharmaceutical product patents.
       The result that the simultaneous withdrawal of all domestic products magnifies the scale of the
welfare losses is driven by our estimates of high, positive cross-price elasticities between domestic
products. As noted earlier, these elasticities imply that such products are close substitutes to one
another. Hence, when all four domestic products disappear from the market, the resulting consumer
loss is substantial. In contrast, the welfare losses associated with the withdrawal of a single domestic
product or a subset of domestic products are more modest; with domestic product groups within the
quinolone sub-segment being relatively good substitutes, if only one of them is withdrawn, consumers
switch to the others, and this limits any welfare losses.
       We should note that if, as we speculated above, the high degree of substitutability between do-
mestic products stems in part from the diﬀerential reach of the distribution networks of domestic and
foreign firms, these estimates may overstate the welfare loss from the simultaneous withdrawal of all
domestic products. That is because, with India becoming TRIPS compliant, foreign subsidiaries may
well choose to expand their product portfolios in India and simultaneously expand their distribution
networks in India, most likely through joint marketing ventures with Indian firms. Media accounts
and interviews with industry sources indicate that such initiatives are increasing in number. In this
case, the welfare loss from the reduction in variety would be a purely transitional phenomenon. Over
time, foreign products would be more readily available in local pharmacies throughout India and this
would compensate for the reduction in the number of domestic products. Alternatively, if Indian con-
sumers insist in buying products produced by Indian firms, foreign multinationals could use licensing
to recover the welfare loss associated with the loss of variety. Note however, that even under this
scenario, the component of consumer welfare loss due to upward price adjustment remains. And a
crude calculation based on the estimates in the last row of Table 8 suggests that this is likely to be
significant. In particular, if we subtract from our estimate of the overall consumer welfare loss (Rs.
17.81 billion), the component attributable to the reduction in variety taking into account expenditure
switching (Rs. 11.35 billion), we are still left with an estimated welfare loss of Rs. 6.46 billion. Given
the size of the welfare loss due to upward price adjustment policymakers may be tempted to continue

  37
     For ease of exposition, Table 8 reports only a subset of the scenarios we have investigated. The consumer welfare loss
associated with the withdrawal of domestic norfloxacin only (not reported in Table 8) is approximately Rs. 0.1 billion;
the welfare loss associated with the withdrawal of sparfloxacin only is close to zero. Hence, the sum of the estimated
welfare losses from the scenarios in which only one domestic product is withdrawn is (7.32+0.23+0.1 +0) = Rs. 7.6
billion per year.



                                                            32
the use of price controls and other domestic regulations. However, such policies would put a limit not
only on prices, but also on the incentives of foreign producers to expand their operations in the Indian
market, so that the welfare loss due to the reduction of product variety could become a permanent
phenomenon.
       Table 9 documents our estimates of the price increases that would result under the various coun-
terfactual scenarios. The table reports the price increases for the product groups, foreign or domestic,
that would remain in the market under each of our scenarios. The groups that are withdrawn from the
market are indicated by the shaded areas. For the foreign products that would remain in the market,
we estimate price increases between 100% and 400%. While these numbers are based on simulations,
and thus not observed, we can obtain a rough idea about their plausibility by comparing them to
the prices of the same products observed in countries “similar” to India in terms of demographics,
but which have less competitive domestic markets. Pakistan is a natural candidate. For the drug
ciprofloxacin, for example, we predict that the price of the (patented) foreign products in India would
be approximately 5 times higher than it is now (see last row of Table 9, first column; the relevant
scenario here is one where all domestic products are withdrawn from the market, since this is the sit-
uation that most closely resembles Pakistan). Lanjouw (1998), p. 39, Table 2, reports that the price
of ciprofloxacin in Pakistan is about 7 times the price of the same drug in India. The two numbers
are of similar order of magnitude, though our estimate is on the low side. These comparisons give us
confidence that the empirical framework we use as a basis for conducting counterfactual simulations
in India captures the main features of this market.
       Table 10 presents our estimates of the net impact of the withdrawal of one or more domestic
product groups on the collective profits of domestic Indian firms in the quinolone sub-segment. Under
the scenario where all the domestic product groups are withdrawn from the market, the net impact
equals the gross impact and is simply the loss of the profits initially enjoyed by domestic firms: Rs.
2.34 billion per year. In the other cases, the foregone profits of those domestic firms whose products
are withdrawn from the market are partly or wholly oﬀset by the increased profits of those domestic
firms that remain in the market and benefit from the reduced competition. From Table 10 it can be
seen that this latter result arises when domestic ofloxacin is withdrawn from the market, in which case
consumers switch to other domestic drugs within quinolones, increasing the profits of the domestic
firms selling those drugs.38
       Critics of the Indian government’s stance on TRIPS frequently assert that it is motivated less
by concerns about consumer welfare than it is by a desire to protect the domestic pharmaceutical
industry. Whether or not that is the case, the estimates presented in Table 10 indicate that the

  38
    To be consistent with Table 8, which reported consumer welfare losses as positive numbers, Table 10 reports foregone
profits as positive numbers. Thus, if the collective profits of domestic Indian firms actually increase, negative numbers
are reported.


                                                           33
loss of domestic producer surplus is unlikely to be the biggest consequence of TRIPS-induced patent
protection. First, as just mentioned, there are scenarios under which the collective profits of domestic
firms would actually go up, though there always is a segment that would be adversely aﬀected.39
Second, even when the collective profits do go down, a comparison with Table 8 indicates that the loss
of consumer welfare is much greater in every instance. And under the scenario where the collective
loss of profits is the greatest and there are no winners among the domestic Indian firms, the loss
incurred by producers–Rs. 2.3 billion on an annualized basis–pales in comparison to the decrease in
consumer welfare reported in Table 8 under the same scenario–Rs. 17.81 billion annually, especially
if one takes into account that the profit loss of Rs. 2.3 billion, was derived by using an upper bound for
the domestic firms’ Pre-TRIPS markups, and hence clearly overstates the profit loss that the domestic
sector would actually incur.40
       Table A6 in the Appendix reports results from counterfactual simulations in which we used the
upper bound for marginal costs. The pre-TRIPS domestic firm profits are of course zero in this case,
since the upper bound was derived by setting marginal cost equal to price. Interestingly, the results in
Table A6 that report the loss in consumer welfare, indicate that the consumer loss would be slightly
higher than before. This is due to the fact that due to the higher marginal cost estimates, the price
increases are now higher compared to the case where the lower bound of marginal cost was used. The
new consumer welfare loss estimate is however roughly of the same order of magnitude as before, so
we focus the rest of our discussion on the results we obtained by using the lower bound of marginal
cost.
       Adding up the estimates of consumer welfare losses from Table 8 and producer losses from Table 10
we get estimates of the total welfare losses to the Indian economy. These are reported in Table 11. At
the upper bound we estimate that in the absence of any price regulation or compulsory licensing the
total annual welfare losses to the Indian economy from the withdrawal of just four domestic product
groups in the quinolone sub-segment would be on the order of Rs. 20.16 billion, which translates at
the then prevailing exchange rate into a figure of U.S. $450 million.
       Given that in practice the simultaneous enforcement of intellectual property rights and elimination
of price controls is unlikely, a more realistic estimate of the welfare loss can be obtained by assuming
that price regulation will prevent upward price adjustments as a result of product withdrawals. This
gives us a mid-range estimate of Rs. 13.7 billion or about U.S. $305 million per year for the scenario

  39
      This may in part explain why the Indian pharmaceutical industry has been divided in its reaction to TRIPS. The
Organization of Pharmaceutical Producers of India, which includes among its members most of the leading Indian
firms as well the subsidiaries of foreign MNCs, is openly supportive of strengthening India’s intellectual property rights
regime (http://www.indiaoppi.com/). Other industry associations such as the Indian Drug Manufacturers Association
with memberships drawn from smaller firms tend to be more critical of TRIPS.
   40
      There are other factors as well that might serve to mitigate the losses experienced by Indian firms, among them the
possibility of joint ventures with, or contract manufacturing for multinationals. Such collaborations are increasing in
frequency in the Indian pharmaceutical industry.


                                                           34
involving withdrawal of all four domestic quinolone product groups. Of this amount, foregone profits
of domestic producers constitute roughly Rs. 2.3 billion, or U.S. $50 million (ca. 16% of the total
welfare loss). The overwhelming portion of the total welfare loss therefore derives from the loss of
consumer welfare.
   Lastly, if we assume that the welfare losses due to the reduction in variety are a purely transitional
phenomenon or that they could be neutralized through expanded use of licensing, and subtract these
from our upper bound estimates, we obtain a lower bound estimate of Rs. 6.5 billion (=20.16-13.7) or
$144 million annually. Though only about 30% of our upper bound estimate, in absolute terms this
lower bound estimate is still very large, representing about 24% of antibiotic sales in 2000.
   Finally, Table 12 presents our estimates of the profit gains realized by foreign producers as a result
of patent introduction. These estimates indicate that the total profit gains to foreign producers would
be only about Rs. 2.4 billion or approximately U.S. $53 million per year. More importantly, the
U.S. $53 million per year estimate corresponds to the rather unrealistic case where there is no price
regulation, so that multinationals are free to adjust their prices upward in response to the reduced
competition. In the presence of price regulation that would keep prices fixed at their pre-patent-
enforcement level (column 2 in Table 12), the profit gain for foreign multinationals becomes Rs. 0.88
billion, or U.S. $19.6 million per year, only. To put the above numbers in perspective, sales of Cipro
alone, the main patented ciprofloxacin product of Bayer, were roughly U.S. $1.6 billion in 2000 (Hensley
(2001)). Assuming a 40% markup (the markup usually quoted for the pharmaceutical industry), this
translates to annual profits of roughly U.S. $640 million per year, for Bayer’s Cipro alone.


5. Conclusion

The results of our analysis suggest that concerns about the potentially adverse welfare eﬀects of
TRIPS in developing countries may have some basis. Specifically, we estimate that in the quinolone
sub-segment of the systemic anti-bacterials segment alone, patent enforcement would result in a large
welfare loss for the Indian economy. The estimated loss ranges from $144 million to an upper bound of
$450 million annually, depending on the way policies are implemented, the extent of price regulation,
and the degree to which foreign multinationals respond to patent protection by expanding their dis-
tribution networks or using licensing more extensively. Of this amount, only a small fraction accounts
for the forgone profits of domestic (Indian) pharmaceutical firms. Hence, we do not find much support
for the claim that TRIPS would have detrimental eﬀects on the Indian pharmaceutical industry. In
fact, under some scenarios we find that the profits of domestic firms may even increase; this happens
because, when certain domestic products become unavailable as a result of patent enforcement, con-
sumers substitute towards other domestic products containing diﬀerent molecules, rather than foreign
products containing the same molecule. This diﬀerential eﬀect of TRIPS on domestic firms’ profits


                                                  35
may partly explain the divided position of the Indian pharmaceutical industry regarding TRIPS.
   With respect to the subsidiaries of foreign multinationals, we estimate the profit gains of these
firms to be approximately U.S. $53 million per year when patents are enforced. This is in the absence
of compulsory licensing or price regulation. With price regulation that would keep the prices of drugs
supplied by multinational subsidiaries at their pre-TRIPS level, the profit gains drop to only U.S. $19.6
million per year. While we certainly do not attempt to draw any conclusions about the relationship
between intellectual property rights protection and research and innovation, we note that this number
represents a very small fraction of the annual sales of big pharmaceutical firms in this sub-segment.
   By far, the biggest eﬀects of TRIPS concern the Indian consumers, for whom we estimate sub-
stantial welfare losses. The losses increase in the number of domestic products that are aﬀected by
TRIPS. The worst case scenario involves simultaneous withdrawal of all domestic product groups in
the quinolone sub-segment. In contrast, when only one domestic product, or a subset of domestic
products are withdrawn, the consumer losses are modest. This pattern is driven by the empirical
finding that domestic products are viewed by Indian consumers as close substitutes; accordingly, the
existence of some degree of domestic competition has a big impact on consumer well-being.
   Finally, our decomposition of the total consumer loss into a “product variety” eﬀect, an “expen-
diture switching” eﬀect, and a “price adjustment” eﬀect, has interesting policy implications.         We
find that a substantial fraction of the total welfare loss is attributable to the loss of variety, which
we interpret as primarily capturing an “ease of access” eﬀect: because the retail coverage of domestic
firms in India is substantially more extensive than the one of foreign multinationals, drugs produced
by domestic firms are more readily available to Indian consumers than drugs sold by foreign producers.
This suggests a potentially independent role of compulsory licensing in addition to, or in lieu of price
regulation, for the sole purpose of mitigating the loss of product variety eﬀect. Even if one considers
this eﬀect to be only a transitional phenomenon that will diminish in importance as foreign firms
respond to TRIPS enforcement by expanding their product portfolios and distribution networks, or by
using licensing more extensively, the welfare loss due to upward price adjustment remains substantial.
The “price adjustment” component of welfare loss could potentially be mitigated by appropriate price
controls or other regulations. However in this case, the incentives of multinationals to expand their
operations in the Indian market would become questionable, and the welfare loss attributable to the
loss of product variety could become a permanent eﬀect.
   In general, our simulations indicate that from a consumer welfare point of view the issue of product
availability is as important as the issue of aﬀordability. In this sense our analysis suggests that policy
makers should evaluate TRIPS related policies not only in terms of their eﬀects on drug prices, but
also in terms of their impact on product availability. This observation is more relevant the more
likely it is that there will be tension between policies designed towards addressing these two sets of



                                                   36
eﬀects. Intellectual property rights enforcement without price regulation is likely to bolster foreign
firms’ incentives to market their products in developing countries and use licensing more extensively
than in the past, but it brings with it the potential of substantial price increases of patented products.
Accompanying price regulation can prevent patent holders from exploiting their market power but not
without diminishing the incentives of such firms to expand their operations in the developing world. A
combination of policies that would completely neutralize TRIPS’ adverse eﬀects on consumer welfare
is hence unlikely.
   Lastly, we find that expenditure switching across sub-segments has a limited role in containing
consumer welfare loss. The claim of TRIPS proponents that any adverse eﬀects arising from the intro-
duction of a patent in a particular market would be mitigated by the availability of close therapeutic
substitutes is thus only valid if there are patent-expired substitutes available within fairly narrowly
defined therapeutic categories.




                                                   37
References

 [1] Andrews, Donald W.K., and Moshe Buchinsky (2000), “A Three-Step Method for Choosing the
     Number of Bootstrap Repetitions,” Econometrica, Vol 68, pp. 23-51.

 [2] Bale, Harvey (2001), “Consumption and trade in oﬀ-patented medicines,” WHO Commission for
     Macroeconomics and Health Working Paper, February.

 [3] Barton, John (2001), “Diﬀerentiated pricing of patented products,” WHO Commission for Macro-
     economics and Health Working Paper, March.

 [4] Berndt, Ernst (1994), “Uniform Pharmaceutical Pricing”, Washington, DC.

 [5] Berry, S., J. Levinsohn and A. Pakes (1995), “Automobile prices in market equilibrium,” Econo-
     metrica, 63, pp.841-890.

 [6] Bresnahan, T. (2004), “Comments on Valuation of New Goods under Perfect and Imper-
     fect Competition”, by J. Hausman, chapter in The Economics of New Goods, available at
     http://www.stanford.edu/~tbres.

 [7] Caves, R.E. et al (1991), “Patent expiration, entry and competition in the U.S. pharmaceutical
     industry,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Special Issue, pp. 1-62.

 [8] Challu, P. (1991), “The consequences of pharmaceutical product patenting,” World Competition,
     15(2), December, pp. 65-126.

 [9] Chin, Judith and Gene Grossman (1990), “Intellectual property rights and North-South trade,”
     in Ronald W. Jones and Anne O. Krueger (eds.), The Political Economy of International Trade:
     Essays in Honor of Robert E. Baldwin, (Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell), pp. 90-107.

[10] Christensen, L.R., D.W. Jorgenson, and L.J. Lau (1975), “Transcendental logarithmic utility
     functions,” American Economic Review, 65, pp. 367-383.

[11] Deardoﬀ, Alan (1992), “Welfare eﬀects of global patent protection,” Economica, 59, pp. 35-51.

[12] Deaton, Angus and John Muellbauer (1980a), “An Almost Ideal Demand System”, American
     Economic Review, 70/3, pp. 312-326.

[13] _______(1980b), Economics and consumer behavior, (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univer-
     sity Press).

[14] Diwan, I. and D. Rodrik (1991), “Patents, appropriate technology, and North-South trade,”
     Journal of International Economics, Vol.63, pp.79-90.

[15] Ellison, Sara Fisher, Iain Cockburn, Zvi Griliches and Jerry Hausman (1997), “Characteristics of
     demand for pharmaceutical products: an examination of four cephalosporins,” RAND Journal of
     Economics, 28(3), Autumn, pp. 426-446.

[16] Efron, B. and R. J. Tibshirani (1993), “An Introduction to the Bootstrap”, Chapman & Hall.

[17] Fink, Carsten (2000), “How stronger patent protection in India might aﬀect the behavior of
     transnational pharmaceutical industries,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 2352.
[18] Frank, R.G. and D.S. Salkever (1997), “Generic entry and the pricing of pharmaceuticals,” Journal
     of Economics and Management Strategy, 6(1), Spring, pp. 75-90.
[19] Ganslandt, M., K.E. Maskus, and E.V. Wong (2001), “Developing and Distributing Essential
     Medicines to Poor Countries: the DEFEND Proposal”, The World Economy.
[20] Goldberg, P. (1995), “Product diﬀerentiation and oligopoly in international markets: the case of
     the automobile industry,” Econometrica, 63, pp. 891-951.
[21] Grossman, G. and E. Lai (2003), “International Protection of Intellectual Property,” manuscript.
[22] Hausman, J. (1994), “Valuation of New Goods under Perfect and Imperfect Competition,” Na-
     tional Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4970.
[23] Hausman, J. and G. Leonard (2002), “The Competitive Eﬀects of a New Product Introduction:
     A Case Study,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 50/3, pp. 237-263.
[24] Helpman, Elhanan (1993), “Innovation, imitation, and intellectual property rights,” Economet-
     rica, 61(4), pp. 1247-1280.
[25] Hensley, S. (2001). “Cipro Loses Share in Traditional Market, As Doctors Seek Other Cures in
     Shortage,” The Wall Street Journal, November 7, 2001.
[26] ICRA (1999), The Indian Pharmaceutical Industry, ICRA Industry Watch Series.
[27] Kremer, Michael (1998), “Patent Buyouts: A Mechanism for Encouraging Innovation,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, November, pp. 1137-1167.
[28] Lanjouw, Jean O. (1998), “The introduction of pharmaceutical product patents in India: heartless
     exploitation of the poor and suﬀering?,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
     No. 6366.
[29] Lanjouw, Jean O. and I. Cockburn (2001), “New Pills for Poor People? Empirical Evidence after
     GATT,” World Development, Vol.29, No.2, pp.265-289.
[30] Lu, J.L. and W.S. Comanor (1998), “Strategic pricing of new pharmaceuticals,” Review of Eco-
     nomics and Statistics, 80, pp. 108-118.
[31] Maskus, K.E. (2000), Intellectual Property Rights in the Global Economy, Washington, D.C.:
     Institute for International Economics.
[32] Maskus, K.E. and D. Eby Konan (1994), “Trade-related intellectual property rights: issues and
     exploratory results,” in A.V. Deardoﬀ and R.M. Stern (eds.), Analytical and Negotiating Issues
     in the Global Trading System, (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press), pp. 401-454.
[33] Mazzoleni, Roberto and Richard R. Nelson, (1998a), “The Benefits and Costs of Strong Patent
     Protection: A Contribution to the Current Debate,” Research Policy, 27(3), July, pp. 273-284.
[34] _______(1998b), “Economic Theories about the Benefits and Costs of Patents,” Journal of
     Economic Issues, 32(4), December, pp. 1031-1052.
[35] Nevo, A. (2001), “Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry,” Econometrica,
     vol. 69, no. 2, March 2001, pp. 307-42.
[36] Nogues, J.J. (1993), “Social costs and benefits of introducing patent protection for pharmaceutical
     drugs in developing countries,” The Developing Economies, 31(1), pp. 24-53.

[37] Nordhaus, W. (1969), Invention, Growth and Welfare: A Theoretical Treatment of Technological
     Change, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1969.

[38] Pollack, Andrew (2001), “Defensive Drug Industry Fuels Fight Over Patents,” New York Times,
     April 20, 2001.

[39] Quah, Danny (2002), “Almost Eﬃcient Innovation by Pricing Ideas,” CEP Working Paper #1219,
     June 2002.

[40] Rozek, R.P. and R. Berkowitz (1998), “The eﬀects of patent protection on the prices of pharmaceu-
     tical products–is intellectual property protection raising the drug bill in developing countries?,”
     Journal of World Intellectual Property, 1(2), March, pp. 179-245.

[41] Sachs, J. (2002), “A New Global Eﬀort to Control Malaria,” Science, Vol. 298, 4 Oct, 2002.

[42] Scherer, F.M. and Jayashree Watal (2001), “Post-TRIPS options for access to patented medicines
     in developing countries,” WHO Commission for Macroeconomics and Health Working Paper,
     June.

[43] Stevenson, Richard W. (2001), “Measuring Success: At Least the Talks Didn’t Collapse,” New
     York Times, November 15, 2001.

[44] Subramanian, A. (1995), “Putting some numbers on the TRIPS pharmaceutical debate,” Inter-
     national Journal of Technology Management, 10(2&3), pp. 252-268.

[45] Trajtenberg, M. (1989), “The Welfare Analysis of Product Innovations, with an Application to
     Computed Tomography Scanners,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(2), September, pp. 444-479.

[46] Watal, Jayashree (1996), “Introducing product patents in the Indian pharmaceutical sector–
     implications for prices and welfare,” World Competition, 20(2), pp. 5-21.

[47] _______(2000), “Pharmaceutical patents, prices and welfare losses: a simulation study of
     policy options for India under the WTO TRIPS agreement,” World Economy, 23(5), May, pp.
     733-752.

[48] Wright, Brian D (1983), “The economics of invention incentives: patents, prizes, and research
     contracts,” American Economic Review, 73(4), September, pp. 691-707.
                                                    Table 1
                                          The Quinolones Sub-segment

                                          Shares (%) of Quinolones Sales           Sales (Rs. Mill): 2000
Molecule                                   Domestic           Foreign           Domestic            Foreign
                                             Firms          Subsidiaries         Firms           Subsidiaries
Ciprofloxacin                                 53.0              2.7              3,030              156
Norfloxacin                                   11.2              0.1               640                3
Ofloxacin                                     11.6              3.1               665               177
Sparfloxacin                                  10.8              0.1               620                4

Lomefloxacin                                  1.5                .                 86                 .
Pefloxacin                                    1.3               0.1                72                 5
Levofloxacin                                  0.0                .                 0                  .
Nalidixic acid                                1.3                .                 73                 .




                                                   Table 2
                        Basic Information about the Four Quinolones Molecules: 2000

                                              Ciprofloxacin   Norfloxacin        Ofloxacin       Sparfloxacin

U.S. or European Patent Holder                       Bayer            Merck     Ortho-McNeil Rhone-Poulenc
Year of U.S. Patent Expiry                            2003             1998            2003          2010
Year of US-FDA Approval                               1987             1986            1990          1996
Year First Introduced in India                        1989             1988            1990          1996

No. of Domestic Indian Firms                            75                 40              17                25
No. of Foreign Subsidiaries                              8                  2               2                 1

Sales Weighted Average Per-unit API* Price of Products Produced by:
Domestic Indian Firms                            11.24            9.05                   90.08            78.84
Foreign Subsidiaries                             10.35            5.28                  108.47                 .

*API: Active pharmaceutical ingredient.
                                           Table 3
               Summary Statistics for the Quinolones Sub-segment: 1999 - 2000

                                            North      East       West          South
Annual Quinolones Expenditure Per           31.25      19.75      27.64         23.59
Household (Rs.)                              (3.66)     (3.67)     (4.07)       (2.86)

Annual Anti-Biotics Expenditure Per         119.88     84.24      110.52        96.24
Household (Rs.)                             (12.24)    (12.24)     (9.60)       (9.96)

No. of SKUs:
                                            12.38      11.29      13.08         12.46
Foreign Ciprofloxacin                        (1.50)     (1.90)     (1.02)       (1.06)
                                             1.83       1.71       2.00          1.58
Foreign Norfloxacin                          (0.70)     (0.75)     (0.88)       (0.83)
                                             3.04       2.96       2.96          3.00
Foreign Ofloxacin                            (0.86)     (0.86)     (0.91)       (0.88)
                                            106.21     97.63      103.42        105.50
Domestic Ciprofloxacin                       (5.99)     (4.34)     (7.22)       (4.51)
                                            38.96      34.96      36.17         39.42
Domestic Norfloxacin                         (2.71)     (2.68)     (2.51)       (3.79)
                                            18.46      16.00      17.25         17.25
Domestic Ofloxacin                           (6.80)     (6.34)     (5.86)       (6.35)
                                            29.83      28.29      31.21         29.29
Domestic Sparfloxacin                        (5.57)     (6.38)     (6.88)       (6.57)

Price Per-unit API* (Rs.):
                                             9.58      10.90      10.85         10.07
Foreign Ciprofloxacin                        (1.28)     (0.66)     (0.71)       (0.58)
                                             5.63       5.09       6.05          4.35
Foreign Norfloxacin                          (0.77)     (1.33)     (1.39)       (1.47)
                                            109.46     109.43     108.86        106.12
Foreign Ofloxacin                            (6.20)     (6.64)     (7.00)       (11.40)
                                            11.43      10.67      11.31         11.52
Domestic Ciprofloxacin                       (0.16)     (0.15)     (0.17)       (0.13)
                                             9.51       9.07       8.88          8.73
Domestic Norfloxacin                         (0.24)     (0.35)     (0.37)       (0.20)
                                            91.63      89.64      85.65         93.41
Domestic Ofloxacin                          (16.15)    (15.65)    (14.22)       (14.07)
                                            79.72      78.49      76.88         80.28
Domestic Sparfloxacin                        (9.76)    (10.14)    (11.85)       (10.37)

Annual Sales (Rs. Mill)
                                            41.79      24.31      45.20         29.47
Foreign Ciprofloxacin                       (15.34)     (8.16)    (12.73)       (6.48)
                                             1.28       1.00       0.58          0.73
Foreign Norfloxacin                          (1.01)     (0.82)     (0.44)       (0.57)
                                            54.46      31.84      35.22         31.11
Foreign Ofloxacin                           (13.99)     (9.33)     (9.06)       (7.03)
                                            962.29     585.91     678.74        703.81
Domestic Ciprofloxacin                      (106.26)   (130.26)   (122.26)      (87.40)
                                            222.55     119.71     149.18        158.29
Domestic Norfloxacin                        (38.84)    (19.45)    (26.91)       (16.26)
                                            125.02     96.21      149.36        112.05
Domestic Ofloxacin                          (44.34)    (30.11)    (52.82)       (42.59)
                                            156.17     121.75     161.30        98.11
Domestic Sparfloxacin                       (31.41)    (25.76)    (46.74)       (34.20)

*API: Active pharmaceutical ingredient.
Note: Standard deviations in parentheses.
                                             Table 4
                               Analysis of Product Price Variance

                                                                     Percentage     Percentage
Product           Partial SS        Partial SS        Total SS      Explained by   Explained by
Group               Time             Region                             Time          Region
Foreign
Ciprofloxacin       0.296              0.306           1.047           28.3%          29.2%
Foreign
Norfloxacin         1.036              1.002           4.179           24.8%          24.0%
Foreign
Ofloxacin           0.429              0.021           0.571           75.2%          3.6%
Domestic
Ciprofloxacin       0.005              0.088           0.104           5.0%           84.1%
Domestic
Norfloxacin         0.059              0.098           0.198           29.6%          49.4%
Domestic
Ofloxacin           2.858              0.104           3.056           93.5%          3.4%
Domestic
Sparfloxacin        1.754              0.032           1.860           94.3%          1.7%




                                            Table 5
                               Revenue Shares of the Exiting SKUs
                                      Revenue Share of                    Revenue Shares
                                        Exiting SKUs                        of All SKUs

Full Sample                                    1.0%                            3.4%

Northern Region                                0.8%                            3.3%

Eastern Region                                 1.2%                            3.6%

Western Region                                 1.0%                            3.4%

Southern Region                                1.2%                            3.3%
                                                Table 6 (a)
                          Demand Patterns within the Quinolones Sub-Segment:
                   Unconditional Price and Expenditure Elasticities in the Northern Region

                                                     Elasticity with Respect to:
                          Prices of                                     Prices of                      Overall
Product            Foreign Product Groups                      Domestic Product Groups               Quinolones
Group             Cipro    Norflo     Oflo             Cipro       Norflo      Oflo   Sparflo        Expenditure

Foreign            -5.57*    -0.13†       -0.15*        4.01*      0.11†      0.11†        0.16*           1.37*
Ciprofloxacin       (1.79)     (0.07)       (0.07)       (1.84)    (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.06)         (0.29)
                        †                       †            †
Foreign            -4.27      -0.45       -4.27         3.50       -6.02      4.51*        4.65*           2.20*
Norfloxacin         (2.42)     (1.12)       (2.42)       (2.10)    (6.23)      (1.84)       (1.83)         (1.05)
                                   †                                   †
Foreign            -0.11*    -0.10        -1.38*        -0.09      0.09        0.23        0.11*           1.16*
Ofloxacin           (0.05)     (0.05)       (0.31)       (0.27)    (0.05)      (0.28)       (0.04)         (0.17)

Domestic           0.18*      0.01*        -0.01        -1.68*     0.08*      0.08*        0.10*           1.17*
Ciprofloxacin       (0.08)     (0.00)       (0.01)       (0.23)    (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.02)         (0.03)

Domestic           0.04*      -0.03        0.04*        0.58*     -2.23*      0.42*        0.40*           0.73*
Norfloxacin         (0.01)     (0.03)       (0.01)       (0.17)    (0.11)      (0.04)       (0.03)         (0.09)

Domestic           0.05*      0.05*         0.11        0.77*      0.74*     -3.42*        0.74*           0.89*
Ofloxacin           (0.02)     (0.02)       (0.13)       (0.28)    (0.08)      (0.25)       (0.08)         (0.21)

Domestic           0.07*      0.04*        0.07*        1.15*      0.63*      0.63*       -2.88*           0.28*
Sparfloxacin        (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.02)       (0.15)    (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.17)         (0.12)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Elasticities evaluated at average revenue shares. Asterisk (*) denotes
                                                        †
significance at the 5% significance level, and stagger ( ) denotes significance at the 10% level.
                                                Table 6 (b)
                          Demand Patterns within the Quinolones Sub-Segment:
                      Unconditional Price and Expenditure Elasticities in Other Regions

                                 Demand Patterns in the Eastern Region
                                               Elasticity with Respect to:
Product             Foreign Groups’ Prices                Domestic Groups’ Prices                    Quinolones
Group             Cipro    Norflo      Oflo      Cipro       Norflo      Oflo     Sparflo            Expenditure
Foreign            -5.94*   -0.14†      -0.16*     4.31*        0.13*      0.11      0.17*                 1.40*
Ciprofloxacin       (1.95)     (0.08)       (0.08)     (2.01)      (0.06)      (0.07)       (0.07)         (0.31)
Foreign            -3.29†      -0.58       -3.29†      2.64†       -4.60       3.46*        3.59*          1.92*
Norfloxacin         (1.80)     (0.83)       (1.79)     (1.53)      (4.51)      (1.38)       (1.39)         (0.82)
Foreign            -0.12*     -0.10†       -1.40*       -0.10      0.10*        0.24        0.13*          1.17*
Ofloxacin           (0.06)     (0.06)       (0.34)     (0.31)      (0.05)      (0.30)       (0.05)         (0.19)
Domestic            0.18*      0.01*        -0.01      -1.72*      0.09*       0.08*        0.11*          1.17*
Ciprofloxacin       (0.08)     (0.00)       (0.02)     (0.27)      (0.02)      (0.03)       (0.02)         (0.03)
Domestic            0.04*      -0.04        0.04*      0.68*      -2.42*       0.49*        0.46*          0.70*
Norfloxacin         (0.02)     (0.04)       (0.02)     (0.20)      (0.13)      (0.05)       (0.04)         (0.10)
Domestic            0.04†      0.04*         0.09      0.61*       0.60*      -2.95*        0.60*          0.92*
Ofloxacin           (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.10)     (0.28)      (0.07)      (0.22)       (0.07)         (0.17)
Domestic            0.05*      0.03*        0.05*      0.92*       0.48*       0.51*       -2.51*          0.43*
Sparfloxacin        (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.01)     (0.17)      (0.05)      (0.06)       (0.16)         (0.10)

                                 Demand Patterns in the Western Region
                                               Elasticity with Respect to:
Product             Foreign Groups’ Prices                Domestic Groups’ Prices                    Quinolones
Group             Cipro    Norflo      Oflo      Cipro       Norflo      Oflo     Sparflo            Expenditure
Foreign            -4.27*   -0.09†      -0.11*     2.86*        0.08*      0.06      0.11*                 1.26*
Ciprofloxacin       (1.29)     (0.05)       (0.05)     (1.33)      (0.04)      (0.05)       (0.04)         (0.21)
Foreign            -7.14†      -0.08       -7.10†      5.94†       -9.95       7.42*        7.70*          2.99†
Norfloxacin         (3.69)     (1.83)       (3.68)     (3.28)     (10.15)      (2.97)       (2.96)         (1.78)
Foreign            -0.13*     -0.12†       -1.45*       -0.09      0.12*        0.26        0.13*          1.19*
Ofloxacin           (0.07)     (0.06)       (0.37)     (0.29)      (0.05)      (0.33)       (0.05)         (0.21)
Domestic            0.19*      0.01*         0.00      -1.74*      0.09*       0.08*        0.11*          1.18*
Ciprofloxacin       (0.08)     (0.00)       (0.01)     (0.24)      (0.02)      (0.03)       (0.02)         (0.04)
Domestic            0.04*      -0.04        0.04*      0.67*      -2.43*       0.50*        0.47*          0.69*
Norfloxacin         (0.02)     (0.04)       (0.01)     (0.18)      (0.14)      (0.05)       (0.04)         (0.10)
Domestic             0.03      0.03*         0.07      0.48*       0.48*      -2.57*        0.48*          0.93*
Ofloxacin           (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.08)     (0.22)      (0.05)      (0.15)       (0.04)         (0.14)
Domestic            0.06*      0.03*        0.05*      0.83*       0.46*       0.49*       -2.41*          0.46*
Sparfloxacin        (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.01)     (0.14)      (0.04)      (0.05)       (0.12)         (0.09)

                                Demand Patterns in the Southern Region
                                               Elasticity with Respect to:
Product             Foreign Groups’ Prices                Domestic Groups’ Prices                    Quinolones
Group             Cipro    Norflo      Oflo      Cipro       Norflo      Oflo     Sparflo            Expenditure
Foreign            -5.60*   -0.13†      -0.15*     4.02*        0.11*      0.10      0.17*                 1.37*
Ciprofloxacin       (1.82)     (0.07)       (0.07)     (1.87)      (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.07)         (0.29)
Foreign            -5.33†      -0.31       -5.31†      4.31†       -7.48       5.59*        5.84*          2.49†
Norfloxacin         (3.01)     (1.34)       (3.00)     (2.45)      (7.34)      (2.19)       (2.19)         (1.28)
Foreign            -0.14*     -0.12†       -1.48*       -0.11      0.12*        0.29        0.16*          1.20*
Ofloxacin           (0.07)     (0.07)       (0.39)     (0.33)      (0.06)      (0.35)       (0.06)         (0.22)
Domestic            0.17*      0.01*         0.00      -1.69*      0.08*       0.07*        0.11*          1.16*
Ciprofloxacin       (0.08)     (0.00)       (0.01)     (0.25)      (0.02)      (0.03)       (0.02)         (0.03)
Domestic            0.04*      -0.03        0.03*      0.59*      -2.25*       0.43*        0.40*          0.73*
Norfloxacin         (0.01)     (0.03)       (0.01)     (0.19)      (0.12)      (0.04)       (0.04)         (0.09)
Domestic            0.04†      0.04*         0.09      0.62*       0.60*      -2.96*        0.60*          0.91*
Ofloxacin           (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.10)     (0.26)      (0.06)      (0.19)       (0.07)         (0.17)
Domestic            0.08*      0.05*        0.08*      1.38*       0.73*       0.75*       -3.23*           0.16
Sparfloxacin        (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.02)     (0.18)      (0.07)      (0.08)       (0.21)         (0.14)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Elasticities evaluated at average revenue shares. Asterisk (*) denotes
significance at 5% level, and stagger (†) denotes significance at the 10% level.
                                                      Table 7
                Upper and Lower Bounds for Marginal Cost, Markup, and Annual Profit by Product Groups
                                         within the Quinolone Sub-segment

Product          Lower Bound      Upper Bound for Upper Bound for          Upper Bound       Lower Bound for Lower Bound
Group             for MC (Rs.)     Markup (Rs.)    Profit (Rs. Mill)       for MC (Rs.)        Markup (Rs.)  for Profit (Rs.)
Foreign                   8.3*                 19%                26.9               10.3                  0%             0.0
Ciprofloxacin            (1.23)               (0.12)             (16.55)
Foreign                    NA                   NA                  NA                 5.3                 0%             0.0
Norfloxacin
Foreign                   32.3                70%*              106.1*              108.5                  0%             0.0
Ofloxacin               (23.16)               (0.21)             (31.85)
Domestic                  4.7*                59%*            1,701.9*               11.2                  0%             0.0
Ciprofloxacin            (1.14)               (0.10)            (298.58)
Domestic                  5.2*                43%*              280.7*                 9.0                 0%             0.0
Norfloxacin              (0.20)               (0.02)             (15.32)
Domestic                 58.7*                34%*              161.2*               90.1                  0%             0.0
Ofloxacin                (2.18)               (0.02)             (12.80)
Domestic                 49.5*                37%*              198.5*               78.8                  0%             0.0
Sparfloxacin             (1.57)               (0.02)             (11.00)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Asterisk (*) denotes significance at the 5% level. Estimated lower bound for
Foreign Norfloxacin’s marginal cost is negative, since the estimated price elasticity is less than 1 in absolute value.
                                               Table 8
Counterfactual Estimates of Consumer Welfare Losses from Product Withdrawal Due to the Introduction of
                              Pharmaceutical Patents (Rs. Bill Per Year)

                                                                           Loss of Variety and:
Counterfactual                                                                          Within-segment Price-
Scenarios: Withdrawal           Pure Loss of Variety                                       Adjustment and
of One or More Domestic                                         Cross-segment              Cross-segment
Product Groups                                               Expenditure Switching     Expenditure Switching
                                         4.98*                        4.92*                            7.32*
Only Ciprofloxacin                       (0.87)                        (0.89)                          (1.46)
                                          0.08                         0.08                            0.23*
Only Ofloxacin                           (0.08)                        (0.08)                          (0.10)
Ciprofloxacin, Ofloxacin,                7.52*                        7.40*                            12.53*
and Norfloxacin                          (1.77)                        (1.80)                          (4.15)
Ciprofloxacin, Ofloxacin,                6.14*                        6.03*                            10.58*
and Sparfloxacin                         (1.42)                        (1.45)                          (3.31)
All Four Domestic                        11.76†                       11.35†                           17.81
Quinolones Products                      (6.43)                        (6.34)                          (12.70)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Asterisk (*) denotes significance at the 5% significance level, and stagger
 †
( ) denotes significance at the 10% level.




                                                  Table 9
                              Counterfactual Estimates of Drug Price Changes
                   After Product Withdrawal due to Introduction of Pharmaceutical Patents

Counterfactual Scenarios:                Changes in Prices with Cross-segment Expenditure Switching
Withdrawal of One or                      and Within-segment Price Adjustment (% of Original Prices)
More Domestic Product
Groups                            Foreign Product Groups                        Domestic Product Groups
                                Cipro     Norflo      Oflo            Cipro        Norflo      Oflo               Spar
                              189.4%*      314.7%       98.2%*           .        148.6%*     141.4%*            164.1%*
Only Ciprofloxacin              (0.18)           NA      (0.21)                     (0.09)      (0.08)            (0.08)
                              100.4%*      150.0%      102.9%*      102.4%*       108.3%*          .             110.7%*
Only Ofloxacin                  (0.01)           NA      (0.08)       (0.01)        (0.01)                        (0.01)
Ciprofloxacin, Ofloxacin,     247.6%*      627.8%      154.4%*           .            .            .             296.3%*
and Norfloxacin                 (0.42)           NA      (0.39)                                                   (0.70)
Ciprofloxacin, Ofloxacin,     255.2%*      627.8%      158.3%*           .        250.1%*          .                .
and Sparfloxacin                (0.40)           NA      (0.37)                     (0.64)
All Four Domestic              396.4%      627.8%      318.4%†           .            .            .                .
Quinolones Products             (3.34)           NA      (1.73)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Asterisk (*) denotes significance at the 5% level, and stagger (†) denotes
significance at the 10% level. We fix Foreign Norflo’s price at the numbers shown, because an estimate for the MC
lower bound is not available for this drug. We tried many different values for Foreign Norflo’s counterfactual prices
and the results are remarkably robust.
                                                 Table 10
 Counterfactual Estimates of Foregone Profits of Domestic Producers from Product Withdrawal due to the
                        Introduction of Pharmaceutical Patents (Rs. Bill Per Year)

                                                                          Loss of Variety and:
Counterfactual                                                                         Within-segment Price-
Scenarios: Withdrawal           Pure Loss of Variety                                      Adjustment and
of One or More Domestic                                        Cross-segment              Cross-segment
Product Groups                                              Expenditure Switching     Expenditure Switching
                                        0.95*                         1.09*                         0.40
Only Ciprofloxacin                      (0.16)                        (0.08)                        (0.31)
                                       -0.04*                        -0.03†                        -0.14*
Only Ofloxacin                          (0.01)                        (0.02)                        (0.04)
Ciprofloxacin, Ofloxacin,               1.24*                         1.40*                         0.42
and Norfloxacin                         (0.17)                        (0.11)                        (0.60)
Ciprofloxacin, Ofloxacin,               1.11*                         1.26*                         0.48
and Sparfloxacin                        (0.17)                        (0.11)                        (0.50)
All Four Domestic                       2.34*                         2.34*                        2.34*
Quinolones Products                     (0.19)                        (0.19)                        (0.19)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Asterisk (*) denotes significance at the 5% level, and stagger (†) denotes
significance at the 10% level.




                                                Table 11
   Counterfactual Estimates of Total Welfare Losses from Product Withdrawal due to the Introduction of
                                Pharmaceutical Patents (Rs. Bill Per Year)

                                                                          Loss of Variety and:
Counterfactual                                                                         Within-segment Price-
Scenarios: Withdrawal           Pure Loss of Variety                                      Adjustment and
of One or More Domestic                                        Cross-segment              Cross-segment
Product Groups                                              Expenditure Switching     Expenditure Switching
                                        5.94*                         6.01*                        7.72*
Only Ciprofloxacin                      (0.94)                        (0.87)                        (1.20)
                                        0.04                          0.05                          0.09
Only Ofloxacin                          (0.08)                        (0.09)                        (0.10)
Ciprofloxacin, Ofloxacin,               8.76*                         8.80*                        12.95*
and Norfloxacin                         (1.84)                        (1.77)                        (3.61)
Ciprofloxacin, Ofloxacin,               7.25*                         7.28*                        11.07*
and Sparfloxacin                        (1.46)                        (1.42)                        (2.88)
All Four Domestic                      14.10*                        13.70*                        20.16
Quinolones Products                     (6.57)                        (6.48)                       (12.85)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Asterisk (*) denotes significance at the 5% level.
                                                 Table 12
    Counterfactual Estimates of Profit Gains of Foreign Producers from Product Withdrawal due to the
                        Introduction of Pharmaceutical Patents (Rs. Bill Per Year)


                                                                          Loss of Variety and:
Counterfactual                                                                         Within-segment Price-
Scenarios: Withdrawal           Pure Loss of Variety                                      Adjustment and
of One or More Domestic                                        Cross-segment              Cross-segment
Product Groups                                              Expenditure Switching     Expenditure Switching
                                        0.17*                         0.14*                        0.35*
Only Ciprofloxacin                      (0.03)                        (0.06)                        (0.17)
                                        0.02                          0.02                          0.01
Only Ofloxacin                          (0.01)                        (0.01)                        (0.02)
Ciprofloxacin, Ofloxacin,               0.36*                         0.28*                        0.71†
and Norfloxacin                         (0.05)                        (0.11)                        (0.40)
Ciprofloxacin, Ofloxacin,               0.37*                         0.30*                        0.79*
and Sparfloxacin                        (0.05)                        (0.10)                        (0.38)
All Four Domestic                       1.17*                         0.88*                        2.43†
Quinolones Products                     (0.31)                        (0.41)                        (1.44)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Asterisk (*) denotes significance at the 5% significance level, and stagger
(†) denotes significance at the 10% level.
           APPENDIX

Additional Tables and Robustness Checks
                                                                                       Table A1
                                                           Spectrum of Activity of Various Families of Anti-bacterial Drugs

                                                Tetra-       Chloram-    Ampicillin,   Cephalo-   Trimethoprim    Macro-      Other         Amino-       Fluoro-
Organism                                        cyclines     penicols    Amoxycillin   Sporins    Combinations    lides       Penicillins   glycosides   quinolones
Gram-positive Cocci
   Staphylococcus Aureus
                Non-penicillinase Producing                                                X                          x             x            x             x
                     Penicillinase Producing                                               X                          x             x            x             x
   Streptococcus Bovis
                           Serious Infections                                 X                                                     x            x
     Uncomplicated Urinary Tract Infection                                    X                                                                  x             x
   Streptococcus Pneumoniae                                      x                         X                          x             x            x             x
Gram-negative Cocci
   Neisseria Meningitidis                                        x                         X                                        x
   Neisseria Gonorrhaoeae
              Non-beta-lactamase Producing                                    X            X            x                           x                          x
                   Beta-lactamase Producing                                   X            X            x                                                      x
Gram-negative Bacilli
   Acinetobacter Spp.                                                         X            X            x                                                      x
   Brucella Spp.                                     x                                                  x                                        x             x
   Campylobacter Jejuni                              x                                                                x                          x             x
   Enterobacter Spp.                                                                       X                                        x            x             x
   Escherichia Coli
     Uncomplicated Urinary Tract Infection           x                        X            X            x                                                      x
                           Systemic Infection                                 X            X                                                     x             x
   Francisella Tularensis                            x           x                                                                               x             x
   Haemophilus Influenzae
                                   Meningitis                    x            X            X            x                                                      x
                             Other Infections                                 X            X            x                                                      x
   Klebisiella Pneumonia                             x           x                         X            x                                        x             x
   Legionella Spp.                                   x                                                  x             x                                        x
   Proteus Mirabillis                                                         X            X            x                                        x
   Other Proteus Spp.                                                         X            X            x                                        x             x
   Providencia Spp.                                                           X            X            x                                        x             x
   Pseudomonas Aeruginosa                                                                  X                                        x            x             x
   Salmonella Spp.                                                            X            X            x                                                      x
   Serratia Marcescens                                                        X            X                                        x            x             x
   Shigella Spp.                                                              X                         x                                                      x
   Yersinia Pestis                                   x           x                                                                               x             x
Anaerobic Bacteria
   Anaerobic Streptococci                            x           x                         X                          x             x
   Bacteroides Spp.
                      Oropharyngeal Strains          x           x            X            X                         X              x
                     Gastrointestinal Strains                    x            X            X                         X              x
   Clostridium spp.                                  x           x                                                   X

Notes: An “x” in a cell indicates that at least one member of the family of drugs indicated in the column heading is listed as the anti-microbial drug of choice or as an
alternative agent for the treatment of the bacterial infection indicated in the row heading.
Source: Table 15-1, pp.225-226, Principles and practice of infectious diseases, edited by Gerald L. Mandell, John E. Bennett, Raphael Dolin, 5th edition, 2000.
                                                                       Table A2
                                               Coefficient Estimates from the Lower-Level AIDS System

                                                        Cross-Price Coefficients
                                 Own         Same                                 Different
                                Price       Molecule,         Different           Molecule,          Coefficient on        Eastern        Western    Southern
Product                        Coeffi-      Different         Molecule,           Domestic            Quinolones           Region         Region      Region
Group             Constant      cients       Status         Foreign Group          Group              Expenditure          Dummy          Dummy       Dummy
Foreign            0.013       -0.120*       0.115*            -0.003†             0.004*                0.010              0.027*         0.031*      0.007*
Ciprofloxacin       (0.02)      (0.05)         (0.05)            (0.00)              (0.00)               (0.01)             (0.01)         (0.01)    (0.00)
Foreign             -0.006      0.000         -0.005            -0.003†             0.004*               0.001              0.001*          0.000     0.000
Norfloxacin         (0.01)      (0.00)         (0.00)            (0.00)              (0.00)               (0.00)             (0.00)         (0.00)    (0.00)
Foreign             0.047*      -0.013         0.008            -0.003†             0.004*               0.005              0.001          -0.003     -0.007*
Ofloxacin           (0.02)      (0.01)         (0.01)            (0.00)              (0.00)               (0.01)             (0.00)         (0.00)    (0.00)
Domestic            0.603*     -0.298*        0.115*            0.004*              0.058*               0.102*             -0.001         -0.044*    0.033*
Ciprofloxacin       (0.04)      (0.05)         (0.05)            (0.00)              (0.00)               (0.02)             (0.01)         (0.01)    (0.01)
Domestic           -0.206*     -0.177*        -0.005            0.004*              0.058*               -0.038*            -0.041*        -0.034*    -0.031*
Norfloxacin         (0.03)      (0.02)         (0.00)            (0.00)              (0.00)               (0.01)             (0.01)         (0.01)    (0.01)
Domestic            0.339*     -0.191*         0.008            0.004*              0.058*               -0.008             0.018          0.034*     0.026*
Ofloxacin           (0.04)      (0.01)         (0.01)            (0.00)              (0.00)               (0.02)             (0.01)         (0.01)    (0.01)
Domestic            0.209*     -0.186*                          0.004*              0.058*               -0.072*            -0.006         0.016*     -0.028*
Sparfloxacin        (0.03)      (0.02)                           (0.00)              (0.00)               (0.01)             (0.01)         (0.00)    (0.00)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Asterisk (*) denotes significance at the 5% level, and stagger (†) denotes significance at the 10% level.
                                                                                     Table A3
                                                     Coefficient Estimates from the Upper-Level AIDS System

                                                           Cross-Price Coefficients
                                                                                                                                   Eastern       Western    Southern
Product              Cons-     Tetra-   Chloram-     Ampi      Cephalo     Trime-     Macro-     Other       Quino-    Antibiotics Region        Region      Region
Group                 tant    cycline   phenicol     -cillin   -sporin    thoprim      lides    penicillin   lones     Expenditure Dummy         Dummy       Dummy
                     -0.11     -0.05      -0.03      -0.14†     0.13*       0.07†      0.08†      -0.02       -0.05      -0.03*     -0.03*        0.00        0.00
Tetracyline          (0.09)    (0.06)      (0.02)     (0.08)    (0.06)      (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.03)      (0.05)      (0.01)       (0.01)     (0.04)       (0.04)
                     -0.02     -0.03       0.04*      -0.15*    0.09*       0.00       -0.09*      0.00      0.14*        0.02*        0.02*       0.01        0.01
Chloramphenicol      (0.05)    (0.02)      (0.01)     (0.04)    (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.04)      (0.00)       (0.01)     (0.01)       (0.01)
                      0.27     -0.14†     -0.15*      0.00      0.10        0.02       0.04        0.09       0.03        -0.01        0.07*      0.13*        0.18*
Ampicillin           (0.17)    (0.08)      (0.04)     (0.14)    (0.10)      (0.06)     (0.08)     (0.07)      (0.07)      (0.01)       (0.03)     (0.05)       (0.05)
                     -0.22     0.13*       0.09*      0.10      0.26†      -0.15†      -0.08      -0.16†     -0.19*       -0.03*       -0.09*      -0.03       -0.06
Cephalosporin        (0.22)    (0.06)      (0.03)     (0.10)    (0.15)      (0.08)     (0.10)     (0.09)      (0.08)      (0.01)       (0.02)     (0.05)       (0.05)
                     0.36*     0.07†       0.00       0.02      -0.15†      -0.04      -0.16*      0.03       0.22*       0.01*         0.01      -0.06*      -0.05†
Trimethoprim         (0.13)    (0.04)      (0.02)     (0.06)    (0.08)      (0.13)     (0.06)     (0.07)      (0.05)      (0.01)       (0.01)     (0.03)       (0.03)
                      0.14     0.08†      -0.09*      0.04      -0.08      -0.16*      0.19†       0.08       -0.05       0.00         -0.02       -0.04       -0.03
Macrolides           (0.21)    (0.04)      (0.02)     (0.08)    (0.10)      (0.06)     (0.11)     (0.08)      (0.05)      (0.01)       (0.02)     (0.03)       (0.03)
                      0.17     -0.02       0.00       0.09      -0.16†      0.03       0.08        0.06      -0.08†       -0.01        0.02†       0.00        0.00
Other penicillin     (0.18)    (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.07)    (0.09)      (0.07)     (0.08)     (0.07)      (0.05)      (0.00)       (0.01)     (0.02)       (0.03)
                     0.41*     -0.05       0.14*      0.03      -0.19*      0.22*      -0.05      -0.08†      -0.02       0.04*         0.03       -0.01       -0.03
Quinolones           (0.11)    (0.05)      (0.04)     (0.07)    (0.08)      (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.06)      (0.02)       (0.02)     (0.03)       (0.03)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Asterisk (*) denotes significance at the 5% confidence level, and stagger (†) denotes significance at the 10% confidence level.
                                                  Table A4
                                Other Specifications for the Northern Region

                      A4(a): Demand Patterns with Seasonal Dummies: Summer
                                              Elasticity with Respect to:
Product                Foreign Groups’ Prices                     Domestic Groups’ Prices
Group              Cipro       Norflo       Oflo         Cipro      Norflo      Oflo              Sparflo
Foreign              -6.06*      -0.14†       -0.15*        4.54*         0.12     0.13†             0.16*
Ciprofloxacin         (1.91)       (0.07)       (0.08)        (2.15)       (0.07)       (0.07)        (0.07)
Foreign               -6.10         0.12         -6.09         5.27        -7.47         6.10         6.19
Norfloxacin           (4.55)       (2.26)       (4.55)        (6.01)      (11.68)       (4.62)        (4.58)
Foreign              -0.11†       -0.11†        -1.58*         0.08        0.11*         0.47         0.11*
Ofloxacin             (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.32)        (0.32)       (0.05)       (0.29)        (0.06)
Domestic              0.18*        0.01†         0.00        -1.72*        0.07*        0.07*         0.10*
Ciprofloxacin         (0.08)       (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.29)       (0.03)       (0.02)        (0.03)
Domestic              0.03*        -0.03        0.03*         0.58*       -2.04*        0.36*         0.33*
Norfloxacin           (0.01)       (0.03)       (0.01)        (0.19)       (0.11)       (0.04)        (0.04)
                           †                           †
Domestic              0.06         0.05*        0.23          0.89*        0.79*        -3.67*        0.77*
Ofloxacin             (0.03)       (0.02)       (0.14)        (0.40)       (0.11)       (0.36)        (0.12)
Domestic              0.07*        0.04*        0.06*         1.25*        0.60*        0.58*        -2.81*
Sparfloxacin          (0.03)       (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.20)       (0.06)       (0.07)        (0.17)

                      A4(b): Demand Patterns with Seasonal Dummies: Monsoon
                                              Elasticity with Respect to:
Product                Foreign Groups’ Prices                     Domestic Groups’ Prices
Group              Cipro       Norflo       Oflo         Cipro      Norflo      Oflo              Sparflo
Foreign              -5.80*      -0.13†       -0.15*        4.32*       0.11†       0.11             0.15*
Ciprofloxacin         (1.89)       (0.07)       (0.07)        (2.07)       (0.07)       (0.07)        (0.07)
Foreign               -3.52        -0.35         -3.52         3.03        -4.31        3.51*         3.57*
Norfloxacin           (2.19)       (1.04)       (2.19)        (2.17)       (4.92)       (1.71)        (1.72)
Foreign              -0.10†       -0.09†        -1.51*         0.06        0.09*        0.41†         0.10*
Ofloxacin             (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.26)        (0.29)       (0.04)       (0.25)        (0.04)
Domestic              0.19*        0.01*         0.00        -1.72*        0.07*        0.07*         0.10*
Ciprofloxacin         (0.08)       (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.29)       (0.02)       (0.03)        (0.02)
Domestic              0.04*        -0.03        0.03*         0.61*       -2.10*        0.38*         0.35*
Norfloxacin           (0.01)       (0.03)       (0.01)        (0.19)       (0.11)       (0.04)        (0.04)
Domestic              0.05†        0.04*        0.19†         0.72*        0.65*        -3.20*        0.64*
Ofloxacin             (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.11)        (0.32)       (0.08)       (0.27)        (0.09)
Domestic              0.07*        0.04*        0.07*         1.25*        0.60*        0.61*        -2.82*
Sparfloxacin          (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.21)       (0.07)       (0.07)        (0.19)

                       A4(c): Demand Patterns with Seasonal Dummies: Winter
                                              Elasticity with Respect to:
Product                Foreign Groups’ Prices                     Domestic Groups’ Prices
Group              Cipro       Norflo       Oflo         Cipro      Norflo      Oflo              Sparflo
Foreign              -5.66*      -0.13†       -0.14†        4.19*       0.12†       0.11             0.14*
Ciprofloxacin         (1.80)       (0.07)       (0.07)        (2.02)       (0.07)       (0.08)        (0.07)
Foreign              -4.37†        -0.20        -4.36†         3.78        -5.33        4.34*         4.41*
Norfloxacin           (2.54)       (1.42)       (2.53)        (2.66)       (6.10)       (2.13)        (2.13)
Foreign              -0.10†       -0.10†        -1.55*         0.07        0.10*        0.44†         0.10*
Ofloxacin             (0.06)       (0.05)       (0.28)        (0.30)       (0.05)       (0.26)        (0.05)
Domestic              0.19*        0.01*         0.00        -1.73*        0.07*        0.07*         0.10*
Ciprofloxacin         (0.08)       (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.29)       (0.02)       (0.03)        (0.02)
Domestic              0.04*        -0.03        0.04*         0.68*       -2.22*        0.43*         0.39*
Norfloxacin           (0.02)       (0.03)       (0.02)        (0.20)       (0.13)       (0.05)        (0.04)
Domestic              0.04†        0.04*         0.18         0.68*        0.61*        -3.08*        0.61*
Ofloxacin             (0.03)       (0.02)       (0.12)        (0.33)       (0.10)       (0.35)        (0.10)
Domestic              0.06*        0.03*        0.06*         1.06*        0.51*        0.53*        -2.56*
Sparfloxacin          (0.02)       (0.01)       (0.02)        (0.20)       (0.06)       (0.07)        (0.18)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Elasticities evaluated at average revenue shares. Asterisk (*) denotes
                                                      †
significance at the 5% confidence level, and stagger ( ) denotes significance at the 10% confidence level.
                                                         Table A5

                               Demand Patterns with OLS Coefficients
                                              Elasticity with Respect to:
Product                Foreign Groups’ Prices                     Domestic Groups’ Prices
Group              Cipro       Norflo       Oflo         Cipro      Norflo      Oflo                     Sparflo
Foreign              -2.76*       -0.05        -0.06         1.39         0.00     -0.01                     0.05
Ciprofloxacin         (0.82)        (0.05)            (0.05)        (0.92)            (0.07)   (0.07)         (0.07)
Foreign               -1.66          1.24             -1.64          0.59             -2.25     1.02              1.10
Norfloxacin           (1.75)        (1.61)            (1.75)        (2.04)            (6.73)   (2.04)         (2.07)
Foreign               -0.04         -0.04             -0.99*        -0.07              0.02    -0.02              0.03
Ofloxacin             (0.05)        (0.04)            (0.26)        (0.24)            (0.05)   (0.23)         (0.05)
Domestic               0.06          0.00             -0.01         -1.56*            0.07*    0.07*          0.10*
Ciprofloxacin         (0.04)        (0.00)            (0.01)        (0.25)            (0.03)   (0.03)         (0.02)
Domestic               0.01         -0.01              0.01         0.46*             -2.18*   0.40*          0.39*
Norfloxacin           (0.02)        (0.04)            (0.01)        (0.20)            (0.11)   (0.04)         (0.04)
Domestic               0.02          0.01              0.00         0.81*             0.73*    -3.16*         0.71*
Ofloxacin             (0.03)        (0.02)            (0.10)        (0.22)            (0.07)   (0.24)         (0.07)
Domestic              0.06*          0.01             0.04†         1.25*             0.63*    0.64*         -2.76*
Sparfloxacin          (0.02)        (0.02)            (0.02)        (0.15)            (0.06)   (0.06)         (0.17)




                                               Table A6
Counterfactual Estimates of Consumer Welfare Losses from Product Withdrawal Due to the Introduction
                   of Pharmaceutical Patents, Assuming MC = P (Rs. Bill Per Year)

                                                                            Loss of Variety and:
                                                                                        Within-segment Price-
Counterfactual Scenarios:        Pure Loss of Variety                                       Adjustment and
Withdrawal of One or More                                         Cross-segment             Cross-segment
Domestic Product Groups                                        Expenditure Switching    Expenditure Switching
                                             4.98*                           4.92*                      9.47*
Only Ciprofloxacin                           (0.92)                          (0.94)                     (2.32)
                                             0.08                            0.08                       4.08*
Only Ofloxacin                               (0.09)                          (0.09)                     (0.83)
Ciprofloxacin, Ofloxacin,                    7.52*                           7.40*                      14.67*
and Norfloxacin                              (1.83)                          (1.88)                     (5.52)
Ciprofloxacin, Ofloxacin,                    6.14*                           6.03*                      12.83*
and Sparfloxacin                             (1.41)                          (1.46)                     (4.57)
All Four Domestic                        11.76†                          11.35†                         19.46
Quinolones Products                          (6.28)                          (6.28)                     (15.20)

                                                                                                              †
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Asterisk (*) denotes significance at 5% confidence level, and stagger ( )
denotes significance at 10% confidence level.
