NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES HUMAN CAPITAL TRANSFER FROM PARENT TO CHILD?
THE INTERGENERATIONAL EFFECTS
OF COMPULSORY SCHOOLING
Philip Oreopoulos
Marianne E. Page
Ann Huff Stevens
Working Paper 10164
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10164
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

We would like to thank Adriana Lleras-Muney, Joshua Angrist, and Daron Acemoglu for making available
the data from their work on compulsory schooling laws. Melanie Guldi and Sami Kitmitto provided
invaluable research assistance. We are grateful to seminar participants at UC-Davis, the University of
Toronto, and Duke University for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Philip Oreopoulos, Marianne E. Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Human Capital Transfer from Parent to Child? The Intergenerational
Effects of Compulsory Schooling
Philip Oreopoulos, Marianne E. Page, and Ann Huff Stevens
NBER Working Paper No. 10164
December 2003
JEL No. I2, J6
ABSTRACT
The strong correlation between parents' economic status and that of their children has been welldocumented, but little is known about the extent to which this is a causal phenomenon. This paper
attempts to improve our understanding of the causal processes that contribute to intergenerational
immobility by exploiting historical changes in compulsory schooling laws that affected the
educational attainment of parents without affecting their innate abilities or endowments. We
examine the influence of parental compulsory schooling on grade retention status for children aged
7 to 15 using the 1960, 1970 and 1980 U.S. Censuses. Our estimates indicate that a one-year
increase in the education of either parent reduces the probability that a child repeats a grade by
between two and seven percentage points. Among 15 to 16 year olds living at home, we also
estimate that parental compulsory schooling significantly lowers the likelihood of dropping out.
These findings suggest that education policies may be able to reduce part of the intergenerational
transmission of inequality.
Philip Oreopoulos
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
Canada
and NBER
oreo@economics.utoronto.ca

Marianne E. Page
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER
mepage@ucdavis.edu

Ann Huff Stevens
Department of Economics
One Shields Avenue
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
annstevens@ucdavis.edu

I. Introduction

A high degree of persistence in economic status exists across generations, but we know
very little about the causal processes that drive this phenomenon. For example, children who
grow up in more highly educated families have better labor market outcomes as adults than
children who grow up in less educated families, but we do not know whether this is because
education bestows parents with skills that make them better parents or because genetic or
environmental factors that contributed to the parents’ educational levels are shared by their
children.

This paper attempts to improve our understanding of the causal processes that

contribute to intergenerational immobility by exploiting historical changes in compulsory
schooling laws that affected the educational attainment of parents without affecting their innate
abilities. Quantifying the extent to which children’s well-being can be improved by increasing
their parents’ education also has important implications for public policy: most discussions about
the government’s role in providing educational aid, for example, focus on the individual’s return
to education and ignore the possibility of social benefits.

Knowing that there are

intergenerational returns to increased schooling would provide a further rationale for such
programs.
Few studies have attempted to isolate the causal effect of education on the next
generation’s well-being. This is at least partly due to the fact that it is difficult to find plausible
sources of identifying variation. It is also hard to find large, nationally representative datasets
that simultaneously provide information on parental characteristics and children’s outcomes.
Our use of compulsory schooling laws applied to Census data allow us to overcome both of these
problems. Several studies have already demonstrated a strong relationship between these laws

1

and individuals’ educational attainment.

Angrist and Krueger (1991) provided the initial

intuition behind this natural experiment when they used quarter of birth to identify the wage
return to education on the grounds that those who were born in later quarters of the year were
compelled to get more education because compulsory education laws forced students to stay in
school until they reached a certain age.1 More recent studies examine how changes in the school
leaving laws and child labor laws themselves correlate with school attainment across region and
over time.

Lleras-Muney (2001) and Goldin and Katz (2003) show that these laws were

effective at raising education levels in the United States. Harmon and Walker (2000) and
Oreopoulos (2003) find similar effects on education attainment from changes in compulsory
schooling in the United Kingdom and Canada. Lleras-Muney also investigates the origins of
these laws in the United States and concludes that the law changes were not driven by underlying
trends in educational attainment but by exogenous political factors. Previous studies have used
these laws to examine the effects of education on earnings [Acemoglu and Angrist, 1999],
criminal activity [Lochner and Moretti, 2001], mortality [Lleras-Muney, 2002], and subjective
measures of well-being [Oreopoulos, 2003], but this is the first study to estimate the
intergenerational effects of the U.S. laws.
Our main analysis is based on a sample of children ages 7-15 taken from the 1960, 1970
and 1980 individual U.S. Census files.

We examine the effects of parental education on

children’s grade retention, and find a substantial and significant positive effect of parental
education on children’s human capital accumulation. This effect is somewhat larger than OLS
estimates would suggest. The estimates indicate that a one-year increase in the education of
1

Subsequent studies question whether the quarter-of-birth variable is a valid instrument in these analyses.
Bound, Jaeger, and Baker (1995) and Bound and Jaeger (1997) for example, show that education
attainment and quarter of birth are only weakly correlated, and that weakly correlated instruments can
generate estimates that are biased in the same direction as OLS. Compulsory schooling laws are much
more strongly correlated with educational attainment than individuals’ quarters of birth, however.

2

either parent reduces the probability that a child repeats a grade by between two to seven
percentage points, and indicate that parental education has an independent and significant effect
on children’s education outcomes.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II describes related studies
that attempt to understand the relationship between parents’ education and children’s outcomes.
Sections III and IV outline our empirical strategy and data, respectively. We present our results
in Section V and draw conclusions from them in Section VI.

II. Background Literature
A few previous studies have attempted to isolate the causal influence of parental
education by comparing siblings. Behrman and Rosenzweig (2002) for example, use within twin
variation in education to identify the effects of twin mother’s schooling on the educational
attainment of their offspring. An advantage of this approach is that it controls for all unobserved
mother characteristics that are common to twins. A disadvantage of this approach, however, is
that it may exacerbate biases if within twin pair differences in characteristics give rise to the
differences in their education levels and also affect their children’s outcomes.2 Within twin
estimates are also known to be more prone to measurement error problems (Griliches, 1979).
Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1994) compare test scores of siblings whose mothers increased their
schooling in between births and find evidence that additional maternal education improves
students’ test scores. Using a similar strategy, Currie and Moretti (2002) find that higher
maternal education improves infant health. This estimation strategy provides the opportunity to
control for mother fixed effects, yet, it is not clear whether the observed improvements in
2

Behrman, Rosenzweig, and Taubman (1994), for example, find birth weight differences between twins correlate
significantly with schooling differences and subsequent earnings. Recent work by Antonovics and Goldberg (2003)
questions the robustness of the Behrman and Rosenzweig’s (2002) results.

3

children’s test scores are driven by changes in mother’s schooling or whether they are driven by
other changes in the mother’s circumstances over time that might be correlated with schooling.
Sacerdote (2000) compares socioeconomic outcomes of adoptees that were randomly assigned to
their adoptive parents and finds no evidence that the adoptive parents’ education affects their
children’s outcomes.3

This approach is appealing because it is impossible to ascribe the

intergenerational link to a genetic inheritance, but it does not entirely eliminate the possibility of
selection bias since even with random assignment parents have the ability to turn a child down.
In addition, an observed correlation could be driven by parental characteristics that are not
genetically transmitted to children but that nevertheless affect both individual and offspring’s
human capital accumulation.4
Most existing studies have also relied on small, nonrepresentative, datasets.

The

Behrman and Rosenzweig study, for example, uses samples of 212 female twin pairs and 122
male twin pairs who participated in the Minnesota Twin Registry. Rosenzweig and Wolpin
(1994) use a sample of unusually young mothers from the NLSY.

Likewise, Sacerdote’s

analyses focus on fewer than 200 adoptees per sample who were born in Britain (the first
sample) or adopted in Colorado (the second sample).
Our approach is similar in spirit to another estimation strategy undertaken by Currie and
Moretti (2002), which isolates the effect of mothers’ education on birth outcomes (birthweight
and gestational age) using county level data on college openings between 1940 and 1990 to
capture differences in the availability of educational services among different cohorts of women
giving birth in the same county and year. These differences are then used to identify differences
3

He does find evidence that parents’ education matters among adopted children in the NLSY, but these children
were not necessarily randomly assigned to their adoptive parents.
4
For example, if characteristics that lead to higher education levels also contribute to better parenting skills
independent of the level of education, then researchers’ inability to control for these characteristics will result in
upward biased estimates of education effects.

4

in mothers’ education levels. The authors estimate that an additional year of maternal education
reduces the incidence of low birth weight by approximately ten percent, and the incidence of preterm birth by approximately six percent.
Like Currie and Moretti, we also use geographic/cohort/year variation to identify the
effect of parental education. Another similarity between our study and theirs is that both employ
large datasets, although Currie and Moretti’s data are only from California. One concern with
Currie and Moretti’s identification strategy is that differences in the density of post secondary
institutions may reflect differences in demand for college, which may in turn be correlated with
parental characteristics that determine children’s outcomes. For example, college openings may
happen as a response to increases in the number of qualified students who live in the area, and
changes in the degree of college preparedness may affect future generations’ well-being whether
or not the parent actually goes to college.
It is worthwhile to highlight some key differences between our study and theirs. First, we
use a different source of identifying variation. We will argue that changes in compulsory
schooling laws are unlikely to be correlated with individual characteristics other than schooling.
In addition, the law changes that we use to identify the effects of parental education will affect a
different part of the education distribution relative to the instruments used by Currie and Moretti:
changes in compulsory schooling laws will affect parents with low levels of education, whereas
changes in the number of post secondary institutions will affect those with higher levels of
education. One might expect that an additional year of schooling would have more impact
among those with relatively little education. Another difference is that we focus on children’s
human capital accumulation instead of health outcomes. Finally, our study allows us to examine

5

the effects of both mothers’ and fathers’ education levels, whereas Currie and Moretti’s data only
contain information on mothers’ education level.
Recent papers by Chevalier (2003) and Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2003) also use
changes in compulsory schooling laws to identify the effect of parental education on the next
generation’s outcomes.

Chevalier’s study uses a change in the compulsory schooling

requirement that took place in Britain in 1957. He finds large effects of mother’s education on
children’s educational attainment, but does not find statistically significant effects of father’s
education.

The single change in the minimum schooling law, however, prevents the use of

cohort-specific trends. As a result, it is impossible to disentangle compulsory schooling effects
from cohort effects. Chevalier’s sample of children is also confined to those who are still living
at home with their parents, and the distribution of educational attainment among children living
at home will be different from that in the population. Teenagers who are high school dropouts,
for example, are more likely to be living apart from their parents than those who are still in
school. While a high proportion of 16 and 17 year-olds still live at home, among those that left
school early, that proportion is much lower.
Black, Devereux and Salvanes examine the effects of an increase in mandatory schooling
from 7 to 9 years, which was phased in across municipalities in Norway between 1959 and 1973.
Using the timing of the law changes to instrument for parental education, they find weak (but not
statistically significant) evidence of a causal relationship between parental education and
children’s outcomes. They do find however, that among mothers with low levels of education,
the mandated increase in education had a statistically significant effect on their children’s
educational attainment.

6

The larger variation in compulsory school law changes in the United States, and the
larger samples from the U.S. Censuses enable us to arrive at much more precise estimates than
from the Norwegian analysis. Institutional differences across countries may also lead to different
results. Cross-country comparisons of intergenerational mobility find that Americans exhibit
less mobility than most Europeans [Bjorklund et al.(2002); Solon (1999)]. Finally, the Black et
al. estimates may be downward biased because all of the children in the sample are subject to the
9 year schooling requirement, whereas only some of the parents are affected by the change in the
law. We are able to avoid this because we focus on children’s grade retention instead of
completed education.

III. Empirical Strategy
Let y if denote a relevant outcome for child i living in family f. Suppose that the true
model for y if is

(1)

y if = α + β 1 FathEd f + β 2 MothEd f + β 3 X f + ε if

where FathEd f and MothEd f indicate the educational attainment of the child’s father and
mother, X f is a vector of all the other family background characteristics that affect the child’s
outcome, and ε if is an error term representing the effects of individual specific factors that are
uncorrelated with family background. If we could observe everything that belongs in X then
estimates of β 1 and β 2 would capture the effects of parents’ educational attainment that are
independent of their other characteristics. Because this is not possible, we attempt to address the

7

omitted variables problem by using U.S. compulsory school laws as instruments for completed
education. Lleras-Muney (2001), Schmidt (1995) and Goldin and Katz (2003) have documented
the effectiveness of these laws from 1910 to 1940, specifically examining the effects of the latest
age allowed before requiring school entry, the minimum school leaving age, and the minimum
age at which a child could obtain a work permit to exempt her from school. All three studies
conclude that these laws had modest, but statistically significant effects on educational
attainment. For example, Goldin and Katz (2003) conclude that changes in compulsory school
legislation over this 30-year period account for about 5 percent of the more than doubling of
secondary school enrollment.
Acemoglu and Angrist (1999) have also collected and recorded information on
compulsory schooling laws between 1915 and 1969, and have used them to estimate both
individual and social returns to education. They simplify the laws by converting them into two
variables: the minimum length of time required in school before being allowed to leave, and the
minimum length of time required in school before being allowed to obtain a work permit. While
both types of laws were influential, work exemptions often allowed students to leave school
before the minimum school leaving age. Several authors have found that the effect of work
permits on educational attainment often dominated the effect of school leaving age restrictions.
Therefore, our instruments will be based on the minimum number of years of schooling required
in order to obtain a work permit and we will use Acemoglu and Angrist’s data collection and
simplification.5 Estimates based on school leaving age restrictions are very similar.6 In the
following section, we describe more precisely how we utilize their information on the laws.

5

The variables collected by Acemoglu and Angrist, Goldin and Katz, and Lleras-Muney are very similar and yield
similar IV estimates. We chose to work with Acemoglu and Angrist’s laws because they allowed us to examine
parents from a wider range of birth cohorts.
6
Available from the authors.

8

We estimate the effect of parents’ education simultaneously, as in equation (1), and
separately. Since the standard error estimates that are produced when we estimate equation (1)
are too large to be able to discern which parent’s education affects the child more, our discussion
will focus on separate analyses of mothers’ and fathers’ education, recognizing that the estimated
coefficient we obtain for each parent’s education will also reflect any benefits to the child that
result if more highly educated parents are able to obtain “better” spouses. The results that are
produced from our joint estimation of mothers’ and fathers’ education are discussed in Section
V.F.
Instead of estimating the equations at the individual level, we conduct our instrumental
variables analysis after aggregating our data to the parental state of birth, parental cohort, and
census year level. Aggregating to the state of birth and cohort level explicitly acknowledges that
our identifying variation comes from variation in compulsory schooling laws across states and
cohorts rather than across individuals. We also aggregate separately by census year because we
wish to take into account the fact that our data are derived from three different census years by
including census year fixed effects. There are two reasons that we wish to do this. First, each
cohort is observed three times: in 1960, 1970 and 1980, and as each cohort ages, their average
level of completed education may change. Second, there may be minor differences across survey
instruments.7
To estimate the instrumental variables counterpart of equation (1), we first generate cell
means for all variables in the regression specification. We then estimate the following first-stage
regression equations:
7

We have also run individual level regressions, regressions that are based on aggregation to the parental state and
year of birth only, and regressions in which the cells are defined by parental state of birth/parental year of
birth/census year and child’s state of residence. The latter specification allows us to include state fixed effects,
which control for differences in educational quality experienced by children across states. These specifications all
produce very similar estimates.

9

(2)

FathEd yjk = γ 0 + γ 1CL7 j ,k +14 + γ 2 CL8 j ,k +14 + γ 3CL9 j ,k +14 + γ 4 X yjk + u y + u j + u k + u jk

(3)

MothEd ylm = η 0 + η1CL7 j ,k +14 + η 2 CL8 j ,k +14 + η 3 CL9 j , k +14 + η 4 X ylm + v y + vl + v m + vlm ,

where FathEd yjk represents average father’s education level for the group of youths observed in
census year y, with fathers from state j born in year k , MothEd ylm represents average mother’s
education level for the group of youths who are observed in census year y, with mothers from
state l born in year m , and X is a vector of variables that capture the child group’s average
race, gender and age. We will estimate both the first and second stage standard errors using
Huber-White standard error estimates and clustering by parent’s state and year of birth. The
instruments to be excluded are CL7, CL8, and CL9 which are dummy variables that denote
required years of schooling prior to obtaining a work permit of 7, 8, or 9 or more years. Details
of how these variables are coded are given in the data section. Fixed effects are included for the
relevant census year, and parent’s state and year of birth.
Identifying the effects of the compulsory school laws on parental education is made
possible through differences in the timing of the changes in these laws across states.
Importantly, there is no reason to expect a future generation’s human capital to affect the laws
that were imposed on a prior generation. It is also difficult to think of parental characteristics that
would be affected by compulsory schooling laws except through the laws’ effect on parental
education. If compulsory schooling laws were changed in response to other changes in a state
such as its demand for low-skilled workers, then they would make poor instruments for
estimating contemporaneous wage returns to education, but changes in state characteristics are
unlikely to have an effect on children’s grade retention some twenty years later.
Lleras-Muney (2001) devotes considerable attention to this issue and finds no evidence
that the law changes reflect other factors that might affect parent’s education levels. For
10

example, she includes measures of manufacturing wages, the percent of workers employed in
manufacturing, expenditures on education and a number of demographic characteristics in
regressions of educational attainment on compulsory schooling laws and finds that their
inclusion does not affect the coefficient estimates on the laws. She also matches individuals to
the laws that were in place when they turned 15 through 24 years of age (when the laws should
no longer have had an effect), and finds that while current laws are always significant, future
laws are virtually never significant.8
A related concern is that changes in compulsory schooling laws affect the educational
attainment of the adults in the child’s state.

This might lead to changes in the child’s

environment beyond her own family background that could affect her eventual outcomes. For
example, if more highly educated adults are more likely to support school taxes, and higher
school expenditures affect children’s human capital then compulsory schooling laws will not
allow us to isolate the effect of growing up in a more educated family from the effect of growing
up in a more educated community. Fortunately, several findings in the literature suggest that any
“spillover” effects of the laws will be small. Goldin and Katz (2003), for example, find that
compulsory schooling laws only explain about 5% of the convergence in educational attainment
between 1915 and 1940.

In addition, the laws have been shown to have no impact on

educational attainment beyond 12th grade. This, combined with the fact that those affected by a
change in the law will comprise only a small fraction of the total stock of adults, suggests that
changes in compulsory schooling will have minimal affects on the education level of the adults
in the child’s community. Furthermore, Acemoglu and Angrist (1999) find little evidence that
education generates positive externalities (in the form of higher wages).
8

Landes and Solomon (1972) run similar but much sparser regressions for the period 1880-1910 (which is prior to
the period we study) using only 10 year leads and find that the laws passed 10 years later were correlated with
educational attainment.

11

Nevertheless, we take the possibility of instrument endogeniety seriously and employ a
number of strategies to verify that our compulsory schooling variables are not picking up the
effect of other changes in the child’s environment. For example, we show that the effect of the
laws is experienced exclusively by parents with less than 12 years of education, which reduces
the likelihood that they reflect more general state or cohort effects. We also show that our
estimates are robust to the inclusion of many state/year controls and to the exclusion of children
who reside in the same state in which their parents were born. The details of these analyses are
discussed in Sections V.D and V.E.
The following shows our main second-stage regression equations:
(4)

y yjk = δ 0 + δ 1 FathEd yjk + δ 2 X yjk + ε y + ε j + ε k + ε yjk

(5)

y ylm = λ 0 + λ1 MothEd ylm + λ 2 X ylm + e y + el + e m + e ylm

where y yjk is the average child outcome among children in census year y , with fathers from
state j born in year k , and y ylm is defined similarly for mothers.

IV. Data

IV.A. Census Data
Our analysis uses data from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) created
by the Census Bureau. The IPUMS consists of individual and household level data from the
decennial census, and includes nearly all of the detail originally recorded by the census
enumerations.

Information exists at the individual level on a broad range of individual

characteristics, including fertility, marital status, immigration, labor-force participation, income,
occupational structure, education, ethnicity and household composition. We use the 1% samples
from the 1960, 1970 and 1980 Censuses, which creates for us a dataset of 711,072 children
12

living in two parent families and 129,632 children living in single parent families. The size of
our dataset is an enormous advantage in terms of enabling us to obtain precise estimates. Most
previous studies of intergenerational education effects have been hampered by researchers’
reliance on datasets of fewer than 1,000 observations. The main disadvantage of the IPUMS, and
the reason that it has not been used for intergenerational mobility studies, is that it is a crosssectional dataset that contains little information on children’s outcomes.

Typical measures of

children’s success, such as test scores or behavioral problems are not collected by the census.
Measures of longer term outcomes such as wages, labor force participation or teenage
childbearing are available in IPUMS, but since many of these attributes are relevant only for
individuals who are in their late teens or older, analyses of these outcomes becomes complicated
by the fact that older children are more likely to live apart from their family of origin. If an
individual is living outside of his parents’ household then there is no way to link him up with his
relevant family background characteristics.
The IPUMS does contain information on the level of educational attainment obtained by
each member of the household. We use this information, together with information on the
child’s age to determine whether or not she repeated a grade.

Grade repetition is both a

widespread phenomenon in the United States and is correlated with many, more commonly used,
measures of eventual educational achievement. A recent report from the National Longitudinal
Study of Adolescent Health, for example, indicates that over 20% of American adolescents have
repeated a grade (Resnick, et.al. 1997), and Feldman (1997) estimates that in many urban
districts more than half of all students will be retained. The likelihood of being held back is also
highly correlated with family background: in 1995, the probability of being retained was about
40% higher among young adults from low income families relative to young adults from middle

13

income families, and about 50% higher for blacks compared to whites (National Center for
Education Statistics, 1997).
There is also evidence that grade retention is correlated with other measures of children’s
success.

The National Center for Education Statistics (1997) for example, estimates that

approximately one quarter of young adults who had repeated a grade had dropped out of school
by 1995. Similarly, Smith and Shepard (1989) find that students who have previously repeated a
grade tend to have worse academic outcomes than similar students who have not repeated a
grade. Since educational attainment and test scores are well known to be predictors of adult
earnings and health, these studies suggest that if we can obtain estimates of the causal effect of
family income and parental education on the probability that a child repeats a grade, we will also
gain insight into the causal relationship between these family background characteristics and
children’s long-run success.
Determining whether or not a child has repeated a grade is complicated by the fact that
there is variation across states and over time in the minimum age at school entry, incomplete
information on school entry cut-off dates across states and over time, and questions about the
degree to which school districts comply with those dates.9 Since we do not have school entry
cutoff dates for each state and year, we create two different measures for assessing “normal”
educational progress. Our first measure assumes that all states use October 1 as their cut-off
date. In other words, we assume that a child who turns six in the first three quarters of the
calendar year will enter first grade in the fall of that year, and that a child you turns six in the
fourth quarter of the year will enter first grade in the fall of the following year. Our limited
9

We have been able to obtain state level information on minimum school entry ages and cut-off dates for 1955
and 1965: 43 states in 1955 and 32 states in 1965. Twenty two states maintained the same cutoff dates over the ten
year period and 7 states changed their cutoff-date. Missing information prevents us from determining what
happened in the remaining states.

14

information on school entry cutoff dates in 1955 and 1965 indicates that he vast majority of
states invoked cutoff dates between September 1 and November 1.

The Census provides

information on age at the time of the survey, quarter of birth and enumeration date. From this
data it is straightforward to determine the year and quarter in which a child was born. We assign
a value of 1 to the variable REPEAT if the child’s reported years of completed schooling is less
than the number of years he “should” have completed based on the Oct 1 cutoff date and 0 if the
child is on target or ahead.
Our second measure classifies children whose educational attainment is below the
median for their state, age, quarter of birth, and census year cell as repeaters. In other words, we
estimate the number of years a child “should” have completed based on the median grade
reached among those who are the same age, and were born in the same birthquarter, live in the
same state, and were observed in the same census year. Any child below the median is then
classified as having repeated a grade. Thus, our second dependent variable, <MEDIAN-GRD, is
equal to 1 if a child’s grade is below the median for other corresponding children, and 0
otherwise. We think that <MEDIAN-GRD is a cleaner measure of whether or not a child has
repeated a grade because it takes into account state and individual level characteristics that affect
the age at which the child was likely to have enrolled in school. Because individuals’ completed
education levels are heavily clustered at the median, about 10-15% of children in each cell are
below the median. These percentages are similar to the percent of those who are classified as
having repeated using the REPEAT measure.
Neither of these measures is perfect. Students who entered school late, for example, will
be classified as having been held back, and delayed entry into kindergarten is a fairly common
practice. Nine percent of first and second graders in the mid-1990’s had entered kindergarten

15

late, whereas only 5-6% had repeated kindergarten (National Center for Education Statistics,
2000). In a recent paper, Cascio (2003) compares directly reported measures of grade repetition
in the 1992, 1995 and 1999 Current Population Survey School Enrollment Supplement to a
below grade proxy created using educational attainment data available in the Census. She finds
that about 20% of all children are incorrectly classified by the below grade proxy, and that about
94% of such errors are comprised of children who have not repeated a grade but who are
classified as such by the proxy.
Normally, researchers are not concerned that noisy dependent variables will generate
biased estimates because measurement error in a normally distributed dependent variable merely
generates inefficient standard error estimates.

Cascio points out, however, that when the

dependent variable is an indicator for whether or not the individual has repeated a grade, then
consistency may be a problem. Measurement error in a binary dependent variable will produce
attenuated parameter estimates (Aigner, 1973; Hausman, 2001).

Cascio estimates that the

attenuation factor that results from using dependent variables like our REPEAT and <MEDIANGRD may be as high as 0.35. While we would prefer to generate unbiased estimates, downward
biased estimates will still be informative because our prior is that the intergenerational
correlation captures effects that are not wholly causal. Therefore, estimates that are statistically
different from zero will still allow us to reject the hypothesis that there is not an exogenous effect
of parental education on children’s human capital.

Also, although <MEDIAN-GRD is binary,

it is a less noisy variable than REPEAT because it takes into account variation in state, age and
quarter of birth by normalizing attainment within each cell.

Specifications based on this

measure, therefore, should suffer less from attenuation bias than those based on REPEAT.

16

The analysis focuses on children between the ages of 7 and 15 years of age. Children
younger than age 7 are not included because they are not old enough to have had the opportunity
to repeat a grade. We exclude children older than age 15 in order to avoid over-representing
children that left home at late ages. To adjust for the fact that older sample members have had
more of an opportunity to repeat a grade, and to adjust for possible gender differences in grade
repetition, all of our regressions include controls for age and gender. Summary statistics for our
samples are shown in Appendix Table 1.

IV.B. Compulsory Schooling Laws
Our compulsory schooling data have been previously collected by Acemoglu and
Angrist, and by Lleras-Muney. Lleras-Muney’s collection of compulsory schooling data is
available at http://www.princeton.edu/~alleras/papers.htm. The Acemoglu and Angrist data we
utilize are summarized in more detail in their appendix. As noted above, we follow earlier
authors by using a variable designed to capture the minimum number of years of schooling that
would be required before an individual is eligible for a work permit. Specifically, we use the
following variable to instrument for education:

CL=max{required years of schooling before receiving a work permit; minimum age required for
a work permit-enrollment age}
In order to capture a potentially non-linear relationship between years of schooling
required and educational attainment, we use the CL variable to create dummy variables of the
form:
CL6 =1 for CL ≤ 6, and 0 otherwise
CL7 =1 for CL = 7, and 0 otherwise

17

CL8 =1 for CL = 8, and 0 otherwise
CL9 =1 for CL ≥ 9, and 0 otherwise
These dummies are matched to parents in our sample based on the school entry laws that
were in place in their state of birth when they were 6 years old and the school leaving laws that
were in place when they were 14 years old. We chose these as the relevant matching years
because they are the lowest common entry and leaving ages across states. Although we would
prefer to match according to the parents’ state of residence at ages 6 and 14, that information is
not available in the Census, which is our primary source of data. This inevitably leads to some
mismatches, but the resulting errors are unlikely to be correlated with the laws because the laws
were not likely a motivating factor behind cross-state moves. Over 90% of parents in our sample
faced 6 to 9 years of mandatory compulsory schooling.

V. Results

V.A. First-stage Results
Before turning to our 2SLS estimates, we examine the results produced by the first stage.
Table 1 shows that compulsory schooling laws changed frequently both across states and within
states over time.10 For example, in 1940 there were 7 states that required seven or fewer years of
schooling, four states that required exactly eight years of schooling and 26 states that required
nine years. Moreover, between 1915 and 1970, required years increased to more than seven in
29 states while 24 states increased the required number of years to more than 10. About 1/3 of
the variation in the laws is across-states and about 2/3 is within states over time.

10

The table includes the number of states that are included in our sample for each year. We are missing compulsory
schooling data for Alaska and Hawaii. The table omits additional states in a few years because our sample of
children does not always include a match with a particular parental state/year cell.

18

Table 2 provides the coefficient estimates from the estimation of equations 2 and 3, along
with the partial R2 and the F-statistic for the hypothesis that the compulsory schooling laws are
jointly equal to zero. Looking first at the relationship between the laws and married fathers’
educational attainment, we see that the coefficient estimates on the compulsory schooling
dummies increase monotonically as expected and are all statistically significant. Importantly,
given our goal of using this relationship as the basis for instrumental variables estimation, the Fstatistic for the full sample of married fathers on the joint test of instrument significance is 46.
Bound, Baker and Jaeger (1995) have suggested that one should be concerned about the
possibility of weak instrument bias when F statistics are close to 1. Staiger and Stock (1997)
further suggest that a value of less than 5 could signal weak instruments. Our F-statistic suggests
that the instruments are strongly correlated with the endogenous regressor, which gives us some
confidence that our IV estimates are unlikely to suffer from bias due to weak instruments. The
partial R2 on the instruments is 0.004. This is an order of magnitude greater than the first-stage
partial R2 which generated concern by Bound Baker and Jaeger.
For more evidence that the compulsory schooling laws are affecting parental education in
the expected way, we separate the sample on the basis of the parents’ completed education level.
Since compulsory schooling laws never mandate high school completion, we do not expect the
law changes to have an affect on educational attainment beyond high school. The relationship
that we see for the full sample in Table 2 should break down when looking at only those with
more than a high school education. For the subsample of children whose fathers’ highest level of
education was a high school diploma or less, all of the relevant statistics look much the same as
in column 1. Among children whose parents received some post-secondary schooling, however,
the compulsory schooling dummies show no evidence of being correlated with higher levels of

19

educational attainment. The partial R2 on the instruments is smaller than for less educated
parents, and the F-statistic has a value of 4. This suggests that compulsory schooling laws are not
picking up more general state-level changes in educational attainment.11
The first-stage estimates for mothers in two parent families and heads in single parent
families look very similar to those for fathers. For both types of parents, the point estimates on
the compulsory schooling dummies suggest that more required years of schooling is positively
correlated with higher educational attainment. This pattern is repeated among less educated
parents, but does not hold among more highly educated parents. In addition, the partial R2 range
from .007 to .011 for both the full samples and the samples of less educated parents, but are
much smaller for the samples of highly educated parents. Likewise, the F-statistic is large for the
combined sample and for the less educated sample, but falls to 2 when the sample is confined to
parents with some post-secondary education. Taken together, these first-stage estimates suggest
that compulsory schooling laws are strongly correlated with the levels of educational attainment
that one would expect.

V.B. Reduced Form Results
Table 3 provides the reduced form results from regressing children’s educational progress
on the compulsory schooling dummies.

The first-stage effects of the minimum school leaving

age faced by the parents are strong enough to observe a substantive reduced form effect on
children’s grade repetition. Children whose fathers were required to stay in school for 7 years
11

We leave out those children whose parents have exactly 12 years of education because it is unclear how we would
expect the education levels of these parents to have been affected by the change in the laws. On the one hand, since
the laws do not ever mandate that an individual complete high school, we would expect the laws to have minimal
explanatory power among parents with 12 or more years of schooling. On the other hand, individuals obliged to
continue high school may perceive the costs of graduation to be smaller than if they could have left school earlier,
and may, therefore, decide to stay on until they obtain a degree. When we conduct our analyses by education
category but include the parents with exactly 12 years of schooling our results are similar to those we present here.

20

were 1.5 percentage points less likely to repeat a grade, on average, than those whose parents
faced more lenient schooling requirements. The pattern of the estimates is also in keeping with
what one would expect: children whose parents were required to stay in school more years
generally experienced larger human capital gains. This pattern is similar when we use the work
permit laws faced by married mothers and single parents.

V.C. OLS Results
The next table displays estimates produced by Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions
of equation (1). Across all parental types and education categories, parental education is strongly
significantly related to children’s human capital accumulation. In general, the point estimates
suggest that an additional year of education will reduce the probability that a child repeats a
grade by 3 to 4 percentage points. The marginal effect of education is smaller among more
highly educated parents, suggesting that the intergenerational return to education falls as
education increases, but the estimates are still substantive and statistically significant.

These

results are consistent with the existing literature, which has documented a positive
intergenerational correlation between parents’ education and that of their offspring. What is
unclear is the extent to which these estimates reflect a causal relationship. To what degree can
parents improve their children’s progress through school by investing in their own human
capital? This question is addressed by our IV estimates in the following section.

V.D. Two-stage Least Squares Results
The estimates presented in Table 5 are generated when compulsory schooling laws are
used as instruments for parental education.

Regardless of which definition of educational

21

progress is used, the IV estimates indicate that an increase in parental education will lower the
probability that a child is held back in school. The point estimates suggest that raising mother or
father’s education by one year (about a third of a standard deviation) will reduce the probability
of their children being retained by between 3 and 8 percentage points. The estimates are all
statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
Like previous work that uses compulsory schooling laws as instruments, the IV estimates
are larger than the corresponding OLS estimates.12 Some researchers have argued that this
phenomenon occurs because errors-in-variables biases outweigh omitted variables biases in OLS
regressions. Another explanation is that compulsory schooling laws affect schooling levels at the
bottom of the education distribution but not at the top. The marginal effect of an additional year
of schooling is likely to be larger among those with low skill levels, and Angrist, Imbens and
Rubin (1996) note that IV estimates will reflect the marginal return for the group that is affected
by the instrument. The pattern of the OLS estimates across education groups is consistent with
this possibility, with the estimated correlations between parental education and children’s
outcomes being two to four times greater among children with less educated parents than among
children whose parents have more than twelve years of education.13
The next panel of Table 5 shows the results from IV regressions applied to the subset of
children whose parents have less than 12 years of education. The evidence presented above on
the power of the first-stage regressions suggests that the IV strategy is most appropriate for this
restricted sample, since our instrument has very low power among parents with more than 12
years of education. As expected, these estimates are similar to the estimates generated by the full
12

The confidence intervals around the OLS estimates do not include the IV estimates, and vs. versa. Hausman tests
for equality of the OLS and IV estimates also reject the null of equality, but this test may not be appropriate since we
are using clustered data.
13
Of course, if there are omitted variables then the information provided by OLS estimates must be regarded with
caution.

22

sample, although they are no longer statistically significant for children growing up in singleparent families when using the <MEDIAN-GRD measure.
The last column of Table 5 presents the results from IV regressions that use the log of
parental wages as the dependent variable.14 We present these estimates in order to show that
they are very similar to those produced by Acemoglu and Angrist (1999), who use the same
instruments to estimate wage returns to education. For example, we find that the wage return to
an additional year of father’s education is about 12%, which compares favorably to Acemoglu
and Angrist’s estimate of 8%. The estimated returns for married women and single parents are
somewhat higher. Acemoglu and Angrist confine their analysis to men.15
While not directly comparable because of differences in the dependent variables, our
estimates appear to be slightly smaller and more precisely estimated than those produced by
Black, Devereux and Salvanes, who find that an additional year of parental education will raise
the child’s education by .04 to .11 of a year but whose estimates are not generally statistically
different from zero. If we assume that grade-repetition will translate less than one-for-one into
differences in completed schooling, our point estimates imply substantially smaller effects. As
noted above, the fact that our estimated effects are statistically significant (despite their smaller
magnitudes), may reflect the greater amount of variation in compulsory schooling laws in our
sample, relative to the Black, el al. sample. Another difference between our study and theirs is
14

We eliminate parents with zero wages or income.
We also measured educational progression as the relative difference between a child’s actual grade and the
median grade of that child’s age, quarter of birth, stage, and census year group. In these regressions, which are not
shown, the estimated coefficients suggest that increasing father’s education by one year will increase his child’s
years of schooling-for-age by 0.02 of a year and that increasing mother’s education by one year will raise her child’s
years of schooling-for-age by 0.01. These coefficients are much less precisely estimated than when we use
REPEAT and <MEDIAN-GRD, however, probably because variation in the residual reflects variation at both the
upper and lower tails of the distribution of education. Forcing parents to complete another year of high school may
have an affect on the probability that the child repeats a grade, but no effect on the probability that the child
completes a grade ahead of schedule. The estimated effect of father’s education is statistically different from zero at
the 1% level, but the estimated effect of mother’s education is not statistically significant at any usual confidence
level.

15

23

that Black et. al. also consistently report IV estimates that are below their OLS estimates. Two
possible explanations are that 1) measurement error in the Norwegian education data is likely
very small because the data come from an administrative source, and 2) returns to education do
not differ greatly across segments of the Norwegian population
Since grade repetition and educational-attainment-for-age are not typical dependent
variables, we have also used our instruments to estimate the effect of parental education on the
probability that a child drops out of school. Using census data on 15-18 year olds living at home,
we construct a variable that is equal to one if the child is not currently enrolled in school and has
not completed 12 or more years of schooling, and we create the same measure for a sub-sample
of 15-16 year olds.

Because the census files only allow us to look at outcomes for children

while they are in the same household as a parent, the high school drop-out variable is not ideal:
dropping out of school is likely to be correlated with moving out of a parents’ household. As a
result, the analysis will suffer from selection bias. Despite this concern, we present some results
using dropout status as our dependent variable, with the caveat that the effects shown here cannot
be generalized to the entire population of 15-18 year olds. Selection issues may be less severe
for the sample of 15-16 year olds. 16
The results from this exercise are presented in Table 6.

Across all samples, and

regardless of the measure of parental education used, there is a negative and (with one exception)
statistically significant relationship between parents’ education and the probability of dropping
out of high school. As with our analysis of grade repetition, the IV estimates are larger in
absolute value than the OLS estimates, and suggest a significant causal relationship running from
parental education to children’s educational attainment. Among 15-18 year olds, these estimates
16

Roughly 95% of 15 year olds in the Census live with at least one parent, but only 77% of 15 year-old high school
dropouts live with a parent. At age 17, these fractions fall to 88% of all 17 year olds, and 67% of 17 year old
dropouts.

24

suggest that an additional year of parental education reduces the probability of dropping out by 3
to 5 percentage points. The mean drop-out rate for this sample is .07 among two parent
households, and .13 among single parent households.

There is also evidence that sample

selection affects the estimates. The coefficient estimates fall (in absolute value) substantially
when we limit the sample to 15 and 16 year olds, who are more likely to be observed living with
a parent. This might be expected if children not living with their parents are also less influenced
by parental characteristics and resources.
Finally, the magnitudes of the effects on drop-out rates are sensible given our estimates
on grade repetition. As noted above, the National Center for Educational Statistics reports that
roughly a quarter of those repeating grades eventually dropped out of high school. Our results for
15 and 16 year olds suggest effects on the drop-out rate that are roughly one-quarter the size of
the effects on grade retention. The estimated effects on the drop-out rate are large, relative to the
sample mean drop-out rates. It seems likely, however, that typical drop-out rates among children
whose parents were affected by compulsory schooling laws may be substantially higher. The
average drop-out rate among children of fathers with less than a high school education, for
example, is .12, compared with .07 for the full sample. While we do not wish to draw any strong
conclusions from the drop-out analysis given the sample selection issues involved, the results in
Table 6 are consistent with those produced by our main analysis. Higher parental education
appears to result in improved educational outcomes for children.

V.E. Further Investigation of Instrument Exogeneity
An important set of concerns with our identification strategy is that the instruments
may be correlated with other state-level changes that affect children’s progress through school.

25

It is important to remember that since the relevant compulsory schooling laws pertain to the year
that the parent turned 14, such state-level changes would have to have an effect on children’s
outcomes approximately twenty years later.

We have also demonstrated that compulsory

schooling laws only affect educational attainment among parents with low skills, which suggests
that they are not picking up a more general state trend. Nevertheless, in this section we devote
our attention to a number of additional robustness checks.
First, we add a variety of state-year controls to our regressions. The additional variables
are motivated by Lleras-Muney (2001) who explicitly explores the possibility that compulsory
schooling laws are endogenous with respect to educational attainment, and include the state
population, the number of schools per square mile, the number of doctors per capita, the value
per acre of farm land, the percent of the state population that is foreign born, the fraction of the
state population living in urban areas, the fraction who are manufacturing workers, and average
wages per worker. The results from this exercise are displayed in the Table 7. Inclusion of the
state/year controls has virtually no effect on the estimated effect of parental education and the
First-stage F-statistics remain strong.17 In the next column we include regional trends along with
the additional control variables. The inclusion of the regional trends has virtually no impact on
the estimated effect of father’s education, but it does reduce the estimated coefficient on
mother’s education when the dependent variable is <MEDIAN-GRD, and it is no longer
statistically different from zero.
We have also estimated our regressions with state-specific trends, but we find that this
greatly reduces the first-stage power of our excluded instruments. It is thus not possible to
separately identify the effects of the state-specific timing of compulsory schooling law changes

17

The estimated coefficients in the single-parent sample are hardly affected by the inclusion of state controls, but the
estimated standard error increases so that the statistical significance of the estimates is reduced.

26

from the effects of other, unobserved state-specific trends. Perhaps this should not be surprising
given that over the period we study most states experienced both upward trends in educational
attainment and increases in compulsory schooling requirements. We note, however, that in order
for our IV estimates to be biased unobserved state trends would have to be correlated with
educational outcomes for children that are observed many years later, and often in different
states (35% of our children do not reside in their parent’s state of birth). We also note that the
estimated coefficients produced by IV regressions that include state trends are very similar to
those that were previously reported, but that their accompanying standard error estimates are
much larger.
Another way of exploring the possibility that our results are driven by unobserved state
trends is to replicate our analysis using only the subset of states and periods for which there was
a decrease in the minimum required years of schooling. We, therefore, create a subsample that
includes all state/year cells from five years prior to a decline in the minimum schooling
requirement through the five years following the law change.18 Like the rest of the country these
states experienced a positive trend in average educational attainment in spite of the fact that their
compulsory schooling requirements were falling, but because their compulsory schooling laws
are moving in the opposite direction, the IV estimates for this sample are less likely to be driven
by underlying trends that affect educational attainment. Table 8 shows that restricting the
sample in this way has virtually no effect on the estimates, although the estimates for children in
single-parent families are no longer statistically significant in the <MEDIAN-GRD specification.
Next, we compare estimates across samples that include different subsets of years during
which the parent turned age 14. If the law changes affect only particular periods, then some
18

If a state experienced an increase in required years of schooling during the five year period after the initial law
change then it is dropped from the sample. If a second decline in required years occurred during the five year period
then the state is included in the sample.

27

other period-specific event may be behind the identifying variation. For brevity, we focus only
on the estimates for <MEDIAN-GRD. The results presented in Table 9 look remarkably similar
across the different cohorts, with estimates of the effect of each parent’s education level ranging
between 4 and 7%.

Furthermore, there is no apparent trend in the magnitude of the estimates

over time.
Finally, we estimate the effect of parental education on children’s human capital using a
sample that excludes children who are living in the same state in which their parents were born.
What is nice about this sample of “movers” is that even if unobserved factors in the parent’s state
of birth influenced the parent’s education decision they will not be related to the current
educational environment in the child’s state. The results from this exercise are shown in the first
column of each panel in Table 10 and are very similar to those for the full sample. We can also
restrict our identifying variation even further by including interactions between the parent’s age
and current state of residence.19 This leaves us with only cross-sectional variation in compulsory
schooling laws and removes any remaining possibility that the estimated effects of parental
education reflect unobserved within parental-state-of-birth changes over time. By comparing the
estimates produced by this very restrictive specification to those in columns 1 and 3, we can
compare estimates using purely cross-sectional variation to those combining cross-sectional and
time-series variation. A finding that these two different sources of identification produce similar
results should help to alleviate concerns about instrument exogeneity.
In fact, although this restriction reduces the estimates substantially, they are still
statistically different from zero, and suggest that a one year increase in parental education will
reduce the probability of repeating a grade by approximately two percentage points. The smaller
estimates may indicate that some of our identification is, indeed, coming off of state trends and
19

In order to include state of residence dummies, we run these regressions at the individual level.

28

that the “true” effect of parental education is somewhat lower than the previous tables suggest.
Nevertheless, it is striking that we continue to find a positive and statistically significant effect
whether our identification is confined to cross-sectional or time-series variation.

V.F. Simultaneous Estimation of Mothers’ and Fathers’ Education Effects
Our analyses so far have focused on the relationship between one parent’s education and
her child’s human capital, but an advantage of our data is that we have information on each
parent’s educational attainment. In principle, therefore, we can test the hypothesis that mothers’
education is more influential than fathers’ and vs. versa. Previous authors have speculated that
because mothers and fathers tend to form different types of relationships with their children, the
effect of their relative education levels may also be quite different. Behrman and Rosenzweig,
for example, find no evidence that the level of mother’s education has a positive effect on her
child’s outcome but do find evidence that more highly educated fathers tend to raise more highly
educated children. One explanation for their finding is that more highly educated women are
less likely to stay home, which may have a detrimental affect on their children’s development.
Although the estimates presented in the previous tables are based on regressions that include
only one parent’s level of education, they represent the combined effect of each parent’s
education together with any effect that results from assortative mating. In order to determine the
relative importance of each parent’s education level one must include them in the same
regression.
Table 11 shows how the estimates of parental education are affected when mother’s and
father’s education are included in the same equation. We find that the combined estimates on
each parent’s education are about the same as when they are estimated separately and that the

29

estimates are always jointly significant. The standard error estimates are much higher, however,
and the estimates are not individually significantly different from zero or from each other. This
is not surprising since our identification strategy rests on variation across states and over time,
and mothers and fathers are often close in age and from the same state. Unfortunately, the
imprecision of the estimates means that it is impossible to say anything about each parent’s
relative importance in the transmission process.

VI.

Conclusion
This paper provides new evidence on the causal effect of parental education across

generations. The limited literature on the intergenerational effects of parental education has
struggled to find appropriate identification strategies; we draw on variation in compulsory
schooling laws, which are arguably exogenous with respect to children’s outcomes fifteen or
more years later. Using data from the 1960-1980 Census files, we estimate that an increase in
parental education of one year will reduce a child’s probability of being retained by between 2
and 7 percentage points. Since grade retention is negatively correlated with other academic
outcomes, the positive effect of parental education on children’s grade progression is likely to
have long-term socio-economic benefits as well.
Identification of a causal effect of parental education implies that at least some of the
intergenerational transmission of inequality can be attributed to environmental influences. There
are many ways in which higher levels of parental education might affect a child’s environment,
including increases in family income, better parenting, and improved social networks.
Understanding the mechanism by which parental education increases children’s human capital is
an important question that deserves further research. Nevertheless, our results are encouraging,

30

as they suggest that government intervention may be able to play a role in altering
intergenerational immobility. Specifically, knowing that there are intergenerational returns to
increased schooling provides a further rationale for programs that provide educational assistance.
More generally, our results draw attention to the social externalities that are associated
with education. While much research has been devoted to understanding the private returns to
education via individual wage effects, designing effective education policy hinges crucially on
taking the full social costs and benefits into account. There is increasing evidence that the social
returns to education are substantial20 and our estimates suggest yet another dimension along
which positive externalities occur. Taken together, these findings indicate that the total returns
to education may be seriously underrepresented by estimates that focus only on individual wage
effects.

20

Currie and Moretti, 2002; Moretti, 2003; Lochner and Moretti, 2001.

31

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Angrist, “How Large are the Social Returns to Education?
Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper #7444, December 1999.
Aigner, Dennis J., “Regression with a Binary Dependent Variable Subject to Errors of
Observation,” Journal of Econometrics, 1 (1): 49-59. (1973)
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger, “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect
Schooling and Earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4), November 1991..
Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens and Donald B. Rubin, “Identification of Causal Effects
Using Instrumental Variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 1996.
Antonovics, Kate, and Arthur S. Goldberger, “Do Educated Women Make Bad Mothers? Twin
Studies of the Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital” Mimeo, 2003.
Behrman Jere R., and Mark R. Rosenzweig “Does Increasing Women’s Schooling Raise the
Schooling of the Next Generation?” American Economic Review, 92:1, March 2002, 323-334.
Behrman, Jere R., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Paul Taubman, “Endowments and the Allocation of
Schooling in the Family and in the Marriage Market: The Twins Experiment,” Journal of
Political Economy, 102 (6), 1994, pp. 1131-74.
Bjorklund, A., M. Jantii, O. Raaum, E. Osterback, and T. Eriksson, “Brother Correlations in
Earnings in Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden Compared to the United States,” Journal of
Population Economics, Vol. 15, 2002, pp. 757-772.
Black, Sandra, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salanes “Is Education Inherited? Understanding
Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital.” Mimeo, UCLA, 2003.
Bound, John, David A. Jaeger, and Regina Baker, “Problems with Instrumental Variables
Estimation when the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explanatory
Variables is Weak,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 1995, 90(430), 443-50.
Bound, John, and David A. Jaeger, “On the Validity of Season of Birth as an Instrument in Wage
Equations: A Comment on Angrist and Krueger’s “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect
Schooling and Earnings”,” NBER Working Paper 5835, November 1996.
Cascio, Elizabeth, “School Progression and the Grade Distribution of Students: A Validation
Study Using the Current Population Survey,” mimeo, June 2003.

32

Chevalier, Arnaud, “Parental Education and Child’s Education: A Natural Experiment,” mimeo,
University College Dublin. 2003.
Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti, “Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational Transmission of
Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings and Longitudinal Data,” working paper,
August 2002.
Feldman, S. “Passing on Failure,” American Educator, 21(3), Fall 1997, 4-10.
Griliches, Zvi. “Sibling Models and Data in Economics: Beginnings of a Survey.” Journal of
Political Economy. Part 2, October 1979; 87(5):S37-64.
Goldin, Claudia and Laurence Katz, “Mass Secondary Schooling and the State: The Role of State
Compulsion in the High School Movement,” mimeo, Harvard University, 2003.
Harmon, Colm and Ian Walker, “Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling for the United
Kingdom,” American Economic Review, December 1995, pp. 1278-86.
Hausman, Jerry, “Mismeasured Variables in Econometric Analysis: Problems from the Right
and Problems from the Left.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15 (4): 57-68.
Landes, William and Lewis C. Solomon, “Compulsory Schooling Legislation: An Economic
Analysis of Law and Social Change in the Nineteenth Century,” Journal of Economic History,
March 1972.
Lleras-Muney, “Were Compulsory Attendance and Child Labor Laws Effective? An Analysis
From 1915 to 1939,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8563, October
2001.
Lleras-Muney, “The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in the United States,”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8986, June 2002.
Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti, “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from Prison
Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
8605, 2001.
Moretti, Enrico, “Human Capital Externalities in Cities,” Handbook of Regional and Urban
Economics, North Holland-Elsevier, forthcoming, 2003.
National Center for Education Statistics, “Dropout Rates in the United States,” NCES research
paper, No. 97-473, 1995.
Oreopoulos, P., “Do Dropouts Drop Out Too Soon? Evidence Using Changes in School Leaving
Laws,” Mimeo, University of Toronto, 2003.

33

Resnick, M.D., Bearman, P.S., Blum, R.W., Bauman, K.E., Harris, K.M., Jones, J., Tabor, J.,
Beuhring, T., Sieving, R., Shew, M., Irreland, M., Bearinger, L.H., Udry, J.R., “Protecting
Adolescents from Harm: Findings from the National Longitudinal Study on Adolescent Health,”
Journal of the American Medical Association, September 10 1997, 278: 823-832.
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “Are There Increasing Returns to the
Intergenerational Production of Human Capital? Maternal Schooling and Child Intellectual
Achievement,” Journal of Human Resources, 29:2, Spring 1994, 670-693.
Sacerdote, Bruce “The Nature and Nurture of Economics Outcomes,” Mimeo, August 30, 2000.
Schmidt, Stefanie, “School Quality, Compulsory Education Laws, and the Growth of American
High School Attendance, 1915-1935,” MIT Ph.D. Dissertation 1996.
Smith, M.L. and L. Shepard, eds., Flunking Grades: Research and Policies on Retention, 1989,
New York, Falmer Press.
Solon, Gary, “Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market,” Chapter 29 in Handbook of
Labor Economics, Vol. 3A, Ashenfelter, O. and D. Card (eds.), North Holland Press, 1999,
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock, “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
Instruments,” Econometrica, 65 (3), May 1997.

34

Table 1
State Mandatory Schooling Laws by Year
Number of States with Mandatory Years of:

1915
1920
1925
1930
1935
1940
1945
1950
1955
1960
1965
1970

< 7 years

< 8 years

< 9 years

Total States
observed

32
30
15
14
9
7
7
5
3
4
3
3

46
47
33
29
21
21
21
15
15
12
11
9

47
47
48
48
48
47
47
34
32
31
29
23

47
47
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
41

Table 2
First Stage: Effects of Compulsory Schooling Laws on Parents' Education
Dependent Variable: Parents' Highest Grade of Schooling:
Years of schooling required
before work permit

all

Dual Parent Families
Fathers
<12th Grade >12th Grade
all

Mothers
<12th Grade >12th Grade

all

Single Parent Families
Heads
<12th Grade >12th Grade

7 years

0.205
(0.043)

0.204
(0.039)

0.045
(0.030)

0.206
(0.040)

0.202
(0.042)

0.033
(0.029)

0.282
(0.080)

0.123
(0.075)

0.185
(0.074)

8 years

0.312
(0.038)

0.280
(0.038)

-0.025
(0.027)

0.298
(0.035)

0.303
(0.038)

-0.006
(0.026)

0.464
(0.072)

0.348
(0.067)

0.029
(0.064)

9 years

0.524
(0.050)

0.496
(0.051)

0.017
(0.036)

0.510
(0.044)

0.439
(0.046)

0.031
(0.033)

0.733
(0.085)

0.547
(0.085)

0.085
(0.081)

711,072

711,072

711,072

711,072

711,072

711,072

129,771

129,771

129,771

Adj. R2

0.890

0.809

0.454

0.845

0.753

0.472

0.688

0.552

0.248

Adj. R2 without instruments

0.886

0.802

0.45

0.837

0.742

0.472

0.681

0.544

0.247

F-Test: Instruments = 0

46.4

34.4

3.9

59

36.9

1.5

32.2

19.6

2.2

Initial Sample Size
Cell Mean Sample Size

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for parent's birth year, state of birth, and census year. Additional controls include race, gender age, and asian ethnicity.
Data are grouped into means by parent's birth year, state of birth, and census year, and weighted by cell population size. Huber-White standard errors are shown
from clustering by birth cohort and state of birth. The ommited compulsory school law variable indicates whether the minimum years of schooling required before
able to obtain a work permit was 6 or less. Samples include all children aged 7 to 15 with U.S. born parents aged 14 between 1915 and 1969. Standard errors are in
parenthesis. See text for more data specifics.

Table 3
Reduced Form Effects of Parents' Compulsory Schooling Laws on Children's Educational Attainment
Education Attainment of:
Fathers

Mothers

Single Parents

Dependent Variable:
Years of schooling required
before work permit

REPEAT

<MEDIAN
GRD

REPEAT

<MEDIAN
GRD

REPEAT

<MEDIAN
GRD

7 years

-0.015
(0.003)

-0.012
(0.003)

-0.016
(0.003)

-0.010
(0.003)

-0.009
(0.007)

-0.009
(0.007)

8 years

-0.022
(0.003)

-0.018
(0.003)

-0.021
(0.003)

-0.014
(0.003)

-0.021
(0.006)

-0.015
(0.006)

9 years

-0.040
(0.004)

-0.031
(0.004)

-0.039
(0.004)

-0.025
(0.004)

-0.033
(0.008)

-0.020
(0.008)

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for parent's birth year, state of birth, and census year. Additional controls include race,
gender age, and asian ethnicity. Data are grouped into means by parent's birth year, state of birth, and census year, and weighted by
cell population size. Huber-White standard errors are shown from clustering by birth cohort and state of birth. The ommited
compulsory school law variable indicates whether the minimum years of schooling required before able to obtain a work permit was
6 or less. Samples include all children aged 7 to 15 with U.S. born parents aged 14 between 1915 and 1969. Standard errors are in
parenthesis. See text for more data specifics.

Table 4
OLS Estimates of Effect of Parent's Education on Children's Education

Repeat

<MEDIAN
GRD

Dual Parent: Father's Education

-0.030
(0.001)

-0.029
(0.001)

Dual Parent: Mother's Education

-0.036
(0.001)

-0.036
(0.001)

Single Parent: Household Head

-0.029
(0.002)

-0.026
(0.002)

Dependent Var:
Full Sample

Parent's Education < 12 years
Dual Parent: Father's Education

-0.038
(0.002)

-0.037
(0.002)

Dual Parent: Mother's Education

-0.040
(0.002)

-0.041
(0.002)

Single Parent: Household Head

-0.027
(0.002)

-0.024
(0.002)

Parent's Education > 12 years
Dual Parent: Father's Education

-0.009
(0.002)

-0.011
(0.002)

Dual Parent: Mother's Education

-0.006
(0.002)

-0.009
(0.003)

Single Parent: Household Head

-0.011
(0.003)

-0.008
(0.003)

Table 5
IV Effects of Parental Education on Children's Education and Parent's Earnings
Dependent Variable:
Repeat

<MEDIAN
GRD

Parent's Log
Annual Earnings

Full Sample
Dual Parent: Father's Education

-0.076
(0.007)

-0.059
(0.007)

0.115
(0.015)

Dual Parent: Mother's Education

-0.075
(0.006)

-0.049
(0.006)

0.205
(0.038)

Single Parent: Household Head

-0.048
(0.009)

-0.027
(0.009)

0.202
(0.039)

Parent's Education < 12 years
Dual Parent: Father's Education

-0.082
(0.011)

-0.073
(0.011)

Dual Parent: Mother's Education

-0.081
(0.012)

-0.062
(0.013)

Single Parent: Household Head

-0.043
(0.016)

-0.021
(0.016)

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for parent's birth year, state of birth, and census
year. Additional controls include race, gender age, and asian ethnicity. Data are grouped
into means by parent's birth year, state of birth, and census year, and weighted by cell
population size. Huber-White standard errors are shown from clustering by birth cohort and
state of birth. Samples include all children aged 7 to 15 with U.S. born parents aged 14
between 1915 and 1969. Standard errors are in parenthesis. See text for more data
specifics.

Table 6
IV Effects of Parents Education on the Probability of Dropping Out of High School
Mean
Dropouts

OLS

IV

Number of
Cells

15-18 year olds
Dual Parent: Father's Education

0.07

-0.017
(0.001)

-0.034
(0.005)

5,047

Dual Parent: Mother's Education

0.07

-0.022
(0.001)

-0.048
(0.006)

5,047

Single Parent: Household Head

0.134

-0.020
(0.001)

-0.030
(0.008)

5,047

15-16 year olds
Dual Parent: Father's Education

0.045

-0.012
(0.001)

-0.022
(0.005)

4,887

Dual Parent: Mother's Education

0.045

-0.016
(0.001)

-0.035
(0.007)

4,887

Single Parent: Household Head

0.082

-0.013
(0.002)

-0.018
(0.010)

3,817

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for parent's birth year, state of birth, and census year. Additional controls
include race, gender age, and asian ethnicity. Data are grouped into means by parent's birth year, state of birth, and
census year, and weighted by cell population size. Huber-White standard errors are shown from clustering by birth
cohort and state of birth. Samples include all children aged 15 to 18 or 15 to 16 residing with a parent that was aged 14
between 1915 and 1969. Standard errors are in parenthesis. See text for more data specifics.

Table 7
Sensitivity of IV Estimates to Additional Controls
Father's Education

Mother's Education

Single Parent's Education

Outcome Variable
IV Coefficients
Repeat

-0.082
(0.011)

-0.087
(0.013)

-0.085
(0.022)

-0.081
(0.012)

-0.079
(0.010)

-0.068
(0.017)

-0.048
(0.009)

-0.053
(0.017)

-0.039
(0.031)

<MEDIAN GRD

-0.073
(0.011)

-0.061
(0.012)

-0.064
(0.020)

-0.062
(0.013)

-0.041
(0.010)

-0.022
(0.019)

-0.027
(0.009)

-0.023
(0.017)

-0.020
(0.032)

no
no

yes
no

yes
yes

no
no

yes
no

yes
yes

no
no

yes
no

yes
yes

Census Parent's St Cntrls
Parent's Regional Trends

First Stage
Years of schooling required before work permit
7 years

0.205
(0.043)

0.106
(0.038)

0.098
(0.037)

0.206
(0.040)

0.096
(0.035)

0.051
(0.037)

0.282
(0.080)

0.087
(0.069)

0.088
(0.070)

8 years

0.312
. 0382

0.114
(0.033)

0.100
(0.033)

0.298
(0.035)

0.118
(0.029)

0.066
(0.030)

0.464
(0.072)

0.133
(0.061)

0.113
(0.062)

9 or more years

0.524
(0.050)

0.293
(0.044)

0.191
(0.043)

0.510
(0.044)

0.309
(0.038)

0.174
(0.039)

0.733
(0.085)

0.368
(0.073)

0.232
(0.075)

46.4

17

6.9

59

30.1

10.3

23

12.5

3.8

F-statistic (instruments)

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for parent's birth year, state of birth, and census year. Additional controls include race, gender age, and asian
ethnicity. Census Parent's State Controls include fraction in state black, in the labor force, in the manufacturing sector, residing on a farm, and average age.
Data are grouped into means by parent's birth year, state of birth, and census year, and weighted by cell population size. Huber-White standard errors are
shown from clustering by birth cohort and state of birth. Samples include all children aged 7 to 15 with U.S. born parents aged 14 between 1915 and 1969.
Standard errors are in parenthesis. See text for more data specifics.

Table 8
OLS and IV Estimates for States with a Downward Change in Mandatory School Years

Repeat

<MEDIAN
GRD

Dual Parent: Father's Education

-0.032
(0.002)

-0.032
(0.002)

1009

Dual Parent: Mother's Education

-0.040
(0.003)

-0.040
(0.003)

1009

Single Parent: Household Head

-0.027
(0.004)

-0.022
(0.004)

929

Dual Parent: Father's Education

-0.060
(0.017)

-0.069
(0.019)

1009

Dual Parent: Mother's Education

-0.070
(0.013)

-0.067
(0.015)

1009

Single Parent: Household Head

-0.051
(0.022)

-0.018
(0.024)

929

Dependent Variable:

Cell-size

OLS

IV

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for parent's birth year, state of birth, and census year.
Additional controls include race, gender age, and asian ethnicity. Data are grouped into means by
parent's birth year, state of birth, and census year, and weighted by cell population size. HuberWhite standard errors are shown from clustering by birth cohort and state of birth. Standard errors
are in parenthesis. See text for more data specifics.

Table 9
IV Effects of Parent's Education on Child's Education for Different Cohorts of Parents
Year when Parent Aged 14
Full
Sample

1915 - 44

1920 - 49

1925 - 54

1930 - 59

1935 - 64

1940 - 69

Father's
Education

-0.0573
(0.006)

-0.0362
(0.019)

-0.0744
(0.021)

-0.0625
(0.010)

-0.0555
(0.008)

-0.0482
(0.009)

-0.0572
(0.015)

Mother's
Education

-0.0491
(0.006)

-0.0681
(0.014)

-0.0556
(0.015)

-0.0516
(0.010)

-0.049
(0.008)

-0.0389
(0.009)

-0.0359
(0.015)

Single Parent's
Education

-0.0273
(0.009)

-0.0475
(0.045)

-0.0439
(0.020)

-0.0369
(0.013)

-0.0354
(0.011)

-0.0206
(0.013)

-0.0028
(0.026)

48

44

44

34

36

33

34

number of states
that changed laws
(out of 49)

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for parent's birth year, state of birth, and census year. Additional controls
include race, gender age, and asian ethnicity. Data are grouped into means by parent's birth year, state of birth, and
census year, and weighted by cell population size. Huber-White standard errors are shown from clustering by birth
cohort and state of birth. The full sample includes all children aged 7 to 15 with U.S. born parents aged 14 between
1915 and 1969. Standard errors are in parenthesis. See text for more data specifics.

Table 10
IV Estimates for Sample of Children in States Different from parent's State of Birth
Dependent Variable:

REPEAT

<MEDIAN-GRD

OLS
Dual Parent: Father's Education

-0.016
(0.000)

-0.017
(0.000)

-0.017
(0.000)

-0.018
(0.000)

Dual Parent: Mother's Education

-0.022
(0.000)

-0.022
(0.000)

-0.024
(0.000)

-0.024
(0.000)

Single Parent: Household Head

-0.023
(0.001)

-0.023
(0.001)

-0.022
(0.004)

-0.025
(0.001)

IV
Dual Parent: Father's Education

-0.071
(0.012)

-0.024
(0.003)

-0.073
(0.013)

-0.026
(0.003)

Dual Parent: Mother's Education

-0.064
(0.010)

-0.022
(0.005)

-0.064
(0.011)

-0.029
(0.006)

Single Parent: Household Head

-0.041
(0.017)

-0.020
(0.010)

-0.041
(0.018)

-0.027
(0.010)

Parent's Birthplace Dummies

Yes

No

Yes

No

State of Residence*Parent's
BirthPlace Dummies

No

Yes

No

Yes

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for parent's birth year, state of birth, and census year.
Additional controls include race, gender age, and asian ethnicity. Data are grouped into means by
parent's birth year, state of birth, and census year, and weighted by cell population size. Huber-White
standard errors are shown from clustering by birth cohort and state of birth. Standard errors are in
parenthesis. See text for more data specifics.

Table 11
Estimated Simultaneous Effects of Parental Education

Repeat

<MEDIAN
GRD

Dual Parent: Father's Education

-0.010
(0.000)

-0.011
(0.000)

1009

Dual Parent: Mother's Education

-0.018
(0.000)

-0.019
(0.000)

1009

Dual Parent: Father's Education

-0.040
(0.037)

-0.089
(0.046)

1009

Dual Parent: Mother's Education

-0.032
(0.042)

0.045
(0.053)

1009

124.9

45.3

Dependent Variable:

Cell-size

OLS

IV

F-test: Father and Mother's
Education Effect = 0

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for parent's birth year, state of birth, and
census year. Additional controls include race, gender age, and asian ethnicity. Data are
grouped into means by parent's birth year, state of birth, and census year, and weighted
by cell population size. Huber-White standard errors are shown from clustering by birth
cohort and state of birth. Standard errors are in parenthesis. See text for more data
specifics.

Appendix Table 1
Descriptive Statistics
Dual Parent Families
1960

1970

Single Parent Families

1980

Combined

1960

1970

1980

Combined

Father or Household Head among Single Parent Families
Age

40.85
(7.26)

40.43
(7.13)

39.49
(7.09)

40.29
(7.18)

38.84
(7.93)

38.22
(7.68)

36.26
(7.20)

37.49
(7.61)

Highest Grade

10.29
(3.64)

11.47
(3.39)

12.60
(3.27)

11.41
(3.56)

9.36
(3.35)

10.43
(3.06)

11.56
(2.66)

10.70
(3.08)

Mother
Age

37.51
(6.53)

37.44
(6.57)

36.78
(6.32)

37.27
(6.49)

Highest Grade

10.56
(2.88)

11.38
(2.50)

12.17
(2.41)

11.35
(2.68)
Children

Age

10.70
(2.52)

10.94
(2.55)

11.08
(2.57)

10.90
(2.55)

11.05
(2.56)

11.08
(2.57)

11.14
(2.58)

11.10
(2.57)

Highest Grade

4.22
(2.57)

4.43
(2.62)

4.55
(2.64)

4.40
(2.61)

4.43
(2.63)

4.52
(2.65)

4.55
(2.62)

4.51
(2.63)

Black

0.09

0.10

0.10

0.10

0.32

0.34

0.37

0.35

Female

0.49

0.49

0.49

0.49

0.50

0.50

0.49

0.50

REPEAT

0.15

0.15

0.15

0.15

0.25

0.21

0.21

0.22

<MEDIAN GRD

0.20

0.19

0.18

0.19

0.28

0.24

0.24

0.25

233,080

266,265

211,727

711,072

26,939

45,462

57,231

129,771

Observations

