NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHOOSING THE FEDERAL RESERVE CHAIR:
LESSONS FROM HISTORY
Christina D. Romer
David H. Romer
Working Paper 10161
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10161
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

We are grateful to Bradford DeLong, William Niskanen, Andrei Shleifer, Timothy Taylor, Michael Waldman,
and Janet Yellen for helpful comments and suggestions, and to the National Science Foundation for financial
support. This paper was prepared for the Journal of Economic Perspectives. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Choosing the Federal Reserve Chair: Lessons from History
Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer
NBER Working Paper No. 10161
December 2003
JEL No. E58, E52, E30, N12
ABSTRACT
This paper uses the lessons of history to identify the sources of monetary policy successes and failures in the
past and to suggest a strategy for choosing successful Federal Reserve chairs in the future. It demonstrates
that since at least the mid-1930s, the key determinant of the quality of monetary policy has been
policymakers’ beliefs about how the economy functions and what monetary policy can accomplish. When
the Federal Reserve chairman and other policymakers have believed that inflation is costly, that inflation
responds to the deviation of output from a moderate estimate of capacity, and that monetary policy can affect
output and prices, as was the case in the 1950s and the 1980s and beyond, policy was well tempered and
macroeconomic outcomes were desirable. When policymakers held other beliefs, such as the view that
monetary policy cannot stimulate a depressed economy or that slack is ineffective in reducing inflation, as
was the case in the 1930s and the 1970s, policy and outcomes were undesirable. This finding suggests that
the key characteristic to look for in future Federal Reserve chairs is a sound economic framework. The paper
shows that the best predictor of the beliefs previous chairmen held while in office are their prior writings,
speeches, and confirmation hearings. Therefore, in choosing future chairs, it is crucial to evaluate the
intellectual frameworks of potential nominees, and to reject candidates whose views are worrisome.

Christina D. Romer
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
cromer@econ.berkeley.edu

David H. Romer
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
dromer@econ.berkeley.edu

Stable, non-inflationary growth has been the goal of monetary policymakers since the inception
of the modern Federal Reserve in the mid-1930s. It is clear, however, that policymakers have come
closer to achieving this goal in some eras than in others. Under chairmen William McChesney Martin Jr.
in the 1950s and early 1960s and Alan Greenspan in the late 1980s and beyond, the Federal Reserve
presided over decades of low inflation and mild real fluctuations. Under Paul Volcker in the 1980s, the
Federal Reserve oversaw a significant recession, but one that returned the American economy to near
price stability and steady growth. In contrast, under Marriner Eccles in the late 1930s, the Federal
Reserve triggered a recession that was second in severity only to the Great Depression and that resulted in
severe deflation. And under Arthur Burns and G. William Miller in the 1970s, the U.S. economy
experienced high and rising inflation and painfully variable real growth.
An obvious question is why monetary policy has been so much more successful under some
Federal Reserve chairmen than others. This question has taken on new urgency because current chairman
Alan Greenspan will need to be replaced in the near future. It is therefore crucial to understand what has
determined policy success in the past and to identify factors that help predict success. Only by learning
the lessons of history will we be able to choose a new Federal Reserve chair who is likely to replicate our
policy triumphs and avoid our policy failures.
This paper demonstrates that the key determinants of policy success have been policymakers’
views about how the economy works and what monetary policy can accomplish. In the first major section
of the paper, we establish this link between beliefs and policy outcomes. We analyze the narrative record
of the Federal Reserve to discover what policymakers believed and why they chose the policies they did.
We find that the well-tempered monetary policies of the 1950s and 1980s and ‘90s stemmed from a
conviction that inflation has high costs and few benefits, together with realistic views about the
sustainable level of unemployment and the determinants of inflation. In contrast, the profligate policies
of the late 1960s and 1970s stemmed initially from a belief in a permanent tradeoff between inflation and
unemployment, and later from a natural rate framework with a highly optimistic estimate of the natural
rate and a highly pessimistic estimate of the sensitivity of inflation to slack. And the deflationary policies

2
of the late 1930s stemmed from a belief that the economy could overheat at low levels of capacity
utilization and that monetary ease could do little to stimulate a depressed economy.1
The clear implication of this link between ideas and policy outcomes is that in choosing a
successor to Alan Greenspan, the key criterion should be economic beliefs. But does the historical record
suggest ways of predicting what a Federal Reserve chair will believe while in office? In the second major
section of the paper, we find that looking at experience and resumes can provide some information.
However, much better predictions of the views that Federal Reserve chairmen held during their tenures
come from their speeches, writings, and testimony prior to being confirmed. Both Federal Reserve
chairmen with beliefs that led to moderate policies and successful outcomes, such as Greenspan, and
those with views that led to undesirable policies and poor outcomes, such as Miller, clearly revealed their
beliefs before they were appointed. Thus, the way to choose a good Federal Reserve chair is to read what
candidates have said about how the economy operates and ask them about their economic beliefs. If what
a candidate says is unrealistic or poorly reasoned, move on to another candidate or risk a replay of the
1930s or the 1970s.

THE KEY ROLE OF IDEAS IN DETERMINING POLICY AND OUTCOMES

To determine what monetary policymakers believed in different eras, we take the straightforward
approach of looking at what they said. Specifically, we examine the prevailing views within the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC) under each Federal Reserve chairman since the passage of the Banking
Act of 1935, which established the current structure of the Federal Reserve System. We omit the period
1941-50, when the Federal Reserve was committed to supporting Treasury bond prices, and therefore did
not pursue independent monetary policy. Thus, we do not analyze the end of Eccles’s tenure or Thomas
McCabe’s brief period as Federal Reserve chairman in the late 1940s and early 1950s.
The views expressed at FOMC meetings are contained in the detailed Minutes of Federal Open

3
Market Committee (abbreviated as Minutes in the following analysis), available from 1936 to 1976; the
verbatim Transcripts of Federal Open Market Committee (Transcripts), currently available from 1981 to
1997; and the brief summaries of meetings collected each year in the Annual Report of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Report). We also examine the Congressional testimony of the
Federal Reserve chairmen and other Board members collected each month in the Federal Reserve Bulletin
(Bulletin).
We use the same narrative sources to establish the link between policymakers’ beliefs and policy
actions. We look at what policymakers said they were doing and why. As a supplement to this narrative
analysis of policy, we look at estimates of the real interest rate and indicators of economic outcomes.
Table 1 presents a thumbnail guide to our findings about monetary policymakers’ beliefs and the policies
those beliefs inspired in different eras.

The Eccles Era
Marriner Eccles became Federal Reserve chairman in March 1936. The most important element
of monetary policymakers’ beliefs during the late 1930s was the notion that speculative excesses and
demand-induced inflation could occur in an economy with underused capacity.

In this view, full

employment was not the dividing line between normal and overheated conditions. Rather, it was possible
to have “the development of inflationary trends before a full recovery has been attained” (Minutes,
3/22/37, p. 6; see also 3/15/37, p. 12). This view was clearly expressed by the associate economist to the
Board. In late 1936, when unemployment was still over 13 percent, he warned that “care should be taken
to prevent any maladjustments of the economic structure from possible over-stimulation” (11/19/36, p.
2).2 Similarly, a number of FOMC members expressed concern about demand-driven inflation despite
widespread agreement that the recovery was far from complete. For example, in March 1937, George
Harrison, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said that expansionary open market
operations “might well add unwise stimulus to the inflation of prices” (3/15/37, p. 9; see also 4/3/37, p.
9).

4
Policymakers believed that a key mechanism by which inflation and speculative excess could
arise in a depressed economy was overly easy credit. The FOMC drew a distinction between “legitimate
business use” of credit and unproductive speculative uses, and worried that overly easy credit could set
off speculation in commodity and asset markets (Minutes, 3/15/37, pp. 6-7). A corollary of this view was
that the FOMC was deeply “concerned … over the current and potential effects on both the credit and
banking situation of the continued increase in the excess reserves of member banks” (11/20/36, p. 10).
The meetings in late 1936 and early 1937 were full of discussions of the dangers of the large and growing
volume of bank reserves above the statutory minimum (see, for example, 11/19/36, pp. 1-2; 1/26/37, pp.
1-8; and 3/15/37, pp. 7-8). A central reason given for this concern was that “a further increase in excess
reserves of member banks might give added impetus to existing inflationary tendencies” (3/23/37, pp. 34).
In addition, the FOMC had little faith that monetary expansion could have salutary effects. For
example, in November 1937, the economist to the Board urged monetary expansion but “not with the
thought that it would cure the situation” (Minutes, 11/29/37, p. 7). Likewise, Harrison said it was a
question “whether the System appropriately could take any action which would tend to check a recession
and to facilitate the continuation of recovery” (9/11/37, p. 9). He implied that if the depressed level of
output was not the result of tight credit, loosening would be of little value. Eccles suggested that adding
to excess reserves in a downturn could have at most “a desirable psychological effect” (12/30/38, p. 16).
Monetary policy actions in this period reflected policymakers’ beliefs. The most significant
action was a doubling of reserve requirements from August 1936 to May 1937. The Board took this step
because it feared that existing excess reserves could “create an injurious credit expansion” (Report, 1936,
p. 217). According to the statement released in July 1936 in anticipation of the first part of the increase,
“the Board decided to lock up this part of the present volume of member bank reserves as a measure of
prevention on the one hand and of further encouragement to sound business recovery and confidence in
the long-term investment market on the other hand” (p. 217). The economist to the Board argued that
raising reserve requirements would help “prevent the development of unsound and speculative situations”

5
(Minutes, 1/26/37, p. 3). Policymakers also felt that “the increase in reserve requirements was fully
justified in order to put the System in position to exercise credit control through open market operations
whenever such action appeared to be necessary” (3/15/37, p. 9; see also 1/26/37, pp. 5-7). While the
official statements stressed that such control could be used for expansion or contraction, it is clear that
what the Federal Reserve gained through the elimination of excess reserves was the ability to tighten.
Friedman and Schwartz (1963) argue forcefully that the rise in reserve requirements was the key
cause of the recession that began in May 1937. As Eccles realized shortly after the March 1937 increase,
“banks have been accustomed … to an extremely large amount of excess reserves … and … it would take
the banks some time to accustom themselves to operating with a smaller amount of excess, as evidenced
by the fact that they had sold earning assets rather than reduce their balances with correspondents”
(Minutes, 4/3/37, p. 7). Bank lending declined and the money supply fell sharply in the wake of the
increases in reserve requirements. Figure 1 shows the behavior of the unemployment rate starting in
January 1934; Figure 2 shows the behavior of the inflation rate. Unemployment rose dramatically in
1938, and prices switched from rising slowly to falling.
As the recession deepened, the FOMC largely refused to act. This response stemmed from the
belief that monetary expansion could do little to encourage recovery. For example, in December 1937,
the committee felt that “the existing volume of excess reserves and of supplies of private capital is
abundant at this time at low rates for continuance of easy credit conditions and for meeting all credit
requirements of commerce, business, and agriculture.” Therefore, “effective action to meet and overcome
the present business recession should be taken outside the field of the System’s various monetary powers”
(Minutes, 12/1/37, p. 2; see also 12/13/37, p. 2, and 3/1/38, p. 6). When the Treasury decided to monetize
gold in April 1938 to try to stimulate the economy, the FOMC actually debated whether it should sell
bonds to counteract the Treasury’s actions (4/21/38, pp. 7-10).
Figure 3 shows estimates of the ex ante real interest rate, which is arguably the most fundamental
indicator of the stance of monetary policy. The derivation of this series is discussed in the appendix. The
real interest rate was substantially negative during most of the mid-1930s, as gold inflows expanded the

6
money supply greatly and generated expectations of inflation. However, it rose markedly in the third
quarter of 1937 (to roughly zero) and was high and positive through most of the 1937-38 recession. The
Federal Reserve clearly did not take the kind of aggressive monetary expansion that might have reversed
expectations of deflation and lowered real rates. The refusal to act is even more striking when one
considers that unemployment reached 20 percent in 1938. This inaction reflects the Federal Reserve’s
belief that monetary loosening could do little to stimulate a depressed economy.

The Martin Era
William McChesney Martin Jr. was appointed Federal Reserve chairman in April 1951. The
Federal Reserve’s worldview in the first decade of Martin’s tenure was surprisingly similar to that of the
1980s and beyond (Romer and Romer, 2002b). Policymakers in this period were emphatic that higher
inflation would not increase output and employment in the long run; indeed, they believed that its longrun effects were negative. For example, Martin stated in 1958: “If inflation should begin to develop
again, it might be that the number of unemployed would be temporarily reduced …, but there would be a
larger amount of unemployment for a long time to come” (Minutes, 8/19/58, p. 57; see also 12/7/54, p.
22, and 9/22/59, p. 8). Martin often made statements very similar to ones Volcker and Greenspan would
make decades later about the importance of low inflation for long-run growth. In 1957, for example, he
said: “stability in the value of the dollar” and “sustained economic growth” “are inseparable. Price
stability is essential to sustainable growth. Inflation fosters maladjustments” (Bulletin, August 1957, p.
869; see also March 1952, p. 244, and February 1959, p. 118.). Indeed, Martin may have taken aversion
to inflation to an extreme; for example, he argued that “a gradual rise in prices …, averaging perhaps 2
per cent a year,” if allowed to continue indefinitely, “would work incalculable hardship” (August 1957, p.
872).
In addition, policymakers had an intuitive natural rate framework of inflation dynamics. For
example, in 1955 one member of the FOMC said, “The economy was moving nearer capacity in many
respects, and as this point approached less efficient means of production would be utilized and prices

7
would tend to rise” (Minutes, 10/4/55, p. 8). Similarly, in 1953, Martin stated, “when an economy is
running at peak levels of production and employment, creating more money will not create more things to
buy. It can only bid up the prices of available supplies” (Bulletin, May 1953, p. 453). On the flip side,
members of the FOMC believed that slack was needed to reduce inflation. In 1958, Martin stated that he
“hoped that inflation would not get out of hand to such an extent that a very serious price would have to
be paid for its correction” (Minutes, 1/6/59, p. 37). There was much discussion in late 1958 and 1959 of
the “rampant inflationary psychology,” and a clear sense that prolonged slowness was needed to change
expectations (2/10/59, p. 22; see also 8/19/58, p. 59).
Policymakers also had moderate estimates of sustainable unemployment and capacity. In early
August 1956, when unemployment had been 4.4 percent the month before, Martin said that “The wagecost spiral needs no comment,” since “we were bordering on a state of over-employment” (Minutes,
8/7/56, p. 32). And in mid-1959, when unemployment was hovering near 5 percent, the economist to the
Board stated, “The economy is approaching the limits of resource utilization” (6/16/59, p. 6).
Finally, policymakers in the 1950s, in contrast to their predecessors in the 1930s, believed that
monetary policy could help both limit expansion in good times and stimulate recovery during recessions.
As Martin said in 1952:

“Basically, the job of the Federal Reserve System is that of monetary

management – to increase the money supply and make it more easily available when there is evidence of
weakness in the economy and to reduce the volume of money and make it less easily available when
indications show that there is excessive expansion” (Bulletin, April 1952, p. 348). He later gave the more
colorful description: “Our purpose is to lean against the winds of deflation or inflation, whichever way
they are blowing” (U.S. Senate, 1956, p. 5). This view has remained a fundamental tenet of Federal
Reserve policymakers throughout the postwar era.
Policymakers’ beliefs were central to the conduct of policy in the 1950s. The notion that
monetary policy could stimulate a depressed economy led the Federal Reserve to loosen substantially in
the recessions of 1953-54 and 1957-58. For example, the FOMC adopted a program of “active ease” in

8
September 1953 (Minutes, 9/8/53, p. 12), and had as the primary goal of monetary policy “avoiding
deflationary tendencies” (9/24/53, p. 29).
More importantly, the belief that inflation was very costly, coupled with the modern view of the
determinants of inflation, led to strong actions to control inflation in mid and late 1950s. Indeed, in an
episode that deserves to be called the Martin disinflation, the FOMC was so concerned about the rise in
inflation to slightly over 3 percent in 1958 that it moved to a highly restrictive stance just after the trough
of the recession.

Martin stated, “The remedy for the inflation ... was bound to be disagreeable but the

problem required taking a stand” (Minutes, 9/9/58, p. 50). Another member said, “the country was going
to have inflation and ... there must be serious shock treatment” (9/9/58, p. 27). These views were widely
shared on the FOMC (see, for example, 5/26/59, pp. 17, 37, and 6/16/59, p. 30).
Figure 3 shows that real interest rates were on average moderate in the 1950s. The Federal
Reserve lowered real interest rates in response to the recessions of 1953-54 and 1957-58, and raised them
substantially in response to inflation in 1957 and 1959-60.

The fact that policymakers responded

forcefully to economic conditions, but had no systematic tendency toward expansion or contraction, is
consistent with their generally moderate beliefs. The result of these policies was that inflation was low
and real fluctuations were small. As Figure 2 shows, inflation was typically under 2 percent in the 1950s
and early 1960s. Figure 1 shows that there were three recessions between 1950 and 1961, but that they
were typically short and fairly mild.
The prevailing intellectual framework at the Federal Reserve changed radically in the 1960s,
however. Interestingly, this is one time when the chairman’s views did not dominate the FOMC. Martin
continued to hold the same views he held in the 1950s.3 But he also believed that policy should be made
by consensus, and that the Federal Reserve’s independence was – and should be – limited (Kettl, 1986,
and Meltzer, 2003). As a result, when the Administration and other FOMC members adopted the “New
Economics,” Martin acquiesced.
A key feature of the Administration’s beliefs was that there was a permanent unemploymentinflation tradeoff, so that “the choice of the ideal level of utilization is a social judgment that requires a

9
balancing of national goals of high employment and reasonable price stability” (Economic Report of the
President, 1969, p. 62).

Furthermore, Administration policymakers believed that 4 percent

unemployment was a “reasonable and prudent” goal for aggregate demand policy (1962, p. 46). The
Federal Reserve’s acquiescence to these beliefs is revealed by the numerous deferential references in the
Minutes for this period to the Administration’s views and goals (see, for example, 2/13/62, p. 5; 5/29/62,
p. 11; and 3/1/66, p. 44).
The new views were also expressed in the Federal Reserve’s own discussions. In 1966, for
example, the staff referred to “the trade-off between reduced unemployment and price stability” (Minutes,
1/11/66, p. 23). In 1962, with unemployment fluctuating around 5.5 percent, the staff believed that
activity could not “be said even to approach an adequate level of resource utilization” (8/21/62, p. 5).
And in early 1968, when unemployment was 3.7 percent and the FOMC expected rapid real GNP growth,
the Committee’s main concern was not that inflation might increase, but merely that it might continue
(Report, 1968, p. 115; see also p. 117).
The change in views had a major impact on monetary policy in the second half of the 1960s.4
Despite rapid output growth, high resource use, and rising inflation, the FOMC did not tighten. The real
interest rate series in Figure 3 is essentially flat at a moderate level over this period. The reason appears
to have been policymakers’ belief in a long-run tradeoff and their optimistic assessments of the
economy’s capacity. A typical sentiment was that of the member who said in early 1968 that he “did not
think the Committee should change its position. There was considerable evidence that the main thrust of
existing inflationary pressures might be of a short-run nature, and that those pressures might end by the
middle of 1968” (Minutes, 1/9/68, pp. 68-69).

Armed with expansionary fiscal policy and

accommodative monetary policy, the economy expanded rapidly, with unemployment dropping to 3.4
percent. Inflation began to creep up; by the end of the decade it was 6 percent.
There was a final shift in views at the very end of Martin’s tenure. The Nixon Administration’s
policymakers (under the leadership of chief domestic policy adviser Arthur Burns) believed that the
change in inflation depended on the gap between actual unemployment and the natural rate, and thus that

10
there was no long-run tradeoff. The new administration’s first Economic Report argued that “inflations
have seldom ended without a temporary rise in unemployment,” and that under the disinflationary
policies it intended to follow, in the short run “output will be below its potential and the rate of inflation,
while declining, will probably still be too high” (1970, pp. 21, 65). Since Martin’s own beliefs were still
those he had held in the 1950s, he welcomed this shift in views (Wells, 1994). And the steady increases
in inflation in the second half of the 1960s led other monetary policymakers to conclude once again that
inflation was highly inertial. For example, at the December 1968 FOMC meeting, most members
expressed deep concern about inflationary expectations and inflationary psychology (Minutes, 12/17/68).
In early 1969 Martin, testified that “Expectations of inflation are deeply embedded” (Bulletin, March
1969, p. 238).
However, although policymakers adopted – or returned to – the natural-rate framework, they did
not abandon their optimistic assessments of the economy’s capacity.

Administration policymakers

estimated the natural rate of unemployment at 3.8 percent and the growth rate of potential output at 4.3
percent per year (Economic Report, 1970, p. 79). The Federal Reserve staff had similar views (Bulletin,
March 1969, pp. 245, 251).
The shift in views led the Federal Reserve to tighten substantially beginning in late 1968.
Consistent with the natural rate framework, Martin believed that policy needed to reduce output below
trend and hold it there until inflation came down. He stated: “A slowing in expansion that is widely
expected to be temporary is not likely to be enough to eradicate ... expectations [of inflation]. ... The
critical test for stabilization policies in 1969 will be their ability to keep ... a rebound in activity and prices
from developing” (Bulletin, March 1969, p. 238). The real interest rate rose roughly 2 percentage points,
and the economy entered a recession at the end of 1969.

The Burns Era
Arthur Burns became Federal Reserve chairman in February 1970. Initially, there was substantial
continuity in beliefs from the end of the Martin era: policymakers believed in the natural rate framework

11
with a very optimistic estimate of the natural rate. For example, Burns testified in February 1970 that
because of monetary and fiscal restraint, “this January the unemployment rate again approached 4
percent,” and “We must now have the patience to wait for the improvement in price performance that will
eventually result” (Bulletin, March 1970, pp. 248-49). The staff forecasts presented at the meetings in
1970 consistently predicted renewed growth, but nevertheless some moderation in inflation (see, for
example, Report, 1970, pp. 99, 133, 145).
The FOMC loosened substantially during Burns’s first two months as chairman and then
loosened consistently beginning in June 1970. The narrative record, while not crystal clear, certainly
suggests that the policy was motivated by economic beliefs. With unemployment at or slightly below 5
percent in previous months, policymakers believed that “expectations of continuing inflation had abated
considerably.” They voted to ease because they felt it was possible for policy to be “sufficiently
stimulative to foster moderate growth in real economic activity, but not … risk a resurgence of
inflationary expectations” (Report, 1970, pp. 148-49). Their optimistic estimate of the natural rate
appears to have made them feel that expansionary policy was not inconsistent with their goal of lowering
actual inflation to validate the reduced expectations.
When inflation failed to fall as quickly as policymakers had hoped, they responded by becoming
dramatically more pessimistic about the downward responsiveness of inflation to slack. In July 1971,
Burns testified:

A year or two ago it was generally expected that extensive slack in resource use, such as
we have been experiencing, would lead to significant moderation in the inflationary
spiral. This has not happened, either here or abroad. The rules of economics are not
working in quite the way they used to. Despite extensive unemployment in our country,
wage rate increases have not moderated.

Despite much idle industrial capacity,

commodity prices continue to rise rapidly.

And the experience of other industrial

countries … shouts warnings that even a long stretch of high and rising unemployment

12
may not suffice to check the inflationary process (Bulletin, August 1971, p. 656).

Burns suggested that the rise of public sector unions, the impact of that rise on the labor movement in
general, welfare, and other factors might be responsible for the change (Minutes, 6/8/71, p. 51). He
concluded that “monetary policy could do very little to arrest an inflation that rested so heavily on wagecost pressures. In his judgment a much higher rate of unemployment produced by monetary policy would
not moderate such pressures appreciably” (p. 51). Such views were common at the Federal Reserve in
this period (see, for example, 5/11/71, pp. 28-29, and 6/29/71, pp. 34-35).
The new view made policymakers unwilling to tolerate even modest unemployment.

For

example, in December 1971, “a number of members expressed the view that more aggressive actions to
stimulate monetary growth were needed at this time in the interest of fostering the desired expansion of
economic activity and employment” (Report, 1971, p. 199). Burns and the rest of the FOMC became
leading advocates of wage and price controls and other unconventional policies aimed at changing
inflationary expectations directly. For example, Burns testified: “it is the considered judgment of the
Federal Reserve Board that, under present conditions, monetary and fiscal policies need to be
supplemented with an incomes policy” (Bulletin, March 1971, p. 239; see also June 1971, p. 481, and
July 1971, p. 596). In taking this position, Burns was going against his allies in the White House, so there
can be no political motivation (Kettl, 1986, pp. 120-25). Instead, Burns became a vocal advocate for
controls precisely because he felt that aggregate demand restraint was no longer an effective way of
dealing with inflation (see, for example, Bulletin, July 1971, p. 596, and November 1971, pp. 917-18).
The expansionary policy pursued by the Federal Reserve in the early 1970s was reflected in the
real interest rate and economic outcomes. The real interest rate shown in Figure 3 averaged close to zero
during Burns’s first three years in office, and was at times strongly negative. Figure 1 shows that the
unemployment rate fell steadily from 1971 to late 1973. As Figure 2 shows, the price controls do appear
to have reduced inflation temporarily. However, inflation began to rise steadily once controls were
relaxed in January 1973.

That the Federal Reserve ran such expansionary policy at a time when

13
unemployment was falling and inflation was rising is exactly what one would expect given the economic
model held by monetary policymakers at the time.
In the mid-1970s, the extreme pessimism within the FOMC about the sensitivity of inflation to
slack gave way to a renewed belief that conventional aggregate demand restraint could reduce inflation.
For example, in February 1974, Burns testified: “The objective of public policy in these difficult
circumstances must be to establish a dependable framework for a gradual return to price stability over the
next few years. In this endeavor we will need to rely principally on sound management of aggregate
demand through general monetary and fiscal policies” (Bulletin, February 1974, p. 105). In contrast to
his earlier exhortations on the ineffectiveness of slack, Burns in 1974 expressed the view that “A slower
pace of economic activity, both here and abroad, may well cause a decline in the prices of industrial raw
materials and internationally traded commodities” (March 1974, p. 210).
This renewed confidence in the usefulness of slack was accompanied by an increase in estimates
of the natural rate. In February 1977, when unemployment was 7.5 percent, Burns said “As the pace of
economic activity quickens in coming months, pressures could develop for larger and more widespread
increases in wages and prices than we have recently experienced” (Bulletin, February 1977, pp. 121-22;
see also March 1977, p. 226). In December 1977, when the unemployment rate was 6.4 percent, another
FOMC member suggested that “the high rate of unemployment was a structural problem that could not be
solved with monetary policy” (Report, 1977, p. 319; see also p. 276).
This greatly increased estimate of the natural rate was also revealed in Burns’s diagnosis of the
inflation of the 1970s. He placed little emphasis on supply factors, and took pains to point out that the
inflation besetting nearly every country was the result of excessive aggregate demand stimulus. For
example, in September 1974 he testified: “For many years, our economy and that of most other nations
has been subject to an underlying inflationary bias that has merely been magnified by special influences.
… governments have often lost control of their budgets, and deficit spending has become a habitual
practice. In many countries, monetary policy has supplied an inflationary element on its own, besides
accommodating fiscal excesses” (Bulletin, October 1974, p. 703).

14
The changes in beliefs in the mid-1970s were reflected in monetary policy actions. In 1974, the
Federal Reserve adopted a significantly contractionary policy at a time when output was already falling.
The Federal Reserve was explicit about its motivation. Burns testified in August: “For a time, we should
be prepared to tolerate a slower rate of economic growth and a higher rate of unemployment than any of
us would like. A period of slow growth is needed to permit an unwinding of the inflationary processes
that have been built into our economy through years of neglect” (Bulletin, August 1974, p. 566). In
September, when unemployment was 5.9 percent, Burns stated that he “would not wish to see a prompt
recovery in economic activity. If recovery began promptly, economic activity would turn up at a time
when inflation was continuing at a two-digit rate” (Minutes, 9/10/74, p. 65). This view was seconded by
other FOMC members (see, for example, pp. 66, 68, 80).
After loosening substantially in response to the surge of unemployment in the winter of 1974-75,
the FOMC voted to raise interest rates slightly, and then pursued a policy of modest expansion. Burns
testified in June 1976 that “we resisted advice to open the tap and let money flow out in greater
abundance,” and that “Another indication of our intention to adhere to a moderate course of monetary
policy may be found in the prompt actions we took some weeks ago to ward off the threat of excessive
growth of the monetary aggregates” (Bulletin, July 1976, pp. 578-79). The Federal Reserve’s fairly
moderate course is consistent with its belief at the time that the natural rate was quite high. As Figures 1
and 2 show, the policies of the mid-1970s were accompanied by unemployment consistently over 7
percent and steady declines in inflation.
Figure 3 shows that the real interest rate rose noticeably in the mid-1970s. This is exactly what
one would expect given the move to more moderate economic beliefs. However, at the end of 1976
policy became dramatically more expansionary. Given that inflation was rising and unemployment was
falling, this expansion was a stark deviation from modern practice. Interestingly, we see no obvious
change in beliefs that would explain this behavior. Greider (1987, pp. 346-47) suggests that Burns may
have expanded in an effort to win renomination from President Carter. Thus, this appears to be one time
when politics or personal ambition, rather than economic beliefs, drove policy. Figures 1 and 2 show that

15
the loosening of policy was accompanied by a substantial fall in unemployment and a surge in inflation at
the very end of the Burns era.

The Miller Era
G. William Miller was appointed Federal Reserve chairman in March 1978. While certain
outspoken members of the FOMC did not change their views, it is clear that the model of the economy
that prevailed within the FOMC changed quite quickly. One important development was that estimates of
the natural rate became more optimistic. In April 1978, when unemployment was 6.1 percent, one
member said that “slack still existed in the utilization of industrial capacity and of the labor force,” and
this view was seconded by another member (Report, 1978, p. 162). In January 1979, with unemployment
at 5.9 percent, Miller testified that signs of tautness in the labor market were “a normal accompaniment of
economic expansion and to date have not reached troublesome dimensions” (Bulletin, February 1979, p.
119). The view that the natural rate was clearly below 5.9 percent was a decided change from the much
higher levels of the natural rate mentioned just the year before.
One sign of this new optimism was that the Federal Reserve attributed the increases in inflation in
this period to various special factors, such as reduced supplies of agricultural goods, increases in the
minimum wage, and depreciation of the dollar, rather than to demand pressure (see, for example, Bulletin,
November 1978, p, 843, and Report, 1979, p. 139). Indeed, in early 1979 Miller testified: “Even in the
absence of excessive aggregate demand pressures last year, inflation accelerated markedly” (Bulletin,
February 1979, p. 119).
This optimism was also revealed by the Federal Reserve’s views about what was needed to
reduce inflation. In November 1978, Miller testified: “If inflation is to be gradually slowed, aggregate
demand must not be permitted to expand to the point at which it presses excessively on available supplies
of labor and industrial resources. This means that real GNP at this juncture probably should not grow at
an annualized rate much above 3 percent, in line with the prospective growth of potential output”
(Bulletin, November 1978, p. 844).

The Federal Reserve clearly thought that the prevailing

16
unemployment rate of 5.9 percent was above the natural rate. And certainly, the estimated growth rate of
potential output was quite high. These optimistic beliefs are particularly striking given that by 1978 the
U.S. economy had been suffering from unemployment-increasing demographic changes and the
productivity growth slowdown for some time.
A perhaps even more important change in beliefs was the reemergence of the view that slack
could do little to reduce inflation. Miller testified in March 1978: “Our attempts to restrain inflation by
using conventional stabilization techniques have been less than satisfactory.

Three years of high

unemployment and underutilized capital stock have been costly in terms both of lost production and the
denial to many of the dignity that comes from holding a productive job. Yet, despite this period of
substantial slack in the economy, we still have a serious inflation problem” (Bulletin, March 1978, p.
193). This concern about the difficulty of reducing inflation was echoed by other members of the FOMC
(see, for example, Report, 1978, p. 210, and 1979, pp. 161-62).
Policymakers’ beliefs were again reflected in the policies they chose. Members of the FOMC
expressed grave concern about inflation and genuinely wanted to reduce it. But their optimistic estimates
of the natural rate led them to avoid seriously contractionary actions. Miller testified: “The Federal
Reserve, for its part, is continuing to pursue a monetary policy that aims at a reduction of inflationary
pressures while encouraging continued economic growth and high levels of employment” (Bulletin,
December 1978, p. 943). Policymakers’ belief that slack would have little impact on inflation reinforced
their conviction that they should avoid genuine contraction. This sentiment was expressed in 1979 when
Miller testified: “The Federal Reserve does not consider a recession desirable. ‘Stop-go’ patterns of
economic growth have … brought no lasting relief from inflation” (February 1979, p. 120).
The belief that aggregate demand restriction was not an effective way to reduce inflation also led
the Federal Reserve to advocate various non-monetary policies. In early 1978, Miller testified that
aggregate demand policies “need to be complemented by programs designed to enhance competition and
to correct structural problems, in particular labor and product markets” (Bulletin, March 1978, pp. 19394). Similarly, the February 1979 “Monetary Policy Report to Congress” concluded that “it may be

17
necessary to augment monetary and fiscal policies with carefully focused programs to facilitate job
placement and to provide skill training” (March 1979, p. 189).
Our estimate of the real interest rate given in Figure 3 was negative at the beginning of Miller’s
tenure, but then rose somewhat. Even so, as Miller himself noted on a number of occasions, “Real
interest rates … still appear to remain low by historical standards and thus continue to facilitate an
expansion of overall demands” (Bulletin, March 1979, p. 227). To run such modest real interest rates
when inflation was already high is clearly out of line with modern practice. It is also exactly what one
would expect given the Federal Reserve’s model of the economy at the time.5 The effects of Miller’s
relatively expansionary policy (as well as the lagged effects of Burns’s last hurrah) are obvious in Figures
1 and 2. The unemployment rate fell steadily in 1978 and early 1979, and inflation surged even before
the oil price shock in the second half of 1979.

The Volcker and Greenspan Eras
With the appointment of Paul Volcker as Federal Reserve chairman in August 1979, the views
guiding monetary policy changed fundamentally. The central elements of those views, however, have
remained quite stable since then, continuing after Volcker was succeeded by Alan Greenspan in August
1987.
A fundamental tenet of monetary policymakers over the past quarter century has been the critical
importance of low inflation. High inflation, in this view, disrupts the economy and depresses long-run
growth. For example, Volcker stated in 1981, “we must not lose sight of the fundamental point that so
many of the accumulated distortions and pressures in the economy can be traced to our high and stubborn
inflation.” He went on to say, “progress on inflation is a prerequisite for … sustained, balanced growth”
(Bulletin, August 1981, pp. 613, 616). Similarly, Greenspan testified in 1995, “I believe firmly that a key
ingredient in achieving the highest possible levels of productivity, real incomes, and living standards is
the achievement of price stability” (April 1995, p. 342). Indeed, both Volcker and Greenspan stressed the
benefits of low inflation virtually every time they testified to Congress about monetary policy during their

18
tenures.
A second central element of policymakers’ beliefs has been a conventional view of inflation
behavior: inflation responds to the output gap, and there is no substitute for aggregate demand restraint in
the process of disinflation. In 1980, Volcker said, “Monetary policy – restraint on growth of money and
credit – is only effective over time; but experience shows that, with perseverance, it can and will be
effective” (Bulletin, February 1980, p. 140; see also March 1980, p. 214). His comments about even mild
incomes policies were few and not encouraging (February 1980, p. 142, and August 1983, p. 604).
Greenspan held similar views of inflation dynamics. In 1993, for example, he argued that real interest
rates “persisting above [their equilibrium] level, history tells us, tend to be associated with slack,
disinflation, and economic stagnation, and rates below that level tend to be associated with eventual
resource bottlenecks and rising inflation” (September 1993, p. 853; see also April 1995, p. 342).
A final key ingredient of modern policymakers’ economic framework has been a relatively high
estimate of the natural rate. Under Volcker, policymakers believed that the level of unemployment
needed to reduce inflation was substantial. In March 1980, for example, when the staff forecast projected
unemployment to rise above 8 percent, FOMC members expected that “the underlying inflation rate
would not be reduced very much in the short run by the rather moderate contraction in activity generally
being projected” (Report, 1980, p. 108; see also 1981, p. 116). During the first decade of Greenspan’s
tenure, estimates of the natural rate were certainly lower than in the Volcker era. For example, in 1994,
with unemployment slightly above 6 percent, Greenspan testified that “the amount of slack in the
economy, though difficult to judge, appears to have become relatively small” (Bulletin, September 1994,
p. 794). However, these estimates were still relatively high considering the changes in the U.S. labor
market toward lower normal unemployment that occurred in the 1990s.
Policy actions under Volcker and Greenspan have followed from policymakers’ beliefs. The
Volcker disinflation is the most striking example: the FOMC’s central focus on low inflation, its belief
that slack would reduce inflation and that other policies would not, and its high estimate of the natural
rate led it to respond to the high inflation of the late 1970s with extremely contractionary policy, and to

19
maintain that policy in the face of a severe recession. By our measure, the FOMC increased the real
interest rate over 5 percentage points from the third quarter of 1979 to the second quarter of 1981, and
kept it high until well after the severe recession of 1981-82. As Volcker stated in 1980:

In the past, at critical junctures for economic stabilization policy, we have usually been
more preoccupied with the possibility of near-term weakness in economic activity or
other objectives than with the implications of our actions for future inflation. ... The
result has been our now chronic inflationary problem ....
The broad objective of policy must be to break that ominous pattern. ... Success
will require that policy be consistently and persistently oriented to that end. Vacillation
and procrastination, out of fears of recession or otherwise, would run grave risks
(Bulletin, March 1980, p. 214; see also Report, 1980, pp. 100-02).

Since the mid-1980s, the Federal Reserve has followed a moderate real interest rate policy; it has
raised the real rate when inflation threatened and lowered it when real activity weakened, but never
pursued extreme expansion or contraction. For example, the FOMC tightened moderately in the late
1980s in response to a modest resurgence of inflation. Our estimated real interest rate rose roughly 2
percentage points in 1988 and 1989. Greenspan explained: “the current rate of inflation, let alone an
increase, is not acceptable, and our policies are designed to reduce inflation in coming years. This
restraint will involve ... some slowing in the underlying rate of growth of real GNP” (Bulletin, April
1989, p. 274). Greenspan clearly recognized that the policy could cause a recession, but felt that making
progress against inflation was crucial (September 1989, p. 616). Conversely, in response to the 1990-91
recession and the ensuing “credit crunch,” the Federal Reserve lowered the real interest rate roughly 3
percentage points in the early 1990s. Greenspan testified in 1994: “Over a period of several years
starting in 1989, the Federal Reserve progressively eased its policy stance … in response to evidence of a
variety of unusual restraints on spending” (April 1994, p. 304). These carefully calibrated policies were

20
obviously consistent with the Federal Reserve’s emphasis on low inflation and its moderate beliefs about
the sustainable level of unemployment. As can be seen in Figures 1 and 2, the result of these policies was
that inflation was low and recessions were few and mild.
The surprising behavior of inflation beginning in the mid-1990s appears to have led Greenspan
and some other members of the FOMC to significantly change their views about the determinants of
inflation. Greenspan testified in 2000 that “there is still uncertainty about whether the current level of
labor resource utilization can be maintained without generating increased cost and price pressures”
(Bulletin, September 2000, pp. 649-50). By raising the possibility that labor market conditions in mid2000 might be sustainable, he was in effect suggesting that the natural rate might have fallen to 4 percent.
At times, Greenspan also suggested that there had been a qualitative change in inflation behavior. He
argued that the economy had become much more competitive, and that as a result, over a considerable
range forces that would otherwise cause firms to raise prices would instead prompt them to find offsetting
cost reductions. In 1999, for example, he suggested that technological progress had “created a broad
range of potential innovations that have granted firms greater ability to profitably displace costly factors
of production whenever profit margins have been threatened” (September 1999, p. 627; see also April
1999, p. 247).
The FOMC left the real interest rate essentially unchanged during the strong expansion of the late
1990s. As Figure 1 shows, unemployment fell to levels not seen since the late 1960s. But, in contrast to
other episodes when the Federal Reserve did not tighten in the face of strong expansion, inflation did not
rise. Although there was clearly a shift in the FOMC’s beliefs that could explain its policy, it is hard to
know how large a role the shift actually played: inflation was so subdued that even policymakers with
conventional views had little grounds for advocating significant tightening.
Taken together, our analysis of the six chairmen’s tenures reveals an important pattern. Over the
past half-century, certain views about how the economy works have led to moderate policies and
desirable outcomes. In particular, under Martin in the 1950s and Volcker and Greenspan after 1979,
policymakers believed that inflation had no long-run benefits and, indeed, high long-run costs; that

21
inflation responds to the deviation of output from a moderate estimate of capacity; and that monetary
policy can be used both to lower inflation and to stimulate a depressed economy. Because of these
beliefs, policymakers in these eras adopted policies designed to restrain inflation and minimize real
fluctuations. And, in each case inflation was indeed restrained and the economy avoided “boom-bust”
fluctuations in output and employment.
In contrast, whenever policymakers have strayed significantly from these sensible views, the
result has been misguided policies and unfortunate outcomes. Under Eccles in the 1930s, the Federal
Reserve believed that demand-induced inflation was possible at unemployment rates of 10 percent, and so
adopted a highly restrictive policy that caused a devastating recession. In the 1960s, the majority of the
FOMC (though not Martin) believed that sustainable unemployment was very low. Under Burns and
Miller in the 1970s, policymakers believed that the natural rate was quite low and that slack could do little
to reduce inflation. The misguided beliefs of the 1960s and ’70s led to policies that were systematically
too expansionary. As a result, the economy experienced high inflation in these decades and a number of
engineered recessions to bring inflation down.

PREDICTING POLICYMAKERS’ VIEWS

Our finding that ideas have been the key determinant of policy success has an obvious
implication: in choosing the Federal Reserve chair, it is crucial to find someone who will be guided by a
sensible economic framework. But how does one predict who will have sensible beliefs? To address this
question, we again use the lessons from history. We look for factors that have predicted what previous
Federal Reserve chairmen believed while in office.
Of course, a sensible framework is not all that matters. A Federal Reserve chair with sound
beliefs might choose not to – or be unable to – impose his or her beliefs on an FOMC with radically
different views. For example, as we have described, Martin in the 1960s deferred to the proponents of the

22
“New Economics” in the Administration and the FOMC, rather than base policy on his own sensible
model. However, the experience of the Federal Reserve since 1936 has been that the chairman’s beliefs
are almost always central to policymaking. Even Miller, who was not particularly skilled or savvy as a
leader, was able to impose his views on the FOMC almost immediately. And, this centrality of the
chairman’s beliefs is likely to be even stronger in the future. The increased independence of the Federal
Reserve, along with the success and prominence of Volcker and Greenspan, has surely enhanced the
deference that will be given future chairs.
It is also true that what constitutes sensible beliefs may change over time. Our previous analysis
has shown what constituted reasonable views in the past. But as the economy changes, reasonable beliefs
about the determinants of inflation and the effects of monetary policy could change as well. This point
has been implicit, for example, in our discussion of beliefs about the natural rate. As we have described,
Greenspan’s and Miller’s estimates of the natural rate were at times quite similar. Yet, Greenspan’s
estimate was sensible because it was realistic for the economy at the time, whereas Miller’s was not
because it was much too low given economic fundamentals during his tenure. Going forward, what is
crucial is that a future chair’s beliefs be reasonable relative to the economy at the time, in the way that
Martin’s, Volcker’s, and Greenspan’s were reasonable relative to the economies they faced. If we can
identify factors that predicted the sensible views of these past chairmen, this may help predict whether a
future chair’s beliefs will be sensible in relation to the economy he or she confronts.6

Predicting Beliefs Using Biographical Information
One way to attempt to predict the quality of chairmen’s economic frameworks is to examine their
background characteristics. Basic biographical information that could plausibly be related to economic
understanding is given in Table 2.7 Obviously, because we have only six observations, the most one can
hope to see are suggestive patterns.
Formal training in economics has an obvious problem as a predictor of sound understanding of
the economy. Burns, who was a distinguished economics professor and president of the National Bureau

23
of Economic Research, was unquestionably the best-trained chairman. Yet his rapidly fluctuating and
often unrealistic views had severely adverse consequences for policy. Nonetheless, the record suggests
that training in economics is desirable. The two chairmen with essentially no training in economics,
Eccles and Miller, had deeply flawed understandings of the economy that led to highly misguided
policies.

And Greenspan and Volcker, two chairmen with sensible economic beliefs, were both

economics majors who did graduate-level work in the field. Martin, the third chair with realistic beliefs,
did not major in economics, but he did study it at Yale. His interest in economics was fostered by his
father, who helped write the original Federal Reserve Act and served as governor and president of the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Table 2 reveals some stronger correlations. The three chairmen with the most sensible views,
Martin, Volcker, and Greenspan, were all at some time associated with the New York financial services
industry: Martin was a stockbroker who became president of the New York Stock Exchange at age 29;
Volcker alternated between positions at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Chase Manhattan;
and Greenspan founded a successful New York consulting firm that had many of the nation’s leading
banks as clients. In contrast, Eccles was a relatively small-time banker from Utah, and Miller was CEO
of a large corporation based in Rhode Island. Both were quite successful in business but were somewhat
provincial. That these two had particularly flawed models shows that even extensive business experience
does not guarantee a realistic understanding of the economy. Burns, the third chairman with flawed
beliefs, also had no significant Wall Street connection.
The three chairmen with the most realistic frameworks also had extensive, relatively non-partisan
public service. Martin left Wall Street at age 36, when he was drafted into the army, and served as head
of the Export-Import Bank and assistant secretary of the Treasury before becoming Federal Reserve
chairman at age 45. Volcker spent the majority of his time in public service; his positions included undersecretary of the Treasury and president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Extensive public
service in areas related to monetary policy may foster pragmatic, sensible views of how the economy
operates. Consistent with this, Greenspan, the third successful chairman, was chairman of the Council of

24
Economic Advisers and served on (and typically chaired) a number of blue-ribbon commissions, such as
those setting up the volunteer army and reforming the social security system.
Two of the Federal Reserve chairmen with misguided models are notable for their lack of public
experience of all types. Eccles had come to Washington for a meeting and somehow ended up as a
special assistant to the secretary of the Treasury. He held this position for just a year before being
appointed to the Federal Reserve Board. Miller held no government positions prior to becoming Federal
Reserve chairman.

He participated in local programs aimed at providing jobs for veterans and

disadvantaged youths and was a member of the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston. Again, Burns is the exception: he was chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers in the
1950s and remained active in economic policy debates in the 1960s, and yet held flawed and volatile
views.

In contrast to Martin, Volcker, and Greenspan, however, he lacked non-partisan public

experience.
Table 2 suggests little correlation between political affiliation and understanding of the economy.
A more plausible link may be from partisanship. Highly partisan chairs may tend to have unrealistic
views because they are chosen for their partisanship rather than for their expertise, or because their
partisanship clouds their judgment. Two of the chairmen with the soundest views, Martin and Volcker,
had little political involvement and believed that the Federal Reserve chair should not be involved in
issues unrelated to monetary policy. At the other extreme, the chairmen with misguided models were
quite partisan. Burns was a key adviser to Nixon during the campaign and served as a cabinet-rank
counselor to the President on all domestic issues for the year before becoming Federal Reserve chairman.
Miller was active in Democratic politics and was chairman of Businessmen for Humphrey-Muskie. And
although Eccles was initially a Republican, he advised Roosevelt on a wide range of issues and was a
vocal champion of Roosevelt’s expansionary fiscal policy. Greenspan, however, is an exception to this
pattern: he has strong (and sometimes extreme) political views and has taken partisan stands on fiscal
policy, and yet has a sound economic framework.
On net, this analysis suggests that concrete background characteristics have been highly imperfect

25
indicators of future views. Training in economics, experience on Wall Street, non-partisan public service
in economic policymaking, and limited political involvement have been correlated with sensible beliefs,
but there are exceptions to nearly every rule. It is therefore useful to consider other ways of predicting
beliefs. The obvious alternative is to analyze the public statements of each nominee prior to becoming
chairman. We look to see whether the writings, speeches, and confirmation hearings of the Federal
Reserve chairmen provided a reliable preview of the beliefs that determined policy during their tenures.

Eccles
The prior record of Marriner Eccles, the first modern Federal Reserve chairman, shows that he
was an intuitive Keynesian.8 Unlike many policymakers in the 1930s, he did not view the Depression as
desirable or immutable. He was a constant advocate of deficit spending and other measures to stimulate
aggregate demand, and he believed that procyclical movements in the money supply were undesirable
(see, for example, U.S. Senate, 1933, and Eccles, 1935).
Other aspects of Eccles’s prior views, however, prefigured the Federal Reserve’s key beliefs in
the second half of the 1930s. Crucially, Eccles believed that monetary expansion by itself could do little
to stimulate a depressed economy. For the most part, his view was that monetary expansion that did not
get money directly to consumers and firms would have no effect. In 1933, he stated: “you can print
money, you can remonetize silver, you can reduce the gold content of the dollar and it is not going to raise
your price level unless you start the purchasing power at the source with the consumer” (U.S. Senate,
1933, p. 710). And in 1935: “Money is extremely plentiful,” and increasing the money stock “would
accomplish nothing toward either price raising or increasing business activity” (U.S. House, 1935, pp.
276, 312; see also p. 404). That same year, when one member of Congress said, “I think it would be
interesting to Members of Congress ... to know what your [monetary] policy would be under present
conditions,” Eccles responded by saying, “Under present circumstances, there is very little, if anything,
that can be done.” When another representative interjected, “You mean you cannot push a string,” Eccles
answered, “That is a good way to put it, one cannot push a string” (p. 377). This is exactly the view that

26
led the Federal Reserve to do little to stem the severe recession of 1937-38.
Despite this view, Eccles believed that policymakers needed to be on guard against excessive
monetary expansion even in a depressed economy. He worried that such expansion could lead to
speculation and inflation.

He therefore advocated acting preemptively “to so regulate underlying

conditions as to diminish the possibility of a speculative boom getting under way” (U.S. House, 1935, p.
180). When the possibility of a massive open-market operation to combat the prevailing high levels of
unemployment and slack was suggested, he replied, “it would be necessary to increase the reserve
requirements by that amount in order to extinguish the reserves; otherwise this operation could carry
possibility of credit inflation to almost unknown heights” (p. 322). Similarly, he said: “If we begin to get
recovery and private credit begins to expand, ... by the time the banking system had used up their present
excess reserves of 2 billion dollars, you would have a volume of money far in excess of anything that the
banking system has ever had, ... it seems to me you could have a great inflation” (p. 420). These views
clearly presage the FOMC’s concern about speculation and excess reserves under Eccles’s leadership.

Martin
Martin’s public statements and writings were relatively few before he joined the Federal Reserve.
Nevertheless, in the available speeches and in his confirmation hearing, one can see definite indications of
the views Martin held as chairman of the Federal Reserve.
As assistant secretary of the Treasury, Martin revealed some of the aversion to inflation and the
realistic estimates of capacity that were crucial to the conduct of policy in the 1950s. In discussing the
recovery of the world economy after the war he stated, “The extent of the postwar inflations has upset
many calculations and postponed the attainment of financial stability” (Martin Papers, Box 15, Folder 7,
Address, 2/27/50, p. 2). Perhaps even more revealing was Martin’s statement that “The defense program
... cannot be carried out without some lowering of consumption standards and some curtailment of
investment” (reported in the New York Times, 10/31/50, p. 39). Given that the U.S. unemployment rate
for the previous month was 4.4 percent, the statement that the United States and the countries of Western

27
Europe were at potential and thus faced a guns vs. butter tradeoff suggests a very moderate and realistic
view of capacity.
Martin’s role in negotiating the Treasury-Federal Reserve Accord of 1951 also provides prior
evidence of Martin’s opposition to inflation and support for independent monetary policy. At a time
when the Secretary of the Treasury and the President were strongly advocating the continued pegging of
bond prices, Martin took the position that the policy was dangerous and needed to be stopped. He played
a key role on the Administration’s side in bringing about the Accord, which ended the policy. As one
news report put it, “Mr. Martin was the first official of the Treasury to recognize the board’s
responsibility to minimize the monetization of the public debt” (New York Times, 3/16/51, p. 50).
Much of Martin’s confirmation hearing in March 1951 was spent discussing the Accord. A
number of senators expressed concern that Martin’s ties to the Treasury would make it difficult for him to
assert the Federal Reserve’s independence. Martin reassured them by expressing his deep aversion to
inflation. When one senator asked, “but do you think it is more dangerous to the country generally to
have a continuing inflation such as we have been experiencing, than it is to let the cost of government go
a good bit higher than it is?” Martin replied: “I do, I do definitely” (U.S. Senate, 1951, p. 18). He also
said: “I don’t want to see interest rates kept low if it is going to promote inflationary pressures. I don’t
think that is sound, and I don’t think that helps matters” (p. 12).
Martin also gave a clear indication of the policies he was likely to follow. He stated, “I shall
resist to the nth degree efforts or a temptation that might occur in the Government to debase the currency”
(U.S. Senate, 1951, pp. 13-14). He reiterated both his view that inflation was very costly and his
willingness to take harsh measures to fight inflation in the short statement he made upon taking the oath
of office: “Unless inflation is controlled, it could prove to be an even more serious threat to the vitality of
our country than the more spectacular aggressions of enemies outside our borders. I pledge myself to
support all reasonable measures to preserve the purchasing power of the dollar” (Bulletin, April 1951, p.
377). These views formed the core of Martin’s economic framework during his tenure as Federal Reserve
chairman.

28
Burns
An important feature of Burns’s macroeconomic framework while chairman was that it changed
frequently. Thus, his prior statements and writings are inherently unlikely to provide a precise indication
of his beliefs while in office. Nevertheless, we do find clear precursors of Burns’s views as chairman in
his prior statements. Perhaps more importantly, we find that his prior beliefs fluctuated substantially,
foreshadowing the variability of beliefs during his chairmanship.
One constant in Burns’s beliefs was a conviction that inflation was very costly. From the late
1950s on, Burns railed against, to quote from the title of one of his talks, “the perils of inflation”
(reprinted in Burns, 1969, p. 286). In a lecture in 1957, for example, he said, “we have slighted the
injustice and hardships that flow from inflation, when in fact these have been multiplying for a
generation” (p. 142). Likewise, in July 1969, shortly before becoming Federal Reserve chairman, Burns
said in an interview: “The immediate problem of greatest urgency is certainly inflation” (U.S. News &
World Report, 7/14/69, p. 60).
While Burns’s concern for inflation never varied, what did change over his career were his beliefs
about the policies necessary to control it. In 1969, Burns expressed great optimism in the country’s
ability to control inflation without a recession.

In response to the question, “Do you expect

unemployment to rise substantially as inflation is brought under control?” Burns replied, “No, I do not”
(U.S. News, 7/14/69, p. 61). At his confirmation hearing Burns implied that an anti-inflationary gap
could be created by lowering the natural rate rather than by raising actual unemployment. He stated: “I
think we ought to be able in the years ahead to pursue, when we need to, a restrictive financial policy
without significantly increasing unemployment. I have great faith in well-managed job banks. I think
they will prove tremendously helpful” (U.S. Senate, 1969, p. 24). Whatever the particulars of the
mechanism, Burns’s statements signaled the optimistic framework that led him to expect disinflation
during his first year in office despite only a very mild downturn.
At other times, Burns’s prior statements show the skepticism about the effectiveness of slack that
was central to his views in the period 1971-73. Creeping inflation and increasing wage and price rigidity

29
were a common theme in his writings, especially in the late 1950s. For example, in his 1959 presidential
address to the American Economic Association he stated: “the once familiar parallelism of the short-term
movements in the physical volume of total production, on the one hand, and the average level of
wholesale or consumer prices, on the other, has become somewhat elusive” (Burns, 1969, p. 123). And in
1967 he testified: “Unhappily, even a mild recession would probably not suffice to bring cost inflation to
a halt under current conditions” (Burns, 1967, p. 127).

As in the 1970s, Burns concluded that this

ineffectiveness of slack meant that policies other than aggregate demand restraint should be sought. He
stated in 1957: “However necessary and helpful a balanced budget and a restrictive monetary policy may
be in the age-old struggle against inflation, it is doubtful whether they alone can cope with the threat of
creeping inflation” (Burns, 1969, p. 150).
Finally, in the mid-1960s, Burns espoused the more realistic views that guided policy in the mid1970s. Arguing against the prevailing belief in a permanent inflation-unemployment tradeoff in 1967, he
said: “Once forces of inflation have been released, it becomes very difficult to bring them under control
without some sizeable readjustments in the economy” (Burns, 1969, p. 277). Burns also believed that the
sustainable level of unemployment had risen over the previous decade. In 1965, he stated that “there are
cogent grounds for believing that if the pressure of aggregate demand had remained at the boom level of
1956-57, the unemployment rate would still have been higher in recent years than it was then” (Burns,
1966, p. 42). To rein in inflation, Burns rejected not only wage and price controls, but even voluntary
guideposts (Burns, 1969, pp. 232-53). Instead, he stressed “the need for prudent control of the money
supply and the need for maintaining and enhancing the forces of competition" (p. 253; see also p. 284).
Reading Burns’s statements in the mid-1960s, one can see not only the Burns who tightened substantially
while the economy was reeling from the first oil price shock in 1974, but also the fine Federal Reserve
chairman he could have been had his economic beliefs been less mercurial.

Miller
The prevailing beliefs at the FOMC during Miller’s tenure included a very optimistic estimate of

30
the natural rate and extreme pessimism about the effectiveness of slack in reducing inflation. In his prior
writings and speeches and at his confirmation hearing, Miller expressed precisely these views. To put it
bluntly, President Carter and Congress had to have known what they were getting when they chose Miller
as Federal Reserve chairman.9
First, consider the natural rate. In January 1977, Miller declared, “fiscal and monetary policies
can be applied to reduce unemployment quickly – from 8 percent to 5½ percent (or perhaps even 5
percent) within two years without triggering a renewed bout of inflation” (Miller, 1977, p. 341). For this
statement to be consistent with a natural rate framework, Miller had to believe that the natural rate was 5
or 5½ percent – much lower than the estimates being mentioned at the Federal Reserve during this period.
Miller expressed views consistent with this optimistic estimate at his confirmation hearing (U.S. Senate,
1978, p. 20).
Far more striking than his optimism about the natural rate were Miller’s views on the
ineffectiveness of slack. In 1977, Miller implied that both the level and duration of unemployment that
would be needed to reduce inflation were very large. His explanation for this was that unemployment
compensation and other social welfare programs had made workers unwilling to lower wage demands
even in the face of high unemployment. He stated: “The Phillips’ curve has an error. The real
relationship is between inflation and uncompensated unemployment. To the extent that unemployment is
compensated ... there is an overstatement of the economic impact of unemployment. ... The result is that
a significant portion of the unemployed act in an economic sense as if they were employed, spend as if
they had jobs” (Miller, 1977, p. 341, emphasis in original). Miller reiterated this view at his confirmation
hearing (U.S. Senate, 1978, p. 74). The implication that he drew from his analysis was that: “If the
economy is behaving as if the unemployment rate was lower, then we might as well pursue macroeconomic policies which will lower the unemployment rate in fact and at the same time improve the
social fabric by offering more people the greater dignity and self respect that comes from having a decent
job” (Miller, 1977, p. 341).
At his confirmation hearing, Miller took his beliefs about the ineffectiveness of slack a step

31
further. He asserted that unemployment not only failed to reduce inflation, it actually caused it. He
stated:

under the ethical values in this Nation, unemployment also breeds inflation. Today there
is no question that high rates of unemployment mean large Federal deficits and large
Federal deficits mean inflation.
So I think the answer is that we must fight both at the same time. I think the
traditional connections between inflation and unemployment have been disrupted by
social concepts that have resulted in the adoption of programs that would create higher
deficits in times of economic distress (U.S. Senate, 1978, p. 38; see also pp. 56, 72).

While this is not a view we see carrying weight in the FOMC during Miller’s tenure, it is certainly
indicative of the basic macroeconomic confusion that did hold sway.
The policy implication that Miller drew from his beliefs was that means other than aggregate
demand restraint were needed to control inflation. Initially, his idea was “to employ selective demand
and supply management to overcome bottlenecks or to increase availability of goods” (Miller, 1977, p.
340).

Among the specific controls and inducements he mentioned were selective consumer credit

controls, an interest surcharge on loans for low priority purposes, a variable investment tax credit, a threeyear moratorium on strikes, workfare, and job-training programs (Miller, 1974, p. 16).

At his

confirmation hearing Miller backed off somewhat from this notion of highly specific interventions, but he
continued to advocate non-monetary approaches to controlling inflation. He testified: “The best chance
for dampening down inflation is in an area where the Fed does not have direct control. That is, by trying
to stimulate business fixed investment. ... that requires a policy on the fiscal side” (U.S. Senate, 1978, p.
84). This view that inflation was not a problem to be solved by monetary policy was one that Miller
carried to the Federal Reserve, with severe consequences.

32
Volcker
In his writings and speeches before his confirmation hearing, Volcker expressed many of the
views that became the hallmark of his tenure. He consistently extolled the benefits of low inflation and
the critical importance of monetary policy in achieving it. In 1977 he stated, “over time, an excess supply
of money contributes nothing to employment, nor to real income, nor to real wealth, but only to inflation”
(Volcker, 1977, p. 24). He went on to say, “My own judgment is that we already have ample evidence
that strong inflationary forces … damage rather than help our prospects for employment and growth” (p.
27). His policy prescription was simple: “we will need to act to bring monetary growth targets gradually
down to noninflationary levels” (p. 28). He recognized that such a policy would have costs, saying that
“price stability is devoutly desired by most. But … policies to achieve that goal can have particular shortterm effects that may be distinctly unpopular” (Volcker, 1978, p. 333).10
But, Volcker’s statements before his confirmation hearing do not show that he had a fully realistic
assessment of the natural rate and the output costs of disinflation, or that he believed it would be worth
bearing very large output costs to reduce inflation. For example, at a time when unemployment was
slightly under 7 percent, he stated that in addition to gradually eliminating inflation, “we also must sustain
the momentum of expansion and cut into unemployment” (Volcker, 1978, p. 333). He also said: “The
‘optimistic’ view suggests that at a time when unemployment is still above ‘full employment’ …, some
moderation of inflation should still be possible as unemployment is reduced” (p. 337).
At his confirmation hearing, however, Volcker expressed precisely the views that led him to
undertake the most aggressive disinflation in Federal Reserve history. He argued forcefully that inflation
was harmful in the long run, and thus that inflation control should be a central goal of policy. He said, “I
believe that ultimately the only sound foundation for the continuing growth and prosperity of the
American economy is much greater price stability” (U.S. Senate, 1979, p. 16). He repeatedly made
statements such as, “The most fundamental thing we can do … is to deal with internal inflation” (p. 8).
He described zero inflation as his ultimate goal (p. 13), though he did caution that it “must be considered
an objective that can be reached only over a period of years and toward which we should move in prudent

33
steps” (p. 15).
Volcker also made clear that he believed that the natural rate was at least in the vicinity of 6
percent. He testified: “earlier this year …, with the unemployment rate still not much below 6 percent …
we had at the same time evidence of the beginnings and the actuality of shortages in some industries, of
insufficient capacity, rising price pressures. All of which suggested that the answer to that remaining
unemployment problem wasn’t going to be found in overall demand measures” (U.S. Senate, 1979, pp.
17-18). Thus, he clearly understood that substantial unemployment would be required to reduce inflation.
Nevertheless, he argued that the benefits of low inflation were large enough that it was worth bearing
those costs. In response to a question about a study suggesting “a terrific price” to reducing inflation
through monetary policy, Volcker responded: “I don’t think we have any substitute for seeking an answer
to our problems in the context of monetary discipline” (p. 5). Similarly, in response to a question
expressing concern about unemployment rising to “7 or 9 [percent] or somewhere in that range,” Volcker
stressed the importance of achieving “stability” in terms of “domestic inflation” (by which he meant low
inflation, not stable high inflation) and “international markets” (p. 18).

Greenspan
Greenspan’s prior writings and confirmation hearing presage the views that have dominated
Federal Reserve policymaking under his leadership. Greenspan was a consistent proponent of the view
that low inflation is critical to long-run growth. In 1979, for example, he argued that inflation “skews the
investment pattern toward shorter-lived projects,” and away from research and other long-term
investments. As a result, inflation was causing “our economic system … to lose its productive efficiency”
(Greenspan, 1979). At his confirmation hearing, he said: “it is absolutely essential that [the Federal
Reserve’s] central focus be on restraining inflation because if that fails, then we have very little
opportunity for sustained long-term economic growth” (U.S. Senate, 1987, p. 29).
Greenspan believed that the only way to achieve low inflation was through monetary and fiscal
policy.

In a 1977 debate with Arthur Okun, he stated, “A necessary and sufficient condition [to

34
eliminating inflation] is to adopt a monetary and fiscal policy that would allow unit money supply to grow
at a rate that implies a noninflationary price increase” (Greenspan and Okun, 1977, p. 120). He opposed
controls, guidelines, and other nonstandard means of controlling inflation (for example, Daly, 1979, pp. 3,
7).
Greenspan’s beliefs about the natural rate and the determinants of inflation before joining the
Federal Reserve are not completely clear. One source of evidence about his beliefs comes from the
Economic Reports of the President during his tenure as chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers in
the mid-1970s. The macroeconomic framework in these Economic Reports was dramatically more
sensible than that in the Reports that came either before or after. Indeed, one of Greenspan’s key
contributions as CEA chairman was to raise substantially the estimate of the natural rate used in the
Council’s forecasts and discussions (Economic Report, 1977, pp. 48-51). Greenspan’s later statements on
these issues, however, sound less realistic. In 1977, he argued that low inflation was so beneficial that
“A phased, moderate decline in the rate of growth in money supply need not have any significant negative
effects on real growth” (Greenspan and Okun, 1977, p. 117). In 1978, he stated that “Our problem is one
for which we have no firm theoretical understanding,” and that the United States was experiencing “a
condition of chronic inflation in a period of less than full utilization of resources” (Daly, 1979, p. 24).
Importantly, even when Greenspan was espousing questionable views about the determinants of
inflation, his policy prescriptions were sensible. In 1978 he stated, “The fact is that we know the
solution” to high inflation – monetary and fiscal restraint that would increase unemployment (Daly, 1979,
p. 25). Furthermore, he made clear that inflation control was worth an extremely high price. At his
confirmation hearing, a senator suggested that the tight monetary policy of the early 1980s was excessive.
Greenspan defended the policy, saying, “we allowed our system to take on inflationary biases which
threw us into such a structural imbalance that, in order to preserve the integrity of the system, the Federal
Reserve had to do what it did. Had it not acted in the way which it did at that time, the consequences
would have been far worse than what subsequently happened” (U.S. Senate, 1987, p. 35). Thus, as with
all of the other chairmen, Greenspan’s prior beliefs provide a clear indication of the economic framework

35
that guided policy during his tenure.

CONCLUSIONS

The history of the Federal Reserve shows that ideas have been crucial. When a realistic model of
how the economy works and what monetary policy can accomplish prevailed within the FOMC, as was
the case in the 1950s and the 1980s and beyond, policy was appropriate and macroeconomic outcomes
were desirable. When an unrealistic and misguided model prevailed, as was the case in the 1930s and the
1960s and 1970s, policy was similarly misguided and outcomes were poor. The fact that monetary
policymakers’ views have played such a central role in determining the success of policy in the past
suggests that the key characteristic to look for in future policymakers is a realistic understanding of how
the economy works. This is true for any position on the FOMC, but especially for the chair, whose views
typically dominate policymaking.
How then does the country go about finding a Federal Reserve chair with sensible views?
Unfortunately, choosing a chair on the basis of background characteristics is risky. While some education
in economics, experience on Wall Street, and largely non-partisan public service may increase the odds
that a nominee will be guided by sensible views, they provide no guarantee. Fortunately, there is
something else that has predicted chairmen’s views exceptionally well in the past: their own writings and
statements. Each of the past Federal Reserve chairmen expressed quite clearly the views that dominated
policymaking during his tenure at the confirmation hearing or before. This finding suggests a crucial
strategy for evaluating potential candidates for Federal Reserve chair: find out their beliefs about how the
economy works and what monetary policy can contribute. Read all of their previous writings. Ask them
about their model of the economy and listen very carefully to the answers. People evaluating a candidate
for Federal Reserve chair must engage in an intellectual discussion and must be willing to reject a
candidate whose views are worrisome.

36
In this regard, the confirmation process of G. William Miller is an important cautionary tale. The
Senate Banking Committee is often mocked for having spent inordinate amounts of time investigating
possible misdeeds of the Bell Helicopter subsidiary of Miller’s corporation while letting Miller’s
unconventional macroeconomic framework go unchallenged. But, in truth, the committee asked Miller
enough questions about his beliefs and prior writings to get a clear picture of his views. And a number of
committee members expressed great skepticism about Miller’s answers. What is shocking is that the
committee nevertheless voted overwhelmingly to confirm him. It is as if, when the senators did not find
enough evidence to reject Miller on the basis of corporate malfeasance, they felt that fundamentally
flawed beliefs about how the economy worked were not an adequate reason for blocking his confirmation.
And yet, Miller’s flawed beliefs are precisely what nearly brought the American economy to ruin in the
late 1970s.
The experience of the 1960s and 1970s is also an important argument against complacency. It is
tempting to think that since monetary policymakers in general, and Federal Reserve chairmen in
particular, have had a largely sensible model for almost twenty-five years, it is unlikely that any candidate
for Federal Reserve chair today could have misguided views. But policymakers had also developed a
realistic framework in the 1950s, only to have it replaced by a deeply flawed model in the 1960s and
1970s. And, there is certainly no shortage of highly questionable frameworks being promulgated by
pundits, politicians, and even professional economists today. The fact that a very costly wrong turn in
economic understanding occurred once means that we must remain vigilant in the future. The only way
that we will know if we are choosing a good Federal Reserve chair is to focus closely on candidates’
beliefs and to reject those whose frameworks are likely to lead them astray.

37
APPENDIX
ESTIMATION OF THE EX ANTE REAL INTEREST RATE

To estimate the ex ante real interest rate, we begin with data on the three-month Treasury bill rate
in the secondary market, converted to quarterly averages. We subtract off the log difference of the
quarterly GDP deflator (at an annual rate) to create a series on the ex post real rate.11 The Fisher identity
implies that the ex post real rate equals the ex ante real rate minus unanticipated inflation. If expectations
are rational, the expectation of unanticipated inflation using information known at the time the
expectation is formed is zero.

Therefore, if one regresses the ex post rate on current and lagged

information, the fitted values provide an estimate of the ex ante real rate (Mishkin, 1981). To implement
this procedure, we use as explanatory variables the contemporaneous value and four lags of each of the
nominal Treasury bill rate, the growth rate of the GDP deflator, and the growth rate of real GDP, as well
as a constant and a linear trend. We estimate the regression over the period 1935Q1 – 2003Q1, leaving
out the war years and the early postwar era (1941Q2 – 1951Q1). The contemporaneous and first lagged
values of the explanatory variables have the most predictive power and the coefficient estimates are much
what one would expect: the ex post real rate responds positively to the nominal rate and negatively to
inflation and output growth. The R2 of the regression is 0.58.

Table 1
Beliefs and Policy Actions under Federal Reserve Chairmen since 1936
Key Beliefs

Resulting Policy Actions

Marriner Eccles (February 1936-January1948)
Inflation and speculative excess are
possible before full employment
Monetary policy cannot stimulate a
depressed economy

Increase in reserve requirements in
1936 and 1937
Only very limited expansion in
1937-38 recession

William McChesney Martin Jr. (April 1951-January 1970)
(Early)

(Late)

Inflation is very harmful
Inflation results from output above
a moderate estimate of capacity
Federal Reserve can and should respond
to recessions
Long-run inflation-unemployment tradeoff
and low “prudent” unemployment rate
At the very end, natural rate hypothesis
with a very low natural rate

Tightening in 1955 and especially
in 1959 to reduce inflation;
generally temperate policy
Expansion in 1953-54 and 1957-58
recessions
Accommodative policy despite
rising inflation
Mild tightening in 1969 to reduce
inflation

Arthur Burns (February 1970-January 1978)
(Early)
(Middle)
(Late)

Natural rate hypothesis with a very low
natural rate
Extreme pessimism about the sensitivity
of inflation to slack
Relatively high natural rate
Slack will reduce inflation

Expansion in 1970-71
Expansion in 1972-73; advocacy
of wage and price controls
Substantial tightening in 1974 to
reduce inflation

G. William Miller (March 1978-August 1979)
Natural rate is relatively low
Extreme pessimism about the
sensitivity of inflation to slack

Expansion despite high and rising
inflation; advocacy of incomes
policies

Paul Volcker (August 1979-August 1987)
Inflation is very harmful
Relatively high natural rate
Slack will reduce inflation

Severe tightening in 1979-81 to
reduce inflation; thereafter,
steady, low-inflation policies

Alan Greenspan (August 1987-)
(Early)

Same as Volcker

(Late)

Low natural rate and rising
productivity growth

Moderate tightening in 1988 to
reduce inflation; otherwise,
steady, low-inflation policies
Neutral policy in 1999-2000
despite low unemployment

Table 2
Biographical Information on Federal Reserve Chairmen since 1936
Chairman

Education

Primary Occupation

Previous Public Service

Political Involvement

Eccles

Attended high school,
but did not graduate

Banker; president of a
bank holding company

Special assistant to the secretary
of the Treasury for one year

Republican, but strong
supporter of Roosevelt

Martin

B.A. in English and Latin
from Yale; attended law
school but did not finish

Stockbroker; president
of New York Stock
Exchange; public servant

President of Export-Import
Bank; assistant secretary of the
Treasury for international affairs

Democrat, but widely
perceived as non-partisan

Burns

A.B., A.M., and Ph.D. in
economics from Columbia

Professor at Columbia;
research director, and
later president, NBER

CEA chairman under Eisenhower;
cabinet-rank counselor to the
President under Nixon

Republican; key domestic
policy adviser to Nixon’s
presidential campaign

Miller

B.S. in marine engineering
from Coast Guard Academy;
J.D. from University of
California, Berkeley

Businessman; CEO of
Textron

Volunteer posts dealing with
employment of the disadvantaged;
class B director of Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston

Democrat; chairman of
Pell’s senate campaign;
chairman of Businessmen
for Humphrey-Muskie

Volcker

A.B. in economics from
Princeton; M.A. in public
administration from Harvard

Banker; monetary
analyst; public servant

Researcher at Federal Reserve Bank
of NY; various positions, eventually
under secretary for monetary affairs,
at the Treasury department; president
of Federal Reserve Bank of NY

Democrat, but widely
widely perceived as
non-partisan

Greenspan

B.A. and M.A. in economics
from NYU; began economics
Ph.D. at Columbia; later
received Ph.D. from NYU

Economic consultant
and forecaster; founder,
Townsend-Greenspan

Domestic policy adviser under
Nixon; CEA chairman under Nixon
and Ford; many task forces;
chairman of National Commission
on Social Security Reform

Republican; strong
libertarian beliefs;
active in Republican
presidential campaigns

Figure 1
Unemployment Rate
25
Eccles

Martin

Burns

Volcker

Greenspan

20

Percent

15

10

5

Jan-03

Jan-00

Jan-97

Jan-94

Jan-91

Jan-88

Jan-85

Jan-82

Jan-79

Jan-76

Jan-73

Jan-70

Jan-67

Jan-64

Jan-61

Jan-58

Jan-55

Jan-52

Jan-49

Jan-46

Jan-43

Jan-40

Jan-37

Jan-34

0

Source: Global Financial Data (www.globalfindata.com), series UNUSAM. After 1948, the data
correspond to the seasonally adjusted series for all workers 16 years and over from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (www.bls.gov), series LNS14000000. While the early data are highly suspect and almost surely
excessively volatile, there is no question that unemployment surged in the 1937-38 recession. The
vertical lines show the months when each chairman’s tenure began. The small gap between Burns and
Volcker is the Miller era.

Figure 2
Inflation Rate
20
Eccles

Martin

Burns

Volcker

Greenspan

15

Percent

10

5

0

Jan-03

Jan-00

Jan-97

Jan-94

Jan-91

Jan-88

Jan-85

Jan-82

Jan-79

Jan-76

Jan-73

Jan-70

Jan-67

Jan-64

Jan-61

Jan-58

Jan-55

Jan-52

Jan-49

Jan-46

Jan-43

Jan-40

Jan-37

Jan-34

-5

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics (www.bls.gov), series CUUR0000SA0. The inflation rate is
calculated as the 12-month log difference of the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers. While
the early CPI data are surely less accurate than the postwar data, virtually all price series show a return of
deflation in 1938. The vertical lines show the months when each chairman’s tenure began.

Figure 3
Ex Ante Real Interest Rate

Eccles

8

Martin

Burns

Volcker

Greenspan

6

Percent

4

2

0

-2

-4

2003Q1

2000Q1

1997Q1

1994Q1

1991Q1

1988Q1

1985Q1

1982Q1

1979Q1

1976Q1

1973Q1

1970Q1

1967Q1

1964Q1

1961Q1

1958Q1

1955Q1

1952Q1

1939Q1

1936Q1

-6

Source: See appendix. The observations for 1941Q2 to 1951Q1 are missing because we exclude those
years from the estimation. The vertical lines show the quarters in when each Federal Reserve chairman’s
tenure began.

REFERENCES
Balke, Nathan S. and Robert J. Gordon. 1986. “Appendix B: Historical Data,” in The American
Business Cycle: Continuity and Change. Robert J. Gordon, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press for NBER, pp. 781-850.
Burns, Arthur F. 1966. The Management of Prosperity. 1965 Benjamin F. Fairless Memorial Lectures.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Burns, Arthur F. 1967. Excerpts from Congressional testimony. Congressional Digest. April, 46, pp.
123-27.
Burns, Arthur F. 1969. The Business Cycle in a Changing World. New York: Columbia University
Press for NBER.
Daly, John Charles, moderator. 1979. Weapons against Inflation.
Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research.

Washington, D.C.:

American

DeLong, J. Bradford. 1997. “America’s Peacetime Inflation: The 1970s,” in Reducing Inflation:
Motivation and Strategy. Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press for NBER, pp. 247-76.
Eccles, Marriner S. 1935. “Monetary Problems of Recovery.” Address to the Ohio Bankers Association.
Reprinted in Congressional Record. February 14, 79, Part 2, pp. 1915-918.
Friedman, Milton and Anna Jacobson Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the United States, 18671960. Princeton: Princeton University Press for NBER.
Greenspan, Alan. 1979. “Inflation’s Effect on Investment.” New York Times. August 8, p. D2.
Greenspan, Alan and Arthur Okun. 1977. “Debate: How to Stop Inflation.” Fortune. April, 95:4, pp.
116-20.
Greider, William. 1987. Secrets of the Temple: How the Federal Reserve Runs the Country. New York:
Simon & Schuster.
Katz, Bernard S., ed. 1992. Biographical Dictionary of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve.
New York: Greenwood Press.
Kettl, Donald F. 1986. Leadership at the Fed. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Martin, William McChesney, Jr. Papers. Missouri Historical Society, St. Louis.
Mayer, Thomas. 1998. Monetary Policy and the Great Inflation in the United States. Cheltenham, UK:
Edward Elgar.
McKinney, Marie. 1992. “G. William Miller,” in Biographical Dictionary of the Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve. Bernard S. Katz, ed. New York: Greenwood Press, pp. 234-44.
Meltzer, Allan H. 2003. “A New Beginning, 1951-60.” Manuscript, Carnegie-Mellon University.

Miller, G. William. 1974. “A Businessman’s Anti-Inflation Formula.” Business Week. October 5, p.
16.
Miller, G. William. 1977. “The Not Impossible Goal: Full Employment and Price Stability.” Vital
Speeches of the Day. March 15, 43, pp. 339-44.
Mishkin, Frederic. 1981. “The Real Interest Rate: An Empirical Investigation.” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy. 15, pp. 151-200.
Orphanides, Athanasios. 2003a. “Monetary Policy in Deflation: The Liquidity Trap in History and
Practice.” Unpublished paper, Board of Governors.
Orphanides, Athanasios. 2003b. “The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation.” Journal of Monetary
Economics. April, 50:3, pp. 633-63.
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer. 2002a. “The Evolution of Economic Understanding and
Postwar Stabilization Policy,” in Rethinking Stabilization Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City, pp. 11-78.
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer. 2002b. “A Rehabilitation of Monetary Policy in the 1950’s.”
American Economic Review. May, 92:2, pp. 121-27.
U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Various years. Annual Report of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Various years. Federal Reserve Bulletin.
U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Various years. Minutes of Federal Open
Market Committee.
U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Various years. Transcripts of Federal Open
Market Committee.
U.S. House of Representatives. 1935. Banking Act of 1935. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office.
U.S. Office of the President. Various years. Economic Report of the President. Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office.
U.S. Senate. 1933. Committee on Finance. Investigation of Economic Problems. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Senate. 1935. Committee on Banking and Currency.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Nomination of Marriner S. Eccles.

U.S. Senate. 1951. Committee on Banking and Currency. Nomination of William McChesney Martin,
Jr. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Senate. 1956. Committee on Banking and Currency. Nomination of William McChesney Martin,
Jr. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. Senate. 1969. Committee on Banking and Currency. Nomination of Arthur F. Burns. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Senate. 1978. Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs. Nomination of G. William
Miller. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Senate. 1979. Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs. Nomination of Paul A.
Volcker. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Senate. 1987. Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
Greenspan. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Nomination of Alan

Volcker, Paul A. 1977. “A Broader Role for Monetary Targets.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Quarterly Review. Spring, 2:2, pp. 23-28.
Volcker, Paul A. 1978. “The Role of Monetary Targets in an Age of Inflation.” Journal of Monetary
Economics. April, 4:2, pp. 329-39.
Wells, Wyatt C. 1994. Economist in an Uncertain World. New York: Columbia University Press.

ENDNOTES
1

Our analysis draws upon and extends the findings in Romer and Romer (2002a). Numerous other authors have
investigated the impact of ideas on the conduct of monetary policy. Examples include the classic work of Friedman
and Schwartz (1963), Orphanides (2003a) on policy in the second half of the 1930s, and DeLong (1997) and Mayer
(1998) on the 1970s.

2

When consecutive citations within a paragraph come from the same source, we omit the repeated material about
the source for the later citations. For key beliefs we provide a number of citations; for less central points we
typically give just one quotation. However, all quotations illustrate important ideas that were mentioned repeatedly.

3

In 1966, for example, with unemployment at 4.0 percent, Martin said that: “The System now would be operating
in an entirely new environment ... of full employment generally and over-full employment of skilled workers. He
personally would favor a little inflation if he thought it would benefit the unemployables, but he did not think it
would; rather, it would do them harm” (Minutes, 1/11/66, pp. 81-82). Thus, he continued to believe not only that
there was an adverse long-run tradeoff, but also that the natural rate was above 4 percent.
4

In the first part of the decade, the U.S. balance of payments deficit meant that the Federal Reserve could not loosen
without endangering the system of fixed exchange rates; as a result, the new ideas had little impact. As Martin put it
in 1962, “the balance of payments problem overshadowed everything else” (Minutes, 5/29/62, p. 41).

5

Orphanides (2003b) argues that monetary policy in the 1960s and 1970s conformed well with modern practice,
providing one uses the estimates of the output gap policymakers had at the time. This finding is consistent with our
view that ideas have been crucial, since beliefs about normal unemployment were a key determinant of historical
gap estimates. At the same time, however, we believe this characterization of the source of policy in these decades
is too simple. For much of the period, prevailing beliefs about the output gap were not the product of a modern
natural rate framework, but reflected assessments of the economy’s maximum reasonable capacity. As a result, the
historical gap numbers are not conceptually comparable to modern estimates. And, we find that beliefs about the
costs of inflation and the sensitivity of inflation to slack were also important determinants of policy.

6

What constitutes sensible beliefs could also change because of changes in the key issues facing monetary
policymakers. For example, it is conceivable that problems involving exchange rates or financial crises will become
central, so that the critical determinant of future monetary policymakers’ success will be their views about these
issues. But the history of monetary policymaking we have described strongly suggests that such other issues will
remain secondary to the more basic macroeconomic issues of inflation, capacity, and the possible contribution of
monetary policy.

7

Most of this information is available from Katz (1992). Where necessary, we supplement this source with
published interviews, other biographies, and the biographical sketches and statements included in the chairmen’s
confirmation hearings.

8

Eccles’s brief confirmation hearing focused entirely on potential conflicts of interest stemming from his business
dealings in Utah (U.S. Senate, 1935). For this reason, we rely on other sources to determine Eccles’s prior beliefs.

9

McKinney (1992) argues persuasively that it was apparent before Miller was appointed that he was primarily
concerned about employment and growth, and hence would run inflationary policy.

10

In his four years on the FOMC before becoming Federal Reserve chairman, Volcker dissented from the monetary
policy directive four times, always in support of tighter policy (Reports, 1975-79). Dissents on the FOMC are
uncommon; thus this record also suggests relatively hawkish views on inflation.
11

The interest rate data are from the Board of Governors (www.federalreserve.gov), series TMSM3M. They are
available starting in 1934Q1. Quarterly data for the GDP deflator and real GDP (which we use later in the analysis)
are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (www.bea.doc.gov) beginning in 1947Q1. To extend these series back

before 1947 we begin with annual data from the BEA. We then derive quarterly values of both series using the
quarterly series constructed by Balke and Gordon (1986, pp. 789-810). Specifically, we derive new series that have
quarter-to-quarter percentage changes within each year equal to those in the corresponding Balke-Gordon series, but
year-to-year percentage changes equal to those in the annual BEA estimates.

