                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE TRADE AND INVESTMENT EFFECTS
                       OF PREFERENTIAL TRADING ARRANGEMENTS

                                               Philippa Dee
                                                Jyothi Gali

                                          Working Paper 10160
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10160


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2003




Paper prepared for Fourteenth Annual NBER-East Asian Seminar on Economics, Taipei, 5-7 September 2003.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Philippa Dee and Jyothi Gali. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Trade and Investement Effects of Preferential Trading Arrangements
Philippa Dee and Jyothi Gali
NBER Working Paper No. 10160
December 2003
JEL No. F1

                                            ABSTRACT

This study quantifies the impact of traditional and ‘new age’ provisions of preferential trading

arrangements (PTAs) on merchandise trade and investment. It does so by estimating gravity models

of bilateral trade and investment. It finds that recent and some past PTAs are not as benign as some

contemporary empirical assessments have suggested. A careful consideration of the analytical issues

– including controlling comprehensively for other observable and unobservable factors, and testing

explicitly for whether the trade and investment effects are significantly different after PTA formation

than before – accounts for less favourable finding in this study. It is also possible for PTAs to have

adverse effects on investment flows. If investment responds in ‘beachhead’ fashion to the trade

provisions of PTAs, the trade carried out from those beachheads could constitute traditional trade

diversion. However, the paper finds little evidence of beachhead investment. Instead, it finds

evidence of net investment creation in response to the ‘new age’, non-trade provisions of PTAs.

Thus the finding on investment is more positive than for trade, but not without qualifications, since

trade diversion is still possible from the new investment positions.

Philippa Dee
APSEG
Crawford Building
Australian National University
Canberra 0200
Australia

Jyothi Gali
APSEG
Crawford Building
Australian National University
Canberra 0200
Australia
