                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE FORMATION OF INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTION
                      AND DISTRIBUTION NETWORKS IN EAST ASIA

                                              Mitsuyo Ando
                                             Fukunari Kimura

                                          Working Paper 10167
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10167


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2003




The first version of this paper was presented at the Fourteenth NBER Annual East Asian Seminar on
Economics, “International Trade,” held in Taipei, Taiwan on September 5-7, 2003. We thank all the
conference participants for useful comments and great encouragement. The MITI (METI) database was
prepared and analyzed in cooperation with the Applied Research Institute, Inc. and the Research and Statistics
Department, the Minister’s Secretariat, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (currently the
Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry), and the Government of Japan. The opinions expressed in this
paper, though, are those of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Mitsuyo Ando and Fukunari Kimura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Formation of International Production and Distribution Networks in East Asia
Mitsuyo Ando and Fukunari Kimura
NBER Working Paper No. 10167
December 2003
JEL No. F1, F2

                                            ABSTRACT

The international production and distribution networks consist of vertical production chains and

distribution networks extended across a number of countries.            This paper claims that the

international production and distribution networks in East Asia present distinctive characters in their

significance in the regional economy, their geographical extensiveness involving a large number of

countries in the region, and their sophistication of both intra-firm and arm’s-length relationships

across different firm nationalities. The paper starts from reviewing crucial changes in policy

framework observed in the developing East Asian countries a decade ago and sketching the

theoretical thoughts explaining the mechanics of international production and distribution networks.

Then, the empirical part of the paper examines the micro data of Japanese corporate firms to make

a closer look at the nature of networks through the pattern of FDI after analyzing overall trade

patterns of the major East Asian countries to confirm the importance of international trade of

machinery parts and components. In addition, the paper quantifies the magnitude of economic

activities of Japanese firms through different channels of transactions, using the firm nationality

approach. The last part of the paper discusses policy implication of the networks.

Mitsuyo Ando                                           Fukinari Kimura
Faculty of Economics                                   Faculty of Economics
Keio University                                        Keio University
2-15- 45 Mita                                          2-15- 45 Mita
Minato-ku Tokyo                                        Minato-ku Tokyo
108-8345, Japan                                        108-8345, Japan
JZT04263@nifty.ne.jp                                   fkimura@econ.keio.ac.jp
1. Introduction
          The East Asian region has continued to serve as the world’s growth center for
four decades.      In the background of this “East Asian miracle,” the World Bank (1993)
emphasized the existence of well-managed macroeconomic fundamentals and wisely
designed microeconomic policies.      In the last decade, the East Asian economies added
“the formation of international production/distribution networks” to their major
characteristics.
          The international production/distribution networks consist of vertical
production chains extended across the countries in the region as well as distribution
networks throughout the world.       The major players are corporate firms belonging to
the machinery industries including general machinery, electrical machinery, transport
equipment, and precision machinery though some firms in other industries such as
textiles and garment also develop the networks.          While the formation of similar
networks is observed between Germany and Hungary/Czech and between the U.S. and
Mexico, the ones in East Asia are distinctive at least at this moment in time in the
following characteristics: first, they have already become a substantial component of
each country’s economy in the region.       Each country’s manufacturing activities and
international trade cannot be discussed without the networks anymore.         Second, the
networks involve a large number of countries at different income levels.           Cross-
country differences in factor prices and other location advantages seem to be effectively
utilized in the formation of vertical production chains.      Third, the networks include
both intra-firm and arm’s-length relationships, partially across different firm
nationalities. Multinational enterprises (MNEs) as well as indigenous firms in each
country are forming sophisticated inter-firm relationships.
          The formation of international production/distribution networks in East Asia
was initiated by drastic changes in development strategies of each country.   In the mid-
1980s and the early 1990s, the East Asian developing economies started applying new
development strategies in which the benefit from hosting FDI is aggressively explored.
The new development strategies do emphasize the utilization of market forces, but they
are not simple laissez-faire policies; rather, pursue new roles of government
involvement in the process of development.         East Asia is presenting a model of new
development strategies in the globalization era.
          The development of international production/distribution networks in East


                                             3
Asia has also provided substantial impact on our academic thought on trade and FDI
patterns.    The traditional comparative advantage theory still has a certain explanatory
power in the interpretation of across-industry location choices, based on international
differences in technological level and factor prices.   The enhanced importance of the
trade in intermediate goods as well as the industrial clustering, however, has stimulated
the development of new theoretical thoughts in international trade theory, particularly in
the literature of fragmentation theory and agglomeration theory.         In addition, the
sophisticated pattern of intra-firm corporate structure and inter-firm relationship
developed in East Asia has inspired research to incorporate the analysis of corporate
behavior into international trade theory beyond the traditional approach of trade and
FDI.
            The purpose of this paper is to confirm the importance of international
production/distribution networks in East Asia.      Although it is difficult to directly
observe the detailed mechanics of the networks with comprehensive statistics, there
exist various side-evidences as well as theoretical discussions reinforcing the argument.
The next section briefly reviews drastic changes in policy framework observed in the
Southeast Asian countries and China in the latter half of the 1980s and the early 1990s.
Section 3 sketches the current status of theoretical thoughts explaining the mechanics of
international production/distribution networks.     Then, the paper turns to statistical
analysis on the characteristics of the networks in East Asia.   Section 4 presents overall
trade patterns of major East Asian countries and confirms the importance of machinery
trade.   Section 5 utilizes the micro data of Japanese corporate firms and makes a closer
look at the nature of networks through the pattern of FDI.       Section 6 quantifies the
magnitude of economic activities of Japanese firms in different channels of transactions
following the firm nationality approach proposed by Baldwin and Kimura (1998).
Section 7 discusses policy implication of the networks and concludes the paper.


2. Drastic changes in development strategies
            Why has an extensive international production/distribution networks been
formulated in East Asia, and not in other regions such as Latin America? One of the
crucial factors is the set of policies implemented by the East Asian developing




                                            4
economies from the mid-1980s or the early 1990s.1
          Most of the East Asian economies have traditionally applied a “dual track
approach,” that is, an approach trying to foster both import-substituting industries and
export-oriented industries at the same time.        There was, however, an important
difference between forerunners (i.e., Japan, Korea, and Taiwan) and latecomers (i.e., the
Southeast Asian countries and China); the latter actively utilized incoming FDI not only
in export-oriented industries but also in some major import-substituting industries such
as automobiles, domestic electric appliances, pharmaceuticals, food processing, and
others.
          While the latecomer countries have maintained the dual track approach
throughout their path of industrialization, they have changed the weights between
import-substituting industries and export-oriented industries over time.        From the
1970s to the mid-1980s, these countries introduced selective FDI primarily in import-
substituting industries.   At that time, potentially competing domestic industries were
insulated by policies that limit the activities of foreign companies only in
geographically segregated places such as export-processing zones though FDI for export
promotion was indeed invited.    From 1985 or 1986 in Malaysia and Thailand and 1991
or 1992 in the Philippines, Indonesia, and China, however, they began to switch their
FDI hosting policy from selective acceptance policy to basically “accept everybody”
policy.   They started trying to host as many foreign companies as possible and
formulate industrial clusters while still keeping trade protection for import-substituting
industries.
          The dual trade approach requires a complicated policy package.          What a
country has to do to invite export-oriented foreign companies is simple though difficult
to carry it out; it must provide the world’s best or second best location advantages for
incoming investors. Trade protection, of course, negatively affects location advantages.
So as to partially neutralize negative effects of import-substituting industry protection,
the Southeast Asian countries have introduced a duty drawback system, i.e., the system
of refunds of duties and indirect taxes on imported inputs in export production.

1
 Kimura (2003) discusses new development strategies applied by the East Asian
economies more in detail. Pangestu (2003) provides the summarized information on
evolution in industrial policies in East Asia in the 1950s-1990s as well as policies and
measures for promoting exports in Asia.

                                            5
Besides, various types of FDI facilitation measures are crucial to attract foreign
companies.    In particular, aggressive policy of inviting foreign small and medium
enterprises (SMEs) effectively works in the formation of industrial clusters.       These
countries have concentrated their public resources on the development of economic
infrastructure including roads, ports, electricity and water supply, telecommunications,
and industrial estate services.   At the same time, they have improved the services of
FDI-hosting agencies, ending up with yielding considerable facilitation.
          It does not mean that these countries give up fostering local indigenous firms.
Instead of hastily providing protection for immature local entrepreneurs, however, they
set a short-term priority on quickly building up a critical mass of agglomeration and
hooking their economies up to international production/distribution networks by
aggressively inviting foreign companies.        The focus of local industry promotion is
shifted to enhancing capability to penetrate into vertical production chains.    Although
cleaning up inefficient import-substituting industries still has to be considered, new
development strategies with aggressively utilizing incoming FDI bear fruit in the
Southeast Asian countries and China.     This sets a sharp contrast with LDCs in other
parts of the world.


3. Supporting economic logic
          What sort of economic logic explains the mechanics of international
production/distribution networks?    When discussing the international division of labor,
the theory of comparative advantage based on the relative cost of production in autarky
is still valid in a number of circumstances.         Technological gap and factor price
differences explain location patterns of industries to some extent.    In interpreting the
mechanics of international production/distribution networks, however, at least three new
lines of thought must be incorporated into our analytical framework.
          The first line of thought is the fragmentation theory.    It is a powerful tool
when we analyze patterns of vertical FDI going to LDCs to formulate vertical
production links or cross-border production sharing system.2               The traditional
international trade theory primarily explains industry-wise location patterns.     In East


2
   As for the fragmentation theory, see Jones and Kierzkowski (1990), Arndt and
Kierzkowski (2001), Deardorff (2001a), and Cheng and Kierzkowski (2001).

                                            6
Asia, however, production-process-wise location patterns were often observed.              A
typical example is semiconductor-related electronics industry.         This industry as a
whole is obviously capital-intensive or human-capital intensive, but its production
activities are finely segmented and located in various places.          The fragmentation
theory neatly presents the logic behind such a location pattern.
             Deardorff (2001a) defines fragmentation as “the splitting of a product process
into two to more steps that can be undertaken in different locations but that lead to the
same final product.”      Suppose that there is initially a big factory located in Japan
taking care of all the production activities from upstream to downstream.             If we
carefully look at individual production blocks, however, we may find that some
production blocks require close attention by technicians while others are purely labor-
intensive.     If we can locate production blocks separately in Japan, Malaysia, and China,
for instance, we may save the total production cost.    Since the East Asian countries still
have substantial differentials in labor costs, the concept of fragmentation across
different cones formalized by Deardorff (2001b) seems to be particularly useful in
understanding the nature of vertical production chains.
             Fragmentation becomes economical when the cost of service links (SL)
connecting production blocks (PB) is low enough.          SL cost includes transport costs,
telecommunication costs, and various coordination costs between PBs.               SL cost
heavily depends on the nature of technology in each industry.      Globalization, however,
reduces SL cost in general and enables firms in many industries to fragment their PBs
further to reduce the total production cost.       As SL tend to carry strong external
economies of scale, the concentration of fragmented PB is often observed.        The forces
of fragmentation and agglomeration sometimes work in the opposite direction, but
globalization actually accelerates both at the same time, which results in a situation
                                                                                           3
where some countries significantly enjoy the fruit of globalization while others do not.
             The second line of thought is the agglomeration theory.   This is an extension


3
  Where to locate fragmented production blocs also depends on the nature of the
products. For instance, when case of parts and components are considerably
standardized and the delivery timing is not too delicate, firms try to find suppliers of the
cheapest products in the world. On the other hand, when parts and components are
highly customized, and closer communication with suppliers is important, they would
like to form industrial clusters.

                                              7
of international trade theory with external economies of scale while introducing the
concept of “space” from city planning and other academic fields.4 Although the micro-
foundation of spatial agglomeration has not been fully explored, the importance of
agglomeration as a source of location advantage is increasingly recognized in both
theoretical and empirical literature.   Economies of scale or agglomeration effects do
not necessarily depend on the initial condition under autarky; in an extreme case, a
country may start having agglomeration purely by chance.        In this sense, the source of
gains of trade in the “new” international trade theory is logically different from those in
the traditional theory of comparative advantage, and such nature of the “new” theory
addresses the possibility of the new role of government.          Among the factors that
generate location advantages for MNEs to invest, agglomeration is one of the crucial
elements, particularly in LDCs.     Governments in East Asia are obviously conscious of
the potential role of government in formulating agglomeration.
          The third line of thought is the internalization theory of corporate firms.      A
firm typically does not do everything from upstream to downstream.                It sets its
upstream-side boundary by purchasing materials or parts from other firms and
determines its downstream-side boundary by selling their products to other firms or
consumers.     Such a boundary setting decision is here called “internalization decision.”
In addition, a firm cuts its internalized activities into thin slices and places these slices
at appropriate places.       This is called “location decision.”           A firm makes
internalization decision and location decision at the same time, considering its own
firm-specific assets such as technology and managerial know-how.             Internalization
may have different dimensions.      For example, internalization decision would be made
across different functional activities such as financial management, personnel
management, R&D activities, parts procurement, sales activities, and others.
          In East Asia, particularly in China, various kinds of internalization patterns
with innovative inter-firm relationships emerge in the effort of concentrating on core
competences.     OEM contracts, EMS firms, and contractual/ordinary processing are
such examples.     Such sophistication is particularly salient in machinery industries.
Technological progress in the line of developing “modules” accelerates the formation of


4
   As for the agglomeration theory, see Krugman (1991, 1995) and Fujita, Krugman,
and Venables (1999).

                                             8
sophisticated inter-firm relationship.   The international trade theory has not fully
digested elements of ownership advantages and internalization advantages that
Dunning’s OLI theory presents yet.5       However, the importance of internalization
choices cannot be neglected when the division of labor is at issue.       Fragmentation
theory and agglomeration theory must be combined with the internalization theory of
corporate firms.


4. Recent trade flows in East Asia
          Now let us review the trade pattern of East Asia.   It is a well-known fact that
the East Asian economies have rapidly developed intra-regional trade relationships since
the early 1980s.     METI (2003) presents some basic figures.     Intra-regional trade of
East Asia grew from US$104.3 billion in 1981 to US$333.1 billion in 1991, and then
US$702.8 billion in 2001; i.e., it increased by 3.2 times in 1981-1991 and 2.1 times in
1991-2001.       Trade intensity indices among the East Asian economies also had an
upward trend, suggesting the development of increasingly closer economic
relationships.
          Fukao, Ishido, and Ito (2003) decompose trade flows into one-way trade,
vertical intra-industry trade, and horizontal intra-industry trade and compare the trade
pattern in East Asia with the one in Europe.   They find that international trade in East
Asia has still a substantial amount of one-way trade but the share of vertical intra-
industry trade rapidly increases.
          On the top of these findings, we would like to claim that the most important
changes in the trade pattern of the region is an explosive increase in trade of machinery
parts and components.      Table 1 shows the values and shares of exports/imports of
machineries and the parts and components in major East Asian economies in 1996 and
2000.6 Machineries are here defined as HS 84-92; i.e., they include general machinery,
electric machinery, transport equipment, and precision machinery.7 To capture the

5
   As for the OLI theory, see Dunning (1993, pp. 81-). Kimura (2000, 2001) analyzes
the micro data of Japanese manufacturing firms and claims that corporate structure and
inter-firm relationship are jointly chosen with the location of activities.
6
  Due to the lack of data available from UN data sources, Table 1 and Figure 1 do not
include Taiwan, which has also played an important role in developing the networks in
East Asia.
7
  See Table A.1 for definition of parts and components in our study.

                                           9
features of the trade patterns in East Asia more vividly, Figure 1 summarizes the shares
of machineries and the parts and components for economies in East Asia as well as
other regions such as North/South America and Europe in 2000.         Note that Figure 1
plots countries from the one with the highest share of machinery parts and components’
exports, aiming at addressing the relative significance of machinery parts and
components’ trade among countries in various regions.


                                         ==Table 1==
                                         ==Figure 1==


          An astounding fact is that the shares of machineries in each East Asian
country’s total exports and imports are indeed very large.    Except the cases of imports
for Japan and China and exports and imports for Indonesia, the shares of machinery
trade are as high as 40 percent or even higher up to 77 percent for both export and
import sides.   They imply how significant the machinery industries are in the East
Asian economies.    Furthermore, the shares of parts and components in machinery trade
are also very high; they are 40 percent to 50 percent or even reach 80 percent in cases of
the Southeast Asian countries, and the shares are further increasing even in the shirt
period between 1996 and 2000.         These suggest a large portion of back-and-forth
transactions of intermediate goods in the international production/distribution networks
in machinery industries, which are extended across a large number of countries at
different income levels in the region.
          In other regions, on the other hand, higher shares of machinery trade and
those of machinery parts and components’ trade are observed only for some specific
countries such as Mexico, the U.S., Hungary, Czech Republic, and Germany (Figure 1).
These suggest the existence of networks in machinery industries between the U.S. and
Mexico and between Germany and the two East European countries but these networks
are not extensively covering a number of countries.          The fact that the shares of
machinery exports and imports are indeed high but the share of machinery parts and
components’ exports is not such high in Mexico would support the evidence where
Mexico imports machinery parts and components from the U.S., assembles them, and
exports final goods back to the U.S., rather than developing networks across
neighboring countries.


                                             10
          Moreover, other countries, particularly the ones in Latin America, present by
far lower shares of machinery exports than countries in East Asia.        At the same time,
the shares of machinery exports are much lower than the shares of machinery imports in
these countries.   They suggest that machinery industries are not well developed in
these economies yet and they are not forming networks.
          In East Asia, the trade pattern is not simple one-way trade based on
international differences in resource endowments anymore.             Rather, sophisticated
vertical production chains as well as distribution connection are extended to region-
wide networks.     Fragmentation is an obvious phenomenon.          The reduction of service
link costs derives from technological progress in logistics and improved policy
environment, which makes extensive fragmentation possible.           One of the motivations
for fragmentation is to take advantage of factor price differences as suggested by
Deardorff (2001b).    In addition, however, other elements of location advantages such
as service link cost and agglomeration effects are increasingly influential in the location
choices of MNEs.
          Note that not all countries in East Asia are effectively connected with such
networks at this moment.      The CMLV (Cambodia, Myanmar, Laos, and Vietnam)
countries have not been fully involved with the networks yet.          These countries have
substantially low wage levels but are not entirely successful in attracting labor-intensive
production processes.    This fact suggests that government policies to reduce service
link costs and encourage agglomeration are crucially important in order for a country to
hook up itself to international production/distribution networks.


5. Evidence from the micro data of Japanese firms
          Corporate firms in the forerunners of development in the region, Japan, Korea,
and Taiwan have had strong technological competitiveness in machinery manufacturing.
Since machines are typically made of a large number of parts and components, the
competitiveness in machines depends on both the quality/production cost of parts and
components and managerial ability of vertical production networks, in which corporate
firms in East Asia particularly have their strengths.   When these firms became mature
enough to compete in international arena, and the Southeast Asian countries and China
prepared for proper policy environment in the mid-1980s and the 1990s, the formation
of international production/distribution networks was a natural consequence.


                                            11
          The networks consist of both intra-firm geographical extension and inter-firm
business relationships.      Up to the 1980s, an important component of the Japanese
economic system was the subcontracting system (shitauke in Japanese) or long-term
relationships between large downstream assemblers and upstream SMEs.8 However,
the inter-firm relationship of Japanese firms has drastically changed since Japanese
firms started to actively conduct FDI in the mid-1980s.      It is often observed that both
large assemblers and SMEs make FDI together to form a certain size of agglomeration
in Southeast Asia or China.       Even in such cases, upstream-downstream relationships
become more competitive, non-exclusive ones.         With strict cost consideration, many
Japanese firms are now open to extend their production chains to firms with other
nationalities as far as the technological level meets.
          Although it is very difficult to trace the nature of such corporate relationships
by statistical figures, this section attempts to present some evidence of corporate firms’
behavior to understand the mechanics of international production/distribution networks
in East Asia by analizing the firm-level micro data of Japanese corporate firms.    Tables
in this section are constructed from either of the two sets of micro data, both of which
are conducted by Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI), Government of
Japan: 1) the F/Y 1996 and F/Y 2001 Basic Survey of Business Structure and Activity
and 2) the F/Y 1999 Survey (the 27th Basic Survey) of Overseas Business Activities of
Japanese Companies.         The first firm-level database provides detailed information on
parent firms located in Japan and also the number, industry, and regional location of
their foreign affiliates.    In Tables 2 to 5, constructed from this database, foreign
affiliates are defined as those with no less than 20 percent Japanese ownership.       The
second database presents information on the performance of foreign affiliates.          In
Table 6, obtained from this database, foreign affiliates include both “affiliates abroad”
with no less than 10 percent ownership by Japanese parent firms and “affiliates of
affiliates abroad” with no less than 50 percent ownership by “affiliates abroad” (call
both of them “Japanese affiliates abroad” hereinafter). A more detailed explanation of
these databases is given in Appendix 1.
          Table 2 presents (a) the number of parent firms with foreign affiliates and the


8
 As for the economic interpretation of the Japanese subcontracting system, see Kimura
(2002).

                                             12
number of foreign affiliates; (b) the number of parent firms with affiliates in East Asia
and the number of affiliates in East Asia; (c) the number of parent firms with affiliates
in North America and the number of affiliates in North America; and (d) the number of
parent firms with affiliates in Europe and the number of affiliates in Europe, by the
industry of parent firms and by the industry of affiliates in 2000.9 In 2000, 3,773 out
of 27,655 firms located in Japan (in the data set) totally have 18,943 foreign affiliates.
Among them, 2,994 firms have 10,224 affiliates in East Asia.        That is, as many as 80
percent of the Japanese firms going abroad has at least one affiliate in East Asia, and 54
percent of the foreign affiliates of Japanese firms are located in East Asia.


                                       ==Table 2==


          Japanese manufacturing parent firms, particularly machinery parent firms are
active investors in East Asia; close to 70 percent of the Japanese parent firms with
affiliates in East Asia are in the manufacturing sector (Industries 120 to 320) and half of
them are in the machinery sector (290 to 320).       The pattern observed for affiliates in
East Asia by the industry of affiliates also reveals how dominant manufacturing
activities are in East Asia, which is clearly different from the patterns for affiliates in
North America or Europe.      In East Asia, 60 percent of the affiliates in the region are
manufacturing, regardless of the industries of their parent firms, while 38 percent of the
affiliates in North America and 31 percent of the affiliates in Europe are.10          The
number of affiliates actually increased in the five years, 1995-2000, from 9,132 to
10,224 in East Asia while the numbers decreased from 3,928 to 3,499 in North America
and from 3,019 to 2,913 in Europe. Manufacturing activities are dominant and have
been intensified in East Asia in terms of both Japanese parent firms and their affiliates.
          Japanese SMEs with regular workers of less than 300 have greatly contributed
to such expansion of manufacturing activities in East Asia by Japanese firms.       Table 3
presents the number of Japanese parent firms with affiliates in East Asia, North America,
and Europe in 2000 by the size of parent firms and by the number of affiliates.        The



9
 See Table A.2 for industry classification.
10
  See Kimura and Ando (2003) for comparative study between Latin America and East
Asia, based on the micro data of Japanese corporate firms.

                                            13
table shows that more than 40 percent of the Japanese firms going to East Asia are
SMEs while the shares are much lower in North America and Europe.             Furthermore,
the fact that a considerable number of firms, including SMEs, have plural affiliates in
East Asia also supports that Japanese SMEs are actively involved in manufacturing
activities in the region.      Such active FDI by Japanese SMEs in East Asia have
contributed to forming a critical mass of industrial clusters.


                                        ==Table 3==


              As suggested by Table 2, Japanese parent firms do not necessarily establish
affiliates in their own industries where they have main activities.11 In general, parent
firms have various activities across industries and establish foreign affiliates in order to
conduct a subset of those activities.      Table 4 provides the detailed information on
sector switching between parent firms and their affiliates in East Asia; Table 4 (a)
includes all sized Japanese firms with affiliates and Table 4 (b) focuses on SMEs.     The
rows denote the industry of parent firms while the columns the industry of foreign
affiliates.     Thus, diagonal cells of the tables indicate the number of non-sector-
switching affiliates while off-diagonal cells denote the number of sector-switching
affiliates.


                                        ==Table 4==


              In East Asia, 75 percent of the affiliates owned by all sized manufacturing
parent firms are in the manufacturing sector.12 Among them, we observe many sector-
switching manufacturing affiliates with manufacturing parent firms (in non-diagonal
cells for industries 120 to 340 in both rows and columns), in particular sector-switching
machinery affiliates with manufacturing parent firms (in non-diagonal cells for
industries 120 to 340 in rows and industries 290 to 320 in columns).      In addition, even


11
   A firm often has various activities at the same time. The industrial classification of a
firm located in Japan is determined by the largest activities the concerned firm conducts
in terms of the value of sales.
12
   In the case of manufacturing SMEs, the share of manufacturing affiliates is much
higher; as many as 87 percent of their affiliates are manufacturing.

                                             14
manufacturing SMEs have sector-switching manufacturing affiliates, particularly sector-
switching machinery affiliates in East Asia, which is not often observed in North
America or Europe.        Such behavior is typical in manufacturing activities aimed at
supplying intermediate goods for other firms or for their own affiliates.   It implies that
Japanese firms have played an important role in developing vertical production
networks in the region.
          Moreover, manufacturing parent firms also have non-manufacturing affiliates,
particularly in the wholesale trade sector.        Sector-switching non-manufacturing
affiliates with manufacturing parent firms (in cells for industries 120 to 340 in rows and
industries 480 and others in columns) make up 25 percent of the affiliates owned by all-
sized manufacturing parent firms and 13 percent of the affiliates owned by
manufacturing SMEs, suggesting that another strategy in East Asia is to establish global
production/distribution networks by internalizing wholesale trade activities.   Note that
these ratios are much smaller than in North America (49 percent for all sized firms and
48 percent for SMEs) and Europe (60 percent and 51 percent).
          Before moving to the performance of Japanese affiliates abroad, let us
formally analyze the characteristics of Japanese parent firms going to East Asia.    Table
5 reports (a) the results of logit regression analysis for Japanese parent firms in all
sectors and (b) the results of Japanese manufacturing parent firms.         The dependent
variable for regression No.1 in both tables is whether a firm has foreign affiliate(s) or
not.   Similarly, the dependent variable for regression No.2/No.3/No.4 is whether a firm
has affiliate(s) in East Asia/North America/Europe.     The independent variables are the
number of regular workers (in log), tangible assets per regular workers, foreign sales,
R&D expenditure, and advertisement expenditure.13 For the whole samples, firms with
foreign affiliates are likely to have large employment size, capital-intensive technology,
large foreign sales, and large R&D expenditure.       The coefficients for both the firms’
size and R&D expenditure in the case of affiliates in East Asia are much smaller than
those in the case of North America and Europe.      It can be concluded that firms going
to East Asia are relatively small as we have descriptively discussed, and thus less R&D
intensive, compared with firms going to North America or Europe.


13
  Note that variables for foreign sales, R&D expenditure, and advertisement
expenditure are in ratios to total sales.

                                            15
                                        ==Table 5==


            Table 6, in turn, focuses on the performance of Japanese affiliates in East Asia,
North America, and Europe.       The table presents (a) the destination of sales and (b) the
origin of purchases by Japanese affiliates in East Asia.    Most of the goods and services
produced by Japanese affiliates in East Asia go to the local market, to Japan, or to other
East Asian countries: 49.6 percent for local, 21.9 percent for Japan, and 21.2 percent for
countries within the region except local and Japan.14 By-origin purchases by Japanese
affiliates in East Asia also show that they purchase most goods and services from the
local market (41.1 percent), or import them from Japan (33.4 percent) or from other
East Asian countries (20.7 percent).     Japan’s share in purchases is slightly higher than
in sales, probably due to the supply of complicated machinery parts and components
from Japan.15     These reveal that more than 90 percent of the sales and purchases by
Japanese affiliates are among the East Asian countries, including Japan, and suggest the
presence of active intra-regional production networks in East Asia.


                                        ==Table 6==


            In the case of North America and Europe, in contrast, sales to Japan are fairly
small; 5.2 percent and 5.8 percent, respectively.       In addition, more than half of the
sales of the affiliates in the regions are from affiliates in non-manufacturing sector (59.2
percent for North America and 63.4 percent for Europe), particularly in wholesale trade
sector (47.5 percent and 44.2 percent).     This indicates that they aim to sell products in
the local market or in countries nearby rather than forming vertical chains of production
networks.
            The empirical observation we have discussed may not directly prove the
relevance of three lines of new theoretical thought.     However, active FDI by Japanese
SMEs, the existence of many sector-switching manufacturing affiliates, and intra-



14
   Contrary to popular opinion, sales to North America by Japanese affiliates in East
Asia are small (3.4 percent). Sales to Europe are also small (2.6 percent).
15
   The share of purchases from North America is quite small.

                                             16
regional trade by Japanese affiliates indeed imply how such logics work in developing
international production/distribution networks in East Asia.


6. Evidence from the firm nationality approach
            The last section tried to capture the activities of Japanese firms in East Asia
by analyzing affiliate holdings and by-destination sales/by-origin purchases.        These
statistical figures, however, does not directly indicate the magnitude of Japanese firms’
activities in exporting from Japan and producing in East Asia and who is trading with
whom.       The amount of gross sales does not necessarily reflect the importance of each
transaction since intermediate inputs embodied in traded commodities may be counted
multiple times.     One of the ways to quantify the importance of transactions is to
introduce the concept of value added contents.
            To quantify the whole Japanese firms’ activities in different locations and
embodied value added contents in international transactions, this section employs the
firm nationality approach, which is first proposed by Baldwin and Kimura (1998) and
Kimura and Baldwin (1998) in a two-country setting and is extended to a three-country
setting by Kimura (1998).         The three-country setting thinks of three geographical
                             16
territories, i.e., Japan, Asia, and the rest of the world (ROW) as well as three nationals,
i.e., Japanese, Asians, and foreigners (the national of ROW).       "Japanese" consist of
Japanese-owned firms located in Japan, households and governments located in Japan,
and foreign affiliates of Japanese firms (FAJFs) located in Asia and ROW.17         Asians
and foreigners are defined in the symmetric way.          Three nationals reside in three
different locations, and thus 9 blocks are drawn as in Figure 2.             Conceptually,
transactions within a block and between blocks are illustrated as 81 (9 times 9) arrows
in total.    We can, however, fill out 14 arrows of transactions because only statistical
data from the Japanese side are readily available.
            The numbers shown for 14 arrows in Figure 2 stand for the estimated
Japanese value added contents of each transaction added at the starting point of the
corresponding arrow in 2000.          Table A.3 provides the summary table and the

16
  Asia stands for Asian countries east of Pakistan in this section.
17
  Note that "Japanese" in this definition is different from those on the residency basis or
those in the sense of factor holders; we treat FAJF as controlled by Japanese and count
the whole activities of FAJF as activities by Japanese.

                                             17
estimation method of each estimate. Additional explanation of estimation method and
data description is given in Appendix 2 as well. Table 7 presents estimates of the value
added contents embodied in sales by Japanese to Asians in Asia and to foreigners in
ROW, estimated based on Table A.3.


                                       ==Figure 2==
                                       ==Table 7==


          Although these figures are only rough estimates with a number of reservations
on the data set, the value added account provides useful insights on the activities of
Japanese MNEs, including intra-firm and arm’s length relationships.          Major findings
are the following three.   First, activities of Japanese firms have gradually shifted from
Japan to Asia.   When we focus on Japanese firms who sell products to Asians in Asia,
value added contents of “to produce in Japan and distributing through FAJF in Asia”
and value added contents of “to produce in Asia and sell locally” increased from 1996 to
2000 (increase in the share by 2.1 percent) while the share of “to produce in Japan and
export directly” decreased by 3.7 percent.18       Also, when we compare value added
contents of “to produce in Asia and sell locally” with “to produce in Japan and
distributing through FAJF in Asia”, the former becomes larger in 2000 though it was
smaller in 1996. This implies that importance of local value added has enhanced vis-à-
vis inputs from Japan.
          Second, international production/distribution networks consist not only of
Japanese firms but also of the mixture of firms of different nationalities.     When value
added in exports by Japanese in Japan to Asians (Asian firms) and foreigners (MNEs
other than Japanese) in Asia is compared with that to Japanese (Japanese affiliates in
Asia) in Asia, for instance, the former is larger than the latter.   Thus, it is not true that
the activities by Japanese firms are solely based on subcontracting relationships or intra-
firm relationships between Japanese parent firms and Japanese affiliates in East Asia
though such activities still consist of a significant portion; rather the activities do




18
 The same analysis (Figure 2 and Table 7) was also conducted for 1996, but the results
were omitted in the paper.

                                             18
include transactions with indigenous firms and MNEs in Asia.19
             In addition, when we again focus on Japanese firms who sell products to
Asians in Asia, the channel for direct exports to Asia from Japan is still important as the
share of “to produce in Japan and export directly” suggests; 58.3 percent in 2000.       In
direct exports from Japan to Asia, capital goods for “Asian” firms are certainly
significant. Besides, intermediate inputs, particularly machinery parts and components,
for “Asian” firms are also large; combined with the information on Japan’s export in
Table 1, roughly one-third to half of them are machinery parts and components.
             Third, the connection with North America or Europe is thin for both exports
and imports. Among several channels for Japanese firms to sell products, the shares of
“to produce in ROW and export to Asia” and “to produce in Asia and export to ROW”
are pretty small.     These low ratios imply weak connections with North America and
Europe, confirming that contrary to popular opinion, sales to North America by
Japanese affiliates in East Asia are small.


7. Current policy issues
             This paper claimed the importance of international production/distribution
networks in East Asia.      In fact, the formation of the networks carries profound policy
implication. This concluding section provides brief discussion on this matter.
             The dual track approach has so far worked pretty well in East Asia.   Figure 3
presents over-time changes in the customs duty import ratios in East Asian developing
countries.     This is the ratio of total customs duty revenue of a country to the c.i.f.-
based import value.      It is immediately noticed that the ratios are much smaller than
average tariff figures that we usually discuss as an indicator for trade barriers.
Moreover, the ratios present clear decreasing trends over time.     These phenomena are
partly due to unilateral tariff reduction for IT-related products in the 1990s and also due
to the effective usage of duty drawback system.         In fact, MNEs in export-oriented


19
  The transactions between Japanese firms in Japan and Japanese affiliates in ROW are
indeed large, but the purpose is to sell Japanese products locally (in North America or
Europe) rather than contributing to forming networks. This is consistent with the facts
observed in Section 5 that the large portion of affiliates in North America and Europe is
in the wholesale trade sector and more than 40% of the total sales by affiliates in North
America or Europe are from affiliates in the wholesale trade sector.

                                              19
industries are now paying very small amount of tariffs in these countries.           Such a
policy package has at least partially mitigated anti-export biases with trade protection
for import-substituting industries and has allowed them to attract both import-
substituting FDI and export-oriented FDI so far.


                                       ==Figure 3==


           However, further activating the international production/distribution networks
requires new policy setting.    First, fostering import-substituting industries was not after
all very successful with a few exceptions, and the cost of protection gradually becomes
unbearable. Indeed, Southeast Asian countries and China still have high tariffs for a
number of import-substituting industries.          To substitute imports by domestic
production, governments of these countries have for long provided trade protection for
domestic firms or incoming foreign companies.        However, trade protection cannot still
be removed because of the long-lasting poor competitiveness of these industries.        The
protection cost is borne by consumers and other industries including export-oriented
industries. It cannot be continued forever, and policymakers gradually recognize that
it is now the time to reorganize these industries in a more competitive environment.
These industries include automobiles, domestic electric appliances, petrochemicals, and
iron and steel.
           Second, even if tariffs are properly removed, business environment of East
Asia is still far from borderless.    Cross-border transaction costs are high for various
reasons.   Physical infrastructure in transportation and telecommunications is one of the
important factors to improve the business environment.        Trade facilitation in customs
clearance and other bureaucratic procedures is another vital element.           As a more
abstract form of transaction costs, legal systems and economic institutions such as
standards, intellectual property rights protection, and dispute settlement facilities, are
also crucial.     To keep attracting FDI and encourage the formulation of agglomeration,
policies beyond simple tariff removal become essential.
           Third, the sophistication of networks and the development of agglomeration
require extensive involvement of local indigenous firms.       The focus of local industry
promotion is not placed on infant industry protection for import substitution anymore.
Rather, the issue is what the government can do in order to make local indigenous firms


                                             20
penetrate into international vertical production chains.         Policymakers know that
impatient performance requirements for foreign companies such as local contents
requirement and technology transfer requirement have not worked very well.
Government-financed technology development centers for local technicians have also
borne lukewarm results in many cases.         The governments should ultimately make
effort in enhancing human resources for both entrepreneurs and engineers, but human
capital development takes time.     The role of government is obviously important, but
there is no easy policy to reach the goal.
          These three issues are, to the authors’ opinion, natural policy agenda in the
formation of the international production/distribution networks, and we hope that
policymakers in this region have clear mind in confronting with these issues.   The East
Asian countries are now actively engaging the effort toward formulating regional trade
arrangements.      The contents of such arrangements are expected to reflect necessary
policy reform in the East Asian countries.




References
Ando, Mitsuyo and Estevadeordal, Antoni. (2003) “Trade Policy Formation in Latin
      America and Asia-Pacific: A Comparative Analysis.” Mimeo.
Arndt, S. W., & Kierzkowski, H. (2001). Fragmentation: New Production Patterns in
      the World Economy.      Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Baldwin, Robert E. and Kimura, Fukunari. (1998) “Measuring U.S. International Goods
      and Services Transactions.”       In R. E. Baldwin, R. E. Lipsey, and J. D.
      Richardson, eds., Geography and Ownership as Bases for Economic Accounting.
      Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Cheng, Leonard K. and Kierzkowski, Henryk. (2001) Global Production and Trade in
      East Asia.    Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Deardorff, A. V. (2001a) “Fragmentation in Simple Trade Models.”         North American
      Journal of Economics and Finance, 12: 121-137.
Deardorff, Alan V. (2001b) “Fragmentation across Cones.”          In Sven W. Arndt and
      Henryk Kierzkowski, eds., Fragmentation: New Production Patterns in the World
      Economy.      Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dunning, John H. (1993) Multinational Enterprises and the Global Economy.


                                             21
      Wokingham: Addison-Wesley.
Fujita, Masahisa; Krugman, Paul; and Venables, Anthony J. (1999) The Spatial
      Economy: Cities, Regions, and International Trade.   Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Fukao, Kyoji; Ishido, Hikari; and Ito, Keiko. (2003) “Vertical Intra-Industry Trade and
      Foreign Direct Investment in East Asia.”   RIETI Discussion Paper Series 03-E-
      001.
Jones, R. W. and Kierzkowski, Henryk. (1990) “The Role of Services in Production and
      International Trade: A Theoretical Framework.” In Ronald W. Jones and Anne O.
      Krueger, eds., The Political Economy of International Trade: Essays in Honor of
      Robert E. Baldwin.    Oxford, Basil Blackwell.
Kimura, Fukunari. (1998) “Japanese Multinationals and Regional Integration in Asia.”
      In Kiichiro Fukasaku, Fukunari Kimura, and Shujiro Urata, eds., Asia & Europe:
      Beyond Competing Regionalism.      Brington: Sussex Academic Press.
Kimura, Fukunari. (2000) “Location and Internalization Decisions: Sector Switching in
      Japanese Outward Foreign Direct Investment.” In Takatoshi Ito and Anne O.
      Krueger, eds,, The Role of Foreign Direct Investment in East Asian Economic
      Development.     Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kimura, Fukunari. (2002) “Subcontracting and the Performance of Small and Medium
      Firms in Japan.”   Small Business Economics 18: 163-175.
Kimura, Fukunari. (2003) “Development Strategies for Economies under Globalisation:
      Southeast Asia as a New Development Model.” Forthcoming in Tran Van Hoa
      and Charles Harvie, eds., New Asian Regionalism: Responses to Globalisation
      and Crises.    London: Palgrave.
Kimura, Fukunari and Ando, Mitsuyo. (2003) “Fragmentation and Agglomeration
      Matter: Japanese Multinationals in Latin America and East Asia.”           North
      American Journal of Economics and Finance, Vol. 14, Issue 3: 287-317.
Kimura, Fukunari and Baldwin, Robert E. (1998) “Application of a Nationality-
      Adjusted Net Sales and Value Added Framework: The Case of Japan.”        In R. E.
      Baldwin, R. E. Lipsey, and J. D. Richardson, eds., Geography and Ownership as
      Bases for Economic Accounting.     Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Krugman, Paul. (1991) “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography.”          Journal of
      Political Economy 99: 183-199.
Krugman, Paul. (1995) Development, Geography, and Economic Theory.          Cambridge:


                                          22
     The MIT Press.
Management and Coordination Agency, Government of Japan. (1999) 1995 Input-
     Output Tables: Explanatory Report.      Tokyo: Management and Coordination
     Agency, Government of Japan.
The Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI), Government of Japan. (2001)
     White Paper on International Trade 2001 (Japanese version). Tokyo: METI
The Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI), Government of Japan. (2002a)
     The 35th Survey of Japanese Affiliates of Foreign Firms (Japanese version).
     Tokyo: Printing Office, Ministry of Finance, Government of Japan.
The Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI), Government of Japan. (2002b)
     The 31th Survey of Overseas Business Activities of Japanese Companies
     (Japanese version). Tokyo: Printing Office, Ministry of Finance, Government of
     Japan.
The Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI), Government of Japan. (2003)
     White Paper on International Trade 2003 (Japanese version). Tokyo: METI.
Pangestu, Mari. (2003) in Bernard Hoekman, Philip English and, Aaditya Matto eds.,
     Development, Trade, and the WTO: A Handbook. Washington D.C.: World Bank.
The World Bank. (1993) The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy.
     Oxford: Oxford University Press.




                                        23
Appendix 1: data sources for section 5
           The Basic Survey of Business Structure and Activity (Kigyo Katsudo Kihon
Chosa in Japanese) is the MITI survey, first conducted for F/Y 1991, then for F/Y 1994,
and annually since then.     The Basic Survey has several attractive features.   First, the
samples in the survey are comprehensive, covering all firms with more than 50 workers,
capital of more than 30 million yen, and establishments in mining, manufacturing,
wholesale/retail trade, and restaurants.     Foreign affiliates covered in the survey are
those with no less than 20 percent Japanese ownership.             Second, the ratios of
questionnaire returns are high; the actual ratios are not disclosed, but are about 90 to 95
percent.    Statistics collected by the Government of Japan are legally classified into
two categories: designated statistics (shitei toukei) and approved statistics (shounin
toukei).   The Basic Survey is the first type, and thus firms in the survey must return the
questionnaires under the Statistics Law.     Third, it provides firm-level data rather than
the data on an establishment basis.       Although establishment-level data are useful in
analyzing production activities, firm-level data are much more appropriate to examine
corporate activities as a whole.
           The Survey of Overseas Business Activities of Japanese Companies, which is
also conducted by MITI, has been conducted annually since F/Y 1970.         Firms targeted
by the survey are those with Japanese affiliates abroad of Japanese firms, except firms
in finance, insurance, or real estates.   The Survey of Overseas Business Activities is of
the approved type, so that the effective return ratios tend to be as low as 60 percent (in
the case of the F/Y 1999 Survey, the returned ratio is 56.0 percent).     As explained in
section 5, Japanese affiliates abroad include both “affiliates abroad” with no less than 10
percent ownership by Japanese parent firms and “affiliates of affiliates abroad” with
more than 50% ownership by such “affiliates abroad”, but the survey can distinguish the
former and the latter if necessary.
           The industry classification used in this paper is presented in Table A.2.
Since the industry classification of the Survey of Overseas Business Activities is
different from that of the Basic Survey, the latter industry classification is matched with
the former to make them comparable.          Unfortunately, services sectors are not fully
covered by both surveys.


Appendix 2: the estimation method and data sources for section 6


                                             24
          The detailed estimation method is described in Table A.3.         Japanese value
added in exports of Japanese-owned firms is calculated by subtracting the import
component in the exports.       The proportion of the import component in exports
(8.504%) is obtained from Management and Coordination Agency (1999) (1995 Input-
Output Tables).     Exports of Japanese-owned firms are calculated by subtracting
exports of JAFF from exports of Japan.       The data for exports of JAFF are available
from METI (2002a).      Assuming that the ratio of value added to sales is the same no
matter where the sales destination is, we obtain the Japanese value added in exports of
Japanese-owned firms to FAJF in Asia (7,205,530 million JP Yen), to FAJF in ROW
(21,084,637 million JP Yen), to Asians in Asia (10,710,170 million JP Yen), and to
foreigners in ROW (3,132,287 million JP Yen).       There is no information on exports to
foreigners in Asia or exports to Asians in ROW.
          Value added earned by FAJF in Asia (8,054,035 million JP Yen) is calculated
as sales minus purchases, which are available from METI (2002b).          Assuming again
that the ratio of value added to sales is the same no matter where the sales destination is,
we obtain the value added by FAJF in goods and services sold to Japanese located in
Japan (1,611,093 million JP Yen), to Japanese located in Asia (2,409,228 million JP
Yen), to Japanese located in ROW (83,975 million JP Yen), to Asians located in Asia
(3,613,841 million JP Yen), and to foreigners located in ROW (335,899 million JP Yen).
Data are not available for sales by FAJF to Asians in Japan and ROW, or those to
foreigners in Japan and ROW.       Value added by FAJF in ROW in goods and services
sold to various places is estimated in the same way.
          METI (2002a) defines Japanese affiliates of foreign firms as those with
foreign share of more than one-third.    Therefore, exports of JAFFs in the analysis are
those by such affiliates.   METI (2002b) defines Japanese affiliates abroad as both
“affiliates abroad” with no less than 10 percent ownership by Japanese parent firms and
“affiliates of affiliates abroad” with more than 50% ownership by such “affiliates
abroad” as mentioned above.      Thus, sales and purchases by FAJFs in the analysis are
those by such affiliates.    In METI (2002b), it is known that exports in sales and
imports in purchases by FAJFs are overstated because FAJFs are sometimes reported as
exports/imports when they are selling local but the ultimate destinations/origins are
foreign countries. We therefore regard 30 percent of sales and purchases to/from Japan
and ROW in manufacturing as of local transactions.        Moreover, there is no available


                                            25
information on the magnitude of transactions among FAJFs in METI (2002b).               We
therefore use 0.4 (0.6) as a proxy of the ratio of sales to FAJFs (Asians) in local sales by
FAJFs in Asia, 0.2 (0.8) as a proxy of the ratio of sales to FAJFs (foreigners) in sales to
ROW by FAJFs in Asia, 0.4 (0.6) as a proxy of the ratio of sales to FAJFs in Asia
(Asians) in sales to Asia by FAJFs in ROW, and 0.2 (0.8) as a proxy of the ratio of sales
to FAJFs (foreigners) in local sales by FAJFs in ROW.
          Since both METI (2002a) and METI (2002b) are approved statistics, the
returned ratios are not so high. As for METI (2002a), 1,935 out of 3,742 parent firms
returned the questionnaires (the returned ratio is 51.7 percent).    In the case of METI
(2002b), 2,157 out of 3,430 parent firms returned the questionnaires (the returned ratio
is 62.9 percent), and the number of Japanese affiliates abroad covered is 14,991.




                                            26
Table 1 Importance of Machinery Trade in the East Asian Economies
                                                      Exports                       Imports                      Exports                               Imports
                                                1996          2000           1996             2000        1996             2000                 1996             2000
                                                                     Japan                                                         Thailand
Value
 Total (US$1000)                            410,944,244 479,244,574     349,185,062 379,661,760         55,672,988 68,780,636               72,311,216 61,445,996
Share
 of machinery goods in total                     74.9%       74.9%            28.1%            32.0%        40.3%           45.6%                50.4%            47.1%
 of parts and components in total                35.4%       36.2%            12.1%            16.1%        21.7%           28.7%                30.3%            34.0%
 of parts and components in machinery goods      47.3%       48.3%            43.1%            50.2%        54.0%           62.8%                60.1%            72.2%

                                                                  Korea                                                           Philippines
Value
 Total (US$1000)                            129,696,331 172,264,221   150,320,064 160,477,507           20,537,617 38,072,479               34,697,094 33,802,416
Share
 of machinery goods in total                     54.2%       59.6%         40.9%       41.4%                58.7%           77.4%                53.8%            54.1%
 of parts and components in total                24.1%       29.0%         20.7%       26.5%                46.5%           60.9%                35.7%            43.4%
 of parts and components in machinery goods      44.5%       48.7%         50.6%       64.0%                79.1%           78.7%                66.4%            80.2%

                                                               Hong Kong                                                          Indonesia
Value
 Total (US$1000)                            180,914,323 202,683,171  201,282,410 214,039,820            49,811,786 62,117,778               42,923,875 33,509,943
Share
 of machinery goods in total                     38.8%       45.5%        41.7%       47.6%                 10.7%           18.1%                42.2%            28.7%
 of parts and components in total                19.5%       27.0%        20.2%       28.7%                  4.4%            9.3%                21.7%            15.7%
 of parts and components in machinery goods      50.4%       59.4%        48.5%       60.2%                 41.8%           51.2%                51.4%            54.6%

                                                                Singapore                                                           China
Value
 Total (US$1000)                            122,882,738 137,803,198   131,337,708 134,544,130          151,046,318 249,201,432           138,831,036 225,091,657
Share
 of machinery goods in total                     70.4%       71.8%         63.0%       65.3%                26.6%           36.2%                42.5%            44.3%
 of parts and components in total                36.8%       45.7%         39.0%       46.0%                10.0%           15.3%                19.2%            28.1%
 of parts and components in machinery goods      52.3%       63.7%         62.0%       70.4%                37.4%           42.3%                45.3%            63.5%

                                                                   Malaysia
Value
 Total (US$1000)                                78,308,476 98,224,808     77,901,213 81,287,187
Share
 of machinery goods in total                        57.3%      64.4%          62.7%       66.0%
 of parts and components in total                   33.7%      41.9%          42.4%       52.5%
 of parts and components in machinery goods         58.9%      65.0%          67.7%       79.5%
Data source: Authors' calculation , based on PC-TAS (UN Comtrade only for Hong Kong's exports).

                                                                                27
   %                  Figure 1 Machinery goods and the parts and components: shares in total exports and imports in 2000
       80                                        Note: Data for Russia and Slovakia are of 1999 due to lack of data in PC-TAC (1996-2000).
        PHILIPPINES
            SINGAPORE
       70         MALAYSIA
                      JAPAN

                                KOREA
       60
                                    THAILAND
                                         HONG KONG
       50

                                                                              CHINA

       40



       30                                                                              INDONESIA



       20



       10



        0
          M .K.
           K ch
                     G




   IN B ia
    O C D




           N l
       Li SIA
        Sl ada




         rg ia
            U ry




         CH kia




            lo ia




         Ec ru
    M AP S




          Es A




                     a
       LA E




       A EA
        H N




            Fr y




                     a

             La a
         JA IA




            Ru ia


                     a



        ua la
    TH OR .




          er o




          Ca nd




        en as




                      r
            Po ce




         on le
        K .A




        O zi




                  do
                  al
                 tin
                  di




                  bi
                 an
       G xic
       G E
      A OR




                 N




                  n
                 N




       A uan




       Co ss
                IN
               PA




                 tv




      G zue
                   i
                ga




                Pe
      V dur
                an
     N ze




      D ra
                la




              Ch
                 S




               m
     N IN




               U




               to
                a




               In




               m
               .S




              ua
                n
              O
              A




              m




             en
              E
             Y




            ov
              e
            un




            te
             e
           th
          IL
   SI IPP




       G




       H
     IL
PH




  H




            Exports: machinery goods                                             Imports: machinery goods
            Exports: parts and components in machinery goods                     Imports: parts and components in machinery goods

Data source: Authors' calculation , based on PC-TAS (UN Comtrade only for exports of Hong Kong and exports and imports of Russia and Slovakia).

                                                                         28
Table 2 Japanese Parent Firms and Foreign Affiliates by Industry, 2000 F/Y
                           By Industry of Parent Firm              By Industry of Affiliate                                By Industry of Parent Firm                       By Industry of Affiliate
                       Number of           Number of                 Number of                                        Number of            Number of                            Number of
     Industry       Parent Firms     %      Affiliates     %           Affiliates        %           Industry       Parent Firms       %     Affiliates             %            Affiliates      %
(a) Parent Firms with Foreign Affiliates                                                         (b) Parent Firms with Affiliates in East Asia
     Manufacturing sector                                                                            Manufacturing sector
     Non-machinery sectors                                                                             Non-machinery sectors
       120-280, 340        1259 33.4             4779 25.2                 4427 23.4                   120-280, 340         1038 34.7            2910          28.5                  3198      31.3
     Machinery sectors                                                                                 Machinery sectors
          290                378 10.0            1821     9.6                961        5.1               290                286      9.6          810          7.9                   543       5.3
          300                489 13.0            2608 13.8                 2024 10.7                      300                429 14.3            1598          15.6                  1475      14.4
          310                283    7.5          1526     8.1              1168         6.2               310                222      7.4          752          7.4                   664       6.5
          320                 96    2.5           426     2.2                292        1.5               320                 75      2.5          226          2.2                   202       2.0
     Sub total             2505 66.4           11160 58.9                  8872 46.8                 Sub total              2050 68.5            6296          61.6                  6082      59.5

    Non-manufacturing sector                                                                            Non-manufacturing sector
          480            864 22.9                  6460 34.1                  5790 30.6                       480            697 23.3                  3350 32.8                     2627 25.7
       Others            404 10.7                  1323   7.0                 4281 22.6                    Others            247   8.3                  578   5.7                    1515 14.8
    Sub total           1268 33.6                  7783 41.1                 10071 53.2                 Sub total            944 31.5                  3928 38.4                     4142 40.5
    Total               3773 100.0                18943 100.0                18943 100.0                Total               2994 100.0                10224 100.0                   10224 100.0

(c) Parent Firms with Affiliates in North America                                                (d) Parent Firms with Affiliates in Europe
     Manufacturing sector                                                                            Manufacturing sector
      Non-machinery sectors                                                                            Non-machinery sectors
      120-280, 340           460 28.9           843         24.1                 592    16.9           120-280, 340          251 27.5                   647        22.2                362     12.4
      Machinery sectors                                                                                Machinery sectors
          290               205 12.9            411         11.7                187      5.3              290                130 14.2                  468     16.1                    157      5.4
          300               215 13.5            434         12.4                223      6.4              300                148 16.2                  436     15.0                    214      7.3
          310               178 11.2            383         10.9                291      8.3              310                 87      9.5              256      8.8                    132      4.5
          320                 47     3.0         79          2.3                 41      1.2              320                 34      3.7               89      3.1                     36      1.2
     Sub total             1105 69.4          2150          61.4               1334     38.1         Sub total               650 71.1                 1896     65.1                    901     30.9

    Non-manufacturing sector                                                                            Non-manufacturing sector
          480                 340 21.4               1085 31.0                  1179 33.7                      480                 193 21.1              871 29.9                   1308 44.9
        Others                147      9.2            264      7.5               986 28.2                    Others                  71     7.8          146      5.0                704 24.2
    Sub total                 487 30.6               1349 38.6                  2165 61.9               Sub total                  264 28.9             1017 34.9                   2012 69.1
    Total                    1592 100.0              3499 100.0                 3499 100.0              Total                      914 100.0            2913 100.0                  2913 100.0
Data source: MITI database.
Notes: Others includes industries "050", "540", and "other".
       Number of affiliates for the cases (a), (b), (c), and (d) are the (a) number of foreign affiliates, (b) number of affiliates in East Asia, (c) number of affiliates in North America,
    and (d) number of affiliates in Europe, respectively.



Table 3 Foreign Affiliate Ownership Patterns of Japanese Parent Firms, 2000 F/Y (Number of Parent Firms)
                                                                                             Number of Affiliates
Number of Regular
workers of Parent Firm                     1          2            3         4           5          6          7          8           9        10       More          Total            %
                                                                                               in East Asia
    50 to 99                           301          67         25          12            1         2        1              .          .          .         1             410       13.7
    100 to 199                         413         101         34          23            7         1        2              .         2           .          .            583       19.5
    200 to 299                         196          92         30          12            8        10        3             2          1           .         1             355       11.9
    300 to 499                         242          99         36          28           18         8        6             4          2           .         4             447       14.9
    500 to 999                         209         117         65          42           27        20        5             2          4          2         10             503       16.8
    1,000 and more                     136         107         77          54           55        45      27             38         16         19        122             696       23.2
    Total                             1497         583        267         171          116        86      44             46         25         21        138            2994      100.0

                                                                                             in North America
    50 to 99                            90          13          2            .           .           .      .              .           .         1             .         106        6.7
    100 to 199                         185          14          2           1            .           .     1               .           .          .            .         203       12.8
    200 to 299                         129          18          2            .           .           .      .              .           .          .            .         149        9.4
    300 to 499                         183          30         10           2           1           2       .              .          1           .            .         229       14.4
    500 to 999                         210          58         20           6           3           1      1              2            .          .           2          303       19.0
    1,000 and more                     271         126         69          39          28         17     10               7           7          1           27          602       37.8
    Total                             1068         259        105          48          32         20     12               9           8          2           29         1592      100.0

                                                                                                in Europe
    50 to 99                             26          2            .         1            .          .       .              .          .          .             .           29       3.2
    100 to 199                           58          8           2          1            .          .       .              .          .          .             .           69       7.5
    200 to 299                           43         11           2           .           .          .       .              .          .          .             .           56       6.1
    300 to 499                           84         21           8          3           1          3        .              .          .          .             .          120      13.1
    500 to 999                          113         24          16          4           2          2        .             1          1          1             3           167      18.3
    1,000 and more                      178         93          55         37          17         18      14              8         10          9            34           473      51.8
    Total                               502        159          83         46          20         23      14              9         11         10            37           914     100.0
Data source: MITI database.



                                                                                               29
Table 4 Sector Switching Between Parent Firms and Their Affiliates in East Asia

(a) Industries of Japanese Parent Firms and Their Affiliates in East Asia, 2000 F/Y (number of affiliates in East Asia)
                                                                               Industry of Affiliate in East Asia
Industry of
Parent Firm    120    130    140    150   160    170    180     190   200    210    220    230    240    250    260       270   280   290   300   310   320   340    480 Others Total
    120        145      1                                               2                                                                                             20    15   183
    130          5     28                                              12                                                                                             19    10    74
    140                       70      7                    2                           2                                                     1     2           2      10      0   96
    150                        5     73                           2                    2                                                     1                        12      1   96
    160                                     14      1                                                                                                          1       2      0   18
    170                                      2     25                                                                                                          1       8      0   36
    180                                                   45                           2                                               1                               5      3   56
    190                                                          63                                                                                      1     6       4      7   81
    200          9      2     43      4      1             1      3   520       3    15      2             4               4     7     6     8     1     3    10     174    47   867
    210                                                                 2       2     4                                                      1                         9    18    36
    220                                                                 7           184      6             1               1     2     2     8     1           5      33      4  254
    230                 1                                               1             3     89                                   2     1           4     1     3      15      8  128
    240                                                                                             6                                                          1              0    7
    250                        1                                         1             4                  87                1     7     1    3      1    4     2      21    26   159
    260                                                                                                    1     51         3    10     2    8      4                  7    29   115
    270                                                                  1            2      1             1              161    14     3   30     14          2      30    23   282
    280          1             1             2                    1                   4                    2               14   161     7   27      5     1    8      34      9  277
    290          4                                                     10             4                    1      8         1    15   362   65     20    18   15     214    73   810
    300                        2      2             1             1     5            12                    5      1         3     6    79 1009      6    17    9     308   132 1598
    310                                             1                                 2                    2      5               9    22   25    569          3      59    55   752
    320                        1                                         2            1                    3                      1     6   14          131           56    11   226
    340                        1                                  1                  10      1                                    2          2            3    66     48    11   145
    480        115     11     83    157     13      8     14      9   142     11     60     22      3     70     47        32    63    39 266      34    22    56   1516   557 3350
   Others        5      0      1     15      6      1      1      0     4      1      2      0      2      2      1         2     4    12    7      3     1     9     23   476   578
               284     43    208    258     38     37     63     80   709     17    313    121     11    179    113       222   303   543 1475    664   202   199   2627 1515 10224

(b) Industries of Japanese Parent SMEs and Their Affiliates in East Asia, 2000 F/Y (number of affiliates in East Asia)
                                                                              Industry of Affiliate in East Asia
Industry of
Parent Firm    120    130    140    150   160    170    180     190   200    210    220    230    240    250    260       270   280   290   300   310   320   340    480 Others Total
    120         41                                                      1                                                                                              4      3   49
    130                 2                                                                                                                                                     0    2
    140                       29      2                                                                                                                                6      0   37
    150                        4     43                           2                                                                                                    5      1   55
    160                                      7      1                                                                                                          1              0    9
    170                                      2     15                                                                                                          1       5      0   23
    180                                                   12                           1                                               1                               4      0   18
    190                                                          18                                                                                      1     5       4      4   32
    200                                                           1    80       1      1                   1               1     6     2                               8      3  104
    210                                                                         1                                                                                      3      0    4
    220                                                                  2           72      2                             1     1     2     3     1                   9      2   95
    230                                                                                     22                                                                 1       2      0   25
    240                                                                                             6                                                          1              0    7
    250                                                                                                   23                     1                             2       4      0   30
    260                                                                                                          12              1     1           1                   2      1   18
    270                                                                                                                   58                  2                1       3      1   65
    280                        1                                  1                    4                                         72     4     1    1                   7      0   91
    290          2                                                                     2                   1      1        1      8   109    10    4     4     7      23      7  179
    300                        1                                  1                    5                                   2      5     1   232          4     5      37    10   303
    310                                                                                1                   2                      1     3     3   45           2       3      1   61
    320                        1                                                                           1                                  5          34            5      1   47
    340                        1                                                      7                                           1           1           3   24       4      0   41
    480         22      1     18     57      4      3      5      8    23       3    24      9      2      8      2       14     17    14    40   10     10   18     401    61   774
   Others        1      0      1      0      0      0      0      0     2       0     0      0      2      1      0        1      1     3     4    3      0    1       6    70    96
                66      3     56    102     13     19    17      31   108       5   117     33     10     37     15       78    114   140   301   65     56   69     545   165 2165
Data source: MITI database
Note: "Others" includes industries "050", "540", and "other".




                                                                                           30
Table 5 Logit Estimation: Japanese Parent Firms, 1995 F/Y
                                                                                                   Dependent Variables
                                                   Foreign Affiliates:          Affiliates in East Asia:       Affiliates in North America:      Affiliates in Europe:
    Variable                                         with =1; without=0           with =1; without=0            with =1; without=0                with =1; without=0
(a) Parent Firms: All Sectors                                  (1)                          (2)                            (3)                               (4)

   Constant                                                -5.547    ***                -5.713     ***                  -8.302    ***                  -11.085     ***
                                                         (-42.82)                     (-42.77)                       ( -45.23)                         (-40.40)
   Number of relgular workers (log)                         0.694    ***                 0.693     ***                   0.960    ***                     1.236    ***
                                                          (31.00)                      (30.22)                         (32.91)                          (30.83)
   Tangible assets per regular workers                      0.010    ***                 0.003     *                     0.009    ***                     0.007    ***
                                                           (6.55)                       (1.66)                          (5.10)                           (2.85)
   Foreign sales: ratio to total sales                      7.132    ***                 5.146     ***                   5.288    ***                     5.564    ***
                                                          (25.06)                      (22.84)                         (23.61)                          (23.12)
   R&D expenditure: ratio to total sales                    9.565    ***                 6.160     ***                 12.479     ***                   11.031     ***
                                                           (8.50)                       (6.02)                         (10.06)                           (8.51)
   Advertisement expenditure: ratio to total sales         -0.122                       -1.546                           1.656                            2.757    *
                                                          (-0.14)                      (-1.19)                          (1.42)                           (1.92)

   Log likelihood                                      -5948.385                    -5425.176                     -3366.289                         -1823.668
   Number of observations                                 13623                        13623                         13623                             13623

(b) Parent Firms: Manufacturing Sector                        (1)'                          (2)'                           (3)'                             (4)'

   Constant                                                -5.769    ***                -5.924     ***                  -8.302    ***                  -11.628     ***
                                                         (-35.19)                     (-35.63)                       ( -37.83)                         (-33.81)
   Number of relgular workers (log)                         0.775    ***                 0.770     ***                   1.078    ***                     1.340    ***
                                                          (26.97)                      (26.74)                         (28.72)                          (26.60)
   Tangible assets per regular workers                      0.006    ***                 0.000                           0.010    ***                     0.008    ***
                                                           (2.93)                       (0.09)                          (4.61)                           (2.77)
   Foreign sales: ratio to total sales                      6.200    ***                 4.275     ***                   4.899    ***                     5.065    ***
                                                          (20.10)                      (17.61)                         (19.35)                          (18.26)
   R&D expenditure: ratio to total sales                    6.341    ***                 3.469     ***                   9.834    ***                     9.265    ***
                                                           (5.51)                       (3.39)                          (7.48)                           (6.99)
   Advertisement expenditure: ratio to total sales          0.846                       -0.030                           2.570                            1.798
                                                           (0.79)                      (-0.03)                          (1.60)                           (1.56)

   Log likelihood                                      -3994.629                    -3715.727                     -2291.635                         -1275.963
   Number of observations                                  8577                         8577                          8577                              8577
   Data source: MITI database.
   Notes:
     Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics.
     *** Significant at the 1 percent level.
     * Significant at the 10 percent level.

Table 6 Intra-Regional Production Networks: Sales and Purchases by Japanese Affiliates in East Asia, 1998 F/Y
                                                             Sales                                                            Purchases
         Number                                               Share in Total Sales (%)                                         Share in Total Purchases (%)
             of                                                                                       Total
Industry               %     Total  Sales    %      Local Japan Third Countries (Total)                         %        Local Japan Third Countries (Total)
         Affiliate                                                                                 Purchases
                            (Million Yen)                                  East North Europe (Million Yen)                                     East North Europe
             s                                                             Asia America                                                        Asia America
Manufacturing Sector
120+130        162 2.6           343929 1.5           69.1 16.2 14.7          6.4      3.3  3.5        137424 0.9         78.8      6.6   14.6      8.0      0.4       0.5
140+150        399 6.4           503397 2.2           43.6 30.2 26.1 12.2              4.9  7.4        254218 1.7         54.0     26.6   19.4     13.1      2.3       0.8
  160           23 0.4             17204 0.1          15.3 56.3 28.3 24.0              0.9  0.1          7818 0.1         94.0      2.7    3.3      0.0      0.0       3.3
  170           14 0.2              7073 0.0          52.8 34.3 12.9          8.8      4.0  0.0          4821 0.0         75.2     13.8   11.0      7.9      0.0       3.0
  180           36 0.6             50256 0.2          74.2 12.5 13.3          9.0      3.5  0.0         15328 0.1         62.5     20.5   17.0     14.1      1.8       1.1
  190           27 0.4             27536 0.1          77.8    0.4 21.8 11.5            0.4  5.5          2694 0.0         73.7     16.6    9.8      0.0      1.9       7.8
  200          529 8.5          1414684 6.1           69.8    6.7 23.5 15.7            5.0  1.5        579333 3.8         53.6     19.4   27.0     13.3      6.8       1.9
  210           17 0.3             36418 0.2          21.2 65.7 13.1          2.9      0.0 10.2         32061 0.2         21.7     18.0   60.4     45.4     10.3       3.9
  220          109 1.8             92230 0.4          64.7 20.1 15.2          9.7      1.7  2.9         38584 0.3         68.0     25.7    6.3      5.1      0.2       0.5
  230           54 0.9           107614 0.5           41.4 34.3 24.3 13.2              4.9  5.1         24259 0.2         57.4     23.6   19.0     17.1      0.3       1.6
  240           16 0.3              7196 0.0           4.5 21.2 74.3 22.5            44.0   7.8          5282 0.0         10.0      6.8   83.2     41.2      9.8       3.2
  250          160 2.6           334130 1.4           69.7 17.2 13.2          8.8      3.5  0.8        140533 0.9         41.3     31.5   27.2     23.1      3.3       0.5
  260          166 2.7           423491 1.8           85.4    2.9 11.7        6.5      2.6  0.1        229136 1.5         19.2     70.0   10.8     10.4      0.0       0.2
  270          110 1.8           281041 1.2           55.9 15.6 28.6 26.3              0.9  1.0        155313 1.0         44.1     31.7   24.2     19.0      0.3       1.1
  280          121 1.9             97240 0.4          70.9 13.4 15.7 11.9              1.9  1.4         47014 0.3         67.8     29.0    3.2      1.7      0.3       1.1
  290          315 5.1           688971 3.0           32.4 40.7 27.0 14.8              5.5  4.6        400705 2.6         57.7     32.2   10.1      8.8      0.8       0.4
  300          916 14.7         5191673 22.3          32.3 32.9 34.8 24.9              5.3  3.0      3711079 24.4         35.8     37.0   27.2     26.3      0.4       0.2
  310          478 7.7          2140129 9.2           81.0 11.1       7.9     2.2      3.5  1.5      1380996 9.1          53.4     37.2    9.4      6.1      2.5       0.7
  320          100 1.6           464375 2.0           27.2 45.9 26.9 23.1              1.5  2.0        271580 1.8         40.2     41.2   18.6     14.5      2.6       1.5
330+340         83 1.3             95985 0.4          22.3 63.6 14.1          2.8      7.5  2.9         63645 0.4         55.1     37.7    7.1      5.9      0.4       0.7
Non-Manufacturing Sector
  480          957 15.4         8524268 36.7          41.3 19.4 39.3 33.0              2.2  2.8      6333657 41.6         28.4     35.2   36.4     28.3      1.5       2.7
 Others      1421 22.9          2386309 10.3          77.7 11.2 11.1          8.0      1.5  1.2      1387281 9.1          72.7     19.5    7.8      5.5      1.1       0.6
Total        6213 100.0       23235149 100.0          49.6 21.9 28.4 21.2              3.4  2.6     15222761 100.0        41.1     33.4   25.5     20.7      1.5       1.3
Data source: MITI database.
Note: "Others" includes industries "050", "540", and "other".




                                                                              31
Figure 2 Japanese value added embodied in sales to Asians and foreigners by Japanese: Three-country setting (2000)
                                                                                                            (Unit: Million JP Yen)


                                             Japan
                                              JAFF owned              JAFF owned
                                               by Asians              by foreigners
                                                  (Asians)             (Foreigners)
                                                    Japanese-owned firms
                                                             (Japanese)


                                                     Value added in exports
                                                     by Japanese in Japan:
                                                          42,132,623




                              10,710,170                                                        3,132,287


                                       7,205,530                                    21,084,637




     Asia                                          1,611,093             2,475,695                                  ROW
                      Asians              FAJFs                                     FAJFs            Foreigners
                                        Total VA:                                  Total VA:
                                        8,054,035                                  27,905,073
                                                       83,975
       Foreigners




                                                                                                                            Asians




                       3,613,841                                                                  19,723,339
                                                                      310,082




                                            2,409,228                          4,930,835
                    465,123                                                                                    335,899

Data source: Table A.3.




                                                                 32
Table 7 Major Channels for Japanese Firms to Sell Products Abroad
                                                                                                        (Unit: Million JP Yen)
                                                                                                              2000
                                                                                                     VA contents        (%)
For Japanese firms to sell products to Asians in Asia (total of below):                               18,373,691         100.0
      To produce in Japan and export directly                                                         10,710,170          58.3
      To produce in Japan and distribute through FAJF in Asia                                          3,233,118          17.6
      To produce in Japan and distribute through FAJF in ROW                                             351,439            1.9
      To produce in Asia and sell locally                                                              3,613,841          19.7
      To produce in ROW and export to Asia                                                               465,123            2.5

For Japanese firms to sell products to foreigners in ROW (total of below):      38,394,682     100.0
       To produce in Japan and export directly                                   3,132,287        8.2
       To produce in Japan and distribute through FAJF in ROW                   14,902,647      38.8
       To produce in Japan and distribute through FAJF in Asia                     300,511        0.8
       To produce in ROW and sell locally                                       19,723,339      51.4
       To produce in Asia and export to ROW                                        335,899        0.9
Note: minor indirect channels such as "to produce in Japan and to distribute through FAJF in ROW and
then through FAJF in Asia" are omitted.
Data source: the above figures are estimated based on Table A.3.




   %                 Figure 3 Custom Duties Import Ratios in the East Asian Countries
   20

   18

   16

   14
                                                                                                                    China
   12                                                                                                               Indonesia
                                                                                                                    Korea
   10                                                                                                               Malaysia
                                                                                                                    Philippines
                                                                                                                    Singapore
     8                                                                                                              Thailand

     6

     4

     2

     0
         1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000




Drawn from Ando and Estevadeordal (2003) (Original data source: World Bank Indocators 2002 (CD-ROM)).


                                                              33
Table A.1 Definition of Parts and Components
HSclassification
840140,840290,840390,840490,840590,8406,8407,8408,8409,8410,8411,8412,8413,8414
,841520,841590,8416,8417,841891,841899,841990,842123,842129,842131,842191,84219
9,842290,842390,842490,8431,843290,843390,843490,843590,843680,843691,843699,84
3790,843890,843991,843999,844090,844190,844240,844250,844390,8448,845090,845190
,845240,845290,845390,845490,845590,8466,846791,846792,846799,846890,8473,84749
0,847590,847690,847790,847890,847990,8480,8481,8482,8483,8484,8485,8503,850490,
8505,850690,8507,850890,850990,851090,8511,8512,851390,851490,851590,851690,851
790,8518,8522,8529,853090,8531,8532,8533,8534,8535,8536,8537,8538,8539,8540,854
1,8542,854390,8544,8545,8546,8547,8548,8607,8706,8707,8708,870990,8714,871690,8
803,8805,9001,9002,9003,900590,900691,900699,900791,900792,900890,900990,901090
,901190,901290,9013,9014,901590,901790,902490,902590,902690,902790,902890,90299
0,903090,903190,903290,9033,9110,9111,9112,9113,9114,9209


               Table A.2 Industry Classification

               Manufacturing sector
                          120          Food processing
                          130          Beverages, tobacco, and animal feed
                          140          Textiles
                          150          Apparel
                          160          Wood and wood products
                          170          Furniture and fixures
                          180          Pulp, paper, and paper products
                          190          Publishing and printing
                          200          Chemicals
                          210          Petroleum and coal products
                          220          Plastic products
                          230          Pubber products
                          240          Leather and leather products
                          250          Ceramics, clay, and stone products
                          260          Iron and steel
                          270          Nonferrous metal
                          280          Metal products
                          290          General machinery
                          300          Electric machinery
                          310          Transport equipment
                          320          Precision machinery
                          330          Arms
                          340          Other manufacturing

                    290+300+310+320 Machinery sector

               Non-manufacturing sector
                         050          Mining
                         480          Wholesale trade
                         540          Retail trade
                        Other         Services and other




                                               34
Table A.3 Exports versus FDI by Japanese-owned Firms
                                                                                                          (Unit: Million JP Yen)
                                                                                                     2000
Category                                                                            Exports          Value-added (VA)        (%)
[1]    Japanese value added in exports of Japanese-owned firms in Japan              46,048,596            42,132,623      100.0
[1-1]         In exports to FAJFs (Japanese)                                          30,919,567           28,290,167
[1-1-1]           located in Asia                                                      7,875,240            7,205,530       17.1
[1-1-2]           located in ROW                                                      23,044,326           21,084,637       50.0
[1-2]         In exports to Asians (non-Japanese)                                     11,705,616           10,710,170
[1-2-1]           located in Asia                                                     11,705,616           10,710,170       25.4
[1-2-2]           located in ROW                                                              n.a.                 n.a.
[1-3]         In exports to foreigners (non Japanese&Asian)                            3,423,414             3,132,287
[1-3-1]           located in Asia                                                             n.a.                  n.a.
[1-3-2]           located in ROW                                                       3,423,414             3,132,287       7.4

[2]       Value added by FAJFs in Asia                                                36,376,123             8,054,035     100.0
[2-1]         In goods and services sold to Japanese                                  18,537,086             4,104,295
[2-1-1]           located in Japan                                                     7,276,515             1,611,093      20.0
[2-1-2]           located in Asia (other FAJFs in Asia)                               10,881,299             2,409,228      29.9
[2-1-3]           located in ROW (other FAJFs in ROW)                                    379,272                83,975       1.0
[2-2]         In goods and services sold to Asians (non-Japanese)                     16,321,948             3,613,841
[2-2-1]           located in Japan                                                            n.a.                  n.a.
[2-2-2]           located in Asia                                                     16,321,948             3,613,841      44.9
[2-2-3]           located in ROW                                                              n.a.                  n.a.
[2-3]         In goods and services sold to foreigners (non Japanese&Asian)            1,517,089           28,240,972
[2-3-1]           located in Japan                                                            n.a.         27,905,073
[2-3-2]           located in Asia                                                             n.a.                 n.a.
[2-3-3]           located in ROW                                                       1,517,089              335,899        4.2

[3]       Value added by Japanese affiliates in ROW                                   92,638,856           27,905,073      100.0
[3-1]         In goods and services sold to Japanese                                  25,617,494             7,716,611
[3-1-1]           located in Japan                                                     8,218,775             2,475,695       8.9
[3-1-2]           located in Asia (other FAJFs in Asia)                                1,029,405               310,082       1.1
[3-1-3]           located in ROW (other FAJFs in ROW)                                 16,369,314             4,930,835      17.7
[3-2]         In goods and services sold to Asians (non-Japanese)                      1,544,107              465,123
[3-2-1]           located in Japan                                                            n.a.                 n.a.
[3-2-2]           located in Asia                                                      1,544,107              465,123        1.7
[3-2-3]           located in ROW                                                              n.a.                 n.a.
[3-3]         In goods and services sold to foreigners (non Japanese&Asian)           65,477,255           19,723,339
[3-3-1]           located in Japan                                                            n.a.                 n.a.
[3-3-2]           located in Asia                                                             n.a.                 n.a.
[3-3-3]           located in ROW                                                      65,477,255           19,723,339       70.7

Definition:
 FAJF:      Foreign affiliates of Japanese firms that include "affiliates abroad" with no less than 10 percent ownership by Japanese
            parent firms and "affiliates of affiliates abroad" with more than 50% ownership by such "affiliates abroad".
 JAFF:      Japanese affiliates of foreign firms with foreign share of more than one-third.
 ROW:       All countries other than Japan and Asia (region).
 Japanese: Households and governments in Japan + all firms located in Japan - JAFF + FAJF .
            Households and governments in Asia + Asian-owned firms located in Asia. + affiliates of firms owned by Asians in
 Asians:    Japan and ROW .
 Foreigners:Households and governments in ROW + foreign-owned firms located in ROW + affiliates of foreign firms in Japan and Asia.




                                                                    35
(Continue)

Method of estimation:
1.      ([Japanese total exports] - [Exports by JAFF]) x (1 - 0.08504) = [1-1.] + [1-2.] + [1-3.]
1-1.   [1-1-1.] + [1-1-2.]
1-1-1. ([Imports from Japan by FAJF in Asia] - [Imports from JAFF by FAJF in Asia (n.a.)]) x (1 - 0.08504)
1-1-2. ([Imports from Japan by FAJF in ROW] - [Imports from JAFF by FAJF in ROW (n.a.)]) x (1 - 0.08504)
1-2.   [1-2-1.] + [1-2-2.]
1-2-1. ([Japanese exports to Asia] - [Exports to Asia by JAFF (available only for exports to Asia)]) x (1 - 0.08504) - [1-1-1.] - [1-3-1.]
1-2-2. [Japanese exports to p.c. nationals located in ROW (n.a.)] x (1 - 0.08504)
1-3.   [1-3-1.] + [1-3-2.]
1-3-1. [Japanese exports to foreigners located in Asia (n.a.)] x (1 - 0.08504)
1-3-2. ([Japanese exports to ROW] - [Exports to ROW by JAFF]) x (1 - 0.08504) - [1-1-2.] - [1-2-2.]
2.     [Sales by FAJF in Asia] - [Purchases by FAJF in Asia] = [2-1.] + [2-2.] + [2-3.]
2-1.   [2-1-1.] + [2-1-2.] + [2-1-3.]
2-1-1. [2.] x [Ratio of sales to Japan by FAJF in Asia] - [2-2-1.] - [2-3-1.]
2-1-2. [2.] x ([Ratio of local sales by FAJF in Asia] x [Ratio of sales to FAJF in local sales by FAJF in Asia (proxy: 0.4)]
2-1-3. [2.] x ([Ratio of sales to ROW by FAJF in Asia] x [Ratio of sales to FAJF in ROW in sales to ROW by FAJF in Asia (proxy: 0.2)]
2-2.   [2-2-1.] + [2-2-2.] + [2-2-3.]
2-2-1. [Value added in goods and services sold to JAFF (owned by Asians) by FAJF in Asia (n.a.)]
2-2-2. [2.] x [Ratio of local sales by FAJF in Asia] x [Ratio of sales to Asians in local sales by FAJF in Asia (proxy: 0.6)]- [2-1-2.] - [2-3-2.]
2-2-3. [Value added in goods and services sold to Asians located in ROW by FAJF in Asia (n.a.)]
2-3.   [2-3-1.] + [2-3-2.] + [2-3-3.]
2-3-1. [Value added in goods and services sold to JAFF (owned by foreigners) by FAJF in Asia (n.a.)]
2-3-2. [Value added in goods and services sold to foreigners located in Asia by FAJF in Asia (n.a.)]
2-3-3. [2.] x [Ratio of sales to ROW by FAJF in Asia]x [Ratio of sales to foreigners in sales to ROW by FAJF in Asia (proxy: 0.8)] - [2-1-3.] - [2-2-3.]
3.     [Sales by FAJF in ROW] - [Purchases by FAJF in ROW] = [3-1.] + [3-2.] + [3-3.]
3-1.   [3-1-1.] + [3-1-2.] + [3-1-3.]
3-1-1. [3.] x [Ratio of sales to Japan by FAJF in ROW] - [3-2-1.] - [3-3-1.]
3-1-2. [3.] x ([Ratio of sales to Asia by FAJF in ROW] x [Ratio of sales to FAJF in Asia in sales to Asia by FAJF in ROW (proxy: 0.4)]
3-1-3. [3.] x ([Ratio of local sales by FAJF in ROW] x [Ratio of sales to FAJF in local sales by FAJF in ROW (proxy: 0.2)]
3-2.   [3-2-1.] + [3-2-2.] + [3-2-3.]
3-2-1. [Value added in goods and services sold to JAFF (owned by Asians) by FAJF in ROW (n.a.)]
3-2-2. [3.] x [Ratio of sales to Asia by FAJF in ROW]x [Ratio of sales to Asians in sales to Asia by FAJF in ROW (proxy: 0.6)] - [3-1-2.] - [3-3-2.]
3-2-3. [Value added in goods and services sold to Asians located in ROW by FAJF in ROW (n.a.)]
3-3.   [3-3-1.] + [3-3-2.] + [3-3-3.]
3-3-1. [Value added in goods and services sold to JAFF (owned by foreigners) by FAJF in ROW (n.a.)]
3-3-2. [Value added in goods and services sold to foreigners located in Asia by FAJF in ROW (n.a.)]
3-3-3. [3.] x ([Ratio of local sales by FAJF in ROW] x [Ratio of sales to foreigners in sales to ROW by FAJF in ROW (proxy: 0.8]) - [3-1-3.] - [3-2-3.]

Data sources: METI (2001) for exports of Japan; METI (2002a) for exports of JAFF; MITI (2002b) for sales and purchases of FAJF.
            Management and Coodination Agency (1999, pp.406) for the import inducement coefficient of export in Japan for 1995: 0.08504.




                                                                        36
