NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REINVENTING BOSTON: 1640-2003
Edward L. Glaeser
Working Paper 10166
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10166
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

This research was generously funded by the Rappaport Institute and Taubman Center for State and Local
Government. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Reinventing Boston: 1640-2003
Edward L.Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 10166
December 2003
JEL No. N9, O0
ABSTRACT
The three largest cities in colonial America remain at the core of three of America’s largest metropolitan areas
today. This paper asks how Boston has been able to survive despite repeated periods of crisis and decline.
Boston has reinvented itself three times: in the early 19th century as the provider of seafaring human capital
for a far flung maritime trading and fishing empire, in the late 19th century as a factory town built on
immigrant labor and Brahmin capital, and finally in the late 20th century as a center of the information
economy. In all three instances, human capital – admittedly of radically different forms – provided the secret
to Boston’s rebirth. The history of Boston suggests that a strong base of skilled workers is a more reliable
source of long-run urban health.
Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

I.

Introduction

In 1980, Boston was a declining city in a middle-income metropolitan area in a cold state.
Over the 60 year period between 1920 and 1980, Boston’s population had fallen from
758,000 to 563,000, and Boston’s real estate values in 1980 were so low that three
quarters of its homes were worth less than the bricks and mortar cost of construction
(Glaeser and Gyourko, 2001). There was little reason at that date to suspect that Boston
would be any more successful than Rochester or Pittsburgh or St. Louis over the next few
decades.
Twenty years later, Boston looks like the future not the past. The city and the
metropolitan area have grown. More strikingly, the Boston primary metropolitan
statistical area (the core city and its close suburbs) is the eighth richest metropolitan area
in the country ranked by per capita income; it is the richest metropolitan area that is
neither a suburb of New York nor in the Bay Area. Housing prices—always the surest
sign that people want to live in a city—have soared. According to the 2000 census,
Boston’s median housing value of $233,000 makes it the fourth most expensive
metropolitan area (after Boulder, Honolulu and Orange County) that is neither in the New
York nor San Francisco metropolitan statistical areas. In one sample of 541 cities, four
of the five cities with the fastest housing price growth between 1980 and 2000 were
Somerville, Newton, Boston and Cambridge.
The source of Boston’s recent success is not unknown. Most skilled cities have done
well over the past two decades, and Boston in 1980 had a strong skill base relative to its
rustbelt peers like Syracuse and Detroit. Today, Boston is one of the most educated
metropolitan areas of the country. This skill base, which is most strongly related to the
educational history of the region, enabled Boston to become a successful city in the
information age. The Boston region’s dominant industries are now high technology,
higher education and financial services. These industries have done extremely well over

2

the past 20 years and have strengthened Boston’s economy, but Boston’s ability to be a
center for these sectors was itself a result of its historic commitment to skills.
But Boston’s transformation from a dying factory town to a thriving information city is
only the latest of the region’s remarkable rebirths. Boston’s history is not a seamless
story of steady success, but rather a series of crises and restructuring. For the first
century of colonial America, Boston had been the largest city in the colonies and had
thrived as a conduit of goods between the old world and the new. But during the second
half of the 18th century, the city stagnated. New York and Philadelphia were superior
ports because of better river access to the rich hinterland and because they were more
southern and less isolated in New England. Boston looked as if it was likely to become a
nostalgic backwater just as the United States were being formed.
However, during the first fifty years of the 19th century, Boston was able to capitalize on
its remarkable base of seafaring human capital to become a center for global shipping and
sailing. Boston’s comparative advantage was not in its port, but in its people who
crewed, captained and owned ships that sailed in and out of ports from New York to
China. One way to understand this change is that peace and technological improvements
created an increasingly global maritime economy during the early 19th century. Boston’s
comparative advantage in seafaring became increasingly valuable during this era, and the
city changed from being an important port for goods coming and going to America, into
the capital of a vast seafaring empire.
The source of Boston’s early 19th century success—sailing skills— ensured that Boston’s
maritime empire would not survive the switch from clipper ships to steam. Steamships
required far less human capital than sailing ships, and all of a sudden Boston seemed like
it was in danger of becoming obsolete. Indeed, its New England competitors such as
Salem and New Bedford never really recovered from the switch from sail to steam. But
unlike those cities, Boston had acquired, as a last product of its sailing supremacy, a vast
population of Irish immigrants. Boston became Irish because the potato famine happened
to have coincided with the last decade when it was cheaper to get from Liverpool to

3

Boston than from Liverpool to New York. If the famine had occurred ten years later, it
seems likely that there would have been no substantial Irish population in Boston because
steerage fares on steamships to New York had become sufficiently cheap.
The initial Irish population which served as the nucleus for a growing city of immigrants
during the nineteenth century helped to turn Boston from a maritime city in 1840 to an
industrial city in 1890. Other factors also mattered. Fortunes, made off the China trade,
were reinvested in Boston area manufacturing plants. Railroads, sometimes also built
from trading wealth, turned Boston into the railroad hub of New England. Finally, the
switch from water power to steam enabled factories to move from rivers like the
Merrimack to a more central location to save on labor and transportation costs. Like
most large American cities during the late 19th century, Boston did well as a center for the
industrializing country.
But Boston’s heady period of growth was over by 1920. Between 1920 and 1950, the
city population stayed flat, while the country’s population grew by 50 percent. Between
1950 and 1980, the city lost population. In 1910, Boston was the fifth largest city in the
country. By 1980, 19 cities were bigger than Boston. Boston declined for at least four
separate reasons. First, Boston was a cold city and over the 20th century, warm cities
grew much more quickly than cold cities. Air conditioning and improvements in public
health greatly increased the quality of public life in the sunbelt. Declining transport costs
freed workers from having to live close to rivers or natural resources. Instead, people
could move to warm places that were pleasant to live in. Second, Boston had been a
manufacturing town and all manufacturing towns were declining. Third, the automobile
was supplanting older forms of personal transportation and central city Boston was
particularly tied to these older forms of transportation and particularly bad as a driving
city. Finally, Boston was a city with high taxes and heavy regulation. All of these
factors suggest that Boston’s mid-twentieth century decline was pretty inevitable.
Yet, again Boston has reinvented itself and the past twenty years have been a period of
enormous success for the region both in terms of incomes and in terms of property

4

values. In the labor market, education is the dominant factor in today’s economy, and
Boston has been specializing in skills for almost 400 years. Among the 200 or so
metropolitan areas with more than 160,000 residents, the Boston primary metropolitan
statistical area ranks fifth in share of the population over the age of 25 with college
degrees (after Boulder, Stamford, Madison, and San Jose) and third in the share of the
population between 25 and 34 with college degrees (after Boulder and Stamford). It
ranks seventh among all metropolitan areas in its share of employees in managerial,
professional or related professions after Boulder, Corvallis, San Francisco, San Jose,
Stamford and Washington. The region’s success has meant that the most pressing
problem for the area is that its regulation of new construction has meant that not enough
people have been able to take advantage of the area’s high levels of productivity.
The story of Boston’s history yields the following implications about urban dynamics.
First, long run urban success does not mean perpetual growth. Long run urban success
means successfully responding to challenges. The basic pattern of Boston’s history is
that the city specializes in one area and inevitably either this area declines or their
dominance in the area is challenged. The survival of the city hinges on re-orientation.
Boston is a large city while Salem is not, because Boston responded to the decline of sail
by becoming a manufacturing city while Salem did not. Boston is a thriving city while
Detroit is not because when manufacturing declined, Boston was able to redefine itself as
a high technology city, while Detroit was not.
Second, Boston’s ability to re-orient itself hinged on industrial diversity. Boston had
never been just a port and from the beginning, artisans in the town had manufactured
goods which were then taken on Bostonian ships abroad. As such, the switch from
seaport to factory town required a large re-emphasis, but not inventing industry from
scratch. Likewise, Boston’s seafaring commerce had always needed financial services,
and as a result, the city had always had banks, brokers and insurers. As Boston’s
manufacturing declined, finance was able to take up its slack.

5

Third, Boston’s ability to regenerate itself hinged upon its ability to attract residents, not
just firms. The American cities that grew because of proximity to productive natural
resources, such as coal, have suffered tremendously over the past 50 years. When the
demand for the key natural resource declined, no one saw any reason to remain in the city
and they left. By contrast, from its earliest days, Boston existed not only as a productive
center but as a place that people wanted to live: a consumer city. Because people wanted
to live there, as well as work there, during times of economic trouble, residents innovated
and stayed. In the coal towns of central Pennsylvania exodus, not innovation, was a more
common response.
Fourth, in all of its period of reinvention, Boston’s human capital has been
critical. Skills with sailing ships enabled the city to reinvent itself as a global maritime
center in the early 19th century. Yankee technology and Irish labor together fueled
industrialization. And today more than ever, Boston’s skills provide the impetus for
economic success in technology, professional services and higher education. Boston’s
experience certainly suggests that human capital is most valuable to a city during
transition periods when skills create flexibility and the ability to reorient towards a new
urban focus.
II.

Colonial Dominance and Decline: 1620-1790

Boston became the capital of Massachusetts and the first city of New England because of
a spring. In 1629, John Endecott had built a house in Charlestown for Massachusetts’
new governor, John Winthrop, to live (Bremer, 2003, p. 192). Salem, where Endecott
had been living, was passed over as a capital surely in part because its rocky soil couldn’t
save its small group of pre-Winthrop settlers from starvation. By contrast, Charlestown
offered better farmland, as well as a protected harbor and the Charles river. Winthrop
was living in the house that Endecott built by July, 1630, but Winthrop’s fellow settlers
were soon dying from disease in Charlestown. Even the limited medical knowledge of
1630 included the understanding that fresh water was a key to health. Charlestown’s one
spring was accessible only during low tide. Winthrop and his sick companions moved

6

across the Charles to Boston “drawn there by a spring with abundant fresh water”
(Bremer, 2003, p. 193).
In 1630, Winthrop had brought 150 settlers to Boston. By 1640, Boston’s population had
grown to 1,200 and by 1690, the city had a population of 7,000. Boston’s colonial
population appears to have peaked around 1740, with 17,000 residents, and when it
finally lost its status as the colonies premier status to Philadelphia. While the exact
location of Winthrop’s capital owes much to springs, rivers and soil, the longer term
success of this city was primarily a result of the success of the Massachusetts colony and
its unusual nature. Indeed, the special character of the Massachusetts Bay colony can
help us to understand not only the success of Boston between 1630 and 1740, but also the
city’s success three centuries later.
Every successful colony prior to Massachusetts had been oriented around extracting
wealth from the new world and bringing that resource back to Europe. Spanish
settlement in the South was driven by silver and gold which enriched the conquistadors,
who returned to Spain and which funded the vast Hapsburg military machine. The Dutch
colony in New Amsterdam and the Swedish colony in what became Delaware were
essentially trading posts oriented towards acquiring furs from Native Americans. The
Virginia settlements soon became plantations from growing tobacco and shipping that
valuable product back to the old world. These were extractive settlements built around
an obvious source of wealth which could be readily exploited, and where many settlers
sought return to the old country once their fortunes were made.
The Massachusetts’ Bay Colony was fundamentally different. The settlers brought by
John Winthrop sought material prosperity certainly, but they had every intention of living
permanently in Massachusetts. After all, the Boston settlers saw Stuart London as a
sinful city to be fled, not as an ideal spot to retire. Moreover, New England had no
obvious source of wealth. As John Smith wrote in 1616, New England’s “main staple,
from hence to bee extracted for the present to produce the rest, is fish” (Smith, 1616), and
there was no reason to live in Massachusetts to fish there. After all, fleets from Europe

7

had been exploiting New England’s fish population for decades before 1630. While
Virginia extended the simple extractive model of Latin America and the previous trading
posts, Massachusetts created a new model with settlers with the goal of building a new
society. New England offered cheap land to be sure, but no natural export.
The data illustrate the differences between New England and the Southern Colonies. In
1700, Virginia and Maryland together exported 317,302 pounds worth of goods (mainly
tobacco) to England. These colonies imported only 173,481 pounds worth of goods from
the mother country. This trade surplus is not a fluke of that year. Between 1700 and
1750, Virginia and Maryland ran trade surpluses in all but three years, and in most years
the surpluses were enormous. Virginia’s trade surplus is the hard evidence for the
extraction of tobacco wealth being brought from the new world to the old. By contrast,
between 1697 and 1774, New England ran a trade deficit every year. In most years,
imports from England were more than double exports. New England wasn’t extracting
wealth from the hinterland and shipping it back to the mother country. But
Massachusetts’ residents were still managing to make enough money to pay for the goods
that they were importing from England.
During the 1630s, the Massachusetts economy operated as something of a colonial Ponzi
scheme. Early settlers provided food and other necessities to newer settlers who had
brought their life’s savings over from England. As such, the capital needed for old
settlers to purchase commodities from England was provided by newer settlers who
bought simple agricultural products at high prices. But this model requires a high ratio of
new settlers to old residents. By 1640, there were already too few people coming from
England for the model to work and Bostonians needed to find an alternative source of
funds to buy the products they needed from England.
However, it turns out that their basic model—providing food and other basic goods which
would never have found a market in England to other colonists—could be slightly
perturbed and made the basis for the commercial economy of New England. The soil of
the extractive economies of the Caribbean and the South was far too valuable to waste on

8

livestock and wheat, but the farmers of these colonies still needed to eat. Producing food
in Massachusetts and shipping it to these richer, southern areas provided the income
needed to pay for commodities which in turn were bought from England. In 1770, 73
percent of Massachusetts shipping left for America, Bermuda and the Caribbean and only
19 percent left for England. Shephard and Walton (1972) tell us that in the 1768-1772
period, 35 percent of the New England exports to the West Indies were fish, 32 percent
were livestock and 21 percent were wood products.
Why does all this matter for the history of Boston? In the modern world, urbanization
and income go closely together. But in colonial America, the extraction-based colonies
were richer than Massachusetts. In 1774, private wealth per free capita was about four
times higher in the south than in New England (Historical Statistics of the United States,
p. 1175). By all accounts, New England seems to have been prospering relative to
Europe, but Boston’s size was not a result of Massachusetts’ wealth.
Instead, Boston’s size was a result of the way that Massachusetts made its wealth.
Virginia’s tobacco trade was simple and hinged on dispersion across vast plantations.
Boats would come down the river to pay cash for bales of tobacco. No Southern rival
grew larger than Boston, in part because one relatively simple commodity dominated
southern life and this didn’t require a commercial or manufacturing center. But since
Massachusetts’ produce was worth too little to export to England, the colonial merchants
had to develop a complex trading system that handled a rich number of commodities
which were shipped to four separate countries. Indeed, one third of Boston’s population
(according to Henretta, 1965) was directly involved in the shipping trades.
Boston’s elite were merchants who grouped together to share risks and learn of the latest
information about prices and shipments. Growing tobacco doesn’t hinge on up-to-date
information. A mercantile operation that tries to match supply with demand across
continents inevitably requires face-to-face contact between merchants. Morison (1961)
describes how Boston merchants even in the 19th century “still continued their
eighteenth-century custom of meeting on ‘change, at one o’clock every week day, to

9

discuss business and politics before going home to their two or three o’clock dinner.”
Their information-intensive business required first-hand knowledge which couldn’t be
gotten by living far from the port.
Surrounding this mercantile elite was a larger population supporting the ocean-going
trades. Many of Massachusetts’ exports required some workmanship, especially ships
and other wood products. Boston became a certain for this form of manufacturing where
New England lumber was transformed into finished goods. Of course, Boston also
provided support services, such as taverns and boarding houses, for the sailors. As
tobacco was so much more valuable per pound than Massachusetts’ exports, the number
of ships leaving Charleston or other southern ports was also lower than the number of
ships leaving Boston, even if the value of the cargo was higher. Since the size of the
port is more likely to reflect the tonnage of ships than the value of goods, this helps us to
understand Boston’s size.
Despite Boston’s success, it is worth stressing that while the absence of a cash crop in
Massachusetts seems to have made Massachusetts more urban than its southern
competitors, it was still much poorer. This was not a case of hardship being perversely
beneficial, at least not in the short run. Rather it is a case of smart colonists surviving in
a difficult environment.
Boston grew as a center for commerce and immigration settled in the America’s first
colony with a balanced economy. The fact that settlers saw themselves as permanent
residents combined with the religious nature of the colony (which partially led the settlers
to want to be permanent in the first place) to create a number of important Boston
institutions. From the start, Boston had a much stronger set of community organizations
than the southern colonies because of its church structure. Membership in the church was
a necessity for anyone wanting full membership in the community, and the churches
organized and disciplined the population. As a result, Massachusetts had dense social
networks and something like rule of law, when the southern colonies were far more
dangerous areas (see Kim, 2003). The differences in homicide rates, which persist to this

10

day between New England and the South, date from this period, and it is hard not to think
that the well functioning church-based organization of Boston played a major role in
keeping the peace.
A second important feature of Boston’s religion-based permanence was its tradition of
democratic egalitarianism. The Puritan’s Calvinist ethos tended to imply political
equality between the righteous. As a result, all church-goers, regardless of wealth, had
equal political rights in the community. Moreover, as the reformation directly challenged
the hierarchical nature of the Catholic Church and tried to replace it with a bottom-up
“congregational” system, Boston’s traditions of direct democracy, home rule and town
meetings come from this era.
The final, remarkable feature of Boston, which again comes from the fact that it was a
balanced, permanent and religious colony, was its focus on education. The Boston Latin
School was founded in 1635 and Harvard College was founded, with government money,
the next year. These institutions were meant originally to train ministers, but they
flourished in a community that valued learning. Again, the Calvinist attention to literacy
surely mattered, but the more complex Massachusetts economy also demanded more
widespread knowledge than the tobacco culture of the south. Harvard’s earliest graduates
were men of the cloth, but increasingly a Harvard education provided valuable
background for merchants and lawyers in a world where literacy and knowledge
increased earnings.
This is not to say that the Southern land-holders of the 18th century weren’t sometimes
enormously well educated, but in the South learning appears to have been more of a
consumption good than an aid in production. After all, both Adams and Jefferson were
extraordinarily well educated and knowledgeable men. Adams earned his living with his
learning excelling in Boston’s complex legal world. Jefferson’s learning helped him
found universities and write the Declaration of Independence, but by all accounts, he was
a pretty unsuccessful plantation manager, and there is no evidence to suggest that his
learning ever helped him increase his earnings.

11

The economy of Massachusetts Bay both drove Boston’s early success and helps us to
understand some of its social, political and educational traditions. Of course, natural
conditions also mattered. Boston’s sheltered harbor facilitated trade. Boston’s colder
climate also helped the urbanization process. While in the 20th century, warm areas have
done well, in the 17th century, warmth was better for microbes than for humans. As a
result, the Southern colonies were generally far more disease prone than New England
and when people concentrated into cities the risks of disease increased even further.
Still, despite these advantages, in the mid-18th century Boston was being surpassed by
first Philadelphia and then New York. To a large extent, the growth of these cities and
their surrounding countryside followed the Massachusetts, not the Virginia, model. Like
Massachusetts, the Penn Family’s colony was based on available land and widespread
permanent settlement, not on a single cash crop. Like Massachusetts, Pennsylvania ran
large trade deficits with England and made them up with trade with southern colonies and
the Indies. Philadelphia would surpass Boston because land in Pennsylvania was much
better than land in New England, because Philadelphia was closer to the markets in the
Indies and in the South, and because the Schuylkill is a much more navigable river than
the Charles. By the 1760s, Philadelphia’s port became busier than the port of Boston
because of these natural advantages.
During much of the later half of the 18th century, Boston slumped. Its population barely
grew from 17,000 in 1740 to 18,300 in 1790. This slow population growth is certainly
associated with Massachusetts losing ground relative to New York and Pennsylvania.
Between 1740 and 1790, the population of Massachusetts more than doubled, but the
population of those other two states increased five-fold. But Boston’s dominance over
Massachusetts was much weaker than New York and Philadelphia’s dominance over
their own states during this era. For example, in 1790, all New York State shipping went
through New York City and more than 95 percent of Pennsylvania shipping went through
Philadelphia.

12

By contrast, Boston’s share (by ton) of ships leaving Massachusetts was only 52 percent.
Somewhat remarkably (from the modern perspective), Boston was only one of three
Massachusetts cities that were among the ten largest cities in America’s first census (the
other two being Marblehead and Salem). In the late colonial period, about 5,000 tons of
salted cod alone was shipped out of Salem, most of it to parts of the Spanish empire.
While Boston offered better access to the American hinterland, Salem was a better
fishing port. This helps us understand how Massachusetts remained the most important
seafaring colony, although Boston was no longer the most important seafaring city in the
thirteen colonies.
III.

1790-1920: Immigrants and Manufacturing

While Boston’s population stagnated between 1740 and 1790, Boston’s population
surged after that year and grew steadily for the next 130 years. The town of 1790 with
18,000 residents became a city of 748,000 in 1920. Figure 1 shows the time path of
Boston’s population. Over the 1790-1890 period, Boston’s population grew steadily by
3.2 percent per year, or 37 percent per decade. The 1790s were a typical decade.
Boston’s population increased from 18,320 to 24,937 for a 36 percent increase. The best
decade for Boston’s population growth between 1790 and 1900 was the 1830s when
population grew by 51 percent and the worst decade was the 1880s when population only
grew by 24 percent.
Of course, America as a whole was growing remarkably over this period. The new
republic had 3.9 million Americans in 1790 and 106 million in 1920. Was Boston
growing faster than the U.S. as a whole? Figure 2 shows change over time in the ratio of
the population of Boston to the population of the U.S. as a whole. During the 1790-1830
period, Boston grew at about the same rate as the country as a whole. 4.6 percent of
Americans lived in Boston in 1790 and 4.7 percent of Americans lived in Boston forty
years later. Starting in 1830, for fifty years, Boston started growing at a much faster rate
than the country as a whole, and by 1880 7.2 percent of Americans were living in Boston.

13

After that point, Boston’s share of the U.S. population stayed constant for forty years, and
then began its eighty year decline.
Two other benchmarks are useful to put Boston’s growth in perspective. Figure 3 shows
Boston’s population relative to the population of Massachusetts as a whole and relative to
the city of New York. Boston’s population relative to Massachusetts rises during every
decade from 1790 and 1880 and declines during every subsequent decade. The growth
period represents the increasing urbanization of New England. The decline period is
somewhat misleading because the bulk of Massachusetts growth during this later period
has been in areas which can fairly be called satellites of Boston.
The relationship between Boston population and New York population is more
straightforward. Boston loses population relative to New York in every decade outside of
the 1860-1880 period. After all, during 1790-1890 when Boston grew at a 3.2 annual
rate, New York grew at an even more impressive 3.9 percent annual rate. When a town
grows from 18,000 to 450,000 in a century, it seems like the big story is that increase, not
the fact that some other cities grew even more quickly. There were some cities that grew
far more slowly. While Salem’s population eventually reached 40,000, its growth rate
over the 1790-1890 period was an anemic 1.36 percent per year. While Boston was the
third largest city in the country in 1790, somewhat remarkably it remained the fifth
largest city in the country as late as 1910.
How can we understand the growth of Boston during the 19th century? The available
evidence suggests that Boston’s growth during the 1790-1840 period followed the
maritime pattern set during the colonial era. Unlike New York, Philadelphia or even
Baltimore, Boston appears to have been overwhelmingly oriented towards trade and
fishing. As late as 1840, the Census reports that Boston had 10,813 people in the oceangoing professions and only 5,333 people in manufacturing. By contrast, New York had
43,390 people working in manufacturing and only 2,786 residents in the ocean-going
trades. In fact, Lowell, not Boston, was Massachusetts’ first city of manufacturing with
8,936 people working in the textile mills. Boston had more sea-going occupants than all

14

of America’s other big cities put together. While they had become manufacturing centers
by 1840, Boston remained centered on the sea just as it had been 100 years earlier.
How did an ocean-going orientation lead to growth between 1790 and 1840 when it had
led to stagnation between 1740 and 1790? During the 1740-1790 period, international
wars cut Boston off from trading partners (notably Spain), British mercantilism
constrained colonial shipping development and, under the Articles of Confederation, state
policies blocked Boston merchants from intra-U.S. trade. As a result, U.S. shipping as a
whole grew only modestly during this era, and Boston’s share of that shipping clearly
declined as it was passed by more southerly ports.
After 1790, the constitution broke down the barriers to national trade. The U.S. was no
longer constrained from trading with Britain’s enemies (and indeed the U.S. fought a war
in part over our right to trade with whomever it pleased). No imperial tariffs constrained
Boston merchants. And so while total U.S. exports and imports were worth $20 million
in 1790 ($391 million in today’s dollars), by 1840, total exports and imports were worth
$239 million (or $4.9 billion today). The increase in trade certainly gave a boost to all of
America’s ports.
But if the pre-1790 trends had continued, we might have expected New England to have a
smaller and smaller share of an increasingly large amount of American water-borne trade.
However, somewhat surprisingly between 1816 (the first available year for comparison)
and 1840 New England’s share of trade appears to have risen. In 1791, 38 percent of
U.S. merchant vessel tonnage was in New England ships. In 1841, New England’s share
of merchant vessel tonnage was up to 58 percent (Albion, 1932). Morison (1961) reports
that between1798 and 1855, the Boston Customs’ District ownership of shipping rose
from 81,000 to 546,000 tons.
This fact doesn’t mean that Boston’s share of American exports and imports was rising.
It wasn’t. In 1821, 21 percent of America’s imports and exports were handled by Boston
and 29 percent were handled by New York. Twenty years later, New York’s share was

15

up to 43 percent and Boston’s was down to 10 percent. Boston Harbor was clearly
outclassed by New York’s harbor along many dimensions, and the opening of the Erie
Canal just made things worse. As a port for products coming from or going to the
American hinterland, New York was vastly superior to Boston and we can’t be surprised
at New York’s rise relative to Boston.
But the boats that landed in New York were to a large extent owned and operated by New
Englanders, often Bostonians. As Albion (1932) writes “Yankees captured New York
Port around 1820 and dominated its activity at least until the Civil War.” Indeed, during
the same era when Boston was losing its importance as a port of entry, Boston and New
England were increasing their control over the shipping fleets. Between 1811 and 1851,
New England’s share of foreign commerce fell from 28 percent to 11 percent while New
York’s share of foreign commerce rose from 21 percent to 52 percent. Over the same
four decades, the share of registered tonnage owned by New Englanders increased from
45 percent to 58 percent (all figures in Albion, 1931). Boston shipyards were providing
the boats, Boston’s merchants owned these ships and its sailors operated them, even
though they were sailing into New York.
If New York was America’s best port, what was Boston doing with all the sailors and
ship-owners? The best explanation for this puzzle is Adam Smith’s classic doctrine of
comparative advantage. The essence of maritime trade is mobility. A community that
has skills in mining coal will still not lead to a coal mining community if there is no coal
in the area. You can’t move a mine. But a community with seafaring skills can easily
supply ships and sailors throughout the world, because ships can move. Boston exploited
its early edge as a maritime community, which stretched back into the 16th century, to
become the capital of a vast maritime empire. Boston was generally just the spot where
the ships began their voyages and where many of the sailors returned home, but this was
enough to give the city in the early 19th century its maritime wealth.
What was Boston’s comparative advantage in the maritime industries? In one aspect of
the trade, New England was well suited—its access to lumber. New England’s large

16

forests supplied the Boston shipbuilding industry which supplied most of America’s ships
(and many English ships as well) for decades. Unsurprisingly though, this industry
gradually shifted to Maine which has even more forests. Boston’s northerly location is a
plus for some forms of fishing, especially access to plentiful fish off the Canadian coast.
Likewise, proximity to Canada and England was worth something in trade.
But the real advantage of Boston in seafaring was not geography but human capital.
Operating and managing sailing ships requires skill. As Morison (1961) writes “even an
ordinary seaman was expected ‘to hand, reef and steer, ... to be able to reeve all the
studdingsail gear, and set a topgallant or royal studdingsail out of the top; to loose and
furl a royal, and a small topgallant-sail or flying jib; and perhaps, also to send or cross a
royal yard.’” Certainly, these skills could be learned by Pennsylvania farmboys (and
Massachusetts’ farmboys for that matter), but children who were sons of seamen who
grew up in New England’s fishing and seafaring towns certainly began with a big
advantage. The importance of maritime human capital didn’t stop at the forecastle.
Large maritime fortunes were often founded by sea captains who had themselves all of
the skills of mates and more besides. The skills required in leading a multi-year, multicontinent trading voyage that involved dealing with cultures as disparate as the Northwest
Indians (who sold the Boston traders otter furs) and the Chinese Court of Canton (who
traded high end China goods for those same otter furs) were also enormous.
As ships got faster and as peace and independence made it possible to establish trading
routes that traveled thousands of miles, Boston’s advantage in human capital made it a
natural capital for a trading empire. Furthermore, Boston had institutions like maritime
insurance, begun in 1724 by Joseph Marion, that were complements to international
trade. When trading high-value products that had traveled thousands of miles, the
disadvantage of starting and ending the journey at Boston relative to New York became
minimal. Far more important was the skill and entrepreneurship that Boston merchants
brought to the exploitation of international trade routes.

17

While the majority of Boston ship tonnage was in trade not fishing, the fishing trades also
supported Boston’s growth. Perhaps the most dynamic fishing industry in the 1800-1850
period was whaling. Whaling was a small 18th century industry, but in the 19th century,
Massachusetts whaling became big business. At one point, manufacturing whale
products was the third largest industry in Massachusetts. The big innovation of the 19th
century seems to have been whaling in the Pacific Ocean, both in the tropical south seas
and in arctic waters. Nantucket and especially New Bedford were the centers of the
whaling trade, but certainly the success of these centers boosted demand for services and
goods provided in Boston. Whaling shows again the pattern of New Englanders with
sea-specific skills exploiting new opportunities created by the increasing globalization of
the early 19th century.
Perhaps the best single piece of evidence that it was sail-specific human capital that drove
Boston’s maritime dominance in the first half of the 19th century is that this dominance
disappeared quickly with the move to steam. Steamships were not only generally
superior for most trips, but like many engine-driven technologies, steamships radically
reduced the skill requirements of operation. Moreover, the skills involved were not the
same as the skills involved in rigging a clipper ship. New England even lost its edge in
ship-building which increasingly involved iron and steel, rather than wood. This change
in technology was perhaps the single most important factor driving the decline of Boston
as a port and the decline of the Boston shipping industry. If Boston’s growth in the first
half of the 19th century depended on the maritime industries, Boston’s growth in the latter
half of that century occurred despite maritime decline.
The Boston Irish
While Boston’s shipping empire would not continue throughout the 19th century, one byproduct of its maritime dominance in the 1840s would profoundly shape the entire future
of the city. The 1840s and the 1850s, which were the last great period of Boston
shipping, happen to have coincided with one of the great agricultural disasters of
European history: the Irish Potato Famine. In the modern era, when a flood of

18

immigrants comes to America, they primarily come to Miami, or California or New
York. These areas offer proximity or strong labor markets to people leaving Latin
America or Asia.
In the 1840s, Boston was the closest American port to Liverpool and the abundance of
Boston sailing ships meant that fares to Boston were lower than fares to anywhere else in
the U.S. The Liverpool-Boston fares were often less than 20 dollars. As a result, we
shouldn’t be surprised that many Irish emigrants, often on the verge of starvation,
minimized transport costs and came to the nearest harbor. If the potato famine had
happened even 30 years later, Boston’s transport edge would have been gone, and
steamships would have bypassed Boston entirely heading straight for New York. Indeed,
Boston’s share of immigrants coming to America was far higher in the 1840s than
Boston’s share of the immigrants during the 1880s and 1890s.
Between 1845 and 1855, 208,000 immigrants came to America through Boston. This
represented 6.6 percent of total immigration into the U.S. during that time period, during
an era when Boston’s base population was less than .6 percent of the total population of
the U.S. This share substantially underestimates Boston’s share of Irish immigration,
since the Irish came disproportionately to Boston and the Germans arrived
disproportionately in New York. Boston’s population rose by about 43,000 during both
the 1850s and the 1860s and almost doubled its population over that 20 year period. At
the same time, Boston was changing from a Yankee town into an Irish city. In 1840, less
than 30 percent of Bostonians were foreigners or first generation Americans. By 1880,
64 percent of the city was foreign born or first generation. The overwhelming share of
the foreign born and their children were Irish. Success with the sailing ship made Boston
Irish.
Of course, Boston’s attraction for the Irish continued after the Civil War. To a certain
extent, this reflected some continuing maritime vitality, but to a much greater extent, Irish
immigrants came to a city with a thriving Irish network. In many cases, Irish Bostonians
funded their relatives coming to Boston. In other cases, as in almost all immigrant

19

enclaves, an initial concentration ensured that new immigrants would have neighbors
who shared their culture and preferences. Indeed, the gain from ethnic concentration was
even greater in an age when native Protestant gangs were known to terrorize the Irish.
Indeed, this violence was so common that one nativist mob even stormed an Urusuline
Convent in Watertown.
Manufacturing in New England
Cheap sailing ship fares brought the Irish to Boston, but these migrants wouldn’t have
stayed without economic opportunities. The economic success of late 19th century
Boston combined low-wage Irish labor with Yankee capital and factory technologies.
While the Boston of 1840 was a seafaring town, the Irish Bostonians of 1880 were
overwhelmingly involved in manufacturing (and for women, the service trades).
Boston’s success before 1920 depended on its ability to employ Irish and native workers
in factory jobs.
New England manufacturing actually began during the 1800-1840 period, but Lowell, not
Boston, was Massachusetts’ largest manufacturing town. Lowell was established in the
1820s as a textile center and was named after Francis Cabot Lowell. Lowell himself
came from a Boston mercantile family, and the capital used to fund the Lowell mills
came from sea trading profits. Boston’s seafaring past also supported its industrial
development because Lowell had studied English factories and made them the basis for
his Massachusetts operation.
But while the capital for the Lowell mills came from Boston and technology came from
England, the Lowell mills were put in a rural area northwest of Boston. While Lowell’s
original factory was on the Charles at Waltham, textile mills depended on a water-borne
power and the Charles was too small of a river to support the mill. As such, it was
natural to move the operation to the closest big river to Boston: the Merrimac. As such,
Lowell was founded at the site of an existing dam on the Merrimack (see Temin, 2000).

20

The Merrimack location also enabled water-born transportation through Newburyport. By
1840, Lowell had more than 20,000 residents and more than 8,000 workers. The Lowell
labor force was predominantly female. Sklar (1993) documents the strong New England
educational system that ensured that women were unusually well-educated for the time
period, and as such they provided a first-rate and inexpensive labor force.
Many of the earliest New England factories were spread throughout the hinterland, and
not located in New England’s largest city. Chauncey Jerome established his pioneering
clock factory in Litchfield county, Connecticut. Samuel Colt’s hand gun factory was in
Hartford, Connecticut. Southern New England was the birthplace of American
industrialization, and this industrialization was led by entrepreneurs like Lowell, Jerome
and Colt. Sokoloff (1988) documents that during much of the ante-bellum period,
Southern New England was the most inventive area of the country, leading the U.S. in
patents per capita across all fields and in manufacturing in particular. As Temin (2000)
argues, the central forces behind New England’s growth appear to be the region’s
“commitment to education” and “clear laws and a judicial process that allowed laws to
adapt to new problems undreamed of by the original legislators” (Temin, 2000, p. 110).
But while manufacturing began in smaller towns throughout the Massachusetts area, the
city of Boston gradually became a more and more important center for industry. While
the Boston of 1840 was oriented towards the wharf, the Boston of 1890 was a
manufacturing town whose workforce labored in factories. One side of this
transformation is the decline of Boston’s port which, as discussed above, was the natural
result of New York’s vast geographic advantage and the irrelevance of New England
sailing acumen in the age of steam. The other side of this transformation is the increasing
location of factories within the city of Boston and in its near suburbs. The story of late
19th century Boston is the increasing centralization of New England manufacturing in the
city of Boston.
Boston’s rise as a center for manufacturing is neither unique nor surprising. As Kim
(1995) has documented, all of manufacturing became more concentrated in the late 19th

21

century. While factories in the middle 19th century were strewn across the American
northeast, by the start of the 20th century, industry and manufacturing was centralized in a
few large metropolitan areas. In 1870, the ten largest cities in the U.S. had a total of 3.7
million inhabitants or 9.5 percent of the total U.S. population. By 1920, the ten largest
cities had 15.4 million residents or 14.4 percent of the overall U.S. population. Boston’s
growth during this period was certainly spectacular, but it was hardly unique. New York,
Chicago, and even Philadelphia had growth rates that were similarly impressive.
Table 1 shows the population in 1860 and 1920 of the ten largest cities in the U.S. as of
1860. The table makes it clear that Boston’s 320% growth rate, while high, was hardly
unusual. In this table, four cities grew more slowly than Boston and five grew more
quickly. The average growth rate in this table is 563%, which is much higher than
Boston’s growth rate.
Indeed, one can reasonably take the view that Boston underperformed during this period,
if it is compared to other Northern cities. Expanding our analysis to the 20 largest cities
in the U.S. in 1860, Boston’s growth rate ranks fourteenth. Excluding the three cities
below the Mason-Dixon (Baltimore, Louisville and New Orleans), Boston again ranks
thirteenth out of seventeen cities. The only Northern cities with more than 45,000
residents in 1860 that grew more slowly than Boston were Albany, Cincinnati, and
Philadelphia. Indeed, an even more spectacular fact is that America’s urban population
as a whole grew by 772 percent over this sixty year period. Understanding Boston’s
growth between 1860 and 1920 does not require understanding Boston-specific factors,
but rather the general forces which were causing a population explosion in all of
America’s cities.
Four factors drove the rise of cities in the late 19th century: increasing agricultural
productivity, changing manufacturing technologies, improvements in transportation and
the related rise in immigration. As urbanists have emphasized for decades, if not
centuries, increasing urbanization critically requires improvements in the productivity of
farms. In 1860, 58 percent of gainful workers were in agriculture. In 1920, 26 percent of

22

gainful workers were in agriculture (Historical Statistics, Series D 152-166). As America
has been a net exporter of food products throughout its history, this change means that in
1860, the average farmer was feeding four non-farmers. In 1920, the average farmer was
feeing 8.5 non-farmers.1 If caloric consumption stayed relatively constant, this tells us
that farm output per farmer needs to have more than doubled over this sixty-year period
for the U.S. to be fed by its agriculturalists.
The available evidence suggests that productivity did increase by at least this amount. In
1840, it took 233 man hours to produce 100 bushels of wheat. By 1880, it took 152 man
hours to produce the same 100 bushels and by 1920, only 90 man hours were needed to
produce those bushels. A similar improvement occurred in corn production which
required 276 man hours to produce 100 bushels in 1840 and 122 man hours to produce
100 bushels in 1920 (Historical Statistics Series K 445-485).
Typically, increases in farm productivity are divided into technological improvements,
which generally increase the amount of land that a farmer can sow and reap, and
biological improvements, which increase the productivity per acre. Certainly, Cyrus
McCormick’s mechanical reaper is one of the great technological innovations in the
history of agriculture. This nineteenth century innovation meant that the time it took to
harvest one acre of wheat dropped from 20 hours in 1830 to less than one hour in 1895.
But despite this innovation, land per farm fell during the 1860-1920 period. Land per
farmer and farm land per U.S. citizen also fell. Farmland per agricultural worker
increased from 66 acres per worker in 1860 to 86 acres per worker in 1920, or a 30
percent increase. Thus, while some of the increase in productivity came from more land
per worker, the bulk of the increase in agricultural productivity came from more efficient
use of land, not bigger farms.

1

These statistics are somewhat misleading because a large number of farmers were producing non-food
crops such as cotton and tobacco. However, if the share of farmers producing these products stayed
relatively constant over this period, then the same doubling of productivity is needed to feed the
increasingly non-agricultural share of the population.

23

Two factors appear to have been particularly important. First, the 19th century saw an
explosion in the use of commercial fertilizer. In 1860, 164,000 short tons of fertilizer
were consumed in the U.S. By 1920, 7.2 million short tons of fertilizer were consumed
(Historical Statistics Series K 192-194). This forty-fold increase in the use of fertilizer
helped increase crop yields per acre substantially. Second, the location of farms within
the United States changed substantially over this period. In 1860, 71 percent of U.S.
farmland was in Northeastern and Southern states of the U.S. By 1920, only 42 percent
of farmland was in these areas. The spread of U.S. population across the continent meant
that farmers moved from the lower productivity land of New England to the enormously
productive farms of states like Iowa.
This spread of population would have been impossible without the rise of railroads which
shipped farm products across the vast American hinterland. In 1860, there were 30,626
miles of rail in the United States. By 1920, 406,580 miles of railroad track were in
operation. This vast increase sped the flow of farm products, but it also led to the
development of cities which generally became vast hubs of railroad lines. Eight
independent railroad lines going into Boston were opened in the 20 years between 1835
and 1855 alone. This massive improvement in transportation technology would also play
a critical role in the development of large urban areas.
The development of cities is almost always driven by a desire to save on transportation
costs. In the 17th century, Boston’s growth hinged on its importance as the major port for
New England. In the 19th century, Boston, like all of the big cities discussed above,
became a major rail center for the northeast. If a factory’s products were to be shipped
throughout the New England area, then Boston offered an optimal location. Just as
Chicago became the hub of the Midwest because of its railroads, Boston’s dominance
over New England occurred in part because of its central position as a railroad hub.
But Boston had been a transport hub in 1820, and the Boston Associates still decided to
set up their factories along the Merrimac. What had changed? There were two related
changes within manufacturing technology that supported the urbanization of factories.

24

First, water power was no longer as important to the functioning of a factory. In the first
part of the 19th century, factories spread across New England in large part to take
advantage of the power created by water mills. By the late 19th century, the cost
advantages of this form of technology had been eroded by the rapid proliferation of
stationary steam engine, which were powering an increasingly large share of New
England manufacturing. In 1838, there were 31 stationary steam engines in New
England. By 1900, there were 14,245 such engines. Steam engines freed factories from
the rivers and enabled them to locate in large urban areas.
Of all cities, perhaps Boston was the most changed by steam technology. In the 19th
century, the Back Bay was filled in and this massive public works project permanently
changed the physical structure of the city. This would not have been possible without
steam shovels.
The second technological change that supported the urbanization of industry was the
reduction in the space requirements of factories. The early textile mills had been vast
edifices which required large amounts of physical areas for big machines. Increasingly
“such technical innovations as the lathe and sewing machine permitted the use of small
machines which were neither expensive of space nor specialized in their structural
requirements so that the upper stories of vacant warehouses and even the attics of
adjacent tenements were rapidly converted into workshop premises” (Ward, 1966). As a
result of these changes, industrial entrepreneurs didn’t need to locate in empty space
where land was cheap. Instead, they could locate in the heart of the city and reap the
advantages of proximity to suppliers, customers and workers.
This last urban advantage—proximity to workers—is particularly important in explaining
the development of urban manufacturing. As discussed above, Boston served as the
entryway for the vast Irish immigration. But the primary importance of the Irish
immigration wave is not that the Irish came through Boston, but that they decided to stay
there. In earlier times, immigrants came through Boston but didn’t settle there. By the
late 19th century, both immigrants to the U.S. and rural-urban migrants were deciding to

25

stay in Boston. In part, the urbanization of population is the natural result of the
urbanization of manufacturing, but there were reasons beyond labor demand that cities
increasingly attracted residents.
For example, public transportation made it possible to travel around Boston more cheaply
than traveling around low density communities. Big cities offered a much richer array of
social activities than low density farming communities. For recent Catholic immigrants,
who were often subject to violent nativist antipathy, dense urban areas facilitated the
formation of segregated communities which could be defended. Furthermore, the
tremendous health disadvantages that cities once had were being eroded by tremendous
advances in public health (especially the rise of clean water) in the late 19th century. For
these reasons, big cities were becoming more attractive places to live, not just places to
work.
IV.

1920-1980: The Declining City

Boston’s population did not start declining in absolute terms until after 1950, but relative
to the U.S. as a whole, the city’s collapse began in 1920. Between 1920 and 1980,
Boston fell from containing .7 percent of the U.S. population to .25 percent of the U.S.
population. Boston’s population as a whole fell from 750,000 in 1920 to 560,000 sixty
years later. Figure 4 shows the ratio of Boston’s population to the combined populations
of Suffolk, Middlesex and Norfolk counties. As Figure 5 shows, the counties
surrounding Boston fared considerably better. Both Middlesex and Norfolk counties
gained population over this period, but as Figure 6 shows, both of the larger counties
(Suffolk and Middlesex) lost population substantially relative to the U.S. as a whole.
Why did Boston decline so much during the middle decades of the 20th century? There
are four important factors that explain the absolute loss of population in Boston as a city
and the relative loss of population in the outlying counties: (1) weather, (2) transportation
technology, (3) the decline of manufacturing, and (4) government policies. I will
document the relative importance of each of these factors in turn.

26

No variable can explain state and city growth over the past 80 years as reliably as
temperature. Warm places grew significantly in the 20th century. Cold places also grew,
but much more slowly. Figure 7 shows the relationship between average January
temperature in a state and the population growth of that state between 1920 and 1980.
Average January temperature is the average January temperature between 1961 and 1990
taken from the 2000 Statistical Abstract of the U.S., Table 408.2 The growth rate of
population is the change in the logarithm of state population, which can be interpreted
loosely as the percentage growth in state population.3 The correlation coefficient
between average January temperature and state population growth over this period is 48
percent. The line in the graph tells us that as January temperature rises by 1 percent, the
expected growth rate of the state increases by 2.3 percent.
Another way to think about the impact of temperature is that the average growth rate of
the 25 states with mean January temperatures less than 29.7 degrees was 95 percent. The
average growth rate of the 25 states with mean January temperature above 29.7 degrees
was 309 percent. The connection between temperature and population growth is quite
strong over this period, and this is certainly one reason why Massachusetts’ population
grew only modestly over this period.
Why did warm places grow so much more quickly than poor places? There are two
important sets of explanations for this fact. First, a series of technological improvements
disproportionately improved life in hot states. Most obviously, the air conditioner made
it possible to live comfortably, and perhaps even more importantly to have factories in
hot climes. Improvements in public health meant that diseases, such as malaria and
cholera that used to regularly kill the residents of Southern states, were brought under
control.

2

The table generally lists the average January average for one major city in the state. In the few cases
where multiple cities were included, I averaged the temperatures across these cities.
3
I use the change in the logarithm of state population instead of the actual percentage growth in population,
because the logarithmic measure tends to be less sensitive to extreme values, especially among states that
begin with a particularly low level of population.

27

Second, changes in transportation technology eliminated the advantages of northern
states, which had once thrived because of proximity to natural resources and rivers. The
average city of 1900 had been located in places which had an advantage in producing
manufactured goods and shipping them by water. As the cost of moving goods
plummeted by over 90 percent in real terms during the 20th century (see Glaeser and
Kohlhase, 2003), these production advantages disappeared and people moved to places
that were distinguished mainly by their advantages as consumer cities (see Glaeser,
Kolko and Saiz, for an analysis of the consumer city phenomenon). Cold cities were
unpleasant to live in and as a result, people moved west and south in search of more
pleasant climes. Firms were no longer tied to the northeast and eventually followed the
workers.
But the decline of cold cities can only partially explain the decline of Boston. After all,
cold weather is shared by all of Massachusetts, but the state grew much more quickly
than the city of Boston did. As a whole, the state of Massachusetts grew by 49 percent
between 1920 and 1980, which is much slower than the national population growth rate
of 98 percent, and this gap is perhaps primarily explained by Massachusetts’ cold
weather. Still, the city of Boston fell by 25 percent over this time period. Something
more than cold weather must be to blame.
Beyond the weather, the second great force moving urban populations over the mid-20th
century was sprawl. Old, dense cities declined and lower density cities, particularly those
on the edge of traditional downtowns, boomed. The primary reason for this rise of
sprawling cities is the rise of the automobile. The traditional American cities were built
first around walking and then around public transportation. Boston’s oldest areas, such
as Beacon Hill and the waterfront, are built at sufficiently high densities to accommodate
foot-borne travelers. 19th century areas, such as Back Bay, Roxbury or nearby suburbs
such as Brookline, were built around the early forms of public transportation such as
omnibuses and then streetcars. These forms of transportation require bigger roads and
allow people to travel larger distances, but they still require people to walk to and from
bus stops. As such, the densities need to be moderate.

28

The automobile requires a completely different level of construction. Roads must be an
order of magnitude when they are meant to accommodate cars rather than buses, because
the area used by a car traveler is at least ten times greater than the area used by someone
using public transportation. Furthermore, cars need parking lots which are themselves
enormously space intensive. It is possible to drive in a city built at pedestrian densities,
but it isn’t pleasant, as anyone who drives around central Paris or Wall Street can attest.
The rise of the automobile inevitably meant that people would increasingly move to
lower density communities that could be designed around the new technology. Indeed,
much of 20th century urban history can be seen as the rise of decentralized communities
which is itself the result of the technological dominance of the automobile.
The rise of the car meant that cities that were built at high densities inevitably suffered
because high densities tend to be incompatible with the automobile. Indeed, the
correlation between a city’s density in 1920 and its use of public transportation 60 years
later is more than 50 percent. Since high density cities, like Boston, were badly suited to
the dominant new transportation technology, those cities tended to lose population.
This fact can be seen in Figure 7 which shows the relationship between urban density in
1920 and growth over the next 60 years. The correlation coefficient between initial
density and urban growth is –44.8 percent. The line in the graph tells us that as a city’s
density in 1920 increases by 1000 people per square mile, the expected growth rate of the
city declines by 5.6 percent. Put another way, the median growth rate of the 68 cities
among the 100 largest in 1920 with less than 10,000 people per square mile was 43
percent. The median growth rate of the cities with more than 10,000 people per square
mile was -20 percent. Boston’s density level in 1920 was 17,200 people per square mile,
making it the eighth densest of America’s large cities. As such, its low growth isn’t
much of a surprise. Boston was a highly dense city in a cold state. Throughout the
middle years of the 20th century, those two factors almost always led to declining
population levels.

29

Density and cold are themselves enough to explain Boston’s decline, but indeed, Boston
had other features which also generally led to urban decline. As I discussed in the
previous section, Boston in 1920 was a manufacturing city and its success had come in
large part from its ability to employ large numbers of immigrant workers in factories. In
general, manufacturing cities did extremely poorly during the middle 20th century. The
factors which made it natural for industry to urbanize in the late 19th centuries, such as
access to ports and rail depots, disappeared in the 20th century. Manufacturing left cities
for suburbs, which could easily be accessed by trucks. Manufacturing left the northeast
for the sunbelt, which had a much less pro-union environment (see Holmes, 1994, for the
classic analysis showing the positive effect of right-to-work laws on employment).
Finally, low transportation costs even made it possible for manufacturing to locate
outside of the U.S. entirely to take advantage of cheap labor costs.
The net result of these factors was a dramatic decline of those cities which had
specialized in manufacturing. Figure 9 shows the relationship between the share of
workers in manufacturing industries and city growth between 1920 and 1980.
Unfortunately, due to data availability, I have been forced to use the share of
manufacturing in 1980, rather than 1920, which is less than ideal. The graph illustrates
the strong negative relationship between manufacturing and urban decline. Cities that
were manufacturing centers generally did poorly during the 20th century urban success,
and Boston may have suffered for this reason as well.
A final reason for Boston’s difficulties during the middle years of the 20th century is city
government. The 1920-1950 period in Boston was the era of James Michael Curley, and
Curley set a pattern of large spending and inflammatory rhetoric. Curley’s success can
itself be traced to the longstanding hostility between the city’s poorer Irish population
and its wealthier Protestant residents. This ethnic division, accompanied by sharp income
disparities between the two groups, set the stage for Curleyism, which included largescale public projects and a general program of redistribution from the Yankee rich to the
Irish poor. Unsurprisingly, this program pushed the rich out of the city.

30

There is little compelling evidence on the connection between government policies and
city growth, but Figure 10 shows the relationship between city growth between 1920 and
1980 and per capita taxes in 1980. Again, somewhat problematically, I am forced to use
taxes and income in 1980 due to data availability. I have divided per capita city taxes by
per capita income in 1980. These taxes are meant to include city-level taxes from all
sources. The graph shows a significant negative relationship, and also shows that Boston
is among the highest tax cities in the sample. The line in the graph tells us that as taxes
(relative to income) rise by one percent, the expected growth rate during the 1920-1980
period declines by six percent.
Boston had a number of features which drove its decline during the middle decades of the
20th century. It built at density levels too high for the automobile to function effectively
and it was located in a cold state. The city had concentrated in manufacturing (although
this was over by 1980) and had extremely high local tax levels. Together these factors
drove Boston’s decline. By 1980, Boston was just another of America’s formerly great
declining cities. Its real estate values were low and it had lost population steadily since
1950. The city was beginning to suffer from the social problems, such as high poverty
and unemployment, that generally accompany urban decline. Indeed, an urban observer
looking at Boston in 1980 would have every reason to believe that it would go the way of
Detroit and Syracuse and continue along its sad path towards urban irrelevance.
V.

1980-2000: America’s Athens Turns Commercial

But that didn’t happen. During the past 20 years, the Boston metropolitan area has
gained population steadily. The city of Boston hasn’t grown significantly more populous,
but at least the population drain has stopped. Most dramatically, there has been an
explosion of housing values. These values create urban problems of their own, but they
are a strong indication of demand for that particular city. While Detroit and Syracuse are
still places marked by extremely low housing demand, the Boston market has generally
been extremely hot. Moreover, Boston has been linked to a number of the most

31

important developments in the U.S. economy over the past 20 years. In this section, I
explore the reasons for Boston’s success in the 1980-2000 period.
One of the most persistent predictors of urban growth over the last century is the skill
level of a city (Simon and Nardinelli, 2002, Glaeser et al., 1995). Figure 11 shows the
relationship between percent college educated in 1980 and the population growth over the
next 20 years among the 147 metropolitan areas with more than 100,000 residents in
1980 with mean January temperatures below 40 degrees. Among these colder cities,
skills are the best predictor of growth. The correlation coefficient between share of
college graduates in 1980 and growth between 1980 and 2000 is 54 percent in this
sample. The correlation coefficient in the full sample of metropolitan areas with more
than 100,000 people is 29 percent. The line in the figure tells us that as the share of the
population (over 25 years old) with college degrees rises by one percent, the growth rate
between 1980 and 2000 rose by 1.9 percent.
At this point, it is not clear why high human capital areas do well and low human capital
areas do more poorly. One set of theories focuses on the role of skilled workers are
innovators and entrepreneurs. An alternative set of theories focuses on the importance of
a skilled labor force and argues that firms are moving to places with skilled labor forces.
Alternatively, skilled workers may be particularly important in providing locational
amenities. Poverty and social problems go together and it may well be that the poor
growth record of low skill cities actually reflects the social problems that accompany low
levels of skill. A final theory is that skilled workers have specialized in industries that
have done well over the last 50 years.
Boston is, of course, hardly the most educated metropolitan area in the country or even
the most educated of the larger metropolitan areas. In 2000, Boulder, Colorado was the
metropolitan area with the highest share of college graduates amongst its adult
population. Indeed not only Boulder but also the metropolitan areas of Madison,
Wisconsin, San Francisco, San Jose, Stamford, Connecticut and Washington, D.C. all
have a higher share of college graduates than Boston. Still, out of the set of 209

32

metropolitan areas with more than 200,000 people, the Boston primary metropolitan
statistical area had the sixth highest level of college graduates in 2000.4 39.5 percent of
Boston’s population over the age of 25 had a college degree and 51.2 percent of
Bostonians between the ages of 25 and 34 had that much education. This extremely high
level of education predicts that Boston should have done well over the past 20 years, and
indeed it did.
How was education the engine of Boston’s success? Table 1 displays the top industries
in Suffolk, Middesex and Norfolk counties. This data comes from the 2001 edition of
County Business Patterns, is based on establishment level questionnaires, and omits
workers in sufficiently small businesses and government employment.5 I have used the
North American Industry Classification System codes and reported employment by 3digit “NAICS” code. Together the top ten industries account for 63, 57 and 46 percent of
employment in Suffolk, Middlesex and Norfolk counties respectively. The first fact to
take away from these tables is that while Middlesex county has 110 percent more people
than Suffolk county, it only has 50 percent more employees. Thus, while it is certainly
true that employment within the Boston metropolitan area has decentralized, it also
remains true that there is more employment at the center than at the periphery.
The tables make it clear that Boston is dominated by four export industries: professional
services, education, finance and healthcare. Professional services is a big category that
means different things in Middlesex and Suffolk counties. In Middlesex county,
professional services are primarily computer-related services (with 38,679 employees)
and scientific research and development services (with 20,016 employees). These two
four digit SIC code industries account for 53 percent of professional services in
Middlesex and six percent of total employment in the county. In Middlesex county,
therefore, professional services means high technology. In Suffolk, however, the
professional services are dominated by law firms who employ 17,908 people in that
county. Suffolk county also has 9,217 people working at computer-related consulting

4
5

In this case, I have included all primary metropolitan statistical areas.
Some industries with small numbers of employers are suppressed, so there is some potential for error.

33

firms and 8,277 people working for management consulting firms. Suffolk is a more
traditional downtown county with a focus on law and management consulting, while
Middlesex county is dominated by the technology sector. This dominance can also be
seen by the fact that Middlesex county is the only one of the three counties with a
significant manufacturing industry: computer and electronic machinery manufacturing.
It is also obviously true that if Boston is not the Athens of America, it is still remarkably
oriented towards education. Educational services is the second largest industry in
Middlesex county and the fourth largest industry in Suffolk county. These numbers are
dominated by higher education, since public school employees are excluded from County
Business Patterns. In a sense, Boston’s specialization in education is actually more
remarkable than its specialization in professional services. After all, professional
services are a large sector of the U.S. economy as a whole. Across the nation, 6.2 percent
of employees in County Business patterns are in the professional services industry, which
tells us that Boston workers are about twice as likely to be in those industries as workers
elsewhere. But only 2.3 percent of County Business Pattern workers are employed by
educational service firms in the country as a whole. As a result, workers in Middlesex
county are more than three times more likely to be in education than workers elsewhere
in the U.S. Boston’s dominance in higher education has existed for centuries and in an
era when college and post-graduate education became increasingly valuable, it is not
surprising that Boston’s schools did well.
Health care is another large Boston industry, especially in Suffolk County where
hospitals and ambulatory health care together account for 14 percent of the total
employees in County Business Patterns. These two three digit industries account for six
percent of employment in Middlesex County and eight percent of employment in Norfolk
County. These numbers are not that unusual. Nationwide, 8.5 percent of County
Business Patterns employees are in these two industries. Suffolk County is unusually
dependent on this industry, but they are a big component of employment in the other
counties because they are a large component of employment in most places.

34

Finally, Suffolk County (and to a lesser degree Norfolk County) has a remaining presence
in financial services. Nine percent of Suffolk County employment is in securities and
commodity contracts and four percent is in financial intermediation. Like New York,
Boston developed expertise in finance because of the early connection between finance
and shipping. This connection occurred both because shipping required risk-sharing and
complicated commodity trading, and because shipping generated profits that were then
reinvested. Like New York, finance remains important long after the maritime trades
have lost their relevance.
The remaining top industries are usually big and generally cater to local residents. They
are not themselves either a source of external revenues or economic growth. Indeed,
health care is itself correlated with urban decline (at least over the past decade) not urban
growth, so the keys to Boston’s growth have been (and will continue to be) technology,
finance and education. These industries are the flip side of Boston’s high education level.
Boston’s high level of education is important because it is connected to specialization in
these three industries. Skilled workers are needed in these industries and the presence of
skilled workers led to entrepreneurship in both technology and professional services.
With this I can return to the comparison between Boston and the rust belt cities. Like
Syracuse and Detroit, Boston was a cold, manufacturing city that had done poorly over
the 1950-1980 period. But unlike those cities, Boston had universities, a well educated
workforce and a residual finance industry. In the 1980s, the return to schooling
skyrocketed. The computer revolution sped up and demand for education soared. As a
result, Boston did extremely well. The other manufacturing cities of the northeast had
much lower levels of education and, as a result, little presence in technology. In 1950,
Boston’s universities may have seemed like a quaint anachronism of the city’s Brahmin
past. However, those universities meant that when America became an information
economy, Boston would be able to capitalize on that transformation.
The Forms of Boston’s Success

35

To any reasonable observer, the past twenty years of Boston’s history looks like a
success, but at this point it is worth asking what form that success has taken and why
Boston has changed in the way that it has changed. First, the Boston area has become
more populous. The Boston consolidated metropolitan statistical area has grown by 13.5
percent over the past two decades. This is certainly impressive, but the median
metropolitan area with more than 200,000 people grew by 22 percent and the total U.S.
population grew by 24 percent. Inner Boston population growth was even more modest.
The city of Boston grew by 4.3 percent over those two decades and the city of Cambridge
grew by 6.3 percent. Admittedly this growth was better than the decline of the 1950-1980
period, but Boston’s success—if it exists—must show up elsewhere.
Conventionally, there are three ways of measuring urban success: population growth,
income growth and housing price growth. All three measures have advantages and
problems. Increasing productivity in a city will show up in increasing wages, prices and
population. In principle, increasing “demand” for a city, by which I mean an increasing
desire of people to live in a particular area, will show up in increasing population and
increasing housing prices. As such, it is worthwhile asking what has happened to wages
and housing in the Boston area to examine these other measures of urban success.
Wages in the Boston area have certainly increased. In 1980, Boston’s income ranked it
in the second quartile of metropolitan statistical areas with more than 200,000 people. In
other words, about one-quarter of larger metropolitan areas had higher income levels than
Boston. Bostonians earned somewhat less than the residents of Atlanta and somewhat
more than the residents of Pittsburgh. Today, the Boston consolidated metropolitan
area’s median household income ranks fourth among consolidated metropolitan areas
behind Minneapolis, San Francisco and Washington, D.C. Boston’s per capita income
ranks fifth behind those three areas and West Palm Beach. While Boston’s population
growth has not been extraordinary, its income growth has been extremely impressive and
now Boston is among the richest places in the country.

36

Boston’s income growth has been matched by truly spectacular housing price growth.
Because of the considerable variables across cities within the Boston area, it makes sense
to focus on housing prices at the city, not metropolitan area, level. Across 541 cities in
the U.S. in 1980 with more than 25,000 residents, by median housing value growth,
Boston ranks fourth. Newton ranks third. Somerville ranks fifth and Cambridge ranks
first. The average housing price growth in this sample is 147 percent over these two
decades. The median housing price in Somerville increased by 393 percent. The median
housing price in Boston increased by 429 percent and the median housing price in
Newton increased by 439 percent. Most incredibly, the median housing price in
Cambridge increased by 549 percent. These numbers are incredible, but they capture
reality: Boston has boomed over the past 20 years but this boom has been reflected
mostly in higher housing prices, not in larger population levels.
Why does a booming Texas economy lead to more bodies and little change in housing
prices, but a booming Massachusetts economy lead only to massive increases in the price
of housing? Standard economic reasoning tells us that the key determinant of whether
prices or population rises is the elasticity of housing supply. When housing is elastically
supplied, we should expect there to be little change in price and a large increase in
bodies. When housing is inelastically supplied, then a local boom causes prices to rise
and little change in total population. The most natural explanation of the form of
Boston’s success is that housing supply has been extremely inelastic, especially in the
cities close to downtown Boston.
There are several reasons for this inelasticity. Boston’s traditionally high densities are
also partially to blame. Furthermore, housing supply is completely inelastic when
housing prices are below construction costs and indeed for much of the 1980-2000 period
(but not today) housing prices were still too low for builders to actually want to build (see
Glaeser and Gyourko, 2002, for details). Finally, zoning and other constraints on new
construction can lead to major constraints on new development. These constraints mean
that if a city becomes more attractive, prices rise, but there are only very tiny amounts of
new construction.

37

To make this point clearly, I now compare Massachusetts and Texas over the 1980-2000
period. I chose Texas because it has some of the fewest constraints on development
anywhere in the U.S. In 2002 alone, Texas handed out 160,530 construction permits. In
that year, Massachusetts gave out 16,875 permits. The sunbelt has other states that are
similar to Texas (Nevada, Arizona, etc.), but Texas seems like a good example of a state
with few barriers to new construction.
Figures 12 and 13 shows the impact of initial years of education on urban success in
Texas over the 1980-2000 period. I use city-level observations and in Figure 12 I show
the relationship between city population growth and the initial share of the adult
education with college degrees. As I argued earlier, college education is associated with
urban success and this is as true in Texas as anywhere else. Figure 12 shows a 39 percent
correlation between city growth and the share of the population with college degrees.
The line in the graph tells us that if the share of the city’s population with college degrees
rises by one percent, the expected growth rate over the period rises by 1.2 percent.
Figure 13 shows the relationship between education and housing price growth in Texas—
there is none. The relationship between the two variables is weakly negative and not
statistically significant from zero. Skills predict population growth but not housing price
growth in Texas. New homes are built and people are able to move into cities that are
growing.
Figures 14 and 15 show the same relationships for Massachusetts. Figure 14 shows the
connection between initial years of schooling and later population growth across
Massachusetts cities. In this case, initial schooling has no impact on later population
growth. Figure 15 shows that this lack of impact does not mean that schooling fails to
predict urban success in Massachusetts. Initial schooling has an extraordinary positive
effect on housing price growth in Massachusetts over the 1980-2000 period. The
correlation coefficient between these two variables is 78 percent. As share of the initial
population with college degrees rises by one percent, expected housing price growth rises

38

by 1.5 percent. Urban success in Massachusetts means higher housing prices. In Texas,
success means more bodies.
Together these set of graphs suggest that the regulatory environment strongly influences
the path of urban growth. In Texas, which is one extreme, successful cities grow in
population. In Boston, which has a much more restrictive regulatory environment, urban
success has led to higher prices, but not more people.
At this point, it is hard to say how costly the regulation of new construction in
Massachusetts may be. Indeed, it may be that the benefits of preserving low density
living outweigh the costs of artificially forcing people to stay away from Boston, and the
costs of forcing employers to pay more for workers. Further work must address this
issue. In 1980, dealing with urban success did not seem to be Boston’s most pressing
problem, but in 2000, we are lucky enough to be challenged with figuring out the right
way to grow.
VI.

Conclusion

Boston has had an extraordinary history and it has had four different eras of success, each
driven by a slightly different force. For the first 100 years of its existence, it was
America’s premier city. Boston was the capital of America’s most commercially diverse
region and it served as the central port for that region. In the 1750-1800 period, Boston
had its first era of decline as its port was eclipsed by New York and Philadelphia. Those
cities’ more southern locations and superior rivers made them vastly superior places for
shipping goods into and out of America.
But in the first 40 years of the 19th century, Boston had its first recovery. Peace and the
increasing globalization of the 19th century maritime economy enabled Boston seafarers
to exploit their expertise. New York and Philadelphia were still the dominant points of
entry in the U.S., but Boston based seafarers manned ships owned by Boston merchants,

39

which traveled into and out of those ports. Boston mariners also thrived from the China
trade and the whaling industry.
Just as the steamship eliminated Boston’s supremacy in sailing ships, Boston reinvented
itself once again as a manufacturing city. Because of the unusual temporal coincidence
of the Irish potato famine and the last period of Bostonian maritime dominance, a vast
number of Irish immigrants came to Massachusetts because Boston was the cheapest and
closest port of entry. These immigrants would provide the muscle for industrial growth
of what had been a maritime time. Boston’s nineteenth century industrial growth was
abetted by railroads and by the fact that factories used steam, not water, for power.
Indeed, almost every large northern city in the U.S. as of 1860 became an industrial
powerhouse over the next 60 years as factories started in central locations where they
could save transport costs and make use of large urban labor forces.
But this period of growth came to an end in 1920. During the middle years of the 20th
century, urban growth was driven by the move to sun and sprawl. As Boston was a high
density city in a cold state, it was bound to decline. Bostonian streets were built around
the pedestrian and the streetcar and, unsurprisingly, people left for the edges of the
metropolitan area. Moreover, technological improvements meant that warmer climes
became increasingly attractive and people moved south and west. As of 1980, Boston
resembled many of the industrial hulks dotting the northeast and Midwest. A reasonable
guess was that Boston’s path between 1980 and 2000 would resemble the path that was
actually taken by Detroit.
In the 1980-2000 period, Boston turned out to look more like San Jose than like Detroit.
The booming information economy relied on skilled workers and Boston’s long history
had left the city with a surfeit of universities. As a result, Boston was ideally poised to
take advantage of the rise in returns to skill that so marked the last quarter of the
twentieth century. Boston left manufacturing and specialized in high technology, finance
and education—industries that required skilled workers and that did extremely well over

40

the 1980-2000 period. Indeed, as long as the skills boom continues, it seems likely that
Boston will continue to thrive.
Still, Boston’s success leaves us with a major policy quandary. In the less regulated areas
of the sunbelt, local economic success leads to massive new construction, accompanying
large increases in population and small changes in housing prices. In the regulated
Massachusetts economy, new construction is extremely difficult and as a result,
economic success leads to higher prices, not large numbers of new homes. As a result,
Boston faces extraordinarily high housing prices. Boston’s limits on new construction
were relatively costless in an era of urban decline, but as the area thrives, these barriers to
construction pose the largest barrier to new growth and may well create large social costs
for Bostonians and would-be Bostonians. The regulation on new construction is surely
the most important policy area facing Boston today.

41

Bibliography
Albion, R.G. (1932) “Yankee Domination of New York Port, 1820-1865,” The New
England Quarterly 5(4): 665-698.
Atack, J., Bateman, F. and T. Weiss (1988) “The Regional Diffusion and Adoption of the
Steam Engine in American Manufacturing,” Journal of Economic History 40(2): 281308.
Bremer, F. J. (2003) John Winthrop: America’s Forgotten Founding Father. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Glaeser, E.L. and Gyourko, J. (2001) “Urban Decline and Durable Housing,” NBER
Working Paper 8598.
Glaeser, E.L. and Gyourko, J. (2002) “The Impact of Zoning on Housing Affordability,”
Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper #1948.
Glaeser, E.L. and Kohlhase, J.E. (2003) “Cities, Regions and the Decline of Transport
Costs,” Papers in Regional Science, forthcoming 2003.
Glaeser, E.L., Kolko, J. and Saiz, A. (2001) "Consumer City," Journal of Economic
Geography 1: 27-50.
Glaeser, E.L., Scheinkman, J. and Shleifer, A. (1995) "Economic Growth in a CrossSection of Cities," Journal of Monetary Economics 36: 117-143.
Henretta, J.A. (1965) “Economic Development and Social Structure in Colonial Boston,”
The William and Mary Quarterly 22(1): 75-92.
Kim, S. (1995) “Expansion of Markets and the Geographic Distribution of Economic
Activities: The Trends in U.S. Regional Manufacturing Structure, 1860-1987” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 110: 881-908.
Kim, S. (2003) “Notes on Legal Developments in Colonial Massachusetts and Virginia,”
mimeographed.
Morison, S. E. (1961) The Maritime History of Massachusetts. Boston: Northeastern
University Press.
Simon, C. and C. Nardinelli (2002) “Human Capital and the Rise of American Cities
1900-1990” Regional Science and Urban Economics 32: 59-96.
Sklar, K.K. (1993) “The Schooling of Girls and Changing Community Values in
Massachusetts Towns, 150-1820,” History of Education Quarterly 33(4): 511-542.

42

Sokoloff, K.L. (1988) “Inventive Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence From
Patent Records, 1790-1846,” The Journal of Economic History 48(4): 813-850.
Temin, P. (2000) Engines of Enterprise: An Economic History of New England. Boston:
Harvard University Press.
Ward, D. (1966) “The Industrial Revolution and the Emergence of Boston’s Central
Business District,” Economic Geography 42(2): 152-171.

43

Table 1: Population Growth of the Ten Largest American Cities in 1860
City

Population in 1860

Population in 1920

Growth Rate

New York

813,669

5,620,048

590%

Philadelphia

565,529

1,823,779

222%

Brooklyn*

266,661

2,300,664

763%

Baltimore

212,418

733,826

245%

Boston

177,840

748,060

320%

New Orleans

168,675

387,219

129%

Cincinnati

161,044

401,247

149%

St. Louis

160,773

772,897

380%

Chicago

112,172

2,701,705

2,308%

Buffalo

81,129

506,775

525%

*The population for Brooklyn in 1920 is the population of Kings County.

44

Table 2: Employment in Suffolk, Middlesex and Norfolk Counties
Suffolk County
Professional, Scientific and
Technical Services (541)
Hospitals (622)

Total Employment
61,863

Share of Total (579,254)
.11

55,637

.10

Security, Commodity
Contracts, etc. (523)
Educational Services (611)

52,834

.09

42,987

.07

Administrative and Support
Services (561)
Food Services and Drinking
Places (722)
Credit Intermediation and
Related Services (522)
Ambulatory Health Care
(621)
Management of Companies
and Enterprises (551)
Social Assistance (623)

42,494

.07

35,316

.06

21,502

.04

21,065

.04

15,429

.03

13,767

.02

Total

362,894

.63

Middlesex County
Professional, Scientific and
Technical Services (541)
Educational Services (611)

Total Employment
110,239

Share of Total (871,013)
.13

64,226

.07

63,914

.07

57,609

.07

43,562

.05

42,121

.05

31,068

.04

28,682

.03

Administrative and Support
Services (561)
Computer and Electronic
Product Manuf. (334)
Wholesale Trade, Durable
Goods (421)
Food Services and Drinking
Places (722)
Management of Companies
and Enterprises (551)
Ambulatory Health Care
(621)

45

Hospitals (622)

26,858

.03

Publishing (511)

24,480

.03

Total

492,759

.57

Norfolk County
Professional, Scientific and
Technical Services (541)
Administrative and Support
Services (561)
Food Services and Drinking
Places (722)
Ambulatory Health Care
(621)

Total Employment
28,209

Share of Total (344,196)
.08

20,391

.06

20,027

.06

14,954

.04

Wholesale Trade, Durable
Goods (421)
Hospitals (622)

14,094

.04

13,356

.04

Educational Services (611)

12,855

.04

Special Trade Contractors
(235)
Insurance Carriers and
Related Activities
Management of Companies
and Enterprises (551)
Total

12,314

.04

11,869

.03

11,405

.03

159,474

.46

46

800000
1920

1930 1940

1950

1960

Population of the City of Boston

1910
1970

600000

1980 1990

1900

2000

1890

400000

1880

1870

200000

1860
1850
1840

0

1810
1790 1800

1800

1820

1830

1850

1900
Year

1950

Figure 1: Boston's Population 1790-2000

47

2000

.008

Boston Population/U.S. Populatio

1880

1890

1900 1910
1920

1870

.006

1930

1850
1840

1790 1800 1810

1940

1860

1950

1830
1820

.004

1960

1970

1980

1990
2000

.002
1800

1850

1900
Year

1950

Figure 2: Boston's Share of Total U.S. Population

48

2000

Boston/Mass

Boston/NYC

.6

.4

.2

0
1800

1850

1900
Year

1950

Figure 3: Boston Relative to Mass. and NYC

49

2000

1900

1910
1920

Boston City Population/Area Popu

.4
1930
1940
1950

.3
1960

1970
1980

1990

2000

.2
1900

1950
Year

Figure 4: Boston's Share of the Area's Population

50

2000

Suffolk
Middlesex

Norfolk

1.5e+06

1.0e+06

500000

0
1900

1950
Year

Figure 5: Population of Boston Counties

51

2000

Suffolk/USA
Middlesex/USA

Norfolk/USA

.008

.006

.004

.002
1900

1950
Year

Figure 6: Boston Counties as a Share of the U.S.

52

2000

Population Change 20-80
3

.
tennesse

nevada

florida
arizona

alaska

2

californ

hawaii

new mexi
oregon
utah
colorado
texas
washingt
maryland
delaware
michigan
wyoming
louisian
new jers virginia
north ca
connectiidaho
new hamp
georgia
indiana
ohio
south ca
wisconsi
illinois
minnesot
new york
alabama
rhodekentucky
is
oklahoma
massachu
maine missouri
vermontmontana
mississi
pennsylv
kansas
west vir arkansas
iowa
nebraska
south da
northdak

1

0
0

20

40
Mean January Temp.

60

Figure 7: Temperature and State Growth 1920-1980

53

80

Population Grow th 20-80
2.46159

SAN DIEG

Fitted values

HOUSTON,

LOS ANGE

JACKSONV
EL DALLAS,
PASO,
TULSA, O
SAN ANTO
OKLAHOMA
MEMPHIS,
WICHIT A,
NASHVILL
FORT WOR

COLUMBUS
NORFOLK,
INDIANAP
ATLANTA,
FORT WAY
YONKERS,
DENVER,
FLINT, M
SAVANNAH
OMAHA,
N
SPOKANE,
TACOMA,
PEORIA,
KANSAS
C
BIRMINGH
SEATTLE,
OAKLAND,
BE
EVANSVIL
DES MOIN SOUTH
WASHINGT
TOLEDO,
NEW
PORTLAND
MILWAUKE
KANSAS ALLENTOW
C GRAND RA
SALTORLE
LAK
ON, SAN FRAN
ERIE, PA RICHMOND DAYT
LOUISVIL
NEW YORK
DETROIT,
SPRINGFI
MANCHEST
ST . PAUL
SIOUX
CI ERBUR
AKRON,
O
WAT
CHICAGO,
ELIZABET
CANT ON, BALTIMOR
PATERSON
BRIDGEPO
SYRACUSE
HARTFORD
ST
.
JOSE
MINNEAPO
CINCINNA
DULUT H,
PHILADEL
WORCESTE
ALBANY,
YOUNGSTO
CAMBRIDG
BAYONNE,
LOWELL,
ROCHESTE
NEW
BEDF
N
NEWARK,
TROY,
NY
NEW HAVESCHENECT
TRENTON,
FALL RIV UTICA,
CAMDEN, BOSTON,
READING,
CLEVELAN
PITTSBUR
BUFFALO,
HARRISBU
WILKES-B
LAWRENCE
PROVIDEN
SCRANTON
WILMINGT
ST . LOUI
KNOXVILL

-.545373

947.754

dens20

Figure 8: Density and City Growth 1920-1980

54

SOMERVIL
JERSEY C

23869.5

Population Grow th 20-80

.

3
SAN
DIEG
HOUSTON,

2

JACKSONV

EL DALLAS,
PASO,
TULSA, LOS
O ANGE
SAN ANTO
OKLAHOMA
MEMPHIS,
NASHVILL
FORT WOR

1

WICHIT A,

COLUMBUS
NORFOLK,KNOXVILL
INDIANAP
AT LANTA,
FORT WAY
YONKERS,
DENVER,
FLINT, M
SAVANNAH
OMAHA,
N
SPOKANE,
TACOMA,
KANSASSOUTH
CPEORIA,
BIRMINGH
OAKLAND,
SEATTLE,
BE
EVANSVIL
DES
MOIN
WASHINGT NEW ORLE SALTPORTLAND
ALLENTOW
LAKKANSAS CDAYTTOLEDO,
SAN FRAN
ON, GRAND RA MILWAUKE
RICHMOND
ERIE,
PA
NEW
YORK LOUISVIL
SPRINGFI
MANCHEST
SIOUX CI ST. PAULDETROIT,
AKRON, O CANT ON, ELIZABET
WAT ERBUR
CHICAGO,
BALTIMOR
PATERSON
BRIDGEPO
SYRACUSE
HART
FORD
ST.
JOSE
MINNEAPO
CINCINNA
DULUTH,
PHILADEL
ALBANY,
WORCESTE
CAMBRIDG
YOUNGSTO
BAYONNE,
SOMERVIL
LOWELL,
ROCHESTE
NEW BEDF
UTICA,
N
NEWARK,
TROY, SCHENECT
NY NEW
HAVE
TRENTON,
FALL RIV
BOSTON,
JERSEY
C
CAMDEN,
READING,
PITTSBUR
CLEVELAN
BUFFALO,
HARRISBU
WILKES-B
LAWRENCE
SCRANTONPROVIDEN
WILMINGT
ST. LOUI

0

-1
0

20
Manufacturing Employment Share

Figure 9: Manufacturing and Urban Decline

55

40

Population Grow th 20-80

.

SAN HOUSTON,
DIEG

2.46159

JACKSONV
DALLAS,
EL PASO,
LOS ANGE
SAN TULSA,
ANTO O
OKLAHOMA
MEMPHIS,
WICHITA,
FORT WOR

NASHVILL

COLUMBUS
NORFOLK,
KNOXVILL
INDIANAP
AT LANTA,
FORT DENVER,
WAY
YONKERS,
FLINT, M
SAVANNAH
OMAHA,
N
SPOKANE,
TACOMA,
PEORIA,
BIRMINGH
KANSAS
C
OAKLAND,
SEAT
TLE,
SOUTH
BE
EVANSVIL
DES MOIN
TOLEDO,
NEW
ORLE
PORTLAND
ALLENTOW
MILWAUKE
SALT
LAK
KANSAS
C
SAN FRAN
DAYTON,
GRAND
RALOUISVIL
ERIE, PA
RICHMOND
NEW YORK
DETROIT,
SPRINGFI
MANCHEST
ST.SIOUX
PAUL
CI O ELIZABET
AKRON,
WATERBUR
CHICAGO,
CANTON,
BALTIMOR
PATERSON
BRIDGEPO
SYRACUSE
HARTFORD
ST . JOSE
MINNEAPO
DULUTH,
PHILADEL
WORCESTE
ALBANY, CINCINNA
YOUNGSTO
CAMBRIDG
BAYONNE,
SOMERVIL
ROCHESTE
NEW
BEDF
UT ICA, N LOWELL,
NEWARK,
TROY,
NY
NEW
HAVE
TRENTON,
FALL
RIV
SCHENECT
BOSTON,
JERSEY
CAMDEN,
READING,
PITT
CLEVELAN
SBUR C
BUFFALO,
HARRISBU
WILKES-B
LAWRENCE PROVIDEN
SCRANTON
WILMINGT
ST . LOUI

-.60854
0

.05

.1
City Taxes/Income 1980

.15

Figure 10: Taxes and City Growth 1920-1980

56

WASHINGT

.2

Population Grow th 1980-2000
.6

Fayettev

Reno, NV

.
Raleigh-

Boise CiColorado Provo--O

Fort Col

Bellingh

.4

.2

0

Barnstab
Anchorag
Denver-Albuquer
Salt
Lak
Nashvill Portland
Springfi
Charlott
Sioux Fa
Clarksvi
MedfordMinneapo
Elkhart- Greensbo
Richland
Madison,
Washingt
Richmond
Lancaste
Lincoln,
Grand
Ra
GreenNorfolkBa
Lexingto
Yakima,
Burlingt
Fort Smi
Ashevill
Columbus
Fargo--M
HickoryBlooming
Oklahoma
Knoxvill
St.
Clou
Amarillo
Des
Moin
Joplin,
Wichita,
Indianap
Little
R O
Portland
Kansas
C
Tulsa,
Spokane,
York, PA Appleton
State Co
Reading, Memphis,
Lafayett
Omaha,Billings
N
Lynchbur
La Cross
Allentow Cincinna
Lubbock,
Rockford
Boston-Glens
FaClaiCedar
Eau
Harrisbu
Wausau,
Fort
Way
ChicagoRa
Pueblo,
New
York
Sheboyga
Chattano
Providen
Johnson
Be
Philadel
JanesvilSouth
Hartford
New Have
New
Lond Topeka,
St. Loui
Louisvil
Kalamazo
Milwauke
Springfi
Evansvil
Roanoke,
Champaig
Rocheste LansingAlbany-Florence
Bangor,
Sioux
Ci Springfi
Jackson,
DetroitLawton,
Williams
Syracuse
Dayton-St.
Canton-Jose
Erie,Toledo,
PA
Clevelan
Lima, OH
Danville Kokomo,
MansfielParkersb Terre Ha
Binghamt Grand Fo
SaginawJamestow
Peoria-Benton
H
Scranton
Cumberla
Altoona,
BuffaloHuntingt
Sharon,
Utica--R
Davenpor
Charlest
Pittsfie
Waterloo
Muncie,
Youngsto
Pittsbur
Duluth-Johnstow

-.2

Columbia

Decatur,

Wheeling
Steubenv

10

20

Share w ith BA's

30

Figure 11: MSA Growth and Education 1980-2000

57

40

Population Grow th

.
Plano ci

1.12156
Carrollt

Arlingto
Laredo c
Mesquite Killeen
North Ri
Grand Pr
Irving c
Brownsvi

McAllen

Austin c
College
Denton c

Garland
Bryan ci
San Anto
Fort Wor
Midland
Haltom C
El Paso
Harlinge
Dallas c
Temple cDuncanvi
Pasadena
Houston
San
Ange
CorpusAbilene
CTyler ci
Victoria
Longview
Baytown
Amarillo
ci
Sherman
Lubbock
Lufkin
c Hurst
DelTexarkan
Rio Wichita
Waco
cit
Nacogdoc

Richards

Odessa c
Texas Ci
Beaumont
Galvesto
Kingsvil

Port Art

-.119038
0

20
40
Share w /College Degrees 1980

Figure 12: City Growth and Schooling in Texas

58

60

Housing Price Grow th

.

Laredo c

1.0161

Austin c
San Anto
Amarillo
Harlinge
Mesquite
Temple
Fort
Wor c
Denton c
Tyler ci
Grand Pr
Dallas c
Waco
cit
San
Ange
Beaumont
Victoria
Corpus
C
Bryan ci
Killeen
Wichita
Irving c
Galvesto
Brownsvi Longview
Carrollt
North Ri
McAllen
El Paso
AbileneLubbock

Pasadena
Port Art
Baytown

Garland
Houston

Plano ci

College

Richards
Arlingto

Midland

Odessa c

.329786
0

20
40
Share w /College Degrees 1980

Figure 13: Price Growth and Schooling in Texas

59

60

Population Grow th

.

Chelsea

.321662

Haverhil
Taunton
Attlebor
Leominst

Marlboro

Lawrence
Lowell
Lynn
cit c
Revere c

Westfiel
Gloucest

Worceste
Beverly
Salem
ci
Malden
c
Peabody Boston c
Quincy c
Everett
WoburnWaltham
c
Springfi Somervil
Fall
Riv
Chicopee
Brockton
Northamp
Fitchbur
New Bedf

0

Newton c

Medford

Holyoke

-.126612

Cambridg

Melrose
Pittsfie

20
40
Share w /College Degrees 1980

Figure 14: City Growth and Schooling in Mass.

60

60

Housing Price Grow th

.
Cambridg

1.8703

Newton c

Boston c
Somervil

Taunton

Medford
QuincyWaltham
c

Fall RivHaverhil
Lynn
Malden
cit c
New Bedf
Brockton Worceste
Lowell c
Chicopee
Springfi

Lawrence

1.00418
0

20
40
Share w /College Degrees 1980

Figure 15: Price Growth and Schooling in Mass.

61

60

