NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INSTITUTIONS, CAPITAL CONSTRAINTS
AND ENTREPRENEURIAL FIRM DYNAMICS:
EVIDENCE FROM EUROPE
Mihir Desai
Paul Gompers
Josh Lerner
Working Paper 10165
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10165
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

We thank Bryan Lincoln, Eric Nierenberg, and Maria Raga for research assistance. Harvard Business
School’s Division of Research provided financial assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Mihir Desai, Paul Gompers, and Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Institutions, Capital Constraints and Entrepreneurial Firm Dynamics: Evidence from Europe
Mihir Desai, Paul Gompers, and Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 10165
December 2003
JEL No. L1, G3
ABSTRACT
We explore the impact of the institutional environment on the nature of entrepreneurial activity
across Europe. Political, legal, and regulatory variables that have been shown to impact capital
market development influence entrepreneurial activity in the emerging markets of Europe, but not
in the more mature economies of Europe. Greater fairness and greater protection of property rights
increase entry rates, reduce exit rates, and lower average firm size. Additionally, these same factors
also associated with increased industrial vintage n a size-weighted measure of age n and reduced
skewness in firm-size distributions. The results suggest that capital constraints induced by these
institutional factors impact both entry and the ability of firms to transition and grow, particularly in
lesser-developed markets.
Mihir Desai
Graduate School of Business
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu

Paul Gompers
Graduate School of Business
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
pgompers@hbs.edu

Josh Lerner
Graduate School of Business
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
josh@hbs.edu

1.

Introduction
The factors that foster the creation and growth of new enterprises remain of central

interest to scholars and policy-makers. New enterprises are considered vital to economic
growth and are increasingly important laboratories for scholars interested in settings where
a variety of market frictions – informational asymmetry, moral hazard, and liquidity
constraints, for example – are most amplified. At the same time, renewed interest in how
differing institutional environments impact the functioning of capital markets and the
investment behavior of firms has drawn attention to how economic institutions vary around
the world and how they influence economic growth and firm behavior.
In this paper, we integrate these literatures by analyzing how institutional
environments impact the entrepreneurial environment. In doing so, we analyze a variety of
measures of entrepreneurial activity including traditional measures such as rates of entry,
rates of exit, and average firm size as well as more comprehensive measures such as
industrial vintage and the skewness of firm-size distributions.

These measures of

entrepreneurial activity are analyzed throughout Europe by exploiting a comprehensive
database of firms that includes a variety of private, smaller firms. The European sample
allows us to analyze a setting where there exists rich institutional variation (both between
Western and Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) and amongst countries in those regions)
and where comparable data is also available. Employing industry fixed effects in this
setting further allows us to control for factors associated with distinctive industrial patterns
across Europe.

The results in the paper suggest that the institutional environment plays an
important role in shaping the nature of industrial activity and, particularly, the dynamics of
new enterprises. Specifically, greater fairness and protection of property rights is shown to
increase rates of entry, decrease rates of exit, and lower average firm size. These effects,
however, are not equally pronounced in all parts of Europe.

The CEE region is

characterized by particular sensitivity to institutional factors suggesting that these effects
may be second-order in more mature, developed economies.
Industrial vintage and the skewness of firm-size distributions are also influenced by
the institutional variables. In contrast to the results on average firm size, vintage (a sizeweighted measure of age) increases with greater fairness, with particularly strong
relationships in the CEE. In conjunction with the results on size, entry and exit, these
results suggest that greater fairness alters not only firm starts but also their ability to
graduate into older, larger enterprisess. Greater fairness appears to reduce firm size but
increase vintage, suggesting that fairness both makes it easier to start firms, but also makes
it easier for firms to graduate into older, larger firms.
We also examine the skewness of firm size distributions across the CEE and
Western Europe. Both the overall level of skewness and the relative skewness of firm-size
distributions for younger firms appear to be a function of fairness and protection of
property rights with particularly amplified effects in the CEE. These results are consistent
with capital constraints leading to skewness in firm-size distributions, with the relative
importance of these factors being greater in emerging markets.

Institutional factors

influence both firm entry and growth at later points.

2

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 links this paper to the relevant literatures
on financial constraints, the nature of entrepreneurial activity, and the cross-country
variation in institutions. Section 3 motivates the empirical approach and describes the
various variables employed in the subsequent analysis. Section 4 presents the analysis of
institutional variables on the various characterizations of entrepreneurial activity. Section
5 is the conclusion.
2.

Motivation and Research Design
Our examination of how institutional conditions determine the pattern of industrial

activity draws on the existing literatures on financial constraints, the nature of
entrepreneurial activity, and the new institutional economics literature. This section briefly
reviews these works.
2.1.

Financial Constraints Literature
The examination of financial constraints has been an important topic within

corporate finance. Models such as Myers (1977), Townsend (1979), Stiglitz and Weiss
(1981), and Myers and Majluf (1984) point to factors in the financial markets that may
limit a firm’s ability to raise outside capital. This inability to raise capital may stem from
information gaps or an inability to contract on the outcomes of a venture.

In this

environment, good projects may find it impossible to get financing on reasonable terms.
Positive net present value projects may, in this setting, be forgone. These works also
demonstrates that firms prefer to finance investment with internal funds because it is less
costly than external funds. Graham and Harvey (2001) show that this type of pecking

3

order appears to figure largely in the minds of chief financial officers when they arrive at
investment decisions.
Early empirical work on financial constraints explored the investment behavior of
firms and its sensitivity to changes in internally generated funds. Fazzari, Hubbard, and
Petersen (1988) found that firms with low or no dividend payout ratios were more likely to
have investment that was sensitive to changes in free cash flow. The authors interpret their
results as demonstrating that capital constraints likely affect companies that do not pay
dividends as they forego investment when internal cash is not available. Costly external
finance has been explored in multi-divisional firms and has been shown to play an
important role as well. Lamont (1997) looks at companies that have oil related production
and non-oil related businesses. He finds that investment in the non-oil related businesses
are dramatically affected by swings in the world price of oil. This is true despite the fact
that the firm’s non-oil businesses were largely uncorrelated with the prospects for their oil
businesses. Similarly, Shin and Stulz (1998) show that the investment in minor divisions
of multi-segment firms is affected by the operating performance of the larger divisions
even if the investment opportunity sets in each division are unrelated to each other.
Other types of investment activity have also been explored in the literature on
capital rationing. Fazzari and Petersen (1993) find that low dividend payout firms have
higher sensitivities of working capital investment to cash flow. Similarly, Himmelberg
and Petersen (1994) show that small manufacturing firms have R&D spending that is
highly dependent upon operating cash flow. The research on capital rationing has been
extended to other countries as well. Hoshi, Kayshap, and Scharfstein (1991) find that

4

firms that are not part of a keiretsu have investment that is more sensitive to cash flows
than are member firms in which member banks can provide credit.

Devereux and

Schiatarelli (1990) find a similar pattern for small firms in the United Kingdom. Small
firms have investment-cash flow sensitivities that are greater than large firms. While most
of this work has been done in developed markets, capital constraints are perhaps even more
likely in developing and transition economies.
2.2.

Entrepreneurial Activity Research
Entrepreneurial activity has received considerable attention in the economics

literature. The empirical work on the determinants of entrepreneurial activity is largely
focused on two streams of research. One body of work examines patterns of entry and
exit. The other stream focuses on the dynamics of firm growth. Our research effort
utilizes insights from both these streams of literature and combines the insights from work
on the importance of capital constraints discussed above. Given the nature of information
and uncertainty for entrepreneurial entities, new ventures have the potential for the greatest
asymmetric information and the largest restrictions on their access to capital.
A large body of industrial organization work has explored the dynamics of firm
entry and exit.

In a series of papers, Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1988, 1989)

examine the changing participants in four-digit U.S. manufacturing industries, highlighting
the heterogeneity of the rate of exit and entry across industries and the evolution of these
rates over time. These papers document the rapid pace of entry during the early phases of
a particular industry and that these rapid entry rates are also associated with rapid exit
rates.

5

Another set of studies has focused on individuals’ transitions into self-employment
(e.g., Evans and Leighton (1989), Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen (1994a, 1994b)), with
particular emphasis on the influence of capital constraints on these decisions. These papers
show that the availability of personal capital is positively related to an individual’s choice
to become an entrepreneur. In addition, they show that entrepreneurs who have greater
“exogenous” resources (via an inheritance, for example) are more likely to survive. The
authors interpret these results as implying that credit constraints are a critical factor in both
the founding and survival of new firms.
A third area of the entry and exit literature, most closely associated with Steven
Klepper (e.g., Klepper and Graddy (1990), Klepper and Simons (2000)), has examined the
empirical regularities associated with the changes in the number of firms active in an
industry over time. Over time the number of firms increases, reaches a peak, and then
declines as the industry consolidates.

Most of this research does not examine the

foundations of entry and exit rates across various industries or markets, rather explores the
time series changes within an industry over time. The results point to the importance of
controlling for industry in any examination of entry and exit. Country-level entry and exit
rates may vary considerably, but much of this variation could be due to the cross sectional
composition of industries active in those markets.
A second theme of entrepreneurial research examines the determinants of firm
growth. Much of this literature has centered on the question of whether Gibrat’s law
holds: i.e., the proposition that firm growth is independent of firm size. As Sutton (1997)
details, this proposition is equivalent to firm-size distributions being approximately

6

lognormal. While initial studies (e.g., Simon and Bonnini (1958), Mansfield (1962)) were
quite positive about the possibility of such a relationship, later work with more detailed
data sets has taken a more skeptical view. A variety of studies, including Evans (1987),
Hall (1987), and Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996), show that growth rates and size
are inversely related.
These works have inspired a number of theorists to develop depictions of the
evolution of industry dynamics. In models such as Lucas (1978), Jovanovic (1982),
Jovanovic and MacDonald (1994), and Ericson and Pakes (1995), the basic empirical
patterns are explained through such factors as gradual learning by entrepreneurs and/or
firms about their own ability and the nature of technological innovation in emerging
industries.
More recently, capital constraints have been offered as an explanation for the
pattern in the size distribution of firms and the relation between size and growth. Cooley
and Quadrini (2003) examine violations of Gibrat’s law.

They develop a model of

financial frictions and investment. They are able to show that capital constraints can
potentially explain why small firms pay lower dividends, are more highly levered, have
higher Tobin’s q, invest more, and have investments that are more sensitive to cash flows.
Cabral and Mata (2003) develop a model of firm growth that depends upon
investments and access to capital. Their model predicts that in the presence of capital
constraints, the firm size distribution will be skewed. As capital constraints worsen, firmsize distributions will become more skewed. The intuition behind their result is that small
firms with good investment opportunities may be periodically unable to raise the resources

7

to exploit those opportunities. In that case, they will underinvest and grow slower than
larger firms with internal cash flow to fund their projects. They argue that the distribution
of firm size will be more highly skewed for younger firms because they are more likely to
be capital rationed. Cabral and Mata then explore the firm size distribution in a sample of
Portuguese manufacturing firms. They find that the distribution of firm size is indeed
skewed and that the skewness is greater for younger firms.
Surprisingly few studies have sought to examine the patterns across nations in
industry structure. Many of these studies (e.g., Johnson and Loveman (1995)) have faced
challenges due to the limited number of industries and nations for which consistent data
could be found. Moreover, many of these studies have been focused on finding common
trends rather than explaining the diversity of patterns.

There are, however, some

interesting recent exceptions. Davis and Henrekson (1999) employ micro-data from the
U.S. and Sweden. Another recent exception is Kumar, Rajan, and Zingales (1999), who
look at average firm size and the dispersion in firm size across industries in 15 European
nations. In particular, they explore the role that legal environment plays on firm size in
capital intensive and non-capital intensive industries.
2.3.

Research on Legal and Institutional Regimes
Our paper also draws upon the legal and institutional framework of recent papers in

the field of law and economics. Much of this work has focused on the role that the
institutional and legal regimes play on the development and functioning of capital markets.
In particular, work by La Porta, et al. (1998, 2000) and La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and
Shleifer (1999) has examined legal and institutional factors that influence the breadth and

8

depth of capital markets. These papers find that higher levels of corruption and better
functioning legal environments promote greater development of financial markets. In
addition, the legal and institutional factors and the overall level of capital market
development, in turn, have been shown to influence aggregate economic outcomes as in
King and Levine (1993), Rajan and Zingales (1998), and Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic
(1998). The presumed channel for the impact of these variables is through the failure to
allocate capital to firms with worthy investment opportunities as a consequence of the
design of legal rules.

Capital constraints are more likely to affect younger, more

entrepreneurial firms in these environments.
In a related literature, the nature of property rights and the prevalence of corruption
have been shown to influence the nature of investment and overall level of economic
growth as in Knack and Keefer (1995). Studies at the micro level have been more limited,
but Frye and Shleifer (1997) and Shleifer (1997), for example, show how variations in
guarantees for property rights protection vary within formerly Communist countries and
how this variation results in differing levels of entrepreneurial investment. As noted in the
survey evidence provided in Johnson, McMillan and Woodruff (2002), the nature of
property rights and the presence of external finance are distinct channels for how
institutional variables impact economic outcomes. Again, these effects are likely to be
more pronounced in developing and transition economies.
3.

Empirical Framework
Our paper examines the role of capital constraints on entrepreneurial activity across

33 European countries. We look at the effect of country-level variation in economic, legal,

9

and institutional variables on a variety of measures of the importance of entrepreneurial
firm dynamics.

These variables have been shown to have important effects on the

development and functioning of capital markets. Our approach is to examine a variety of
measures that provide insights into various dimensions of new firm activity. In particular,
our unit of observation is at the country/industry level. Analyzing the determinants of
entrepreneurial activity across Europe at the country/industry level holds the promise of
controlling for industrial heterogeneity in a setting where technologies are relatively
homogenous yet where there is variation in institutional regimes and there is a sharp
difference in the stage of development between Western Europe and Central and Eastern
Europe.
3.1.

Measures of Entrepreneurial Activity
For each industry within a country, we calculate the entry and exit rate, the average

firm size, the industrial vintage (a weighed-average measure of firm age discussed in detail
below), and the skewness of the firm size distribution. In this section, we first discuss the
dependent variables in our analysis and then describe the set of control variables that we
employ.
3.1.1. Firm Entry and Exit
Firm entry and exit are important measures of entrepreneurial activity. Markets
that provide an opportunity for greater numbers of startup firms are said to be more
dynamic and entrepreneurial. Similarly, the rate at which firms die measures both the
competitive nature of the local market and the potential advantage that incumbents have.

10

We measure entry relative to the number of firms existing in the prior year. Our measure
of entry is the number of firms that enter our sample in 1998 that were not in the sample in
1997 divided by the total number of firms that existed in 1997 in the country/industry pair.
Similarly, we calculate the exit rate as the number of firms that were in our sample in
1997, but were not in 1998, divided by the total number of firms in that country/industry
pair in 1997.
We expect that if capital constraints influence the entry decision, then more
developed capital markets will provide greater access to capital and hence have greater
entry rates. Institutional and legal variables associated with capital market development
should be positively related to entry rates. Similarly, the literature on startup survival
shows that reductions in capital constraints improve firm survival. We therefore would
expect that political and legal variables associated with greater capital market development
would lead to a lower exit rate.
3.1.2. Average Firm Size
Because of the role small firms play in an economy, we also look at average firm
size. While this measure does not distinguish between small, old firms and small, young
firms, it does measure whether the local economic environment supports a large number of
small firms. Within each country/industry pair, we calculate the average firm size as
measured by number of employees. While the prediction is not unambiguous, we might
expect that lower levels of capital rationing would lead to greater number of small firms
that can enter and survive in the market. Hence, average firm size would be expected to be
smaller in markets with better economic institutions.

11

3.1.3. Industrial Vintage
In addition to the more traditional measures discussed above, we are also interested
in the importance of entrepreneurial firms for overall economic activity. In order to
capture the importance of younger firms to industrial activity, we construct a measure of
industrial vintage. Vintage is constructed within each country/industry pair and is the
weighted average age of the firms in each industry where the weights are given by
turnover, assets, or employees. In essence, this measure shows how important young firms
are to the productive capacity of an industry. A high average vintage would imply that
most of the productive capacity is produced by relatively older firms in the economy. On
the other hand, a low vintage would indicate that young firms dominate the productive
capacity. While the results are not sensitive to the choice of weights, we emphasize
weighting by employees given the ability of this measure to obviate any accounting
differences across countries.
How is vintage distinct from average firm size and why might these two measures
of industrial activity diverge in their response to institutional factors? In particular, given
that we expect younger firms to be smaller, won’t economies or industries that are on
average smaller also have a younger vintage? The distinction between the two measures
can be best understood by considering the ways in which they are constructed:
I

(1)

∑ Si

Average Size = i =1
I

I

∑ Si ∗ Agei

Vintage = i =1

I

∑ Si

i =1

12

In this notation, i indexes firms within a given country industry-pair, Si is a measure of
firm size (in this case the number of employees) and Agei is the age of that firm. In order
to see how capital constraints might give rise to distinct effects on size and vintage, it is
useful to recast these measures in a setting where there are two cohorts of firms denoted as
old (o) and young (y). In such an example, the measures in (1) can be rewritten as:

Average Size =

(2)

N o So + N y S y
No + N y

Vintage =

N o So Ageo + N y S y Age y
N o So + N y S y

where N is the number of old or young firms, S is the average size of firms in each
cohort and Age is just the respective age of the two cohorts. In this setting, N o So is the
employment in the old sector and N y S y is employment in the young sector. For the
moment, assume that So > S y .

To see the intuition behind how these measures may diverge, note that if, for
example, N o increases and So decreases such that the product, N o So , is constant (i.e., they
exactly offset each other, so employment in the old sector does not change), then vintage
will not have changed while average size will be smaller. More generally, it is useful to
consider examples where these two measures move in opposite directions.

As an

example, consider situations where vintage rises and average size decreases. This can arise
for at least two reasons:
i)

If So goes down and N o goes up by more than enough to ensure that population
shifts to the old sector ( So′ < So , N o′ > N o so that N o′ So′ > N o So ) then vintage will
increase and average size will decrease.
13

ii)

If S y goes down and N y does not go up enough so that population in the young
sector shrinks ( S y′ < S y and N y is kept at levels so that N y′ S y′ < N y S y ) then
vintage will increase and average size will decrease.

As this example makes clear, average size simply measures the average size of firms and
vintage provides a broader measure of where the mass of industrial activity is. Institutional
variables need not have similar effects on these two characterizations of activity.
Specifically, if lower capital constraints make it easier to get external financing at
earlier stages, the young sector would be smaller on average. At the same time, if firms are
able to graduate to being older, larger firms faster (or do not exit or fail as much) the
fraction of actual employment in the young sector could be lower. If institutional variables
change firm growth patterns in this way, average firm size would be lower and vintage
would be higher. The actual effect of capital constraints on these patterns is, consequently,
an empirical question.
3.1.4. Firm Size Distributions and Skewness
While vintage provides a fuller characterization of the importance of younger firms
to economies than firm size, the fullest characterization of industrial activity is likely a
firm size distribution and age-specific firm-size distributions. As discussed above, studies
of firm-size distributions have tended to be industry specific or country specific. In this
paper, we examine the nature of overall and age-specific firm size distributions at the
regional, country, and country-industry level.

14

Specifically, we examine if the skewness of firm-size distributions is related to the
presence of institutional determinants of capital constraints. Additionally, to the degree
that skewness of overall firm-size distributions might be associated with other factors, it is
useful to consider the relative skewness of the younger firm-size distributions. If capital
constraints are operative in shaping the nature of industrial activity, we would expect
overall firm-size distribution and, especially the firm size distribution of the younger
cohorts, to be skewed.
3.2.

Control Variables
The level of economic development is likely to affect the attractiveness of

becoming an entrepreneur. Greater gross domestic product (GDP) per capita is likely to
provide a larger market potential and greater infrastructure for start-ups. In our analysis,
GDP per capita is measured by purchasing power parity for residents at the national level.
If the level of economic development plays a role in supporting entrepreneurial activity,
then we might expect that GDP per capita to have a positive effect on the ability of
individuals to successfully become entrepreneurs.
We also include several political and legal variables when available for both
Western Europe as well as Central and Eastern Europe. As the previous literature has
shown, corruption can play a role in corporate activity. Corruption is defined broadly as
“the misuse of public power for private benefits, e.g., bribing of public officials, kickbacks
in public procurement, or embezzlement of public funds.” Our fairness/corruption index is
tabulated by Transparency International and is utilized in Djankov et al. (2000). The index
averages the corruption scores given by the following sources: (1) Freedom House Nations

15

in Transit; (2) Gallup International; (3) the Economist Intelligence Unit, (4) the Institute
for Management Development, Lausanne; (5) the International Crime Victim Survey; (6)
the Political and Economic Risk Consultancy, Hong Kong; (7) The Wall Street Journal’s
Central European Economic Review; (8) the World Bank and the University of Basel; (9)
the World Economic Forum. The index is coded on a ten point descending scale from 1
(most corrupt) to 10 (least corrupt).
The second institutional measure that we utilize is protection of property rights. A
large economics literature has explored the role that property rights play on the ability to
attract capital and ownership structures. From the perspective of an entrepreneur, strong
property rights may serve two roles.

First, strong property rights might allow older

companies to prevent entrepreneurs from starting their own ventures. Alternatively, strong
property rights might give young startups an advantage as they compete against established
companies. Our measure of protection of property rights is taken from World Economic
Forum’s “The Global Competitiveness Report 2000,” and are defined on a seven point
scale, with one denoting nations where property rights are not clearly delineated nor are
strongly protected by law and seven indicating cases where property rights are clearly
delineated and strongly protected.
We examine the functioning of the legal system in each country through a measure
called the Formalism Index.

The index, cited in Djankov, et al. (2002), measures

substantive and procedural statutory intervention in judicial cases at lower-level civil trial
courts, and is formed by adding up the following indices: (1) professionals vs. laymen, (2)
written vs. oral elements, (3) legal justification, (4) statutory regulation of evidence, (5)

16

control of superior review, (6) engagement formalities, and (7) independent procedural
actions. The index ranges from 0 to 7, where 7 means a higher level of control or
intervention in the judicial process.
As discussed above, a number of papers have examined how well the legal system
functions. In particular, we look at an index of Interference of Courts that was tabulated by
the Survey of World Business Environment from the World Bank Group between 1998 and
2000. This variable captures whether the courts are fair and impartial. The index ranges
from 1 to 6, where 1 means always fair and impartial and 6 never. One might expect that
the legal system would be important for protecting new entrants that may be exploited by
larger, existing companies.

Finally, we include a measure of the procedural burden

associated with initiating an enterprise. As developed in Djankov, et al. (2000), the paper
employs the number of procedures that a start-up firm must undertake before it can operate
legally.
4.

Data and Descriptive Statistics
The core data used in this paper are the Amadeus data on corporate activity across

Europe. Amadeus is a panel dataset of both public and private companies throughout both
Eastern and Western Europe.

In particular, the dataset covers nearly four million

companies in 33 European countries (including all the EU countries) and contains a variety
of financial and ownership details.
The original data was provided by Bureau Van Dijk (BvD), a European electronic
publishing firm. It specializes in cleaning and organizing data supplied by information

17

providers in various countries to create a broader data set. BvD gathers the national data
through information providers of Amadeus data within each country (e.g., Companies
House in the UK, Kamers van Koophandel in the Netherlands, INPI in France, National
Bank of Belgium). These national companies collect the data from the national public
body in charge of collecting the annual accounts in its country.

In some countries,

particularly those in Central Eastern Europe, the information provider collects the data
directly from the companies because of the difficulty obtaining the data from government
sources as well as the relative unreliability of the government collected data.
Because of different disclosure requirements, the amount and type of information
varies among countries. For instance, some countries have more data on income statement
items than on balance sheet items, while firms in other countries have more balance sheet
information than income statement information. The completeness of the data also varies:
for instance, German regulations are more flexible for small and median enterprises and
failure to disclose is not a punishable offence. Appendix A lists the providers of data for
the Amadeus Database.
This sample construction method poses a challenge for our analysis. In particular,
it is likely that our computations of exit and entry rates, as well as of mean and median
firm size, will be affected by the inclusiveness with which the national statistical agency in
a particular country collects information. The thoroughness with which these data is
collected may vary systematically with other national characteristics that we employ as
right-hand side variables in the regressions below. This issue is particularly a concern for

18

Western European nations, as the Amadeus data compilers rely exclusively on government
databases in those countries.
We address this concern in three ways. First, as discussed above, we employ a
variety of dependent variables, rather than simply relying on a single measure.

Second,

the regression analysis employs industry fixed effects to ensure that within industry
variation is emphasized, to counter any selection bias based on varying rules for industry
inclusion. Finally, we eliminate all firms with less than twenty employees from the
analysis. Because this cut-off point is above that of any reporting nation, it helps insure
comparable samples across countries.
This final procedure reduced the sample size substantially, from 3.4 million to just
under four hundred thousand firms. We also repeat the analyses below using the entire
sample, and find that the results are little changed. The 394 thousand companies include
firms from the European Union (Ireland, Great Britain, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece,
France, Belgium, Germany, Austria, Finland, Sweden, Denmark, Netherlands and
Luxembourg) and Central and Eastern European countries (Poland, Czech Republic,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Lithuania, Estonia, Latvia, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Croatia,
Bosnia H., Yugoslavia, Macedonia, Russia and Ukraine). In addition, Amadeus contains
data on companies in Switzerland, Norway, and Iceland.
A number of EU-directives, which aim to harmonize filing requirements, are
slowly being implemented.

These result in more information being available in the

relatively more recent years within the data. Uniformity is achieved by the standardization
of accounting information and of industry codifications. BvD has manually allocated a

19

CSO code (derived from the UK Statistical Office SIC codes) and an English translation of
the trade description for each company allowing activity searching across the database. All
national activity codes are cross-referenced to allow cross border searching by a common
code. Greater detail on the nature of the Amadeus data and a number of decisions made
regarding regional and industrial classifications is provided in Appendix B.
4.1.

Summary Statistics
Before we start the empirical analysis in the next section, we explore some of the

initial summary statistics. In Table 1, we examine summary information by country.
Panel A summarizes the data for Western Europe. We tabulate the number of firms in
1998, the number of regions within the country, the number of industries that have
companies listed in the national database, the mean and median turnover, mean and median
assets, as well as mean and median employees for companies included. The data summary
shows the wide variability in the number of companies represented. For example, we only
have data on 154 companies in Luxembourg and 152 in Iceland. On the other hand, we
have information on 95 thousand companies in Germany and 49 thousand companies in
France. These differences reflect both the size of the country, the nature of economic
activity, and the criteria for inclusion in the individual national sample.
In addition, regional information varies by countries and seems to be weakly
related to the number of companies included in the data. For example, France, Germany,
and the UK have the most regions (26, 28, and 37 respectively) and they also are the three
largest countries in terms of reporting companies. In addition, the data within each country
generally include information on a large number of industries (between 150 and 215). The

20

two exceptions are Iceland and Luxembourg, in which the number of firms reporting in the
data is quite low.
In Panel B we present the same summary statistics for countries in Central and
Eastern Europe. In most countries, except for Romania, which has 18,000 companies in
1998, the number of companies reporting is somewhat smaller than we saw in Panel A for
Western Europe. When we look at the number of regions in the country, we find that the
average number of regions per country is quite a bit smaller than Western Europe.
Data on turnover, assets, and employees demonstrates that the data is highly
skewed. Mean values of turnover, assets, and employees are typically substantially larger
than the median values. This is not surprising given that we expect a skewed distribution
of firm size.
Mean turnover is lowest in Macedonia with a mean turnover of just under $500,000
and a median turnover of $119,000. The largest mean turnover is Switzerland with a mean
of $321 million and a median of $51 million. Assets show a similar skewness. The lowest
average asset levels are again in Macedonia, with the largest average assets are in
Switzerland. Finally, dispersion on the number of employees is quite large. Average sizes
are relatively small in all countries. The largest average number of employees is 727 in
Luxembourg, a country where only 154 companies reported. In Estonia ,the other extreme,
the average company had 81 employees. Median numbers of employees are substantially
lower for all firms.

21

Table 2 presents the same summary statistics, but now by industry, not country.
For example, the first industry listed is coal mining. The Amadeus data has information on
coal mining companies in 26 countries. These firms are, generally, quite large, 2,460
people, although the median is substantially lower, 403. This likely is a result of a small
number of very large mining companies and a large number of small firms. The largest
numbers of companies fall into the wholesale trade category (44,000 firms) with firms
listed in every country. These firms tend to be quite small, having an average of 194
employees and a median of 44 employees.
5.

Analysis
In order to understand the nature of entrepreneurial activity across economies, the

analysis that follows considers the determinants of entry, exit, average firm size, industrial
vintage, and the skewness of the firm-size distributions throughout Europe and,
subsequently, in Western and Eastern Europe separately.

While entry and exit rates

capture activity in a given year, the other measures reflect longer-run determinants of
industrial activity.
5.1.

The Determinants of Entry and Exit
Studies of entrepreneurial activity have often examined entry and exit rates. Within

an economy, higher entry rates have typically been viewed as an indicator of dynamic
economies. Our goal is to understand how legal, institutional, and regulatory factors affect
entry and exit. Our measures of entry and exit examine that activity within a particular

22

industry for a particular country. We thus use countries crossed with industries as our unit
of observation.
In Table 3, the dependent variable is the rate of entry within each country-industry
cell for 1998, calculated as the ratio of new firms in 1998 to all firms in 1997. In all
specifications presented in Table 3, industry fixed effects are included to control for the
distinctive nature of industries. Similarly, GDP per capita is employed in all specifications
to control for the overall level of economic development.
Independent variables measure the quality of legal and political institutions. In
particular, coefficients are reported for an index of fairness (the inverse of corruption), a
measure of the strength of property right protection, a formalism index, an index of the
interference of courts, and a measure of start-up procedures. Because some of these
measures are highly correlated with each other, we use only one of these variables in each
regression. Thus, each column presents the results of five separate regressions.
In this first specification of Panel A, negative but statistically insignificant
coefficients are associated with the fairness index and the property rights index. The
measures associated with the judiciary are more mixed. In nations characterized by higher
levels of formalism, there is no significant effect, but those characterized by greater
degrees of interference by the judiciary have significantly lower entry.
Column 2 incorporates a dummy variable for Central and Eastern Europe (CEE).
This measure is consistently negative and significant, suggesting that this region is
characterized by lower rates of entry. Inclusion of the CEE dummy has little effect on the

23

level and significance of the coefficients on the other independent variables, but suggests
the need to separately consider Western Europe and the CEE. In particular, given the
recent transitions of many CEE economies, the effects of political, legal, and regulatory
variables may be more pronounced.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3 employ the same empirical framework employed in
Column 1, but separately estimate entry regressions for Western Europe and the CEE.
Several results emerge from this separation:
•

The dominant pattern is that political, legal, and regulatory institutional structures
matter far more in Central and Eastern Europe than in Western Europe. All five
variables are statistically significant in the CEE regressions; while only one (the
measure of court interference) is in the Western Europe regressions. This pattern
reflects the relative importance of the differing institutional environments. In the
CEE, differences in institutional environment are clearly first order while in
Western Europe these considerations seem second order.

•

Greater fairness and stronger property rights are unambiguously associated with
higher rates of entry in Central and Eastern Europe. Similarly, greater judicial
interference and formalism are associated with lower entry. Somewhat puzzlingly,
in nations where more start-up procedures are required, there is more entry as well.
This reflects the fact the measure of start-up procedures is highly correlated with
the fairness index. Not surprisingly, when both measures are used in a multivariate
regression, the measure of start-up procedures is usually significantly negative.

24

•

The only measure significant in Western Europe is that more interference in the
courts is associated with greater entry.

Taken together, the results indicate that the dynamics of entry are distinctive in Western
Europe and CEE, with institutional considerations having a far more profound effect on
entry in Central and Eastern Europe.
Panel B repeats the analysis.

Instead of estimating ordinary least squares

regressions, we now employ median regressions, which should be less sensitive to outliers.
The results are similar to those from before. Greater fairness and protection of property
rights are only associated with more entry in Central and Eastern Europe. The two judicial
measures are now consistently significant and negative in the CEE, while they are
significant and positive in the Western Europe.

More start-up procedures are now

associated with more entry throughout Europe.
The dynamics that affect entry are also likely to have an impact on the rate of exit
for a given industry with a country. Table 4 takes a similar empirical approach to that in
Table 3 to examine exit in Europe. Columns 1 and 2 suggest that greater fairness and
stronger property rights are associated with lower rates of entry, but the significant
coefficient on the CEE dummy suggests the importance of considering Western Europe
and CEE separately. Segregation of the two sub-regions in columns 3 and 4 demonstrates
that, much like in the case of entry, different dynamics of exit exist in Western Europe and
the CEE. Specifically, fairer countries are associated with lower rates of exit throughout
Europe, but the effect is about thirteen times larger in the CEE. Nations with stronger
property rights have significantly lower exit rates, but only in Eastern Europe. Finally,

25

greater legal formalism and more interference by courts are associated with lower exit rates
in Western Europe while no pattern is seen in the CEE. Results are similar in the median
regressions in Panel B.
These patterns are consistent with those seen in the analysis of entry above. The
institutional environment appears to matter more in Central and Eastern Europe.

A

consistent pattern appears in these nations, with stronger property rights and greater
fairness being associated with a more favorable environment for entrepreneurs (more entry
and less exit). The results of our political, legal, and regulatory variables in Western
Europe are far less consistent and are more difficult to understand. It appears that there is
no consistent effect of these institutional variables on entry and exit. It may be the case
that other factors – distinctive levels of human capital investment, for example – matter
much more in more mature economies.
5.2.

The Determinants of Average Firm Size
Average firm size offers another perspective on the dynamics of firm growth by not

emphasizing entry and exit in one year, but by considering a snapshot of overall industrial
activity. As noted above, greater fairness and stronger property rights are associated in the
CEE countries with greater entry and lower exit. This pattern may lead to either larger or
smaller average firm size.
Table 5 considers the determinants of average firm size, employing the same
empirical framework as we did for entry and exit. Once again, the dependent variable is
the average firm size for firms within a given industry in a particular country. As with

26

Tables 3 and 4, columns 1 and 2 of Table 5 consider the pooled European sample with and
without a CEE dummy. In both specifications, fairer countries and those with stronger
property rights are associated with smaller firms. Lower levels of legal formalism, greater
levels of interference by the courts, and more start-up procedures are associated with larger
average firm size.
These results, however, differ when we consider Western Europe and CEE
separately.

Specifically, higher levels of fairness and stronger property rights are

associated with smaller average firm size in CEE. This result is consistent with the
analysis above: the institutional environment appears to matter critically in creating a
favorable atmosphere for entrepreneurship in Central and Eastern Europe.
The results in Western Europe are far smaller in magnitude.

Moreover, they

suggest that nations with greater fairness are associated with larger, not smaller, firms. As
before, the results for the legal variables are different in sign: lower levels of legal
formalism and greater levels of interference by the courts are associated with larger firm
size in both sets of nations. The results on columns 7 and 8—when we estimate median
regressions—are quite similar. Once again, we find that the institutional factors matter
more for entrepreneurial activity in CEE, but have much weaker effects in Western
Europe.
5.3

The Determinants of Industrial Vintage
As discussed in Section 3, the measure of industrial vintage offers a summary

measure of industrial activity that integrates average firm size with measures of age.

27

Industrial vintage captures the relative contribution of entrepreneurial firms to overall
industry output. This measure may be closely correlated with average firm age, or may be
quite distinct, if institutional variables affect firm growth patterns differently in various
nations.
As above, the analysis of industrial vintage presented in Table 6 considers the
effects of fairness, property rights protection, legal variables and startup procedures on the
relative importance of young firms to industrial activity. The analysis presented here
employs a measure of vintage based on employees, given the greater consistently with
which this measure is reported. Unreported analyses using vintage measures based on
turnover and assets are, however, not significantly different, as are those using different
weighting schemes. We once again use industry-country pairs as our unit of analysis.
The first two columns of Table 6 consider the overall pooled European sample with
and without the presence of a CEE dummy. Greater fairness is associated with a higher
vintage, while results for protection of property rights is inconsistent. More interference in
the courts and less formalism are also associated with a higher vintage. When we look at
the sets of nations separately, greater fairness and stronger property rights are associated
with higher vintage in both of the two regions. In Western Europe, greater formalism is
associated with lower vintage.
associated with higher vintage.

In CEE nations, greater inference with the courts is
The results are similar when we estimate median

regressions.
What do the distinctive results on vintage and average size indicate? As noted
before, in CEE nations, greater fairness is associated with more entry and less exit. When

28

we look at average firm size, fairness is associated with smaller firms, but the opposite
effect holds when we look at vintage. This suggests that while fairer nations, particularly
in Central and Eastern Europe, are not only associated with higher rates of entry, but that
fairer countries allow the surviving firms to grow large. In general, the distinction between
the results on vintage suggest two things: the inadequacy of any one measure at capturing
the nature of entrepreneurial activity and the importance of institutional factors in
influencing both the birth of firms and their transition into older, larger firms.
5.4.

Skewness of the Firm Size Distribution
Finally, we turn to the effect of the institutional environment on the distribution of

firm sizes. As noted in Section 2, Cooley and Quadrini (2002) and Cabral and Mata
(2003) argue that in the presence of capital constraints, the firm size distribution will be
skewed. In this section, we examine the distribution of firm size across various industries,
following the same approach as above.
Figures 1 through 3 provide a graphical preview of the results. Figure 1 shows the
distribution of firm size in Western Europe, with the number of firms plotted against the
logarithm of sales. The overall distribution is skewed, with a skewness of 0.87. When we
break down the distribution by firm age, we find that the distribution of firms under 10
years of age are the most highly skewed and that skewness decreases with age. Figure 2
provides a similar representation for Central and Eastern Europe. The comparison between
the regions is instructive. First, the overall distribution is more highly skewed, with a
skewness of 1.18. Moreover, when we break down the distribution by firm age, we find
that firms under 10 years of age are even more highly skewed and that firms that are more

29

than ten years old have size distributions that are very close to a lognormal distribution. In
Figure 3, we provide a similar analysis for one country - Great Britain, a country in
Western Europe with a highly developed capital market.

Not only is the overall

distribution much less skewed (0.37), but the differences in skewness by cohort are much
less pronounced.
These figures motivate the analyses reported in Tables 7 and 8. The dependent
variable in the first table is the skewness of the firm size distribution in each industry in
every sample country. In the latter one, we employ the difference between the skewness of
the distribution of firms below the median age and those above this threshold. Once again,
each industry-country pair is employed as a distinct observation.
When we examine the level of skewness in Table 7, we find that nations with
greater fairness and stronger property rights are associated with less skewness. Similarly,
firms with a higher level of formalism are associated with more skewness. The results
regarding fairness and property rights, however, stem exclusively from the CEE nations in
the sample. No significant effects are seen in the Western Europe. In both sets of nations,
more formalism is associated with greater skewness.

More judicial interference is

associated with less skewness, but only in Western Europe. The results are very similar
when we estimate median regressions in Panel B.
Table 8 examines the difference in the skewness of the size distribution in
particular industries for firms that are below the median age compared to firms that are
above the median age. Greater fairness reduces the difference between the skewness of the
size distribution for younger firms compared to the skewness of the size distribution for

30

older firms. The results are consistent with the capital constraints explanation. In nations
where institutions are less fair and property rights weak, the presence of capital constraints
may lead to a particularly skewed distribution for younger firms, who are less likely to be
able to finance all positive net present value investment opportunities from internally
generated cash flows.
6.

Conclusion
This paper seeks to demonstrate the effects of institutional constraints on the real

activities of firms, with a focus on entrepreneurship. These firms are of interest for two
reasons.

First, entrepreneurial firms in many respects represent testing grounds for

scholars interested in how frictions can affects the workings of companies and markets.
Second,

encouraging

entrepreneurship

is

of

intense

interest

to

policymakers.

Understanding the critical links between institutional development and entrepreneurial
activity is critical, especially in emerging and transitioning economies.
Our focus on political, legal, and regulatory factors is motivated by work that has
demonstrated their importance to the development of capital markets. The results suggest
a strong influence of the institutional environment in shaping firm dynamics. The results
regarding entry, exit, firm size, vintage, and skewness tell a consistent story. Greater
fairness and stronger protection of property rights are critically important in encouraging
both the emergence and growth of new enterprises, particularly in emerging markets. The
results are much less clear-cut in Western Europe. To us, this suggests that in more
developed economies, these institutional effects may be second order to the many other
unobserved factors that may affect entrepreneurial dynamics.

Examples of such

31

considerations that have been highlighted in earlier studies include tax codes (Gentry and
Hubbard (2002) and Cullen and Gordon (2003)), labor market conditions (Gromb and
Scharfstein (2001)), and the supply of new ideas.
Our results suggest several avenues for further research. First, while studies of
entrepreneurship typically emphasize entry, our results suggest that there may exist another
critical point in firm maturation where institutions impact the ability of firms to graduate
into larger firms. As a consequence, entry rates alone are an inadequate measure of
entrepreneurial dynamism.

The identification of the determinants of how institutions

impact this maturation process must be better understood. Second, the inability of our
institutional variables to explain many of the patterns seen in Western Europe raises the
question of what factors influence entrepreneurial activity in more developed markets.
Finally, establishing the links between these measures of entrepreneurship and broader
economic growth remains a central open question in this literature.
It is our hope to continue to explore these important issues in a European setting.
The high degree of disclosure of information on privately held firms in Europe, in
combination with the broad scope of the Amadeus dataset, will hopefully provide greater
insight into these questions of entrepreneurial dynamics.

32

References
Cabral, Luis and Jose Mata, 2001, “On the Evolution of the Firm Size Distribution: Facts
and Theory,” Unpublished working paper, New York University, October 2001.
Cooley, Thomas F., and Vincenzo Quadrini, 2003, “Common Currencies vs. Monetary
Independence,” Review of Economic Studies, 70, 785-806.
Cullen, Julie Berry and Roger H. Gordon, 2002, “Taxes and Entrepreneurial Activity:
Theory and Evidence for the U.S.,” Working Paper No. 9015, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Davis, Steven J., and Magnus Henrekson, 1999, “Explaining National Differences in the
Size and Industry Distribution of Employment,” Small Business Economics, 12, 59-83.
Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, 1996, Job Creation and
Destruction, Cambridge, MIT Press.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Vojislav Maksimovic, 1998, “Law, Finance, and Firm Growth,”
Journal of Finance, 53, 2107-2137.
Devereux, M. and F. Schiantarelli, 1990, “Investment, Financial Factors and Cash Flow:
Evidence from UK Panel Data” in R. Glenn Hubbard (editor), Asymmetric Information,
Corporate Finance and Investment, Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2000,
“The Regulation of Entry,” Working Paper No. 7892, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2002,
“Courts: The Lex Mundi Project,” Working Paper No. 8890, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson, 1988, “Patterns of Firm Entry
and Exit in U.S. Manufacturing Industries,” Rand Journal of Economics, 19, 495-515.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson, 1989, “The Growth and Failure
of U.S. Manufacturing Plants,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104, 671-698.
Ericson, Richard, and Ariel Pakes, 1995, “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A
Framework for Empirical Work,” Review of Economic Studies, 62, 53-82.
Evans, David S., 1987, “Tests of Alternative Theories of Firm Growth,” Journal of
Political Economy, 95, 657-674.
Evans, David S., and Linda S. Leighton, 1989, “Some Empirical Aspects of
Entrepreneurship,” American Economic Review, 79, 519-535.

33

Fazzari, Steven M., and Bruce C. Petersen, 1993, ‘‘Working Capital and Fixed Investment:
New Evidence on Finance Constraints,’’ RAND Journal of Economics, 34, 328–342.
Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen, 1988, ‘‘Financing
Constraints and Corporate Investment,’’ Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 141–
195.
Frye, Timothy and Andrei Shleifer, 1997, “The Invisible Hand and the Grabbing Hand”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 87, 354-358
Gentry, William M. and Glenn Hubbard, 2002, “Entrepreneurship and Household Saving,”
Unpublished working paper, Columbia University.
Graham, John R., and Campbell R. Harvey, 2001, “The Theory and Practice of Corporate
Finance: Evidence from the Field”, Journal of Financial Economics, 60, 187–243
Gromb, Denis, and David Scharfstein, 2001, “A Model of Entrepreneurial Activity,”
Unpublished working paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Hall, Bronwyn H., 1987, “The Relationship between Firm Size and Firm Growth in the
U.S. Manufacturing Sector,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 35, 583-606.
Himmelberg, Charles P., and Bruce C. Petersen, 1994, ‘‘R&D and Internal Finance: A
Panel Study of Small Firms in High-Tech Industries,’’ Review of Economics and Statistics,
56, 38–51.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, 1994a, “Sticking It Out:
Entrepreneurial Survival and Liquidity Constraints,” Journal of Political Economy, 102,
53-75.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, 1994b, “Entrepreneurial
Decisions and Liquidity Constraints,” Rand Journal of Economics, 25, 334-347
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kayshap, and Jeremy Scharfstein, 1991, “Corporate Structure,
Liquidity and Investment: Evidence from Japanese Industrial Groups,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 106, 33-60.
Johnson, Simon, and Gary Loveman, 1995, Starting Over in Eastern Europe:
Entrepreneurship and Economic Renewal, Boston, Harvard Business School Press
Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff, 2002, “Property Rights and
Finance,” American Economic Review, 92, 1335-1356.
Jovanovic, Boyan, 1982, “Selection and the Evolution of Industry,” Econometrica, 50,
649-670.
Jovanovic, Boyan, and Glenn M. MacDonald, 1994, “The Life Cycle of a Competitive
Industry,” Journal of Political Economy, 102, 322-347.
King, Robert G., and Ross Levine, 1993, “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be
Right,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 713-737.
Klepper, Steven, and Elizabeth Graddy, 1990, “The Evolution of New Industries and the
Determinants of Market Structure,” Rand Journal of Economics, 21, 27-44.

34

Klepper, Steven, and Kenneth L. Simons, 2000, “The Making of an Oligopoly: Firm
Survival and Technological Change in the Evolution of the U.S. Tire Industry,” Journal of
Political Economy, 108, 728-760.
Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer, 1995, “Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross
Country Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures,” Economics and Politics, 7
(November), 207-228
Kumar, Krishna B., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Luigi Zingales, 1999, “What Determines
Firm Size?,” Working Paper No. 7208, National Bureau of Economic Research.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998,
“Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 1113-1155,
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 1999, “Corporate
Ownership Around the World,” Journal of Finance, 54, 471-517.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2000,
“Investor Protection and Corporate Governance,” Journal of Financial Economics, 58, 125
Lamont, Owen, 1997, “Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital
Markets,” Journal of Finance, 52, 83-109.
Lucas, Robert E, Jr., 1978, “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of
Economics, 9, 508-523.
Mansfield, Edwin, 1962, “Entry, Gibrat's Law, Innovation, and the Growth of Firms,”
American Economic Review, 52, 1023-1051.
Myers, Stewart C., 1977, “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing.” Journal of Financial
Economics, 5, 147 – 175
Myers, Stewart C., and N. Majluf, 1984, “Corporate Investment and Financing Decisions
When Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not Have,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 13, 187-222.
Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales, 1998, “Financial Dependence and Growth,”
American Economic Review, 88, 559-586.
Shin, Hyun-Han, and Rene Stulz, 1998, “Are Internal Capital Markets Efficient?,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 531-552.
Shleifer, Andrei, 1997, “Government in Transition,” European Economic Review, 41, 385410.
Simon, Herbert, and C. Bonnini, 1958, “The Size Distribution of Business Firms,”
American Economic Review, 48, 607-617.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Andrew Weiss, 1981, “Credit rationing in Markets with Imperfect
Information,” American Economic Review, 71, 393-410.
Sutton, John, 1997, “Gibrat’s Legacy,” Journal of Economic Literature, 35, 20-49
Townsend, R., 1979, “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State
Verification,” Journal of Economic Theory, 21, 1-29.

35

Appendix A: Information Providers by Country
Albertina data
Nad Boticem 593/8, 102 00
Praha 10
Czech Republic
Tel. : 420 (2) 71960166-9
Fax : 420 (2) 71960161

Intercredit Ljubljana
Cankarjeva 3
61000 Ljubljana
Slovenia
Tel. : 386 (61) 125 9065
Fax : 386 (61) 125 9130

CFI Online
22, Northumberland Road
Ballsbridge
Dublin 4
Ireland
Tel. : 353 (1) 664 1111
Fax : 353 (1) 664 1100

Jordans
20-22 Bedford Row
London
WC1R 4JS
United Kingdom
Tel. : 44 (117) 923 06 00
Fax : 44 (117) 923 00 63

Chamber of Commerce and Industry of
Romania
4, Expozitiei Bdv., Sector 1
Bucharest 783341
Romania
Tel. : 40 (1) 223 08 93
Fax : 40 (1) 223 16 70

Købmandstandens Oplysningsbureau
Gammel Mønt 4
1117 København
Denmark
Tel. : 45 - 33 11 12 00
Fax : 45 - 33 11 16 29

COFACE SCRL
5 Quai Jayr - BP 9063
69255 Lyon
France
Tel. : 33 (4) 72 85 10 00
Fax : 33 (4) 72 20 10 50
COFACE MOPE
Rua de Santa Marta 43 E/F, 4°
1150 Lisboa
Portugal
Tel. : 351 (1) 352 29 96
Fax : 351 (1) 352 04 18
CreditInform AS
P.O. Box 5275, Majorstua
N-0303 Oslo
Norway
Tel. : 47 (22) 93 20 00
Fax : 47 (22) 46 53 90

Krediidiinfo
Pronski 19
10124 Tallin
Estonia
Tel. : 372 (6) 659 9600
Fax : 372 (6) 665 9601
MID Group Ltd.
Bulevar Lenjina 20/IV ulaz B
11070 Novi Beograd
Yugoslavia
Tel. : 381 (11) 699 905
Fax : 381 (11) 696 059
National Bank of Belgium
14, boulevard de Berlaimont
1000 Brussels
Belgium
Tel. : 32 (2) 221 21 11
Fax : 32 (2) 221 31 17

36

Creditreform Bulgaria
zh.k. Ilinden, bl. 129, vh. B
1309 Sofia
Bulgaria
Tel. : 359 (2) 929 3993
Fax : 359 (2) 920 0994
Creditreform Croatia
ul. Baruna Trenka 13
10000 Zagreb
Croatia
Tel. : 385 (1) 45 777 68
Fax : 385 (1) 45 731 12
Intercredit Budapest
Kálvária tér
71089 Budapest
Hungary
Tel. : 36 (1) 303 9300
Fax : 36 (1) 210 27 28

Novcredit
Via dell'Artigianato
20090 Vimodrone (Milano)
Italy
Tel. : 39 (2) 250100.1
Fax : 39 (2) 250 07070
Patikimo Verslo Sistema
P.O. Box 2878
2000 Vilnius
Lithuania
Tel. : 370 (2) 22 41 33
Fax : 370 (2) 22 41 33
UC
11496 Stockholm
Sweden
Tel. : 46 (8) 670 90 00
Fax : 46 (8) 661 48 32
Verband der Vereine Creditrefom
Hellersbergstraße 12
41415 Neuss
Germany
Tel. : 49 (2131) 109 10
Fax : 49 (2131) 109 8000

37

Appendix B: Characteristics of the Sample
B.1 Company-Level Data
The Amadeus data contains over 130 variables of information for the companies
within the data set. Company profile variables include the geographical location,
identification number, legal form, etc. In addition, industry codes are included. Because
of differences across countries, there are more than 15 different industry codes and its
corresponding descriptions (see next section for greater details on industry codes). The
data also provides information on the firms’ managers and auditors. Typically, the data
would include information on up to 10 managers. In addition, standard balance sheet and
income statement items are tracked. The exact financial information captured differs
depending upon the data collected within the country.
One of the interesting aspects of the data is information on ownership and
subsidiaries. These data include owners’ and subsidiary’s identification number, country,
turnover, date of acquisition, and percentage of ownership (up to 10 owners and
subsidiaries per company). Ultimate holding company data is also available for some
companies. Depending upon the country, these data is available for both public and
private companies.
B.2. Types of Companies
The inclusion criteria used by Bureau van Dijk Amadeus differs by country, relying
on individual national filing requirements for the core data. State-owned companies as
well as privately owned firms are included. Banks and insurance companies are not
included. Two different types of companies are included in the Amadeus data. Type 1
companies are those whose capital is divided into shares which can be offered to the
general public and whose members are only liable for its debts to the extent of any amount
unpaid on their shares. Type 2 companies are those whose capital is divided into shares
that cannot be offered to the general public. The liability of its members is limited to the
amount of their shares. Finally, the database includes information on other entities
including partnerships (IHG, KG, K/S, Ky, Kb, SNC, SC, G,bH &Co, KG, SapA, Sas, Snc,
ANS, K/s, HB, KB) and sole proprietorships (SURL, EVBA, Sole proprietorships, OE,
EE), and cooperatives. Table A-1 illustrates a breakdown of Type 1 and Type 2 companies
by country.
B.3. Industry Classifications
Our analysis exploits industry level information in the data across countries. As
such, we need to have common industry definitions within the data. All firms in the
Amadeus data have an identifier used by the national body collecting the data. Typically,
these codes are unique to the individual country. In addition to the national industry codes
assigned by the information provider in each country, detailed uniform 7-digit CSO
activity codes are assigned by Bureau van Dijk to all of the companies in the database. The
CSO activity codes have been assigned to each company from the standard list of 8,000
activities produced by the British Central Statistical Office (CSO). All the codes (NAF,
ATECO, WZ, SIC-UK, BIK, ISIC, SIC-US, etc.) are cross-referenced to the CSO activity
code. In addition, NACE codes (Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in the

38

European Community) are the basis for many of the new updated and more harmonized
national codes. All countries in the EU are now obligated to create new classifications
whose first three digits are based on NACE 1.
Bureau Van Dijk has provided a spreadsheet with conversion codes between the
various industry classifications. Also, Amadeus online allows users to obtain all the
corresponding codes to a particular code.
B.4. Ownership and Subsidiary Data
Bureau Van Dijk merges ownership data that it receives from all its information
providers into one large database. This information is then analyzed to identify each cross
border holding/subsidiary link by the national identification number of the companies
involved.
This means that all subsidiaries that European companies have in countries outside
Europe that are not reported to the national statistical office do not appear in the subsidiary
section of the company. Those subsidiaries overseas disclose information to their national
office. Thus, if a French company has one subsidiary in Spain and two in Canada, the
Spanish Information provider will report data on its French parent company that will be
then linked to the French company as a subsidiary. Because Amadeus has no information
provider from Canada, there is no way to find out if the French company has a Canadian
subsidiary unless the company reports it.
Ownership and subsidiary data are dated corresponding with the latest statement
available for the parent company. Ownership and subsidiary data usually include the name
and identification number of both the parent and the subsidiary, which can be then tracked
within the database, percentage of ownership (direct and total), turnover, and date of
acquisition. If a company has more than 10 owners or subsidiaries, only the largest 10 will
be reported. There is also information on ultimate shareholder, including identification
number, country, type, and turnover.
B.5. Regional Information
The data by country is further divided into regions. The regions within the
Amadeus dataset are based upon the definitions of regions defined in the European
Commission’s Eurostat. Eurostat’s regional statistics cover the principal aspects of the
economic and social life, such as demography, economic accounts, employment,
unemployment, and so forth. Eurostat attempts to group together population or places with
sufficient similarities to comprise a logical unit for administrative purposes. Eurostat, in
collaboration with the other Commission departments, set up the Nomenclature of
Statistical Territorial Units (NUTS) at the beginning of the 1970s as a single, coherent
system for dividing up the European Union’s territory.
As of yet, the NUTS classification has no specific legal basis, i.e. there is no
regulation that sets rules for compiling and updating the system of regional reporting and
boundaries. These matters have been settled so far by “gentlemen’s agreements” between
the Member States and Eurostat, sometimes after long and difficult negotiations. The
NUTS scheme is then published by Eurostat (the latest edition came out in 1999). NUTS
is a hierarchical classification scheme, with three levels of aggregation referred to as
NUTS Levels 1, 2, and 3 (the finest partition).
39

Figure 1: Firm Size Distributions for Western Europe, Overall and by Cohort, 1998

Note: The left panel depicts the overall firm size distribution for Western Europe in 1998. The right panel depicts the size distribution by
cohort. Summary statistics for the distributions are provided at the bottom of the panels.

Figure 2: Firm Size Distributions for Central and Eastern Europe, Overall and by Cohort, 1998

Note: The left panel depicts the overall firm size distribution for Central and Eastern Europe in 1998. The right panel depicts the size
distribution by cohort. Summary statistics for the distributions are provided at the bottom of the panels.

Figure 3: Firm Size Distributions for the United Kingdom, Overall and by Cohort, 1998

Note: The left panel depicts the overall firm size distribution for the United Kingdom in 1998. The right panel depicts the size distribution
by cohort. Summary statistics for the distributions are provided at the bottom of the panels.

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics by Country, 1998

Country
Panel A: Eurozone
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom

Number of
Firms

Number of
Regions

Number of
Industries

Mean Revenues
($ thousands)

Median
Revenues
($ thousands)

Mean Assets
($ thousands)

Median Assets
($ thousands)

Mean
Employment

Median
Employment

7,380
11,273
8,304
4,613
49,434
95,315
5,438
152
913
38,556
154
10,760
6,842
2,751
30,882
13,604
6,703
50,099

9
11
1
6
27
44
13
1
2
20
1
12
1
7
17
8
1
37

53
55
53
52
55
56
53
30
47
55
31
55
54
52
55
54
52
56

$25,442
$51,272
$65,271
$61,280
$46,304
$62,490
$14,193
$47,689
$124,787
$35,619
$250,100
$129,378
$30,008
$30,601
$23,447
$50,904
$321,396
$87,030

$5,655
$10,384
$18,047
$7,062
$6,524
$6,251
$3,577
$21,916
$27,979
$7,424
$34,643
$7,019
$5,765
$4,649
$4,145
$7,644
$50,592
$13,350

$159,313
$43,422
$26,905
$53,479
$43,161
$712,887
$16,761
$52,962
$82,630
$39,459
$365,893
$90,544
$27,356
$39,677
$22,175
$57,971
$906,497
$128,815

$31,384
$4,461
$4,411
$3,937
$3,285
$109,763
$3,524
$17,369
$10,632
$6,135
$20,420
$8,764
$2,738
$3,458
$2,829
$3,873
$128,137
$6,744

129
127
174
264
231
264
109
216
381
287
775
467
97
221
526
605
473
420

45
39
43
48
42
45
42
125
87
41
154
81
38
53
39
42
50
79

Panel B: Central and Eastern Europe
Bulgaria
4,484
Croatia
1,280
Czechoslovakia
4,370
Estonia
2,939
Hungary
2,852
Latvia
1,326
Lithuania
336
Macedonia
35
Poland
9,338
Romania
13,762
Russia
9,059
Slovakia
415
Ukraine
343
Yugoslavia
296

6
1
6
1
7
1
1
1
16
8
1
4
1
1

55
49
54
51
53
50
38
19
54
56
54
48
44
41

$3,725
$17,521
$14,657
$2,928
$24,842
$5,277
$9,646
$487
$22,968
$2,940
$41,985
$19,456
.
$14,362

$592
$6,619
$3,868
$918
$6,317
$1,955
$3,813
$119
$6,951
$636
$3,034
$4,531
.
$3,197

$3,412
$43,278
$15,890
$2,062
$16,924
$4,702
$6,699
$1,424
$18,379
$2,810
$101,929
$20,079
$24,331
$30,280

$409
$11,828
$3,049
$411
$3,078
$1,086
$2,165
$890
$3,675
$377
$5,615
$3,898
$5,663
$5,985

248
334
257
81
438
188
356
651
377
234
1,105
353
532
427

118
158
100
40
130
100
127
339
148
51
347
124
309
186

Note: The first three columns of the table provide the number of firms and regions by country and the number of industries represented within those countries. The next six columns
provide mean and median revenues, assets and employment by country for those firms. The top panel features countries from the Eurozone and the bottom panel features countries from the
Central and Eastern Europe. The sample is restricted to those firms with more than twenty employees.

Table 2
Descriptive Statistics by Industry, 1998

Industry
Mining-Coal
Oil and Gas Extraction
Mining-Uranium
Mining-Metal
Mining-Other
Food
Tobacco
Textiles-manufacture
Clothing
Leather
Wood
Paper
Publishing
Refined Petroleum
Chemicals
Rubber
Glass, Ceramics
Metals-Basic
Metals-Fabricated
Machinery and Equipment
Computers, Office
Electrical Machinery
TelecommunicationOptical, medical
Motor VehiclesTransport-Other
Furniture
Recycling
Electricity, gas, hot water
Water-Collection and
Construction
Motor vehicles-sale,repair
Wholesale
Retail
Hotels and restaurants
Land transport
Water transport
Air transport
Auxiliary transport
Postal and
Financial
Auxiliary financial
Real estate
Renting machinery
Computer-services
Research and Development
Other Business Activities
Public Administration
Education
Health and social work
Sewage and sanitation
Professional organizations
Recreation, cultural
Other services
Private households
Missing

Mean
Median
Number of Number of Number of Revenues ($ Revenues ($ Mean Assets
Firms
Countries
Regions
thousands)
thousands) ($ thousands)
360
3,129
1,661
2,803
2,164
18,326
232
7,377
4,386
2,359
5,466
3,535
9,252
515
8,047
5,481
7,660
4,725
20,911
16,317
1,204
9,045
3,141
4,031
3,035
1,825
8,079
568
2,297
680
37,311
15,889
44,714
18,661
9,211
10,731
808
405
7,162
1,333
4,504
1,403
5,210
1,335
6,470
1,027
26,774
208
1,992
6,273
1,992
364
3,557
3,115
5
24,943

26
29
29
28
29
32
26
31
30
31
30
30
32
28
32
31
32
31
31
31
25
31
29
31
29
31
29
22
29
23
31
32
32
32
31
30
28
28
31
30
25
26
28
25
30
27
32
19
26
27
27
19
31
25
3
31

85
221
172
187
239
263
80
238
228
195
241
233
244
155
251
246
251
242
257
250
164
248
216
221
235
213
247
128
203
156
263
259
263
261
257
253
121
101
240
170
166
158
224
189
215
163
254
75
187
224
214
94
232
206
5
230

$207,486
$179,577
$11,712
$6,271
$46,307
$55,931
$425,501
$18,620
$19,721
$19,955
$17,761
$61,953
$37,145
$550,169
$123,220
$37,799
$31,235
$90,101
$16,491
$49,163
$103,700
$30,374
$95,782
$64,782
$313,034
$79,710
$15,576
$8,729
$275,874
$61,082
$18,745
$38,636
$61,956
$83,475
$16,643
$26,667
$103,553
$323,677
$51,196
$358,397
$130,636
$197,666
$63,858
$43,078
$39,241
$20,399
$63,868
$20,222
$8,420
$14,181
$17,637
$26,270
$40,637
$4,809
$2,718
$13,444

$15,353
$2,400
$1,379
$1,613
$4,859
$7,492
$34,152
$6,066
$4,000
$5,363
$5,399
$11,443
$6,422
$33,269
$16,677
$10,628
$6,819
$12,641
$4,781
$8,548
$12,006
$4,563
$10,693
$8,524
$12,059
$8,957
$5,382
$3,109
$22,356
$5,939
$3,912
$12,502
$11,900
$7,382
$2,898
$4,384
$15,414
$19,890
$9,377
$14,125
$7,384
$14,001
$8,179
$7,618
$6,893
$4,546
$5,863
$1,873
$3,117
$3,645
$4,111
$4,440
$5,138
$2,557
$1,479
$3,523

$368,356
$254,009
$7,035
$10,506
$99,505
$45,637
$323,605
$15,812
$18,277
$13,726
$17,008
$71,119
$37,673
$459,250
$138,828
$35,479
$39,060
$103,791
$14,322
$43,631
$89,705
$27,562
$73,364
$74,735
$309,375
$102,597
$10,477
$8,524
$554,410
$206,458
$24,126
$19,622
$30,198
$42,077
$25,736
$50,015
$123,762
$325,729
$51,267
$523,103
$512,289
$988,963
$119,825
$71,257
$22,120
$34,512
$79,469
$27,462
$10,418
$10,620
$28,718
$30,793
$36,886
$4,249
$3,758
$20,217

Median
Assets ($
thousands)
$25,962
$2,353
$855
$669
$3,892
$4,881
$22,390
$4,772
$2,548
$3,401
$3,670
$8,605
$4,580
$29,958
$13,123
$7,422
$5,402
$9,928
$3,335
$6,587
$8,596
$3,519
$7,741
$8,393
$8,557
$8,082
$3,442
$1,973
$46,176
$11,936
$2,606
$4,626
$6,025
$2,706
$2,316
$2,705
$18,005
$17,306
$5,326
$12,874
$8,923
$21,921
$11,265
$7,311
$4,122
$6,079
$4,212
$812
$2,392
$2,436
$2,303
$4,181
$4,371
$1,956
$2,331
$2,535

Mean
Median
Employment Employment
2,460
558
221
145
275
344
869
223
226
214
173
305
208
696
1,042
319
291
620
228
307
370
221
449
381
1,331
1,090
138
98
1,924
416
157
97
194
716
248
338
549
1,412
216
2,337
630
749
617
179
199
309
433
453
136
218
173
138
281
74
59
213

403
64
43
43
49
82
280
70
70
65
50
80
51
101
89
77
59
90
47
70
74
46
82
70
100
99
50
42
154
117
42
40
44
43
46
47
120
238
56
112
65
66
48
42
49
138
63
64
58
68
58
42
53
42
37
36

Note: The first three columns of the table provide the number of firms and countries by industry and the number of regions represented within those
industries. The next six columns provide mean and median revenues, assets and employment by country for those firms. The sample is restricted to those
firms with more than twenty employees.

Table 3
Determinants of Entry in Europe, 1998
Dependent Variable: Rate of Entry, 1998
OLS Univariates
All europe
(1)

(2)

Median Univariates

Eurozone

CEE

(3)

(4)

All europe
(1)

(2)

Eurozone

CEE

(3)

(4)

Fairness Index

-0.7370
(1.0179)
1518

-0.4610
(0.7774)
1518

-0.7222
(1.0835)
945

0.9781 **
(0.3809)
573

0.0007
(0.0042)
1518

0.0013
(0.0033)
1518

-0.0033
(0.0022)
945

0.0543 ***
(0.0203)
573

Formalism Index

2.8788
(4.8328)
1468

3.4709
(5.4512)
1468

6.9379
(6.9246)
945

-8.7470 ***
(2.3772)
523

0.0051
(0.0125)
1468

0.0046
(0.0095)
1468

0.0368 ***
(0.0066)
945

-0.2590 ***
(0.0567)
523

Interference of Courts

-0.1070 ***
(0.0207)
863

-0.1021 ***
(0.0199)
863

0.0857 ***
(0.0126)
389

-0.2727 ***
(0.0332)
474

-0.0168
(0.0160)
863

-0.0190
(0.0246)
863

0.0562 ***
(0.0131)
389

-0.2881 ***
(0.0463)
474

Start up Procedures

1.5289
(1.2827)
1396

1.6259
(1.3797)
1396

1.6655
(1.6358)
877

1.7853 ***
(0.4961)
519

0.0073 ***
(0.0014)
1396

0.0074 ***
(0.0013)
1396

0.0055 ***
(0.0012)
877

0.0395 ***
(0.0128)
519

Protection of Property
Rights

-5.2522
(5.3976)
1213

-3.6880
(4.0308)
1213

-5.5331
(5.9479)
945

0.2584 ***
(0.0272)
268

0.0272 ***
(0.0087)
1213

0.0349 ***
(0.0105)
1213

0.0122
(0.0125)
945

0.2717 ***
(0.0390)
268

N
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

Y **
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

CEE dummy?
Industry Fixed Effects?
GDP per capita controls?

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

Note: The table presents the results of univariate regressions where the dependent variable is the rate of entry in 1998 as defined in the text. In the left panel, specifications are estimated via
ordinary least squares and the right panel median regressions are presented. In each panel, the first two columns employ all of Europe while the the third and fourth column restrict attention to the
Eurozone and CEE, respectively. In the second column of both panels, a dummy variable set equal to one for CEE observations is also included. In all specifications, industry fixed effects and gdp
per capita countrols are employed. The independent variables are the fairness index, the formalism index, a measure of interference by courts, a measure of start-up procedures, and a measure of
property rights protection as described more fully in the text. Each cell provides the coefficient on independent variable, the standard error and the number of observations for that regression. In
OLS specifications, the standard errors are heteroskedastiicty-consistent and in the median regressions, standard errors are bootstrapped.

Table 4
Determinants of Exit in Europe, 1998
Dependent Variable: Rate of Exit, 1998
OLS Univariates
All europe
(1)

(2)

Median Univariates

Eurozone

CEE

(3)

(4)

All europe
(1)

(2)

Eurozone

CEE

(3)

(4)

Fairness Index

-0.0155 ***
(0.0035)
1409

-0.0131 ***
(0.0031)
1409

-0.0042 **
(0.0020)
913

-0.0548 ***
(0.0170)
496

-0.0057 ***
(0.0018)
1409

-0.0062 ***
(0.0019)
1409

-0.0079 ***
(0.0014)
913

-0.0323 ***
(0.0058)
496

Formalism Index

0.0151 ***
(0.0043)
1369

0.0154 ***
(0.0046)
1369

0.0184 ***
(0.0047)
913

0.0136
(0.0143)
456

0.0029
(0.0029)
1369

0.0037 **
(0.0018)
1369

0.0097 ***
(0.0026)
913

-0.0009
(0.0072)
456

Interference of Courts

-0.0357 **
(0.0162)
784

-0.0287 *
(0.0171)
784

0.0173 ***
(0.0061)
381

-0.0002
(0.0433)
403

-0.0133 **
(0.0063)
784

-0.0140 **
(0.0068)
784

-0.0030
(0.0069)
381

0.0672 ***
(0.0173)
403

Start up Procedures

0.0050 ***
(0.0013)
1296

0.0054 ***
(0.0014)
1296

-0.0002
(0.0012)
852

0.0373 ***
(0.0065)
444

-0.0030 ***
(0.0006)
1296

0.0030 ***
(0.0005)
1296

0.0033 ***
(0.0005)
852

0.0035
(0.0034)
444

Protection of Property
Rights

-0.0411 ***
(0.0084)
1169

-0.0241 ***
(0.0069)
1169

0.0032
(0.0068)
913

-0.0810 ***
(0.0192)
256

-0.0106 ***
(0.0036)
1169

-0.0134 ***
(0.0052)
1169

-0.0106 *
(0.0055)
913

-0.0530 ***
(0.0063)
256

CEE dummy?
Industry Fixed Effects?
GDP per capita controls?

N
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

Note: The table presents the results of univariate regressions where the dependent variable is the rate of exit in 1998 as defined in the text. In the left panel, specifications are estimated via ordinary
least squares and the right panel median regressions are presented. In each panel, the first two columns employ all of Europe while the the third and fourth column restrict attention to the Eurozone
and CEE, respectively. In the second column of both panels, a dummy variable set equal to one for CEE observations is also included. In all specifications, industry fixed effects and gdp per capita
countrols are employed. The independent variables are the fairness index, the formalism index, a measure of interference by courts, a measure of start-up procedures, and a measure of property rights
protection as described more fully in the text. Each cell provides the coefficient on independent variable, the standard error and the number of observations for that regression. In OLS specifications,
the standard errors are heteroskedastiicty-consistent and in the median regressions, standard errors are bootstrapped.

Table 5
Determinants of Size in Europe, 1998
Dependent Variable: Average Firm Size, 1998
OLS Univariates
All europe
(1)

(2)

Median Univariates

Eurozone

CEE

(3)

(4)

All europe
(1)

(2)

Eurozone

CEE

(3)

(4)

Fairness Index

-0.0570 ***
(0.0189)
1523

-0.0288 *
(0.0167)
1523

0.0585 ***
(0.0147)
918

-0.2980 ***
(0.0407)
605

0.0015
(0.0161)
1523

0.0171
(0.0105)
1523

0.0388 ***
(0.0128)
918

-0.3017 ***
(0.0508)
605

Formalism Index

-0.3514 ***
(0.0328)
1475

-0.2966 ***
(0.0331)
1475

-0.0580 *
(0.0336)
918

-0.8830 ***
(0.0638)
557

-0.4284 ***
(0.0280)
1475

-0.3413 ***
(0.0392)
1475

-0.1239 **
(0.0505)
918

-0.8545 ***
(0.0895)
557

Interference of Courts

0.3530 ***
(0.0634)
889

0.3985 ***
(0.0636)
889

0.1390 **
(0.0562)
383

0.6596 ***
(0.1112)
506

0.2893 ***
(0.0937)
889

0.3061 ***
(0.0865)
889

0.1114 ***
(0.0344)
383

0.7154 ***
(0.1426)
506

Start up Procedures

0.0194 ***
(0.0065)
1411

0.0204 ***
(0.0063)
1411

-0.0048
(0.0062)
857

0.1214 ***
(0.0137)
554

0.0011
(0.0048)
1411

0.0021
(0.0037)
1411

-0.0064
(0.0044)
857

0.0873 ***
(0.0167)
554

Protection of Property
Rights

-0.3636 ***
(0.0426)
1279

-0.2027 ***
(0.0413)
1279

0.0787
(0.0485)
918

-0.3199 ***
(0.0651)
361

-0.2384 ***
(0.0592)
1279

-0.0807
(0.0544)
1279

0.0955
(0.0367)
918

-0.3175 ***
(0.0717)
361

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

CEE dummy?
Industry Fixed Effects?
GDP per capita controls?

N
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

Note: The table presents the results of univariate regressions where the dependent variable is the average firm size, measured by employees, in 1998 as defined in the text. In the left panel,
specifications are estimated via ordinary least squares and the right panel median regressions are presented. In each panel, the first two columns employ all of Europe while the the third and fourth
column restrict attention to the Eurozone and CEE, respectively. In the second column of both panels, a dummy variable set equal to one for CEE observations is also included. In all specifications,
industry fixed effects and gdp per capita countrols are employed. The independent variables are the fairness index, the formalism index, a measure of interference by courts, a measure of start-up
procedures, and a measure of property rights protection as described more fully in the text. Each cell provides the coefficient on independent variable, the standard error and the number of
observations for that regression. In OLS specifications, the standard errors are heteroskedastiicty-consistent and in the median regressions, standard errors are bootstrapped.

Table 6
Determinants of Vintage in Europe, 1998
Dependent Variable: Vintage, 1998
OLS Univariates
All europe
(1)

(2)

Median Univariates

Eurozone

CEE

(3)

(4)

All europe
(1)

(2)

Eurozone

CEE

(3)

(4)

Fairness Index

0.0808 ***
(0.0152)
1516

0.0445 ***
(0.0144)
1516

0.0325 **
(0.0139)
912

0.1324 ***
(0.0385)
604

0.0832 ***
(0.0133)
1516

0.0541 ***
(0.0182)
1516

0.0374 *
(0.0207)
912

0.1123 ***
(0.0403)
604

Formalism Index

-0.1125 ***
(0.0333)
1468

-0.1915 ***
(0.0331)
1468

-0.2046 ***
(0.0331)
912

-0.0938
(0.0791)
556

-0.0354
(0.0421)
1468

-0.1439 ***
(0.0509)
1468

-0.1582 ***
(0.0396)
912

0.0574
(0.0980)
556

Interference of Courts

0.5833 ***
(0.0572)
888

0.4448 ***
(0.0533)
888

-0.0935
(0.0687)
383

0.4930 ***
(0.0751)
505

0.3799 ***
(0.0950)
888

0.3452 ***
(0.1005)
888

-0.1370 **
(0.0652)
383

0.4185 ***
(0.1499)
505

Start up Procedures

0.0145 **
(0.0057)
1409

0.0130 **
(0.0057)
1409

0.0146 **
(0.0057)
856

0.0234
(0.0149)
553

0.0110 *
(0.0066)
1409

0.0129
(0.0038)
1409

0.0088
(0.0061)
856

0.0597 ***
(0.0179)
553

Protection of Property
Rights

0.1386 ***
(0.0430)
1272

-0.0648 *
(0.0389)
1272

0.1157 **
(0.0511)
912

0.0848 *
(0.0464)
360

0.1795 ***
(0.0547)
1272

-0.0578
(0.0598)
1272

0.0497
(0.0522)
912

0.0057
(0.1125)
360

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

CEE dummy
Industry Fixed Effects?
GDP per capital controls?

N
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

Note: The table presents the results of univariate regressions where the dependent variable is the measure of vintage, measured by employees, in 1998 as defined in the text. In the left panel,
specifications are estimated via ordinary least squares and the right panel median regressions are presented. In each panel, the first two columns employ all of Europe while the the third and fourth
column restrict attention to the Eurozone and CEE, respectively. In the second column of both panels, a dummy variable set equal to one for CEE observations is also included. In all specifications,
industry fixed effects and gdp per capita countrols are employed. The independent variables are the fairness index, the formalism index, a measure of interference by courts, a measure of start-up
procedures, and a measure of property rights protection as described more fully in the text. Each cell provides the coefficient on independent variable, the standard error and the number of observations
for that regression. In OLS specifications, the standard errors are heteroskedastiicty-consistent and in the median regressions, standard errors are bootstrapped.

Table 7
Determinants of Skewness in Europe, 1998
Dependent Variable: Skewness, 1998
OLS Univariates

Median Univariates

Eurozone

All europe

CEE

Eurozone

All europe

CEE

(1)
-0.0261
(0.0163)
1396

(2)
-0.0377 **
(0.0159)
1396

(3)
-0.0007
(0.0165)
858

(4)
-0.1693 ***
(0.0417)
538

(1)
-0.0036
(0.0184)
1396

(2)
-0.0048
(0.0142)
1396

(3)
0.0171
(0.0141)
858

Formalism Index

0.1128 ***
(0.0309)
1361

0.0804 **
(0.0326)
1361

0.0555
(0.0330)
858

0.1910 **
(0.0845)
503

0.1348 ***
(0.0265)
1361

0.0725
(0.0514)
1361

0.1089 **
(0.0535)
858

0.1648 *
(0.0900)
503

Interference of Courts

0.0561
(0.0610)
823

-0.0002
(0.0589)
823

-0.4227 ***
(0.0672)
374

0.0308
(0.0888)
449

0.0076
(0.0749)
823

-0.0118
(0.0637)
823

-0.4374 ***
(0.0534)
374

0.1636
(0.1249)
449

Start up Procedures

-0.0045
(0.0059)
1319

-0.0056
(0.0059)
1319

-0.0179 ***
(0.0060)
825

0.0515 ***
(0.0168)
494

-0.0023
(0.0046)
1319

-0.0049
(0.0056)
1319

-0.0157 ***
(0.0061)
825

0.0762 ***
(0.0126)
494

-0.0597
(0.0394)
1183

-0.1611 ***
(0.0409)
1183

-0.0509
(0.0492)
858

-0.2752 ***
(0.0645)
325

-0.0649 *
(0.0359)
1183

-0.1827 ***
(0.0250)
1183

-0.0232
(0.0612)
858

-0.2808 ***
(0.0853)
325

Fairness Index

Protection of Property
Rights

CEE dummy
Industry Fixed Effects?
GDP per capital controls?

N
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

(4)
-0.139298 **
(0.0602)
538

N
Y
Y

Note: The table presents the results of univariate regressions where the dependent variable is the skewness of the firm-size distribution in 1998 as defined in the text. In the left panel, specifications
are estimated via ordinary least squares and the right panel median regressions are presented. In each panel, the first two columns employ all of Europe while the the third and fourth column restrict
attention to the Eurozone and CEE, respectively. In the second column of both panels, a dummy variable set equal to one for CEE observations is also included. In all specifications, industry fixed
effects and gdp per capita countrols are employed. The independent variables are the fairness index, the formalism index, a measure of interference by courts, a measure of start-up procedures, and a
measure of property rights protection as described more fully in the text. Each cell provides the coefficient on independent variable, the standard error and the number of observations for that regression.
In OLS specifications, the standard errors are heteroskedastiicty-consistent and in the median regressions, standard errors are bootstrapped.

Table 8
Determinants of Differential Skewness in Europe, 1998
Dependent Variable: Skewness (Below the Median Age - Above the Median Age), 1998
OLS Univariates
All europe
(1)

(2)

Median Univariates

Eurozone

CEE

(3)

(4)

All europe
(1)

(2)

Eurozone

CEE

(3)

(4)

Fairness Index

-0.0355
(0.0227)
1275

-0.0273
(0.0221)
1275

0.0327
(0.0218)
804

-0.2630 ***
(0.0578)
471

0.0118
(0.0254)
1275

0.0376
(0.0255)
1275

0.0754 ***
(0.0191)
804

-0.3028 ***
(0.0712)
471

Formalism Index

-0.1912 ***
(0.0451)
1253

-0.1606 ***
(0.0460)
1253

-0.0922 *
(0.0482)
804

-0.3186 ***
(0.1090)
449

-0.2277 ***
(0.0425)
1253

-0.1939 ***
(0.0332)
1253

-0.1611 **
(0.0709)
804

-0.3216 **
(0.1591)
449

Interference of Courts

0.0495
(0.0840)
761

0.0483
(0.0839)
761

-0.3407 ***
(0.0876)
364

0.1656
(0.1499)
397

0.0569
(0.1045)
761

0.0764
(0.0893)
761

-0.4842 ***
(0.1400)
364

0.2071
(0.2096)
397

Start up Procedures

-0.0149 *
(0.0080)
1217

-0.0135 *
(0.0080)
1217

-0.0369
(0.0077)
787

0.0884 ***
(0.0260)
430

-0.0246 ***
(0.0073)
1217

-0.0216 **
(0.0104)
1217

-0.0424 ***
(0.0097)
787

0.1083 ***
(0.0294)
430

Protection of Property
Rights

-0.2093 ***
(0.0565)
1089

-0.1519 **
(0.0593)
1089

-0.0320
(0.0702)
804

-0.1971 **
(0.0979)
285

-0.2103 ***
(0.0694)
1089

-0.0947
(0.0721)
1089

0.0663
(0.0897)
804

-0.2212
(0.1439)
285

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

CEE dummy
Industry Fixed Effects?
GDP per capital controls?

N
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

N
Y
Y

Note: The table presents the results of univariate regressions where the dependent variable is the difference in skewness of the firm-size distributions for firms above and below the median age in 1998 as
defined in the text. In the left panel, specifications are estimated via ordinary least squares and the right panel median regressions are presented. In each panel, the first two columns employ all of Europe
while the the third and fourth column restrict attention to the Eurozone and CEE, respectively. In the second column of both panels, a dummy variable set equal to one for CEE observations is also
included. In all specifications, industry fixed effects and gdp per capita countrols are employed. The independent variables are the fairness index, the formalism index, a measure of interference by courts,
a measure of start-up procedures, and a measure of property rights protection as described more fully in the text. Each cell provides the coefficient on independent variable, the standard error and the
number of observations for that regression. In OLS specifications, the standard errors are heteroskedastiicty-consistent and in the median regressions, standard errors are bootstrapped.

