NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSEQUENCES OF CONSTITUTIONS
Torsten Persson
Working Paper 10170
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10170
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

This paper is based on my Presidential Address in the 2003 Congress of the European Economic Association,
held in Stockholm August 20-24. I am grateful to Tim Besley and Guido Tabellini for comments, to JoseMauricio Prado Jr. for research assistance, and to Christina Lönnblad for editorial assistance. The Swedish
Research Council and the Tore Browaldh Foundation provided financial support, as did the Canadian Institute
for Advanced Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Torsten Persson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Consequences of Constitutions
Torsten Persson
NBER Working Paper No. 10170
December 2003
JEL No. D72, E60, H00, O11
ABSTRACT
The paper presents empirical findings regarding the economic policy consequences of constitutional
arrangements, in three different dimensions. First, the data are consistent with several theoretical
predictions about the consequences of electoral rules and forms of government for fiscal policy and
rent extraction, even when non-random constitution selection is taken into account. Second,
empirical tests of the predictions from a new comprehensive model of parliamentary democracy
show that proportional elections raise government spending through their indirect consequences for
party structures and types of government, rather than through their direct effects on policymaking
incentives. Third, new empirical results suggest that constitutional arrangements may have important
consequences for structural polices that promote long-run economic performance, hinting at a
missing link in the causal chain from history to current economic performance. All these empirical
findings appear statistically robust, and the estimated effects are large enough to be of genuine
economic interest.
Torsten Persson
Director, Institute for International Economic St
Stockholm University
S-106 91 Stockholm
SWEDEN
and NBER
torsten.persson@iies.su.se

Five years ago, in the Berlin congress, I gave the Marshall lecture together with Guido Tabellini. That lecture described our first steps, mostly
theoretical steps, into a new research field: how constitutional rules influence
economic policy (Persson and Tabellini, 1999). In this lecture, I would like
to report on how that research is developing, and how it might develop in the
future. My discussion will come in three parts, three variations on a common
theme: the consequences of constitutions. Let me begin by putting the three
parts in context.
Recent theoretical studies by economists have asked how incentives for
policymaking might diﬀer under alternative electoral rules and alternative
forms of government. Figure 1 illustrates the purpose of the theory. We represent diﬀerent constitutional arrangements by diﬀerent rules in an extensiveform game, and try to make ceteris paribus predictions about the consequences for economic policy outcomes. These predictions have motivated
data collection and subsequent empirical studies. Embarking on such empirical studies, however, one quickly runs into problems of statistical inference.
The most serious one is illustrated in the figure. The data strongly suggest
that constitutional rules are not randomly selected. And the same features of
history, geography and culture may well influence both constitutional rules
and the policy outcomes these rules are predicted to shape. Resolving this
endogeneity problem is a major goal in the literature. The first part of the
lecture will present some results from this work, drawing on a new book
(Persson and Tabellini, 2003) and new articles (Persson and Tabellini, 2004,
and Persson, Tabellini, and Trebbi, 2003). The constitutional eﬀects on fiscal
policy and on corruption turn out to be statistically robust and quantitatively
important.
The research in the first part sits close to the border between economics
and political science. In the second part, I will discuss how one might build a
more solid bridge between the disciplines. Traditional political science does
not really deal with the direct consequences of constitutional rules, operating through incentives for policymaking. As illustrated in Figure 2, however,
it deals very much with the consequences for the structure of political representation — the number of parties, the type of governments, and so on.
Such political outcomes have typically been taken as given in the research by
economists. But they are likely to spill over into policy decisions, creating
indirect consequences for policy. How do we sort out the direct and indirect
consequences?
Obviously, we need a more encompassing approach. In the second part,
2

I will give an example of such an approach when describing the main results
in a new paper with Gerard Roland and Tabellini (Persson, Roland, and
Tabellini, 2003). The paper proposes a model of a parliamentary democracy,
which is rich enough to allow for direct as well as indirect consequences of
rules for elections. It also takes to the data the model’s predictions of the
consequences of alternatives rules for political outcomes, as well as fiscal
policy outcomes. These predictions appear to hold up.
The final part is about bridging another gap. Recent empirical research on
the macroeconomics of development has singled out certain ”structural polices” as essential for long-run economic performance (Hall and Jones, 1999,
and Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001). In doing so, it has tackled a
fundamental endogeneity problem that stems from performance feeding back
to policy. As illustrated in Figure 3, the approach has been to suggest specific
instruments: historical, geographical or cultural features that influence structural policies but have no independent influence on performance. This work
supports the common idea that “institutions” are essential for development.
But the concept of institutions remains vague.
In the third part, I will suggest that the logic of the research program
on constitutions should lead us to expect systematic consequences also for
growth-promoting policies. If this is the case, it would help fill the institutional void between history and current performance, as illustrated in the
figure. To shed more light on this suggestion, I have assembled some new
data. I use these, first, to replicate some of the central results in the earlier
literature, then, to investigate whether there is any empirical support for the
idea of systematic consequences of constitutions in this dimension. The first
round of empirical results are quite encouraging.
After laying out this crude road map, I’d like to turn to the first part.

1

Consequences for economic policy

The empirical research I want to describe here deals with the consequences
of alternative electoral rules and forms of government. I will briefly describe
the general approach and specific results for fiscal policy and political rents.
Much greater detail can be found in the original work (Persson and Tabellini,
2003, 2004, Persson, Tabellini, and Trebbi, 2003).
The most interesting variation in electoral rules and forms of government

3

is found at the national, not the sub-national, level.1 We have put together
two data sets, each with as many democracies as a generous definition permits. Specifically, we have a pure cross section, with average observations
for 85 countries over the 1990s, and a panel with annual observations for 60
countries going back to 1960.
Two features of the constitutional data are crucial to recognize. First,
deep reforms of electoral rules and forms of government are very rare among
democracies, even though marginal reforms occur more frequently. In some
cases, estimation of constitutional eﬀects on policy must thus rely on the
cross-sectional variation in the data.
Second — and, as I already mentioned — constitutions have not been selected at random. For instance, majoritarian elections are over-represented
in previous British colonies and under-represented in Europe. Presidential
regimes are over-represented in Latin America, in poor economies and in
young democracies. Systematic selection is likely also on less observable features. Estimation of constitutional eﬀects must thus beware against diﬀerent
forms of selection bias.
To avoid prospective statistical pitfalls, we apply several estimation methods. The first is regression with a ”rich right-hand side”. But this standard
method relies on conditional independence and linearity, which may both
go astray in the wake of non-random selection. Thus we try to relax these
assumptions in various ways.
In order to reduce selection bias from unobservables — that influence both
constitutions and policy choices — we can try to find a good instrument.
This way is attractive, but often diﬃcult. Our best idea has been to exploit
systematic co-variation between the relative frequency of alternative constitutional rules and their broad time period of introduction. We thus use pure
timing as an instrument for currently observed constitutions, while controlling for the eﬀect of age of democracy on policy outcomes. Another way to
relax conditional independence is to adjust the estimates, Heckman-style, for
selection bias. In applications where piecemeal reforms are relevant, we can
also use our panel data to eliminate bias from (time-invariant) unobservables.
If constitutional eﬀects are heterogeneous, we may have problems even
with selection on observables. For example, if a reform from presidential
to parliamentary governance has diﬀerent eﬀects on fiscal policy choices in
1

Besley and Case (2003) survey the empirical work on the policy consequences of the
rich variation in other aspects of political institutions across the US states.

4

Latin America than elsewhere, over-representation of presidentialism in Latin
America may bias our estimates of the constitutional eﬀect on fiscal policy.
Obviously, we can test explicitly for such interaction eﬀects and do so for a
few possible culprits. A more general and parsimonious way to relax linearity
is to rely on non-parametric methods, such as matching.
I would like to report on three sets of empirical results. For each of
them, I will make a few remarks about the underlying theory and about our
measurement. I will then summarize the constitutional eﬀects that appear
robust to alternative methods of estimation.
Hypothesis E1 A first hypothesis is about the eﬀects of electoral rules
(hence the label E1). Suppose legislative seats are awarded by plurality
rules rather than proportional representation (PR). This should tilt policy
towards spending programs with benefits targeted to particular geographical
groups, not the electorate at large, and (perhaps) towards higher overall
spending. (A similar eﬀect can be expected by smaller district magnitude,
i.e., by a given size legislature being elected in a larger number of districts.)
The main theoretical idea behind this hypothesis is quite straightforward
(see Persson and Tabellini, 1999, Lizzeri and Persico, 2001, Milesi-Feretti,
Perotti, and Rostagno, 2002). If candidates with the highest vote shares win
every seat at stake — rather than seats in proportion to their vote shares —
it becomes more attractive to target small and geographically concentrated
groups of voters. (The same will hold true if each district represents a small
share of the electorate.)
We thus classify actual electoral systems according to their electoral formula (classifying by district magnitude gives similar results). A binary indicator (called maj ) is coded to 1 whenever the plurality method is used, and 0
where it is not. For spending, we proxy geographically non-targeted spending
by welfare-state programs, such as pensions and unemployment insurance.
Overall spending is measured by total expenditures by central government.
The results indicate that a reform from an all-PR to an all-plurality-rule
system would cut welfare spending by about 2% of GDP in the long run.
This estimate is robust for a set of older democracies, a little more shaky
for all democracies. When it comes to overall spending, the finding is robust
across samples as well as estimation methods: an electoral reform would cut
spending by about 5% of GDP — a substantial number indeed.

5

Hypothesis E2 A second hypothesis concerning electoral rules has to do
with their detailed features. Systems where a larger number of lawmakers
are elected in each district, and systems where they are elected on personal
rather than party-list ballots, are both expected to reduce rent extraction by
politicians.
The key idea here is that extraction is better deterred if chances of reelection for individual lawmakers (or parties) may respond more forcefully
to their performance (see Myerson, 1993 and Persson and Tabellini, 2000).
Large district magnitude achieves this by allowing easier entry and a larger
number of candidates than small districts. Personal ballots impose individual
accountability and stronger incentives than party-list ballots, which impose
only collective accountability.
Empirically, we thus measure each system’s district magnitude along a
continuous scale, as political scientists do. We also measure the share of
lawmakers elected on party lists. vs. personal ballots. As proxies for political
rents, we use diﬀerent perception indexes of corruption, or of ineﬃciency in
the delivery of government services.
We find sizable eﬀects in the hypothesized direction. Here, we can exploit
a number of recent reforms in electoral rules that change district magnitude,
ballot structure, or both. Luckily, the estimates from cross-sectional and
panel data agree pretty well.
Hypothesis G A third hypothesis concerns the form of government. Presidential, as opposed to parliamentary, regimes are expected to cut total spending and non-targeted spending programs.
A key point in the theory is whether the executive is subject to a confidence requirement in the legislature (see Person, Roland and Tabellini, 2000).
As presidential regimes have no such requirement, legislative majorities become less stable than in parliamentary regimes. If majorities re-form, issue
by issue, broad spending programs suﬀer. No well-defined stable majority
becomes a residual claimant on tax revenue, and this reduces the incentives
to boost overall taxation and spending.
In the data, we thus classify forms of government by a binary indicator
(labeled pres), which is coded to 0 or 1 depending on whether the executive is
or isn’t accountable to the legislature. Broad programs and overall spending
are measured as before.
When it comes to welfare state programs, we find the hypothesized result

6

only among good (and old) democracies, where presidential regimes spend
less, by about 2% of GDP. For overall spending the results are very robust,
however, and in line with the hypothesis. Presidential regimes have smaller
governments by at least 5 % of GDP — again, a large number.
Other findings In addition to these tests of theoretical predictions, we
have done more exploratory work, to establish some stylized facts about
constitutions and policy. For instance, we find smaller budget deficits in
majoritarian than proportional democracies. Adjustment of fiscal policy to
income shocks diﬀers systematically across diﬀerent forms of government.
And electoral budget cycles take quite diﬀerent forms, depending on both
these constitutional features.
More details about these results, and about our data and empirical methods, can be found in the work cited at the beginning of the section.

2

Consequences for political representation
and fiscal policy

To introduce the second part of the lecture, let me return to the finding that
overall spending is higher under proportional than majoritarian elections.
Some of the theory behind Hypothesis E1 suggests this to be a direct eﬀect,
due to diﬀerent aggregation of policy preferences by alternative electoral
rules. But that theory omits from the analysis any eﬀects on the structure
of political representation, which is treated as exogenous.
Research by political scientists suggests that this omission may be important. A long tradition in comparative politics, involving Duverger (1954),
Lijphart (1990) and many others, shows how electoral rules shape party
structure. Majoritarian elections produce fewer parties and a more skewed
distribution of seats than proportional elections. Moreover, ample documentation, by Taagepera and Shugart (1989), Strom (1990) and others, suggests
that party structure shapes the type of government in parliamentary systems. Few parties mean more frequent single-party majority governments,
and less frequent coalition governments, than many parties. Finally, research by economists and political scientists finds that coalition governments
spend more than single-party governments (see e.g., Kontopoulos and Perotti, 1999), perhaps because they are more plagued by so-called common-pool
7

problems. At least for twenty or so developed parliamentary democracies,
there is some evidence for each of these links separately.
These findings suggest a possible indirect explanation of higher spending
under proportional elections: a larger number of parties boost spending via a
higher incidence of high-spending coalition governments. So, to what extent
do the empirical findings reflect direct and indirect consequences of electoral
rules? Because the empirical results described in Section 1 are on reduced
form, they are not helpful in discriminating between the two.
To sort out the question, we need theoretical guidance how to approach
the data. Allowing for both direct and indirect eﬀects means that we must
model not only policy formation, but also party formation and government
formation, as endogenous. Models of this kind do not yet exist. One reason is
that the modeling challenge is hard. Another is probably that the challenge
falls in the cracks between two academic disciplines.
I will give an example of how we might approach the task, by summarizing
the main arguments in Persson, Roland and Tabellini (2003). In that paper,
we build a comprehensive model of parliamentary democracy. We also test
empirically the joint predictions regarding the political and economic consequences of diﬀerent electoral rules. I begin by briefly sketching the model,
and some of its main predictions. Next, I describe the data, and selected
empirical results.
Model structure We consider a single period of economic activity. The
population is divided in four groups of equal size, indexed by J. These have
quasi-linear preferences, given by
V J = y − τ + H(g J ) .
A universal tax rate, τ , cuts the resources available for consumption. Each
group derives concave benefits from group-specific spending, gJ , provided by
the government. The sitting government decides how to use the revenue from
taxing all the groups
X
X
4τ =
gJ +
rP ,
J

P

either for group-specific spending programs or for party-specific rents, r ; the
index P thus refers to parties.
While the economic side of the model is very simple, the political side entails a four-stage game. (1) Groups of opportunistic politicians make forwardlooking, strategic decisions which parties to form. (2) A government is formed
8

by a subset of the parties. (3) Parties in government make strategic policy
decisions. (4) Voters cast their ballots non-strategically, but conditional on
policy.
The modeling revolves around two ideas. In party formation, politicians weigh expected electoral outcomes against expected rents earned from
holding government oﬃce. And policy formation is driven by electoral conflicts: all governments face a conflict with the opposition, but strong intragovernment conflict is present only in coalition governments.
At the party formation stage, there are four pre-existing groups of legislators (we don’t consider the preceding election), one per economic group J.
Each legislative group has to decide whether to merge with another group
into a large party or form a small party on its own, taking into account the
uncertainty about government status, G (see below), as well as electoral outcomes (see below). Given the choices of others, each group thus maximizes
expected equilibrium payoﬀs: E{E(N WGJ )}, where E(N WGJ ) is defined from
the party payoﬀs below — if the group forms a small party its payoﬀ is identical to the party payoﬀ; if it merges with another group it obtains half the
party payoﬀ. To simplify matters, we impose some constraints on the party
coalitions allowed to form. From this stage, we obtain an equilibrium party
configuration, where the number of parties, N, can be 2, 3 or 4.
Government formation is modeled very simply, as a mechanical lottery.
Nature decides on the parties in government, under the constraint that they
command 50% of the legislature. If N = 2 only single-party governments
are possible. If N = 4 only coalition governments are possible, and if N =
3 both types can occur. This stage produces a government-status outcome
for each party: it can be part of a single-party government, S, a coalition
government, C, or the opposition (out of government), O.
At the policy formation stage, the parties in government maximize an
objective defined over current rents and expected seats, s:
P
E(N WGP ) = rG
+ E(N sPG )R

A single-party government makes all decisions on spending, {gJ }, and rents,
rP , (the tax rate, τ , follows from the government budget constraint) as a
unified actor, even though the large party forming it it consists of two primitive groups. This assumption is without loss of generality; if we allowed
the two groups to bargain over policy, they would agree on all policy instruments. In a coalition government formed by two small parties, these agree on
9

spending which is targeted to groups not represented in government. As for
the remaining policy decisions, we assume that each party unilaterally sets
spending for its own economic group g J , J = P, and its own party rents,.rP .
(Think about an allocation of ministers to parties.) As parties now face
separate electoral rewards (see below), these choices create intra-government
conflict.
Finally, the voters cast their ballots. Voters are non-strategic and follow
simple voting rules, some of them care only about ideology (attached voters),
others also care about policy (semi-attached voters). The latter drive most
results. Consider these voters of group J, in the case their own party, P = J,
is in government. They then reward the party with their vote, if their utility
exceeds a reservation level: the right-hand side of
V J ≥ V ∗J + ω i + δ .

(∗)

The popularity shocks, ωi and δ, serve to create electoral uncertainty at the
previous policy formation stage. If the utility of the semi-attached voters in J
is lower than the reservation level, they instead support the opposition — if the
opposition consists of two parties, these are supported with equal probability.
If their own party is not in government, the semi-attached support one of
the government parties (with equal probability) if (∗) is satisfied; if not, they
support their own party. This probabilistic voting behavior creates distinct
incentives in diﬀerent governments. Voters cannot separately reward two
groups of legislators who have merged into a single large party. But they can,
if the two groups have formed small parties and joined forces in a coalition
government.
An equilibrium in the model is a party structure, a set of possible governments, and policy choices for each government, produced by subgame perfect
choices at the party-formation and policy-formation stages, given the rules
followed at the government-formation and election stages.
Theoretical results and empirical predictions We compare equilibrium outcomes under two stylized electoral systems, which decide how votes
are converted to seats. Under proportional elections, all legislators are elected
by PR in a large, nation-wide electoral district. Under majoritarian elections,
all legislators are instead elected by plurality rule in small, single-seat districts.
Moreover, we consider alternative compositions of electoral districts (under majoritarian elections). In a symmetric benchmark case all districts have
10

exactly the same composition. But we also study alternatives, where economic groups (and ideological voters) are asymmetrically distributed across
districts.
We show that government spending depends only on the type of government, coalitions spending more than single-party governments. (With
asymmetries this has to be slightly modified, substituting mainly for only.)
Intuitively, electoral conflict within government coalitions raises spending on
the groups represented in government and thereby overall spending. The
electoral system thus only (mainly) exerts indirect eﬀects on spending, by
aﬀecting the type of government.
When it comes to overall rents, the electoral system does have direct effects. Each type of government may extract more or less under proportional
than majoritarian elections, depending on parameters. Coalition governments always extract more rents than single-party governments. Intuitively,
each of the coalition parties does not iternalize the full electoral costs of
unilaterally extracted rents, as the punishment is shared with the coalition
partner and the two parties have separate electoral objectives.
Equilibrium party structure depends crucially on the electoral rule. 4
parties is the unique outcome under proportional elections, producing only
coalition governments. In the symmetric benchmark case, there are typically
both 2-party and 4-party equilibria under majoritarian elections, producing
alternatively coalition or single-party governments. With asymmetric distributions of voters, 3-party systems also become possible equilibria, however,
opening up the possibility for alternating single-party and coalition governments. Intuitively, under majoritarian elections with plurality rule a group
contemplating staying on as a small party at the party-formation stage expects a clear electoral disadvantage. Under proportional elections, the group
can expect to capture larger rents at no electoral cost, by staying a small
party instead of merging.
Two sets of predictions stand out. They can be summarized in the following two hypotheses regarding the political and economic eﬀects of electoral
rules.
Hypothesis PE. Proportional elections raise the incidence of
coalition governments, but only indirectly via party fragmentation (larger number of parties).
Hypothesis EE. Proportional elections raise spending, but only
11

indirectly via more frequent coalition governments.
In terms of the discussion at the beginning of this section, our model
predicts indirect consequences, but no direct consequences, of electoral rules
on total spending.
How should we confront these hypotheses with data? Obviously, we
can test whether the political and economic eﬀects go in the expected direction. But the predictions are sharper, each hypothesis implying some
over-identifying restrictions. While PE says that measures of electoral rules
should be valid instruments for party structure, when explaining the type of
government, EE says that electoral rules should be valid instruments for the
type of government, when explaining government spending.
Data To carry out the tests, we combine data from two sources. One is
the data used in the empirical work described in Section 1 The other source
is a new panel data set for constitutional features and political outcomes, assembled in collaboration with political scientists (see Lundell and Karvonen,
2003).
For the 1990s, we can put together a cross section with data from about
50 parliamentary democracies. But we also have a panel, starting in 1960,
with data from about 330 legislative periods in more than 35 democracies. As
mentioned earlier, most existing political-science research on electoral rules,
parties and governments relies on data from at most 20 democracies.
Table 2.1 shows means and standard deviations of four central variables,
measured across countries and legislatures and cross-tabulated by electoral
formula. The party fragmentation variable is computed as a Herfindahl index, going from 0 to 1, with higher values indicating more fragmentation.
The type of government is measured by the incidence of coalition or singleparty governments, respectively (The remaining type is minority government,
but as our model does not allow them, we use both complementary types as
dependent variables, eﬀectively classifying minority governments in two alternative ways). Total government spending is measured as described in Section
1. Evidently, all means in the table conform to the model predictions: majoritarian electoral rules (numbers in the left column) are associated with less
fragmented party systems, fewer coalition governments but more single-party
governments, and smaller government spending.

12

Empirical results What happens when we approach the data in more
sophisticated ways? First consider the political eﬀects. They are estimated in
three samples. Two of these only exploit the cross-sectional variation among
parliamentary democracies, either during the 1990s or during 1960-98. Given
the prospective pitfalls in cross-sectional inference, however, we also exploit
the within-country time variation associated with electoral reforms. We use
a panel with the last six legislatures in each democracy, because observed
electoral reforms are concentrated in the last two decades.
Column 1 in Table 2.2 reports on a pure cross-sectional regression of
party fragmentation in the 1990s on a set of controls and on four measures of
electoral rules (see the Notes to the table and Persson, Roland and Tabellini,
2003 for further information on all specifications). The first two of the electoral rule variables are (binary) indicators of majoritarian and mixed electoral formulas, the third a (continuous) measure of district magnitude; the
fourth is a (continuous) measure of electoral thresholds for representation,
results not displayed). All three variables have the expected sign and two
are statistically significant at the 5% level.
In column 2, we use these four measures as instruments for party fragmentation when explaining the incidence of coalition governments, also adding
to the second stage other constitutional variables expected to aﬀect the likelihood of coalition governments, such as bicameralism and constructive votes
of confidence. As expected, more fragmentation has a strong positive eﬀect
on coalition governments. The chi-2 statistic from the Sargan test is at the
boundary of the acceptance region, when we test the over-identifying restriction that the three electoral-rule variables of interest only influence coalition
governments indirectly.. Results are similar if we replace party fragmentation
with the number of parties, or the incidence of coalition governments with
the incidence of single-party governments; in these cases, the statistic for the
test of the overidentifying restrictions is safely within the acceptance region.
Columns 3 and 4 show that, essentially, the same results come out when
we average over four decades, instead of one, in a smaller number of countries. Columns 5 and 6 show that the main results stand when identified
exclusively from the within-country variation around electoral reforms. All
in all, Hypothesis PE holds up well.
What about the predicted eﬀects on economic policy in the same three
samples? Table 2.3 speaks to this question. Now, the dependent variable is
total government spending. Column 1 shows a reduced-form cross-sectional
regression of spending on a set of controls and the exogenous constitu13

tional variables, including the electoral-rule variables. District magnitude
and mixed electoral rules have a significant influence on spending. Column 2
shows a structural form, where we use the electoral rule variables as instruments for coalition governments. Evidently, coalitions have a strong positive
eﬀect on spending. We saw before that the mean of coalition diﬀers by about
0.3 across electoral rules. This translates into a spending diﬀerence of about
5% of GDP, on par with the reduced-form estimate reported in Section. As
for the over-identifying restrictions, we cannot reject that electoral rules only
have an indirect eﬀect on spending.
Columns 3 through 6 show the corresponding estimates for the longer
cross section and the panel. In both cases, the results are consistent with the
predictions in Hypothesis EE. So are the results when we use single-party
government as the intervening variable in place of coalition government, and
or a panel with observations corresponding to years rather than legislatures.
More work certainly remains to do on this topic. On the empirical front,
we have not taken all of the model’s predictions to the data, including its
predictions for rents (coalition governments should have higher rents). On
the theoretical front, we have not worked out the precise eﬀects of diﬀerent
forms of heterogeneity. But, so far, the results are pretty promising.

3

Consequences for growth-promoting policy
and economic performance

The third variation on my constitutional theme is about building a bridge to
the macroeconomics of development. When faced with the question which
policies are particularly important for long-run economic performance, many
economists would probably point to regulatory policies, providing wide protection of property rights and promoting accumulation of capital, human
capital or productive knowledge. Another common answer might be nonprotectionist trade policies, permitting appropriate price signals and promoting eﬃcient resource allocation.
But attempts to empirically confirm such conjectures, at the macroeconomic level, face major endogeneity problems. One is reverse causation:
economic performance is likely to feed back to policy formation. Another
problem is measurement error: gauging regulatory or trade policies across
countries, or time, is quite a hazardous exercise.

14

Some recent contributions in the macro development literature have made
progress on these problems by using history, geography or culture to isolate
exogenous variation in structural policies. Hall and Jones (1999) launched
the general idea that societies are more likely to pursue growth-promoting
structural policies, the more strongly they have been exposed to Western European influence — for historical or geographical reasons. They thus used four
instruments for a country’s structural policy: its latitude, its predicted trade
from geographical and population characteristics, and its current population
shares with a European language, and with English, as their mother tongue.
Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) took the argument further.
Their ingenious idea was to use data on settler mortality in 19th century
colonies to measure Western European influence. They argued that investment in ”good institutions” was less intensive in places with a more dangerous
disease environment, that good institutions are long-lasting, and that good
institutions are conducive to good policy.
As mentioned in the introduction, I will argue that it makes sense to
think about democratic constitutions as a source of variation in growthpromoting policies, and that the data indeed seem to support this argument.
Before doing so, however, let me use a little replication exercise to provide a
concrete illustration of the results in the existing literature.
Replicating earlier results For each country, economic performance is
measured by (the log of) output per worker; that is, a measure of labor
productivity. The results are similar for GDP per capita or TFP. Structural
policy is the average of two indexes. One of these indexes refers to government
anti-diversion policy, related to the protection of private property rights,
another refers to the number of years with open borders since 1950. The
two indexes, and thus the overall index, are normalized to lie between 0 and
1. These variables are defined in the same way as “output per worker” and
“social infrastructure” in Hall and Jones (1999). But they are based on more
recent data. And each measure is computed not only as an average for a
cross section of countries, but for a panel including every country and year
since the early 1980s.2
2
The data for computing output per worker are obtained from the Penn World Tables
6.1. The structural policy variable is computed as the simple average of two indexes:
(GADP +YRSOPEN )/2. The GADP index measures government diversion policies in
five dimensions (law and order, bureaucratic quality, corruption, risk of expropriation,
government repudiation of contracts); it is obtained from the IRIS-3 data set. The YR-

15

Consider first the results for average outcomes in the 1990s, in the full
cross section of about 100 countries where all data is available. Table 3.1
begins by reporting a two-stage instrumental-variables estimate of the eﬀect
of structural policy on output per worker (estimating by GMM means allowing for heteroskedasticity of unknown form). Column 1 shows the first stage.
Controlling for continental location and identity of prior colonial powers, two
of the four Hall and Jones instruments do not pass the relevance cum exogeneity test (latitude and the fraction of English speakers). As shown in the
table, however, higher shares of European speakers and more favorable conditions for trade do (by the F-statistic in col. 1 we can reject irrelevance, and
by the chi-2 statistic in col.2 we cannot reject exogeneity). These variables
are clearly associated with better structural policy. Column 2 shows the
second stage. Structural policy ha a large, positive, and precisely estimated
eﬀect on performance. According to these estimates, if one could engineer an
improvement in structural policy by one standard deviation this would raise
long-run productivity by about 150%.
What happens when we run the same specification on the smaller (about
60 obs.) cross section, where the Acemoglu et al settler mortality data is
available? Columns 3 and 4 show that the results from the larger sample
hold up. If anything, the eﬀect of structural policies is now larger.
Columns 5 and 6 use Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson’s (2001) measure
of (the log of) settler mortality as the sole instrument for structural policy,
to more convincingly isolate exogenous variation in policy (due to Western
influence). The eﬀect of structural policy on performance is still precisely
estimated and even larger than before.
What do we make of these results? They certainly strengthen the presumption that policies on regulation and trade, in a broad sense, do shape
long-run economic performance. A common interpretation in the literature
is that good policy requires good institutions. This sounds very reasonable,
SOPEN index measures the number of years since 1950 (as a share) a country has been
open according to five diﬀerent criteria (tariﬀs, non-tariﬀ barriers, capital controls, the
black-market premium, and socialist rule); it is an update by the original Sachs-Warner
index, from Easterly, Levine and Roodman (2003), which was kindly made available by
David Roodman.
There are two diﬀerences vis a vis the measurement in Hall and Jones (1999). First,
the labor productivity measure is not adjusted for output in the mining sector, as done
by these authors. Secondly, when data are missing, data is not imputed for the missing
values, as done by these authors.

16

but the institutional lessons remain quite vague. In particular, they do not
give much guidance for reform.
Do constitutions shape growth-promoting policy? Getting back to
the main theme of this lecture, I would like to suggest that certain constitutional rules might be a tangible source of good policy. If that were the case
this would furnish us with one of the missing institutional links in the chain
from history to current performance.
Why is this a plausible idea? From a theoretical perspective, we can think
about enduring and broad protection of property rights as provision of public
goods or, at least, as (geographically) non-targeted policies benefiting broad
groups in the population. Even though protectionist trade policies tends to
be primarily targeted towards sectors of production, rather than regions of
residence, sectors and regions may correlate well, particularly in developing
countries. Non-protectionist trade policy thus also has broad, rather than
(geographically) targeted, benefits. Certain constitutional arrangements may
better promote such policies, by similar arguments as in the existing models
of fiscal policy. In Section 1, I referred to the argument that parliamentary
systems tend to better serve the interests of stable majorities of voters than
presidential systems. I also referred to the argument that proportional elections tend to better serve the interests of broad majorities than majoritarian
elections. Perhaps the mere existence of a stable democratic regime — whatever its type — is also favorable for policies with broad and stable benefits,
by allowing more widespread political participation than a non-democratic
regime.
What do the data say? Persson and Tabellini (2003, Ch.7) make a start
on answering this question, but provide only cross-sectional evidence for a set
of democracies, so it is interesting to extend the analysis to non-democracies,
as well as to panel data.
Specifically, I will ask if some specific constitutional indicators help explain good structural policy and economic performance. One is an indicator for democratic rule. Following Persson and Tabellini (2003), I use two
measures. I start by coding a country as democratic if its Gastil index (obtained from Freedom House) takes a value below 5; alternatively I do so if its
POLITY index (obtained from the Polity IV data set) takes a positive value.
Age of democracy is the number of years with uninterrupted democratic rule
(according to the same criteria), going backwards from year 2000. Parliamen-

17

tary and proportional democracy indicators are obtained by interacting the
democracy indicators with the binary indicators for parliamentary regimes
and proportional elections discussed in Section 1 (specifically, 1 minus the
indicators pres and maj, respectively).
Cross sectional evidence I begin with cross-sectional estimates. Here,
I first add my constitutional indicators alongside the two Hall and Jones
instruments in the earlier two-stage specification. The democracy, and proportional democracy indicators turn out not to be significant determinants
of structural policy. But the form of democratic government, and the age
democracy do. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 3.2 show the first and second stage
of the GMM estimates for the full 1990s cross section, when these two variables are added to the first stage (cf. the standard errors and the F statistic
in Column 1). As shown in the table, parliamentary democracies, and older
democracies, have better structural policies. Of course, the earlier concerns
abut simultaneity remain. We thus test for exogeneity of all the instruments
but one, and for exogeneity of the two constitutional variables by themselves.
Neither test rejects (see the Sargan-Hansen J and C-statistics at the bottom
of the table). The estimated eﬀect of structural policy on productivity is
close to the one in Table 3.1. According to the estimates, the constitutional
eﬀects are substantial in magnitude. Introducing parliamentary democracy
(or, equivalently as the democracy indicator is insignificant, going from presidential to parliamentary democracy) improves structural policy so as to raise
long-run productivity by about 40%.
The next two columns show that the results are equally strong in the
smaller settler mortality sample. In this sample, I try to obtain additional
insight by scrutinizing the first stage of the estimates. I thus re-estimate
the structural-policy equation, using settler mortality as an instrument for
parliamentary democracy. As an additional instrument, I use one of the
constitutional timing variables mentioned in Section 1: the indicator constitutional reform51-80 is set to 1 if a country is democratic and its present
electoral rule or form of government was introduced in the period from 1951
to 1980, and to 0 otherwise. The last two columns of the table show that
higher mortality (less Western European influence) reduces the likelihood
of parliamentary democracy. The resulting variation in the form of government is now estimated to have an even stronger eﬀect on structural policy
than in columns 1 and 3. Moreover, we cannot reject that settler mortality

18

only aﬀects structural policy indirectly, through parliamentary democracy.
Repeating the same exercise, but treating age of democracy, rather than
parliamentary democracy, as endogenous, yields similar results.
The results clearly support the idea that constitutional arrangements may
be an important link between history and growth-promoting policy.
Panel evidence More support comes from the panel data. In Section
1. This may seem puzzling at first given the observation in Section 1 that
deep constitutional reforms are rare among democracies. But as the data
now include non-democracies, we can exploit reforms with entry into, or exit
from, democratic status, to investigate the outcomes associated with diﬀerent
constitutional rules in democracies. Depending on the specific democracy
measure used (from Freedom House or Polity IV), we have 25-40 such entries
and exits in the data. The econometric specification always includes fixed
country eﬀects, so as to use only the within-country variation around the
reforms. It also includes a set of fixed time eﬀects, so as to obtain ”diﬀerencein-diﬀerence” estimates.
Column 1 in Table 3.3 displays such diﬀerence in diﬀerence estimates of
the eﬀect on structural policy, based on a yearly panel. As in the crosssectional data, parliamentary democracy improves structural policy. Introducing presidential democracy in a non-democracy now has a small negative eﬀect. Column 2 shows diﬀerence in diﬀerence estimates of output per
worker, where the constitutional variables appearing in column 1.are used
as instruments for structural policy. As indicated by the test-statistic for the
overidentifying restrictions, we cannot reject that (one set of) these reforms
are exogenous to output per worker.
Columns 3 and 4 repeat the same analysis, when democratic status is
obtained from the Polity IV data set, rather than from Freedom House. (This
implies diﬀerent country coverage as well as a diﬀerent coding of democratic
status.) Now, the introduction of democracy with proportional elections also
improves structural policy. The instrumental-variable estimate of the eﬀect
on output per worker is more or less identical to that in column 2.
Finally, in the last two columns we replace yearly data with 5-year averages. Column 5 shows the estimates from the same specification as in column
3 (except that the time eﬀects refer to five-year-period dummies instead of
year dummies). Column 6 reports on instrumental-variable (GMM) estimates, while explicitly allowing for a dynamic panel structure (see the notes

19

to Table 3.3 for the precise specification). The eﬀect of structural policy on
productivity is similar to the earlier estimates.
Based on a first round of empirical work, these results are really very
preliminary. With that qualification, however, the results do suggest that
constitutional arrangements are indeed instrumental for structural policies
that foster good economic performance. The subject is certainly important
enough to warrant further investigation.

4

Final remarks

Five years ago (Persson and Tabellini, 1999), we embarked on some new
research with the vague idea that constitutional rules may have systematic
consequences for economic policy.
In this lecture, I have referred to a new book (Persson and Tabellini,
2003). Based on its results, I have argued that the data indeed seem consistent with several theoretical predictions about the consequences of electoral
rules and forms of government for fiscal policy and rent extraction. The empirical results seem robust to non-random selection of these constitutional
features. Moreover, the estimated eﬀects are large enough to be of genuine
economic interest.
I have also referred to a new paper (Persson, Roland, and Tabellini, 2003).
Based on its results, I have argued that it may be useful to model not only the
direct consequences of constitutions via policymaking incentives, but also the
indirect consequences via the structure of political representation. Building
a bridge to research in political science, we will be better equipped to inspect
the mechanism whereby constitutions shape economic policy.
Finally, I have referred to new research for this lecture. Based on preliminary empirical results, I have argued that constitutions may have important consequences for structural polices promoting long-run economic performance. Building a bridge to research in development economics, we may
learn important lessons about growth-enhancing institutional reform.
Tangling out this web of constitutional consequences is certainly not an
easy task. To make further progress we must dig deeply into various corners of
our tool-box. We need solid game-theoretic modeling, painstaking assembly
of new data sets, and careful econometrics.

20

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron, Johnson, Simon, and Robinson, James (2001), “The
Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation”, American Economic Review 91, pp.1369-1401.
[2] Besley, Timothy. and Case, Anne (2003), “Political Institutions and
Policy Choices: Evidence from the United States”, Journal of Economic
Literature 41, pp. 7-73.
[3] Duverger, Maurice (1954), Political Parties. New York: Wiley.
[4] Easterly, William, Levine, Ross, and Roodman, David (2003), “New
Data, New Doubts: A Comment on Burnside and Dollar’s ’Aid, Policies
and Growth”’, American Economic Review, forthcoming.
[5] Hall, Robert and Jones, Chad (1999), “Why Do Some Countries Produce
so Much More Output Per Worker than Others?”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 114, pp. 83-116.
[6] Kontopolous, Yoanis and Perotti, Roberto (1999), “Government Fragmentation and Fiscal Policy Outcomes: Evidence from the OECD Countries”, in Poterba, James and von Hagen, Juergen (eds.), Fiscal Institutions and Fiscal Performance, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[7] Lijphart, Arend (1990), “The Political Consequences of Electoral Laws,
1945-1985”, American Political Science Review 84, pp. 481-496.
[8] Lizzeri, Alessandro, and Persico, Nicola (2001), “The Provision of Public Goods under Alternative Electoral Incentives”, American Economic
Review 91, pp. 225-245.
[9] Lundell, Krister and Karvonen, Lauri (2003), “A Comparative Data Set
on Political Institutions”, mimeo, Åbo Akademi.
[10] Milesi-Feretti, Gian-Maria, Perotti, Roberto, and Rostagno, Marco
(2002, “Electoral Systems and the Composition of Government Spending”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, pp. 609-657.
[11] Myerson, Roger (1993), “Eﬀectiveness of Electoral Systems for Reducing Government Corruption: A Game Theoretic Analysis”, Games and
Economic Behavior 5, pp. 118-132.
21

[12] Persson, Torsten, Roland, Gérard, and Tabellini, Guido (2000), “Comparative Politics and Public Finance”, Journal of Political Economy 108,
1121-1161.
[13] Persson, Torsten, Roland, Gérard, and Tabellini, Guido (2003), “How
Do Electoral Rules Shape Party Structure, Government Coalitions and
Economic Policies?”, mimeo, Stockholm University.
[14] Persson, Torsten and Tabellini, Guido (1999), “The Size and Scope of
Government: Comparative Politics with Rational Politicians, 1998 Alfred Marshall Lecture”, European Economic Review 43, pp. 699-735.
[15] Persson, Torsten and Tabellini, Guido (2000), Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[16] Persson, Torsten and Tabellini, Guido (2003), The Economic Eﬀect of
Constitutions, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[17] Persson, Torsten and Tabellini, Guido (2004), “Constitutional Rules and
Fiscal Policy Outcomes”, American Economic Review, forthcoming.
[18] Persson, Torsten, Tabellini, Guido, and Trebbi, Francesco (2003), “Electoral Rules and Corruption”, Journal of the European Economic Association 1, pp. 958-989.
[19] Strom, Kaare (1990), Minority Government and Majority Rule, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
[20] Taagepera, Rein and Shugart, Matthew (1989), Seats and Votes: The
Eﬀects and Determinants of Electoral Systems, New Haven: Yale University Press.

22

History
Geography

Rules of
constitution

Economic
policy
outcomes

Culture

Figure 1
Consequences for policy when constitution selection non-random?

Economic
policy
outcomes

Rules of
constitution

Structure of
representation

Figure 2
Direct or indirect consequences for policy?

History
Geography

Rules of
constitution

Economic
policy
outcomes

Culture

Figure 3
Constitutional consequences for growth-promoting policies?

Economic
performance

Table 2.1
Political and economic outcomes cross-tabulated by electoral rules
Majoritarian (N=138)

Proportional (N=187)

party fragmentation (Herfindahl index)

0.54
(0.17)

0.70
(0.09)

incidence of coalition governments

0.24
(0.41)

0.55
(0.47)

incidence of single-party governments

0.63
(0.47)

0.17
(0.37)

government spending (% of GDP)

25.94
(9.05)

35.12
(9.30)

Basic observations refer to legislative periods in 52 parliamentary democracies going back as far as 1960, if data permit.. Means displayed in the
table are computed by pooling observations across all legislatures elected by plurality rule, and by pure PR , respectively (mixed systems
excluded).. Standard errors in brackets. Data sources described in the text..

Table 2.2
Effects of electoral rules on political outcomes
Sample

Cross 90s

Cross 60-98

Dep. var

party
coalition
fragmentation

party
fragmentation

party fragmentation
majoritarian
mixed
district magnitude

2.01**
(0.71)
-0.12**
(0.05)
-0.22**
(0.09)
0.11
(0.07)

Over-id, chi-2(df)

Panel
coalition

party
fragmentation

2.62***
(0.74)
-0.09*
(0.05)
-0.01
(0.06)
0.14**
(0.07)

7.91(3)**

coalition
1.35*
(0.81)

-0.06
(0.04)

2.31***
(0.24)
4.25(3)

4.16(3)

3.83(6)

Estimation

OLS

2SLS

OLS

2SLS

GMM

GMM

N. obs

52

47

38

36

141

97

Robust standard errors in brackets: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5**, * significant at 10% .
OLS regressions also control for electoral thresholds, population, old British colony, plus fractionalization (col. 1 only)..
Second stage in 2SLS includes population, old British colony, investiture vote, constructive vote of confidence, plus bicameralism and fractionalization (col. 2 only)
First stage in 2SLS includes all second-stage variables, and party fragmentation, majoritarian, mixed, and electoral thresholds.
GMM specification (in 1st differences) always includes population, quality of democracy, plus one (col. 5) or two (col. 6) lags of dependent variable. Instruments for
lagged dependent variable are further lags of that variable. In col. 6 party fragmentation is treated as endogenous, with majoritarian, district magnitude, electoral
threshold and one lag of party fragmentation as additional instruments.
Over-id chi-2(df) refers to Sargan-Hansen test statistic for over-identifying restrictions, critical values (at 5% ) are 7.81 (cols. 2, 4, 5), and 12.59 (col. 6) .

Table 2.3
Effects of electoral rules on government spending
Sample

Cross 90s

coalition
majoritarian
mixed
district magnitude

Cross 60-98
17.00***
(3.72)

-4.76
(3.39)
-8.31*
(4.53)
14.52***
(2.05)

Over-id chi-2(df)

Panel
30.07***
(10.79)

6.51**
(3.12)

-2.73
(2.55)

1.08
(1.67)

17.29***
(2.29)

0.25***
(0.08)

2.16(3)

1.29(2)

5.35(3)

10.24(9)

Estimation

OLS

2SLS

OLS

2SLS

GMM

GMM

N. obs

46

46

34

34

111

105

Robust standard errors in brackets: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5**, * significant at 10% .
OLS regression and second stage of 2SLS, cols. 1-2, include income, population above 65, federalism, old British colony, trade, and fractionalization
OLS regression and second stage of 2SLS, cols. 3-4, include income, population above 65, federalism, and old British colony.
First stage in 2SLS, cols 2 and 4,: all second-stage variables, electoral variables displayed in cols. 1and 3, plus investiture vote (col. 2), or electoral threshold (col. 4).
GMM specifications (in 1st differences) always include population, population above 65, output gap, length of legislatre, plus one lag of government spending. Instruments
for lagged government spending is one further lags of that variable. In col. 6 coalition is treated as endogenous, with majoritarian, district magnitude, electoral threshold
and one lag of coalition as additional instruments.
Over-id chi-2(df) refers to Sargan-Hansen test statistic for over-identifying restrictions, critical values (at 5% ) are 5.99 (col. 4), 7.81 (cols. 2 and 5), and 16.92 (col. 6) .

Table 3.1 Cross sectional (GMM) estimates
History and structural policy shape economic performance
Cross section

Full data set

Dep. variable

structural
policy

structural policy
European speakers
predicted trade share

Settler mortality data set
output per
worker

structural
policy

3.81***
(0.66)
0.21***
(0.06)
0.09***
(0.03)

output per
worker
5.17***
(1.06)

9.00***
(2.57)

–0.06**
(0.02)
11.01***

Over-id, chi-2(df)
N. obs

output per
worker

0.33***
(0.09)
0.05
(0.04)

settler mortality

Excl. instruments, F

structural
policy

6.82***
2.39(1)

98

98

5.98**
0.61(1)

58

58

59

59

Robust standard errors in brackets; *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.
Second stage includes structural policy (endogenous) and indicators for earlier colonial powers (Britain, France, Spain-Portugal, Other) and continents (Latin Am., Africa, Asia)
First stage includes the same seven indicators, and instruments as indicated in cols 1, 3 and 5.
Excl. instruments F refers to test statistic of hypothesis that the instruments do not belong to the first-stage regression.
Over-id chi-2(df) is the Hansen J statistic when testing the over-identifying restriction for the instruments, critical value (cols 2 and 4) at 5% is 3.84.

Table 3.2 Cross sectional (GMM) estimates
Constitutions may be the missing link
Cross section

Full data set

Dep. variable

structural
policy

structural policy
parliamentary democracy
age of democracy

Settler mortality data set
output per
worker

structural
policy

3.59***
(0.64)
0.10**
(0.05)
0.32***
(0.09)

output per
worker

structural
policy

4.78***
(0.86)
0.17**
(0.08)
0.34**
(0.15)

0.31**
(0.16)
0.38***
(0.14)

constitutional reform 51-80

0.25**
(0.11)
–0.10**
(0.04)

settler mortality
Excl. instruments, F
Over-id (df, all – 1)
Over-id (df, const vars)
N. obs

parliamentary
democracy

10.50***

97

5.88***
3.03(3)
0.68(2)
97

57

4.75**
1.94(3)
1.39(2)
57

0.31(1)
57

57

Robust standard errors in brackets; *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.
Second stage in cols 2, 4 includes structural policy (endogenous) and indicators for earlier colonial powers (Britain, France, Spain-Portugal, Other) and continents
(Latin Am., Africa, Asia). Second stage in col. 6 includes parliamentary democracy (endogenous), age of democracy (exogenous) and same seven indicators.
First stage includes exogenous second-stage variables and instruments as indicated in cols 1, 3 and 5.
Excl. instruments F refers to test statistic of hypothesis that thel instruments do not belong to the first-stage regression.
Over-id chi-2(df, all -1) is the Hansen J statistic when testing the over-identifying restriction for all (but one) of the instruments.
Over-id chi-2(df, const.vars) is the C statistic when testing the over-identifying restriction for the two constitutional instruments.

Table 3.3 Panel estimates
Constitutional reforms may improve growth-promoting policies
Panel

Yearly

Dep. variable

structural
policy

structural policy
parliamentary democracy
(Freedom House data)
democracy
(Freedom House data)
parliamentary democracy
(Polity IV data)
proportional democracy
(Polity IV data)

5-year
output per
worker

structural
policy

1.56**
(0.73)

output per
worker

structural
policy

1.50**
(0.68)

output per
worker
1.31**
(0.59)

0.06***
(0.01)
–0.01***
(0.00)
0.04***
(0.01)
0.02***
(0.01)

Over-id

0.24(1)

0.01
(0.02)
0.03**
(0.01)
0.01(1)

5.85(5)

Estimation

FE

FEIV

FE

FEIV

FE

GMM

N. obs (countries)

1428 (102)

1428 (102)

1432 (102)

1432 (102)

406(107)

272(94)

Robust standard errors in brackets: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5**, * significant at 10% .
FE specifications in cols. 1, 3 , and 5 include fixed country and period (year or 5-year) effects in addition to the constitutional variables displayed in these columns.
FEIV specifications in cols. 2 and 4 include fixed country and year effects in addition to structural policy (endogenous); with the constitutional variables in cols. 1 and
3 used as instruments. GMM specification (in 1st differences) in col. 6 includes fixed period effects and one lag of output per worker in addition to structural policy
(endogenous) . Instrument for lagged output per worker is one further lag of that variable, and instruments for structural policy are: one lag of structural policy plus the
constitutional variables in col. 5.
Over-id chi-2(df) refers to Sargan-Hansen test statistic for over-identifying restrictions, critical values (at 5% ) are 3.84 (cols. 2 and 4), and 11.07 (col. 6) .

