                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              ASSESSING, MANAGING AND FINANCING EXTREME EVENTS:
                            DEALING WITH TERRORISM

                                          Howard Kunreuther
                                         Erwann Michel-Kerjan
                                            Beverly Porter

                                         Working Paper 10179
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10179


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2003




We are grateful to Elisabeth Abrams, Jim Ament, Neil Doherty, Martin Feldstein, Geoff Heal, Carl Hedde,
Paul Kleindorfer, Christian Gollier, Patricia Grossi, Burkhard Pedell, Jack Seaquist, Kent Smetters and
Gordon Woo for valuable comments on various drafts of this paper. Kunreuther and Michel-Kerjan
acknowledge financial support from Radiant Trust, Lockheed Martin and the Institut Veolia. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Howard Kunreuther, Erwann Michel-Kerjan, and Beverly Porter. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Assessing, Managing and Financing Extreme Events: Dealing with Terrorism
Howard Kunreuther, Erwann Michel-Kerjan, and Beverly Porter
NBER Working Paper No. 10179
December 2003
JEL No. G22, G28, D80

                                            ABSTRACT

       This paper discusses new challenges we face with terrorism as a catastrophic risk by focusing

on risk assessment, risk management as well as risk financing issues. The special characteristics of

terrorism compared with major natural hazards call for the development of public-private

partnerships, as recognized in November 2002 when the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002

(TRIA) was passed. This paper shows, however, that the temporary insurance system established

by TRIA is neither a complete answer nor a definitive one. It raises fundamental questions for U.S.

insurers as to how they will estimate the risk in order to set premiums for terrorist coverage that they

now must offer to their clients. We discuss some of the most recent developments of terrorism

models for helping insurers and reinsurers assess the premiums they should charge and how much

coverage they can assume as well as for firms to better understand their exposure.

       Since the passage of TRIA, the current level of demand for insurance coverage has remained

low and we discuss some factors that may contribute to it. After presenting alternative foreign

public-private partnerships and discussing the potential role for terrorist catastrophe bonds, we

provide some features of a more sustainable program for terrorism insurance in the U.S. after

December 31, 2005.

Howard Kunreuther                   Erwann Michel-Kerjan                Beverly Porter
The Wharton School                  The Wharton School                  AIR Worldwide Corporation
Center for Risk Management          Center for Risk Management          101 Huntington Avenue
Jon M Huntsman Hall, Suite 500      Jon M Huntsman Hall, Suite 500      Boston, MA 02199
3730 Walnut Street                  3730 Walnut Street                  bporter@air-worldwide.com
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6340         Philadelphia, PA 19104-6340
and NBER                            erwannmk@wharton.upenn.edu
kunreuther@wharton.upenn.edu
   1. INTRODUCTION

    The nature of international terrorism has changed in the 1990s. As studied by several
authors, there has been a significant rise in casualties from transnational incidents due to
terrorism over the last decade (Hoffman, 1998; Enders and Sandler, 2000). As pointed out by
Sandler and Enders (in press), “the events of 11 September with their massive casualties of
innocent people of all ages came as no surprise to those of us who study terrorism and
warned of an ominous changing nature of transnational terrorism.”
        Although numerous efforts have been undertaken during the last two years to prevent
new attacks on US soil, the economic impact of a successful attack has to be seriously
considered. As defined by the White House in July 2002, homeland security is “the concerted
effort to prevent attacks, reduce America’s vulnerability to terrorism, and minimize the
damage and recover from attacks that do occur” (White House, 2002, p.2). Part of that
“recovery component” is the need for insurance coverage to provide adequate financial
protection to victims of catastrophes. Those systems must be adequately designed to assure
business and social continuity of the country in case of major attacks.
        Prior to September 11, 2001 (9/11) terrorism coverage in the United States was
included in most standard commercial policy packages without considering the risk
associated with these events. The private insurance market had functioned effectively in the
U.S. because losses from terrorism had historically been small and, to a large degree,
uncorrelated. Attacks of a domestic origin were isolated and carried out by groups or
individuals with disparate agendas.
        None of these events created major economic disruption nor produced many
casualties. The 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center (WTC) killed 6 people and caused
$725 million of insured damages (Swiss Re, 2002-a). The Oklahoma City bombing of 1995,
which killed 168 people, had been the most damaging terrorist attack on domestic soil, but
the largest losses were to federal property and employees that were covered by the
government.
        The analogy to protection against natural hazards is instructive in this regard. The
insured losses from Hurricane Andrew in 1992 and the Northridge Earthquake in 1994 led
insurers and reinsurers to pay more attention to the catastrophic potential of natural disasters.
Some insurers were forced to declare insolvency due to these events. Those that survived
began to rethink the ways they were doing business. Many of them turned to catastrophe
models for guidance.
         Insurers and reinsurers did not have to pay close attention to their potential losses
from terrorism in the United States prior to 9/11. The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001




                                               3
killed nearly 3,050 people1 and inflicted damage currently estimated at nearly $80 billion,
about half of which was insured2; i.e. the most costly event in the history of insurance (Swiss
Re, 2002-a). Commercial property, workers’ compensation, life, health, disability, aircraft
hull, and general liability lines each suffered catastrophic losses. More specifically, insured
business interruption losses were estimated at $11 billion, workers’ compensation at $2
billion, and life insurance at $2.7 billion. The insured property losses at the WTC were
estimated at $3.5 billion, aviation liability also at $3.5 billion and other liability costs
reimbursed by insurers/reinsurers at $10 billion (Hartwig, 2002).
        Hence, this event confronted the insurance industry with an entirely new loss
dimension. Reinsurers, who were liable for the lion’s share of the claims, were for the most
part unwilling to renew coverage and the few who marketed policies charged extremely high
rates for very limited protection. Insurers unable to obtain reinsurance, or to raise sufficient
capital either internally or from the capital markets, scrambled by offering policies that
explicitly excluded terrorism coverage.
        The lack of available terrorist coverage delayed or prevented certain projects from
going forward due to concerns by lenders or investors. For example, the U.S. General
Accounting Office noted several cases of deals that could not be completed and a
construction project that could not be started because the firms could not find terrorism
coverage at prices they could afford (U.S. General Accounting Office 2002 pp.11-14).
        The larger question being debated today is whether terrorism is an insurable risk and,
if so, how will it be covered. That is, can insurers offer coverage at a premium at which
buyers are willing to purchase protection? If so, how does one go about determining that
price? What are the chances of another terrorist event occurring? How frequently are such
events likely to occur and how severe are they likely to be in terms of insured loss?
        Spectacular as were the losses at the WTC and the Pentagon, do they represent the
worst-case scenario? Probably not, if the predictions of some concerning a possible chemical
or biological attack become a reality. Since the start of the war in Iraq in March 2003, the
U.S. government has issued clear warnings that additional terrorist attacks are likely. Several
terrorist attacks have indeed occurred that have been linked to Al Qaeda, including the
deadly explosion at a nightclub in Bali that killed close to 200 in October 2002. Some have
suggested that the resolution of the war in Iraq will diminish the threat of future attacks.
Others argue the opposite. What is unarguable is that the uncertainties associated with
terrorism risk are considerable.
        In the field of risk management, catastrophic risks present very specific challenges to
be dealt with by a wide range of stakeholders: insured and not insured citizens and firms,
insurance and reinsurance industry, financial markets, government and policymakers. The
general question that emerged in the 1990’s along with the unprecedented dimension of
losses due to major natural disasters was: how does one assess and manage risk associated
with extreme events that are characterized by a low probability of occurrence but which, if




1
  This number represents victims of the attacks in New York, Washington, DC and Pennsylvania as well as
among teams of those providing emergency service.
2
  The exact amount is still evolving and can also differ from a study to another depending on what types of loss
are considered.


                                                       4
they occur, are of high impact? This paper focuses on the new challenges we face with
terrorism as a catastrophic risk.3
        The paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses the nature of terrorism
as a catastrophic risk, whether that risk is insurable and differences between the risk of
terrorism and that of natural disasters as well as the need for public-private partnerships to
cover the risk. Section 3 describes the nature of insurance protection under the Terrorism
Risk Insurance Act (TRIA) of 2002 as well as supply and demand for terrorism coverage and
suggests why the current demand for terrorism coverage has been low since TRIA was
passed. Section 4 discusses the recent development in modeling the terrorist risk in assisting
insurers and reinsurers to assess the premiums they should charge and how much coverage
they can assume. This section also discusses how terrorist models are now being used to
establish insurance rates nationwide. After discussing the potential role of terrorist
catastrophe bonds and presenting alternative foreign public-private partnerships in Section 5,
the paper concludes with directions for future research.

2. IS TERRORISM AN INSURABLE RISK?
        Consider a standard insurance policy whereby premiums are paid at the start of a
given time period to cover losses during this interval. Two conditions must be met before
insurance providers are willing to offer coverage against an uncertain event. Condition 1 is
the ability to identify and quantify, or estimate at least partially, the chances of the event
occurring and the extent of losses likely to be incurred. Condition 2 is the ability to set
premiums for each potential customer or class of customers. If Conditions 1 and 2 are both
satisfied, a risk is considered to be insurable. But there may still be no market-clearing price
for the coverage that will be profitable for the insurer. In other words, it may be impossible to
specify a rate for which there is sufficient demand and incoming revenue to cover the
development, marketing, operating and claims processing costs of the insurance and yield a
net positive profit over a prespecified time horizon (e.g. 5 years). In such cases the insurer
will opt not to offer coverage against this risk.

2.1 Satisfying the Insurability Conditions
        To satisfy Condition 1 estimates must be made of the frequency of specific events and
the extent of losses likely to be incurred. Such estimates can use historical data and/or
scientific analyses as well as data on what experts know and do not know about a particular
risk to construct a loss exceedance probability (EP) curve that depicts the probability that a
certain level of loss will be exceeded during some prespecified time period (e.g., 2004)4.
        It is considerably more challenging to construct an EP curve for terrorist activities
than it is for natural disasters for several reasons. For one thing it is much more difficult to
determine the probability that a terrorist attack will occur because of our extremely limited

3
  Several other authors have been working on related issues over the past two years, see Cummins and Doherty
(2002), Jaffee and Russell (2002), Lelain et al. (2002), Swiss Re (2002-b).
4
  It is not necessary, however, to have a precise estimate of the probability for a risk to be covered by insurance
(Eeckhoudt and Gollier, 1999; Gollier, 2000). For example, space insurance coverage began in 1965 –by
Lloyd’s of London– despite the lack of historical data and the difficulty of calculating the risk of failure.
Lloyd’s covered the discovery of the Loch Ness monster in 1973. In 2001, potential attacks by the Yeti for
travelers in the Himalaya Mountains have been covered too (Godard et al., 2002).


                                                        5
data on these events, particularly if one is restricting the sample space to a particular
geographical area such as the United States. Furthermore a potential target that may appear to
have a high likelihood of attack, such as a trophy building, may also have a high level of
protection and security which makes it less likely to be chosen by terrorists (Woo, 2002). It
is easier to construct estimates of the losses by constructing scenarios of different types of
events that could occur as illustrated in Section 4.
         With respect to Condition 2, the considerable ambiguity associated with the terrorist
risk implies that insurers will want to charge a much higher premium than if they had more
precise estimates of the probability and associated losses. (Kunreuther et al., 1995). If the
capacity of the industry is reduced due to a decrease in surplus from large losses and the
reluctance of investors to provide sufficient new capital, then premiums will rise due to a
shortage in supply. The situation will be exacerbated if the recent losses from a catastrophic
risk trigger an increase in demand for coverage, as was the case after September 11th.5
         Both terrorist activities and natural disasters have the potential to create extreme
losses, thereby posing limitations for the insurability of the risk. Because of this shared
characteristic, one may be tempted to draw parallels between the two without paying
sufficient attention to their crucial differences. These differences include: availability of
historical data6, ambiguity of the risk, information sharing, the potential to influence the
probability of an event, and differences in the impact of mitigation measures on future losses.
The differences are summarized in Table 1. Two features of the terrorism risk – information
sharing and dynamic uncertainty – raise some challenges for the private sector in providing
insurance protection without some type of partnership with the public sector.

2.2. Information Sharing and Dynamic Uncertainty
        Information is currently shared differently for terrorism than for natural hazards. In
the case of natural hazards, new scientific information on the risk is public knowledge so that
insurers, citizens or businesses at risk and public sector agencies all can have access to this
information. With respect to terrorism, whatever data exists on possible attacks or current
threats is normally kept secret by government agencies for national security reasons.
        One justification for government intervention in insurance markets relates to
problems of asymmetric information between buyers and sellers (e.g., adverse selection). In
the case of terrorism there is symmetry of non-information on the risk between insureds and
insurers where government is the most informed party7. This information issue constitutes a
notable feature of terrorism as catastrophic risk. (See Table 1).




5
  This was also the case in California following the Northridge earthquake of 1994. Insurers contended that they
could not risk selling more earthquake coverage at the current regulated rates. This led to the formation of a
state-run earthquake insurance company—the California Earthquake Authority. (Roth, Jr. 1998); see also
Kleindorfer and Kunreuther (1999) and Grace et al. (2003).
6
  Terrorism is of course not a new risk per se. However, as we mentioned in the introduction, the nature of
terrorist activities has been seriously changing for the past decade: new groups appeared, with new
expectations. As a result of that, historical data may be poorly helpful to analyze emerging threats.
7
  Of course, that may constitute a real limitation of the development of an insurance market if government
determined the price of terrorism coverage, which is currently not the case in the US.


                                                       6
                       Table 1. Natural Hazards versus Terrorism Risks

                               Natural Hazards                            Terrorism Risks
                          Potential catastrophic losses              Potential catastrophic losses
    Historical Data     Some historical data:                      No historical data:
                        Record of several extreme events already   9/11 events were the first terrorist
                        occurred.                                  attacks worldwide with such a huge
                                                                   concentration of victims and insured
                                                                   damages.
       Risk of          Risk reasonably well-specified:            Considerable ambiguity of risk:
      Occurrence        Well-developed models for estimating       Terrorists can purposefully adapt their
                        risks based on historical data and         strategy (target, weapons, time)
                        experts’ estimates.                        depending on their information on
                                                                   vulnerabilities; dynamic uncertainty.
   Geographic Risk Specific areas at risk:                         All areas at risk:
                        Some geographical areas are well known     Some cities may be considered riskier
                        for being at risk (e.g., California for    than others (e.g., New York City,
                        earthquakes or Florida for hurricanes).    Washington), but terrorists may attack
                                                                   anywhere, any time.
     Information        Information sharing:                       Asymmetry of information:
                        New scientific knowledge on natural        Governments       keep     secret new
                        hazards can be shared with all the         information on terrorism for obvious
                        stakeholders.                              national security reasons.
      Event Type        Natural event:                             Resulting event:
                        To date no one can influence the           Governments can influence terrorism
                        occurrence of an extreme natural event     (e.g., foreign policy; international
                        (e.g., an earthquake).                     cooperation;         national    security
                                                                   measures).
     Preparedness       Insureds can invest in well-known          Weapons and configurations are
    and Prevention      mitigation measures.                       numerous. Negative externalities of
                                                                   self-protection effort; substitution
                                                                   effect in terrorist activity.
                                                                   Insureds may have difficulty in
                                                                   choosing       measures       to  reduce
                                                                   consequences of an attack;
                                                                   Federal agencies may be in a better
                                                                   position to develop more efficient
                                                                   global mitigation programs.
     Catastrophe        Developed in late 1980’s and early         The first models were developed in
      Modeling          1990’s.                                    2002.


        A principal terrorist goal is to destabilize a region or country by attacking certain
targets that disrupt normal activities and by creating fear. Since terrorists will adapt their
strategy as a function of their resources and their knowledge of the vulnerability of the entity
they are attacking, the nature of the risk changes over time leading to dynamic uncertainty.
This feature of the risk reflects an important difference from natural hazards. Damage due to
a future large-scale earthquake in Los Angeles can be reduced through adoption of mitigation
measures; however, it is currently not possible to influence the occurrence of the earthquake



                                                  7
itself. Terrorism risk, on the other hand, will change depending on two complementary
strategies to combat terrorism, which thus becomes a mixed public-private good
(Trajtenberg, 2003). The first entails protective measures adopted by those at risk with
potential negative externalities on the other targets. The second consists of actions taken by
the government to enhance general security and reduce the probability that a terrorist attack
will occur.
        Indeed, another aspect of terrorism is the negative externality stemming from self-
protection on the risks faced by others. Keohane and Zeckhauser (2002) analyze the
relationships between the behavior of potential victims and the behavior of terrorists. They
point out that establishing publicly observable protective measures against a given mode of
attack on a specific building should reduce the probability of an attack against it because the
marginal benefit of the attack (i.e., the likelihood of success) as perceived by the terrorist
group decreases. However, shielding that building makes an attack on an uprotected
structure more likely. This type of dynamic interdependency reduces the social benefit from
protection by individual building owners. For this reason federal agencies may be in a better
position to develop global mitigation programs and hence internalize these externalities.
        Dealing with terrorism and governmental risk management policies, a substitution
effect (Sandler, Tschirhart, Cauley, 1983) also has to be considered when evaluating the
effectiveness of specific policies aimed at curbing terrorism. For example, the decision to
install weapon detectors in airports may reduce skyjackings but also encourage terrorists to
adopt other modes of attacks (e.g., assassination attempts). Hence, the measure of
effectiveness must take into account both direct effects and indirect ones: a policy can be
effective in thwarting a specific type of terrorist event but not in curbing terrorism per se
(Enders and Sandler, 1993; Cauley and Im, 1988).
        These features of terrorism raise the question as to how the government and the
insurance industry can work together in providing protection and reducing future losses from
these risks. The need for public-private partnerships was recognized in November 2002 when
the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 (TRIA) was passed. TRIA raises fundamental
questions for U.S. insurers as to how they will estimate the risk in order to set premiums for
terrorist coverage that they now must offer to their clients.

3. TERRORISM RISK INSURANCE ACT (TRIA) OF 2002
        In the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks many insurers warned that another event of
comparable magnitude could do irreparable damage to the industry. Furthermore, they
contended that the uncertainties surrounding terrorism risk were so significant that it was, in
fact, an uninsurable risk.
        By early 2002, 45 States permitted insurance companies to exclude terrorism from
their policies (Brown, Kroszner and Jenn, 2002). On the one-year anniversary of the 9/11
attacks, the U.S. remained largely uncovered (Hale, 2002). The President and the U.S.
Congress viewed such a situation as unsustainable. If the country suffered future attacks it
would inflict severe financial consequences on affected businesses deprived of insurance.
TRIA, which provides for up to $100 billion of terrorism insurance, was passed by Congress
in November 2002 and signed into law by President Bush the next month.




                                              8
3.1 Public-private Risk Sharing under TRIA
        While the passage of TRIA may have been welcome news for commercial
enterprises8, it was a mixed blessing for insurers who were obligated to offer an insurance
policy against terrorism to all their clients and the insured has the option of refusing the
coverage. Insured losses from commercial lines of insurance as well as business interruption
due to an attack are covered under TRIA only if the event is certified by the U.S. Treasury
Secretary as an “act of terrorism”, that is, as having been carried out by foreign persons or
interests9 and only for losses higher than $5 million.
        Under TRIA’s three-year term (ending December 31, 2005)10, there is a specific risk-
sharing arrangement between the federal government and insurers11 that operates in the
following manner. First, the federal government is responsible for paying 90% of each
insurer’s primary property-casualty losses during a given year above the applicable insurer
deductible (ID), up to a maximum of $100 billion. The insurer’s deductible is determined as
a percentage of the direct commercial property and casualty earned premiums of each insurer
the preceding year. The percentage varies over the three-year operation of TRIA: 7% in
2003, 10% in 2004 and 15% in 2005. The federal government does not receive any premium
for providing this coverage.
        Second, if the insurance industry suffers terrorist losses that require the government
to cover part of the claim payments, then these outlays will be partially recouped ex post
through a mandatory policy surcharge. That surcharge is applied to all property and casualty
insurance policies whether or not the insured has purchased terrorist coverage, with a
maximum of 3% of the premium charged under that policy. The federal government will pay
for insured losses above specific insurance marketplace retention amount (MR) as depicted in
Figure 1. That amount evolves as follows: $10 billion in 2003, $12.5 billion for 2004 and $15
billion for 2005.

3.2 Some Illustrative Scenarios
         To illustrate how TRIA operates, consider an “act of terrorism” occurring in 2004 in
the U.S. Suppose that N insurance companies cover all terrorist losses and that the premiums
for commercial and worker’s compensation lines of business for those N insurers was $40
billion in 2003 (subject to the deductible). As each insurer has to pay its deductible (10% in
2004), the total insurers’ deductible is equal to $4 billion. Let Smax be the maximum ex post
surcharge that the government can levy for the year 2004. Now consider three different
scenarios with increasing levels of insured losses.

Scenario A. The insured losses are $500 million.
That amount is below the total insurers’ deductible, $4 billion, so the insurers cover the entire
amount of the losses. The federal government pays nothing.


8
   According to a recent study by the Council of Insurance Agents and Brokers (CIAB), 85% of insurance
brokers who responded estimated that terrorism was more available in the market in June 2003 than it was in
January 2003 (CIAB, July 2003).
9
  An event like the Oklahoma City bombings would not be covered under TRIA.
10
   The act expires on December 31, 2004, but may be extended through 2005.
11
   Reinsurers are not part of TRIA but can provide coverage to insurers against their losses from terrorist
attacks.


                                                    9
                                         Figure 1. Loss sharing under TRIA

      Insured losses                                     Loss sharing
          ($bn)                                             ($bn)

     100                                                  100
                           90% federal

           L                                                 L




                                                                         Taxpayers
                                                                                                      Federal
                                                                                                      reimburseme


                                                          MR
                                                                                                      Ex post
                                                                                                      surcharge

                                                         TIP
         ID
         Figure 1. Loss sharing under TRIA
                                                                          Insureds
           0
               L: total insured losses                                   Reimbursement
         FigureID:
                1. Insurer
                    Loss sharing    under
                            deductibles (sumTRIA
                                             of)                         by private insurers
               MR: Market Retention                                      Reimbursement by
               TIP: Total insurance payments                             federal government




Scenario B. The insured losses are $5 billion.
The insured losses are above the insurers’ deductible. Insurers would have to pay $4.1
billion: the total deductible (i.e., $4 billion) as well as 10% of the remaining insured losses
(i.e., 10% of $1 billion). The federal government pays 90% of $1 billion (i.e., $0.9 billion).
As the $5 billion losses are lower than the $12.5 billion market retention, the government can
be reimbursed by levying the surcharge Smax. Under that scenario, Smax covers all federal
payments12. After the surcharge is levied, the insurers and insured cover the entire claims
payments; the government pays nothing.


12
  As the surcharge is applied to all property and casualties insurance policies and not only to those covered by
the N insurers, Smax is, by definition, higher than 3% of $40 billion in that example; i.e. higher than $1.2 billion.


                                                        10
Scenario C. The insured losses are $20 billion.
Here again, insurers would have to pay the total deductible (i.e., $4 billion) as well as 10% of
the remaining amount of insured losses (10% of 16 billion), i.e. a total $5.6 billion13. The
federal government pays 90% of the remaining amount of $16 billion, i.e. $14.4 billion14.
The government will recoup the difference between the $12.5 billion representing the
insurance industry aggregate threshold for 2004 and the $5.6 billion that private insurers paid
out; i.e. a surcharge levied ex post against policyholders of $6.9 billion.15 In this case the
government pays $7.5 billion of the losses16 with the remainder covered by insurers
providing terrorist coverage and all the property and casualty policyholders. Table 2
summarizes these three scenarios.

                             Table 2. TRIA under three simple scenarios
 Insured losses        Losses retained by the Reimbursement by Via 2004 surcharge
   ($ Billion)              N insurers        federal government (policyholders)
       .5                        .5                    0                0

         5                         4.1                          .9                          .9
                                (4+0.1*1)                     (0.9*1)                  Min (S;0.9)

                                   5.6                         14.4                 Min (Smax; 6.9)
        20
                               (4+0.1*16)                    (0.9*16)               (6.9 = 12.5 – 5.6)


3.3. Insurance supply
         Under TRIA, insurers are required to offer all their policyholders terrorist coverage
for commercial property, commercial casualty and workers’ compensation17 lines. This
terrorism coverage must not differ from non-terrorism coverage and the insured has the
option of refusing the coverage. Companies were given 90 days after TRIA was enacted on
November 26, 2002 to develop and disclose to policyholders new premiums and coverage
terms. Many insurance companies found themselves in the situation of having to set a price
for a risk they would prefer not to write. Although their exposure to terrorism risk was much
reduced through the public-private partnership created by TRIA, it is still significant.
         Over the course of the next 90 days, insurance companies followed a variety of
strategies. Some determined that their exposures were not in high-risk locations and chose to
leave existing premiums unchanged. Others, particularly those with portfolio concentrations
in major metropolitan areas deemed at high risk, such as New York, Washington, DC,
Chicago and San Francisco, set very high premiums.



13
   Under such a scenario and if we assume the total premiums received by these N insurers remain the same in
2002, 2003 and 2004, these N insurers would have paid $4.52 billion in 2003 and they would pay $7.4 billion in
2005.
14
   Under the same assumption, federal government would have paid $15.48 billion in 2003 and it would pay
$12.6 billion in 2005.
15
   If that amount is greater than the 3% threshold (Smax), the surcharge will be levied over several years.
16
   To be compared with $10 billion in 2003 and $5 billion in 2005.
17
   Terrorist coverage for workers’ compensation covers both terrorist attacks and acts of war.


                                                     11
3.4. Low insurance demand
         TRIA is designed to provide adequate reimbursements and indemnification to victims
of major terrorist attacks and to assure social and economic continuity of the country should
a terrorist attack occurs. The existence of a viable terrorism insurance market is a cornerstone
for a system of national preparedness since it impacts on a variety of economic activities.
These range from real estate transactions where insurance is normally a condition for a
mortgage to investment in cost-effective loss reduction measures that are rewarded by lower
premiums or higher coverage limits. Developing a meaningful insurance program requires
accurate estimates of the likelihood and consequences of terrorist attacks, thus aiding the
process of emergency preparedness and response.
         Congress passed TRIA in November 2002 partly for these reasons and also because
there was a huge demand for coverage by firms during the year following 9/11 with limited
coverage available at an affordable price. The expectation was that TRIA would ease insurers
concerns about providing coverage and enable buyers at risk to purchase coverage at
reasonable prices.
         Although insurers are now required to offer terrorism coverage to their commercial
clients, they have the freedom to set the premium at whatever level they feel is appropriate.
The demand for coverage has been much lower than anticipated even though insurance is
now available nationwide (Hsu, 2003; Treaster, 2003). The Council of Insurance Agents and
Brokers (CIAB)18 undertook the first national survey on the level of demand for terrorist
coverage (CIAB, March 2003). At that time, almost half of its members that handle the
largest accounts (customers who pay more than $100,000 annually in commission and fees to
the broker) indicated that less than 1 in 5 of their customers had purchased terrorism
insurance. The low demand was even more pronounced for smaller companies (less than
$25,000 in commission and fees to the broker): 65% of the brokers indicated that less than 1
in 5 customers were purchasing insurance against terrorism.
         According to a recent national survey by the CIAB, 72% of the brokers indicated that
their commercial customers are still not purchasing terrorism insurance coverage (CIAB, July
2003). Even in locations like New York City, the level of demand remains low. The New
York-based insurance brokerage firm Kaye Insurance Associates recently surveyed 100 of its
clients in the New York area on a series of insurance-related issues, including terrorism
insurance. Only 36% of companies surveyed have bought terrorism insurance (Muto, 2003).
If the low level of demand continues this means that an attack similar to the one on the World
Trade Center, would very likely have a much more devastating effect on business continuity
today than after 9/11. The following factors may be responsible for the lack of interest in
insurance coverage.

High Premiums
       Large firms that buy terrorism coverage are now typically paying 20 percent of the
standard commercial property/casualty premium, while most small and medium accounts are
assessed 10 percent of premium. For large firms in high risk areas such as Manhattan, the
cost has been assessed up to 100 percent or more of the standard commercial insurance


18
  The council represents the top tier of the nation’s insurance brokers who collectively write 80 percent of the
commercial property/casualty premiums annually.


                                                      12
premium at the start of 2003 (CIAB, March 2003). While prices have fallen in since then,
Manhattan properties are still paying a 20 percent surcharge, according to the Kaye survey.

Credit risk
         Although TRIA limits the potential losses to the insurance industry, some firms are
still concerned as to the impact of a large terrorist attack on the solvency of their insurers
(i.e., credit risk). They consider the case where insurers may not be able to meet their
obligations if a catastrophe occurs as a limitation to terrorism insurance purchase.

Limits in coverage
        Some businesses are concerned not only with “acts of terrorism” certified by the
federal government (i.e., terrorist acts sponsored by foreign interests) but also by the prospect
of domestic terrorism such as an attack similar to the Oklahoma City bombings in 1995,
which are not covered by TRIA. The market for domestic terrorism is still mixed with some
insurers offering coverage (sometimes at no cost if the risk is perceived to be low) while
other simply excluding it (CIAB, March 2003). In the latter case, businesses may prefer not
to buy any terrorist coverage than partial protection.

Behavioral bias
         Another explanation for low demand could be the “it will not happen to me”
mentality. Since most businesses have no information on the terrorism risk itself and no new
attack has occurred on U.S. soil since 9/11, firms may perceive the chances of another event
to be extremely low. This behavior has been well-documented for natural hazards where
individuals tend to buy insurance after a disaster occurs and cancel the policy several years
later if they have not suffered a loss (Kunreuther, 2002). It is hard to convince them that the
best return on an insurance policy is no return at all. In other words, there is a tendency for
most people to view insurance as an investment rather than as a form of protection.
         Two years after 9/11, the concern with damage from terrorism has assumed a back
seat in most people’s minds. Today most firms believe that if a terrorist attack occurs it will
not happen to them, whereas in the first few months after 9/11 they had the opposite belief.
According to the Kaye survey, 68% of companies that do not have terrorism insurance in
New York area responded that the primary reason they have not purchased such coverage is
because they didn't consider themselves a terrorism target. At a national level, the CIAB
study published in July 2003 indicated that more than 90% of the brokers said their
customers eschew terrorism insurance because they think they don’t need it (CIAB, July
2003). These firms consider insurance, even at relatively low premiums, to be a bad
investment. If a business were strapped for cash, then it would be more likely to place
insurance against terrorism as very low on its priority list. The expectation that government
may financially aid affected businesses whether or not they are covered by insurance after a
major attack, as illustrated by the airline industry following 9/11, may also contribute to
limiting interest in spending money on coverage.




                                               13
3.5. Concluding comments
        There seems to be a large difference in the perception of the seriousness of the
terrorist threat by those who are potential buyers of insurance and those who are supplying
coverage. Suppliers of terrorism insurance are likely to charge higher premiums than normal
because of the large uncertainty surrounding this risk and the possibility of a concentrated
loss in a metropolitan area should there be an attack that could lead to insolvency.
        In these circumstances TRIA alone will not solve the problem. If one wants to create
a market for terrorism insurance, both buyers and sellers need to do a more systematic
analysis of the relationship between the price of protection and the implied risk. There is no
guarantee that firms will be willing to pay more for coverage or that insurers will greatly
reduce their premiums. But there is a much better chance that a larger market for terrorism
coverage will emerge than if the status quo is maintained.
        The U.S. Treasury Department is required by Congress to undertake studies of the
supply and demand for terrorism coverage so that more informed decisions on whether TRIA
should be renewed in 2005 may be made. Those studies should contribute to a better
understanding of the current level of demand for terrorism insurance as well as to suggest
possible improvements in the partnership to create a more stable insurance market should
another attack occur. At the same time, many insurers and reinsurers chose to take advantage
of newly available tools designed to help them estimate their potential losses and thereby
make rational and informed pricing decisions.
        Catastrophe modelers, leveraging their considerable experience and expertise in
modeling natural hazard events, released the first generation of models to provide insurers
with credible estimates of loss across multiple lines from terrorist attacks. The value of such
models is in their ability to reduce uncertainty in risk estimates. One effect of that reduced
uncertainty would be a lowering of premiums for terrorist insurance.


4. TERRORISM LOSS ESTIMATION APPROACHES
        Insurance markets function best when losses are relatively small, random and
uncorrelated, and when there is an abundance of historical loss data to which statistical
techniques can be applied to predict future losses. Conditions are less than ideal when it
comes to natural catastrophes as they can be of catastrophic proportion and are often highly
correlated. Furthermore, because such extreme events occur infrequently, loss data are
relatively scarce, making reliance on traditional actuarial techniques dubious at best.
        Using stochastic simulation techniques and a scientific understanding of the physical
mechanisms that govern such events, modelers are able to estimate the frequency, spatial
distribution and severity of future natural catastrophes. The models incorporate extensive
historical databases to develop probability distributions for frequency, location and other
physical parameters. By sampling from these distributions to create large stochastic catalogs
of simulated events, the models produce distributions of expected losses as reflected in
exceedance probability (EP) curves. (Grossi and Kunreuther in press).
        Historical data on terrorist attacks, however, is significantly more limited. To the
extent they do exist and are available from such sources as the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI), the U.S. Department of State, the Center for Defense and International
Security Studies (CDISS) and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) among others, they may



                                              14
not be representative of current threats. Even more important, unlike earthquakes and other
natural disasters, whose occurrence has a physical basis that can be understood by scientists,
terrorist attacks are a function of the malicious intent of groups of individuals of varying size
and varying agendas. The groups themselves come and go and their ability to attract
resources in terms of both financial and human capital waxes and wanes as the larger
political and/or economic climate changes over time.
        As discussed in Section 2, it is clear that the uncertainty surrounding the frequency,
location and severity of future terrorist activity is much higher than for natural hazards,
making the task of modeling much more complex. In the absence of historical data to which
probability distributions can be fit, the models are by necessity more subjective in nature.
And while they also produce EP curves, it may be useful to think of these as representing
distributions not of expected loss, in the statistical sense, but rather of potential losses. To
explore the alternative approaches that modelers have used to overcome the challenges of
quantifying terrorism risk, it is useful to begin with a simple model as depicted in Figure 2.




Figure 2. Catastrophe Model Components


4.1. Estimating Terrorism Hazard
        A terrorism model, like its natural catastrophe counterparts, must first address three
basic issues regarding the hazard itself: frequency of occurrence, the most likely locations of
future terrorist attacks, and their severity in terms of insured and non-insured loss. In
undertaking this analysis, the different potential targets, plus the interdependencies in
infrastructures and systems must be taken into account (Pate-Cornell and Guikema, 2002).
For example, the loss of electric power or contamination of the water supply could create
long-term business interruption risks and require residents in the affected areas to relocate.
        The management of international terrorism risks has traditionally relied upon the
experience and judgment of a specialist underwriter. For certain individual risks, the advice
of security professionals may be sought, and for a portfolio, maximum loss would be
carefully capped. However, the overall risk assessment procedure would remain essentially
qualitative and subjective. The most basic terrorism risk model is thus one encoded within
the working experience of an underwriter, and dependent on his personal expert judgment.
To cover rare catastrophic acts of terrorism, beyond the experience of even the most
seasoned underwriter, the judgment of external terrorism experts will be invoked. Terrorism
risk management would still be firmly judgment-based, but the underwriter would be
supported by the greater knowledge and perception of terrorism experts. Recognizing that
experts’ risk estimates are based on their own set of assumptions and may reflect a set of
biases, the challenge is to evaluate these estimates carefully in modeling terrorism risk.


                                               15
        Terrorism models incorporate the judgment of teams of experts familiar both with
limited available data and current trends. These experts will have operational experience in
counterterrorism at the highest national and international levels, with many specializing in
terrorism threat assessment.
        Because each expert is privy to his own sources of intelligence, and has his own
security clearances, there is no common database of information upon which all experts can
form their judgments. In fact, much of the crucial information is confidential.

Determining Likelihood of Attacks: The Use of Expert Opinion
       The modeling firms use expert opinion in their models to determine the likelihood of
attacks but, their collaboration with the scientific community may be based on different
approaches. Some modeling firms employ the Delphi method while others utilize a
conference of experts to capture and statistically combine various opinions into a useful and
cohesive form that can be used to generate probabilities.
        The Delphi method This is a well-known and accepted approach developed by the
RAND Corporation at the start of the Cold War. Among its first applications was the
forecasting of inter-continental warfare and technological change. It was also used by the
Applied Technology Council (ATC-13) to derive the damage functions in the first generation
of earthquake models.
        The Delphi method comprises a series of repeated interrogations, usually
administered by questionnaire. Direct interaction between the participants is avoided to
preclude any bias resulting from a tendency to “follow the leader”. After an initial round of
interrogation, subsequent rounds include information from the previous round, presented
anonymously. Thus individuals are encouraged to reconsider and, when appropriate, to
change their views in light of the replies of other members of the group. They are also asked
to assess their own expertise and confidence in their answers. Finally, the results are
averaged using these confidence levels as weights. (Adler and Ziglio, 1996).
        Experts are asked to weigh in on several aspects of event frequency and intensity: the
number of attacks per year, the type of target, the attack mode or weapon type, and finally the
specific target of each potential attack. Each of these issues depends in part on the nature of
the terrorist organization originating the attack. Critical to the results is the team’s
operational understanding of the likely terrorist actions in the context of the current state of
security countermeasures. Targets and attack methods that were once undefended may now
be more vigorously protected by federal homeland security, state and local policy, and
private security resources.
        While the methodology, if well administered, is highly structured, in the end the
outcome is still only opinion, though one that has been summarized statistically, rather than
in terms of a majority vote. For complex problems not governed by scientific laws, however,
the judgment and intuition of experts in their field is not only an appropriate ingredient in any
model, but a critical one.
       Conferences of Experts         In these conferences, experts can exchange their
opinions with all participants. The agenda in those closed meetings can be, for instance, the
determination of what kind of weapons a specific terrorist group is more likely to use or what
areas/countries are more susceptible to attack. Firms that use this method see the value in
having experts share intelligence and other confidential information. When some experts are


                                               16
unable to attend the conference, then their judgment can be elicited separately and fed back
to others using the Delphi method.
        Expert opinions are of course not a definitive answer to the question of determining
the probability of an attack using specific weapons against a given potential target, but they
allow a better understanding as to how terrorists operate and enable one to refine terrorism
models. The lack of historical data makes the use of experts the only way for modelers to
determine the likelihood of new attacks by trying to better understand the terrorists’ behavior.
        Limitations in Using Experts           Experts may not always be the best forecasters.
As all of them may have knowledge about different aspects of terrorism, some can be much
more focused on a given terrorist group and disregard dangers from the other. They can be
specialized on a given type of weapon or on a very specific kind of biological or chemical
agent. Other experts can be specialized in the political side of terrorism, while others have
more experience in its impact on business alone. In other words, the group of experts
assembled does not necessarily represent a collective expertise on the subject. Each expert
can be accurate within his or her small window of expertise, but the whole group of experts
can be wrong about the reality of the global threats; a kind of illusory expertise (Linstone and
Turoff, 1975).
        Another pitfall is the possible Optimism/Pessimism bias of experts. For instance, if a
terrorist attack recently occurred, a natural trend would be to overestimate the likelihood of
new attacks in the short run. Conversely, if governmental services arrested leaders of a
terrorist group, a natural bias could be to concentrate only on that group and overlook other
terrorists so as there may be misconceptions of the likelihood of other attacks.

Identifying Likely Targets and Attack Modes
        Before probabilities of attack can be assigned to individual targets, they must be
identified. This is done in conjunction with the modelers’ expert teams. Target types will
vary depending on the nature and goals of the individual terrorist groups or organizations
being modeled. For example, the sorts of targets that the Animal Liberation Front will find
attractive, for example, will be quite different from those likely to be chosen by Al Qaeda,
not only because of differences in the resources at this group’s disposal, but because of its
different political agenda19.
        Once the target types are identified, databases of individual potential targets are
developed. Modelers are well positioned to do this, having amassed large databases of
building stock with their property values in the course of developing natural catastrophe
models. In the case of terrorism, targets (within the U.S.) might include high profile
skyscrapers, government buildings, airports, chemical plants, nuclear power plants, dams,
major tunnels and bridges, large sport stadiums, major corporate headquarters, marine
terminals, and so on. Trophy targets are identified that represent a higher value to the
terrorists and therefore, all else being equal, a higher probability of attack. Simulated attacks
are perturbed spatially, however, with respect to a given target or within an area, such as a
port. Target databases can comprise tens of thousands or even hundreds of thousands of
structures.

19
  According to Al Qaeda’s operational training manuals, that organization’s goals include economic disruption
and mass casualties. Symbolic targets are also attractive – ones associated with the American way of life or
those simply with name recognition (Woo, 2002).


                                                     17
         The terrorist group receives value or utility from the damage, or loss, inflicted on his
adversary. The expected loss is determined by the probability of success in carrying out the
attack and the economic and psychological value of the target. In turn, the probability of
success is determined by the amount of resources the terrorist group allocates to the attack, as
well as by the amount of resources its opponent allocates to detecting terrorist activity and
defending the target. Both parties are constrained by the amount of resources at their disposal
and the game becomes essentially one of strategic decisions by the relevant parties about how
to deploy those resources, i.e. which targets to attack and with what weapons, and which to
defend.
         These approaches utilize game theoretic models and simulations of the underlying
causality processes that can be parameterized from observational data. An analogy with the
war on terrorism may clarify the situation. Military leaders face considerable uncertainty and
lack of data in answering the following questions on the battlefield: Where should one
attack? When should one attack? What weapons should one use? To shed light on these
questions, war gaming has been substantially advanced through the use of mathematical
equations, large-scale simulations, and distillations (i.e. relatively simple simulations that
capture the salient features of the situation, without trying to model all the details).
         In the context of the terrorist risk problem, expert judgment can be elicited through
decision conferences at which intelligence and other confidential information can be shared.
These decision conferences have provided the knowledge base for the construction of
mathematical models of terrorism. Based on this expert opinion one can develop models of
interaction based on the principles of game theory. The test of any mathematical risk model
is its explanatory and predictive capability. Some game theoretic models predict that as
prime targets are hardened, rational terrorists may focus on lesser softer targets to attack
(Woo, 2002). This prediction is essentially equivalent to the statement made by the CIA
director, George Tenet, in his prophetic unclassified testimony of February 7, 2001, (prior to
9/11) when he said: “as security is increased around government and military facilities,
terrorists are seeking out softer targets that provide opportunities for mass casualties.”
Explicit admission of this target strategy has since come from Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the
Al Qaeda chief of military operations, who was arrested in March 2003.
         One counterintuitive outcome of such a game is that the risk to very high-profile
buildings, which are assumed to be highly attractive to the terrorist, could be much the same
as the risk to buildings of less prominence, or value (Major, 2002). The more valuable the
target, the more resources would be allocated to its defense. While the marginal effectiveness
of increased defenses at any given target diminishes as the total defense resource allocation
to that target increases, the terrorist’s probability of success is still reduced. So if such a
defense strategy is observable by terrorist groups, that target now a less attractive one to
attack. Thus expected loss may actually be equalized across (valuable) targets.
         The severity of the attack is a function of the attack mode, or weapon type. The
likelihood that any particular weapon type will be utilized in an attack is a function of the
organization carrying out the attack. It is also a function of target type. That is, the type of
weapon selected in carrying out an attack will presumably be appropriate to the type of target
given that the terrorist is constrained by limited resources. The probabilities assigned to
weapon types are again developed in conjunction with input from the expert teams.
         Modeled weapon types include so-called “conventional weapons”, such as package,
car and truck (of various sizes) bombs, as well as aviation crash. In light of Al Qaeda’s



                                               18
clearly expressed interest in acquiring and deploying weapons of mass destruction, models
also account for the possibility of “non-conventional” weapon attacks, including chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN).

4.2. Inventory Module
        The property databases that are used as input into natural catastrophe models are also
relevant for terrorism models20. The attacks of September 11, 2001, revealed that not only are
the terrorist targets themselves at risk, so are surrounding buildings. Nevertheless, the effects
of terrorist attacks with conventional weapons are likely to be highly localized relative to
hurricanes, earthquakes and the like. In that case, the resulting damage depends on such
things as the kind explosive material used, the amount of material, and the density and
verticality of the surrounding buildings.
        For non-conventional weapons, the spatial extent of damage depends, for example, on
the delivery mechanism, and on external factors such as wind speed and wind direction.
Terrorism models can also be used to estimate aggregate insured or insurable losses for the
entire insurance industry, for individual company portfolios, or for individual buildings. As
in the case of natural catastrophe models, the quality of the output is only as good as the
quality of the input data. As noted in the introduction, while the large losses resulting from
natural catastrophes have historically been primarily to property, terrorist attacks can affect
multiple insurance lines, including life, liability, workers’ compensation, accident and health.
They can also result in severe stress on the psyche of a nation under siege.
        Modelers have access to or have developed industry databases of employees by
building occupancy and construction type at ZIP Code level. These can be supplemented
with state payroll and benefit information, generally available to insurance companies. The
more detailed the information provided by the client, the more detailed and reliable the
output. Modelers are emphasizing to insurers the importance of gathering detailed data on
where people are during the day and in what kinds of buildings.

4.3. Vulnerability
         Research on the impact of attacks on structures has been ongoing since before the
1950s. Much has been carried out by the Department of Defense. The Department of State
has examined blast loading in the course of developing anti-terrorism designs for U.S.
embassies. Other applications have had a civilian focus, such as examinations of the effects
of natural gas explosions. Research activity has surged since the bombing of the Alfred P.
Murrah Federal Office Building in Oklahoma City (1995) and the U.S. military housing
facilities in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia (1996).
         Modelers have developed damage functions that incorporate the results of
experimental and analytical studies of how different building types respond to such attacks,
combined with historical data from actual events. In the case of a terrorist attack using
conventional and nuclear weapons, buildings sustain damage as a result of a variety of
assaults on their structural integrity and their non-structural components. In the case of other
non-conventional weapons, including chemical and biological, the structure of the building
may be unaffected. The resulting contamination, however, may render it unusable for long
20
     See Grossi and Kunreuther (in press) for a detailed discussion of the elements of these databases.


                                                         19
periods and result in extensive cleanup costs, up to full replacement value. In either case, the
damage functions determine loss to building, contents and loss of use.

Conventional Weapons
        The damage relationships that correspond to the building that is the “target” of the
attack are functions of building type and attack type. The type of attack, whether package, car
or truck bomb, can be expressed as a TNT-equivalent (trinitrotoluene). The size of this
charge can be thought of as the “intensity” of the event. Damage to the target building results
from the resulting shock wave, the subsequent pressure wave, and fire.
        The target building may sustain “total” damage from the point of view of insured loss
even if it remains standing. If the building collapses it will increase the number of fatalities.
Furthermore, different modes of collapse, such as an overturn versus a “pancake” collapse as
occurred at the World Trade Center in New York on 9/11, will affect the degree of damage to
surrounding buildings and thus the total area affected by the event. The buildings
surrounding the target building are also likely to be damaged by the resulting shock and
pressure waves. In addition, they can be damaged by falling debris (the geographical extent
of which depends on the mode of collapse, if any), and by flying (projectile) debris.

Non-conventional Weapons (CBRN)
        The effects of nuclear weapons on both structures and populations have been the
subjects of extensive research for decades. Chemical, biological and radiological (CBR, so-
called “dirty bomb”) attacks are more problematical. Accidental releases of chemical agents,
such as the one that occurred at the Union Carbide chemical plant in Bhopal, India (1984)
have been analyzed, as was the 1986 accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, which
resulted in a significant release of radioactive material. Other events include the 1995 sarin
attack on the Tokyo subway and the more recent distribution through the mail of weaponized
anthrax in autumn 2001 in the US. These examples provide data for empirical analysis and
research.
        Fortunately, those attacks have been extremely rare. The greatest degree of
uncertainty associated with terrorist attacks surrounds the potential effects of non-
conventional weapons. Modelers have, in some cases, developed relationships between the
use of non-conventional weapons and potential damage; others employ models developed for
various government agencies. These typically follow what is known as a
“source/transport/effects” approach.
        The source refers to how a hazard agent originates, including the type, yield,
effectiveness, and other properties of the agent. Various attack types are simulated, including
chemical agents such as sarin, VX, tabun, and biological agents such as anthrax and
smallpox. Various types of nuclear and radiological attacks using materials such as cesium,
cobalt and plutonium are also simulated.
        Transport refers to the means by which the agent disperses or moves from the source
to the people, or facilities, which are presumed to be the targets of the agent. A full range of
dispersal mechanisms is considered, from mail-borne dispersal similar to the anthrax attacks
in 2001, to wide area dissemination via aerosol spraying, and by way of conventional bomb
blast. An important feature is the model’s capacity for modeling winds over complex terrain.



                                               20
        Effects refer to the physical, performance, and psychological effects of the attack on
humans as well as on the environment. While even a small “suitcase” nuclear device can
cause extensive physical damage to buildings over a relatively large geographical area, the
primary effects on buildings of other non-conventional weapons is contamination, which may
render them unusable for long periods of time. In fact, in some cases, the most cost-effective
way of dealing with badly contaminated structures may be demolition under very cautious
and well-defined procedures.

4.4. Estimating Injuries and Fatalities
         In addition to property damage, terrorism models for insurance purposes also estimate
fatalities under both workers’ compensation and life insurance policies, as well as losses
from injuries arising from workers’ compensation, personal accident and other casualty lines.
The number of injuries and fatalities, as well as the severity of injuries, is a function of the
nature of damage sustained by both structural and non-structural components of buildings,
and by their contents. Figure 3 illustrates the process for workers’ compensation losses.




Figure 3. Modeling Worker’s Compensation Losses


       In estimating workers’ compensation losses, the model accounts for variability in
damage to individual buildings so that one can estimate the extent of injuries and fatalities.
For each level of event severity, a mean damage ratio is calculated. Around each mean, a
complete probability distribution of damage is developed. Because different structural types
will experience different degrees of damage, the damage functions vary according to
construction materials and occupancy. The distributions of damage are mapped to slight,
moderate, extensive and complete in Figure 4.




                                              21
Figure 4. Building Damage Distribution Mapped to Different Damage States

         At the level of “complete” damage, the building may or may not have actually
collapsed. Complete damage means that the building is not recoverable. Collapse would
typically result in more severe injuries and larger numbers of fatalities than if the building is
still standing. Once again, construction type is important: the probability of collapse given a
state of complete damage may vary a lot by construction type.
         Estimates of workers’ compensation (and other casualty lines) loss are based not only
upon the number of people injured, but also on the severity of the injuries. The HAZUS®21
model, for example, uses a four-tier severity scale: minor, moderate, life-threatening and
fatality. Distributions of injury severity are then developed for each damage state for each
building and occupancy type.
         Combining information on the number of employees in each damaged building and
the cost of injuries, the model generates the total loss distribution at a particular building.
Figure 5 illustrates the flow of the calculations after the injury severity-rate distributions are
determined. Losses are calculated based on the number of employees in each injury severity
level and on the cost of the injury.
         To calculate losses arising from life insurance and personal accident claims, the
model takes the same approach described above, but potential losses are calculated for both
residential and commercial buildings using assumptions about the distribution of the
population between commercial and residential structures at the time of the attack.




Figure 5. Calculation of Workers’ Compensation Loss for an Individual Building


21
  HAZUS or Hazards U.S., is a natural hazard loss estimation methodology developed by FEMA under
contract with the National Institute of Building Sciences.


                                               22
4.5. The ISO Advisory Loss Costs

         Loss estimates generated by modeling techniques are of interest to all parties.
Insureds want a better understanding of their exposure to potential terrorist attacks in order to
determine whether to purchase coverage. Insurers can use model output to develop pricing,
determine reinsurance needs and fashion policy conditions, including deductibles, exclusions
and caps. Loss estimates for individual addresses can be of significant interest when the
location, type of activity conducted at the address, or the prominence of the tenant may make
that property a particularly attractive target. Model output is also of interest to policy makers.
In New York, for example, modeled loss estimates are being used to support a request for a
larger share of federal funding for homeland security.
         Because terrorism models have been applied to thousands of potential targets, they
can provide a picture of the relative risk by state, city, zip code and even by individual
location. For example, at the start of 2002, the Insurance Services Office (ISO) used the
estimates provided by AIR (one of its subsidiaries) to file advisory loss costs with the
insurance commissioner for each state.22 ISO defined three tiers for the country. ISO’s study
placed Washington, DC, New York, Chicago and San Francisco in the highest tier and
recommended loss costs in those cities of $0.10 per $100 of property value. A second tier
consisted of Boston, Houston, Los Angeles, Philadelphia and Seattle; the rest of the country
fell into the third tier.
         ISO’s recommendations were not, however, well received by cities in the first tier
who felt they were being treated unfairly and some of whose politicians complained that such
premiums would drive out businesses. Negotiations ensued and compromises made. ISO
filed revised loss costs for first-tier cities based on zip code level model results, which
differentiated between the higher risk of downtown city centers and the lower risk of
properties on the outskirts. But nowhere did the new advisory lost costs exceed $0.03 per
$100 of property value.23 Thus, while the new official advisory loss costs no longer
adequately reflected the risk in the eyes of the modelers, they became more palatable for a
number of stakeholders. The Departments of Insurance of all 50 states eventually approved
ISO’s 2003 loss costs. A revised scale for 2004 is now being filed.


5. FUTURE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS
        This section discusses the potential role of terrorist catastrophe bonds and
summarizes the experience in other countries as to how the public and private sectors have
established partnerships for covering terrorism risk. These arrangements may be appropriate
for developing the future program of terrorism insurance in the United States after December
31, 2005. That question is explored in the last part of the section.



22
   A “loss cost” is defined by ISO as the long-term average annual expected loss (as generated by the AIR
model) per $100 of insured property value. It is used to set insurance rates, or premiums, after the addition of
such things as an expense load to cover administrative fees, a profit margin, and a risk load. Once an ISO
advisory loss cost has been approved by a state, any insurance company can adopt it without having to
undertake their own often lengthy and expensive rate filing process.
23
   The second tier settled at $0.018 per $100 of property value and third tier at $0.001.


                                                      23
5.1. Expanding Capacity Through Catastrophe Bonds
        One of the reasons why insurers have been reluctant to provide terrorist coverage is
the lack of capacity by the insurance industry to cover this event. Cummins, Doherty and Lo
(2002) have undertaken a series of analyses that indicate that the U.S. property-liability
insurance industry could withstand a loss of $40 billion with minimal disruption of insurance
markets. According to their model, a $100 billion loss would create major problems for the
insurance industry by causing 60 insolvencies and leading to significant premium increases
and supply side shortages.
        As pointed out above, in the aftermath of 9/11 there was a severe shortage of
reinsurance against terrorism. For insurers to provide their clients with the same amount
coverage they offered prior to 9/11, they need to find capital from other sources. If the cost of
this capital is high, the insurance premium will be prohibitively expensive and demand for
coverage will dry up. To illustrate this point, it is useful to focus on the following scenario
(with fictitious names) 24
             Over the past 10 years the AllRisk (AR) Insurance Company has provided $500 million
             in coverage to Big Business (BB) Inc. against risks to its building, including those due
             to terrorism at a total premium of $13 million. AR covers $100 million itself and has
             purchased an excess of loss reinsurance contract from Reinsurance Enterprise (RE) to
             cover the remaining $400 million. Given the events of Sept. 11th RE has decided that
             terrorism will no longer be included in its coverage because of the uncertainties
             associated with the risk. BB needs terrorism coverage since the bank that holds its
             mortgage requires this as a condition for the loan.

        Now that RE has decided to eliminate terrorist coverage in its reinsurance treaties,
AR must decide whether or not to continue providing BB with the same type of insurance as
it has had previously and, if so, how much coverage it is willing to offer and at what price.
        The first concern of the underwriters at AR is making sure the firm’s chance of
insolvency is below an acceptable risk level. For AR to offer BB $500 million in coverage, it
now has to raise an additional $400 million in capital from different sources. One possibility
would be for an investment bank to issue AR a $400 million catastrophe bond to cover the
losses from a potential terrorist attack. A catastrophe bond requires the investor to provide
money up-front that will be used by the firm if some type of triggering event occurs, such as
a terrorist attack. In exchange for a higher return than normal, the investor faces the
possibility of losing either a portion of or its entire principal invested in the catastrophe bond.
        The amount paid out to the insurance company (in this case AR) depends on how the
catastrophe bond is constructed in advance of the event. If investors are concerned with the
ambiguity associated with the terrorist risk, they will require a much larger than average
return on their investment in order to compensate them for the possibility of losing their
principal. Given the unusually high premiums on catastrophe bonds for natural hazard risks
where there is considerably less ambiguity and uncertainty than for a terrorist attack, this
should not be surprising.
        One can now determine the premium that AR would have to pay for terrorist
coverage as a function of the annual return on investment (ROI) required by investors for
them to put money in a catastrophe bond. Assume that the normal annual return on

24
     This scenario is based on Kunreuther (2002).


                                                    24
investments is 8%. For a specific ROI, the annual cost, C, to AR of obtaining $400 million
through issuing a catastrophe bond would be:
                                         (ROI - 0.08)$400 = C
        If AR believes the probability of a claim of $100 million is 0.01 then its actuarial loss
for providing BB with this amount of insurance is $1 million. Assuming a loading factor of
λAR = 0.5 for AR to offer BB Inc. $500 million of insurance coverage by purchasing a
catastrophe bond for $400 million, they would have to charge an annual premium (in
millions of $s) of P = ($1 + C) (1.5).
        Table 3 shows how C and P are affected by different required ROIs of investors.

 Table 3. Impact of Changes in Return on Investment (ROI) on Catastrophe Bond Cost (C) and
                          Insurance Premiums (P) (in Millions of $)

                                      Catastrophe Bond
                           ROI                                  Premium (P)
                                          Cost (C)
                           10%               $8                      $13.5
                           12%               16                      25.5
                           14%               24                      37.5
                           16%               32                      49.5
                           18%               40                      61.5
                           20%               48                      73.5


        During the fall of 2001, it was not unusual for investors to require an ROI of 20% to
invest in terrorist coverage.25 In 2003, it is likely that the ROI for investors is lower than at
the end of 2001; however, even if the ROI were only 12%, insurers would have to charge
$25.5 million for terrorist coverage, almost twice the price that BB was paying prior to 9/11.

5.2. Potential Role of Terrorist Catastrophe Bonds
        It is interesting to speculate as to why a market for catastrophe bonds to cover losses
from terrorist attacks has not emerged since 9/11. Consider the case where an investment
banker was considering issuing a one-year catastrophe bond for covering the losses from
terrorism.26 Let p represent a conservative estimate of the probability of a terrorist attack
during the year 2004 that would destroy BB’s building.
        If the normal annual rate of return was assumed to be 8% (i.e., 0.08), a risk neutral
investor who committed $Y to a catastrophe bond would require the following ROI when
there was no terrorist attack:

                          (1-p) (ROI) Y - pY = .08Y                          (1)


25
   This figure is based on discussions in November and December 2001 with insurers who were trying to raise
capital for covering terrorist risks.
26
   We have focused on one-year catastrophe bonds to keep the example simple. Multi-year catastrophe bonds
make the analysis more complicated but the qualitative conclusions discussed below do not change.


                                                    25
       Let pi be the annual probability of a terrorist attack where an investor is indifferent
between receiving an annual ROI = i on a catastrophe bond knowing it would lose its entire
investment should the attack occur. Substituting i for ROI and pi for p in equation (1) and
rearranging terms one obtains:
                              pi = (i - 0.08)/(1+i)                  (2)

        Thus, if i = 0.10 one can determine from (2) that p.10 = 0.02/1.10 = 18/1000. If a risk
neutral investor believed the annual probability of a terrorist attack were p < 0.018, then an
ROI of 10% would be an attractive investment. If i = 0.20 then p.20 = 0.12/1.20 = 1/10
implying that if p < 0.10, an individual would want to invest in a catastrophe bond if it
returned 20% in the case of no terrorist attack. These indifference probabilities would be
slightly lower if the investor were risk averse. Yet it is still hard to comprehend why the
investment community has not viewed catastrophe bonds as a viable option for dealing with
terrorism, particularly if a terrorist bond comprised only a small portion of the investor’s
portfolio.
    In a recent paper, Bantwal and Kunreuther (2000) specified a set of factors that might
account for the relatively thin market in catastrophe bonds in the context of natural hazard
risks. They point out that spreads in this market are too high to be explained by standard
financial theory, giving rise to another asset pricing puzzle that cannot be fully explained by
investor risk aversion. The paper suggests that the high spreads are not just a consequence of
investor unfamiliarity with a new asset, but instead signal some deeper issues that need to be
resolved before the catastrophe bond market can fully develop. In particular, the authors
conjecture that ambiguity aversion, myopic loss aversion, and fixed costs of education might
explain the reluctance of institutional investors to enter this market.
        Four additional factors may help explain the lack of interest in new financial
instruments for covering the terrorist risk. There may be an important moral hazard problem
associated with issuing such bonds if terrorist groups are connected with financial institutions
having an interest in the U.S. Second, investment managers may fear the repercussions on
their reputation of losing money by investing in an unusual and newly developed asset.
Unlike investments in traditional high yield debt, money invested in a terrorist catastrophe
bond can disappear almost instantly and with little warning. Those marketing these new
financial instruments may be concerned that if they suffer a large loss on the catastrophe
bond, they will receive a lower annual bonus from their firm and have a harder time
generating business in the future. The short-term incentives facing investment managers
differ from the long-term incentives facing their employers. If this is a major problem in
marketing catastrophe bonds, then there is a need to develop strategies for bringing the
principal (employer and its shareholders) and its agents (investment managers) into
alignment.
        A third reason why there has been no market for terrorist catastrophe bonds was the
reluctance of reinsurers to provide protection against this risk following the World Trade
Center attacks of September 11th. Investors (e.g., mutual funds) see reinsurers as experts in
this market. When investors learned that the reinsurance industry required high premiums to
provide protection against terrorism they were only willing to provide funds to cover losses
from terrorism if they received a sufficiently high interest rate27.

27
     Jim Ament provided us with this interesting insight.


                                                            26
        Finally most investors and rating agencies consider terrorism models to be too new
and untested to be used in conjunction with a catastrophe bond covering risks in the United
States. They are viewed by them as not very reliable in predicting the frequency of terrorist
attacks, although they provided useful information on the potential severity of the attacks.
One of the major rating firms noted that the estimates derived from the models could vary by
200 percent or more. Without acceptance of those models by the major rating agencies, the
issuance of terrorist catastrophe bonds would be unlikely, at least in the United States.
(U.S. General Accounting Office, 2003).28.
5.3 Experiences in Other Countries
United Kingdom
        In the wake of the two terrorist bomb explosions in the City of London in April 1992
and an announcement seven months later by British insurers that they would exclude
terrorism coverage from their commercial policies, the UK established a mutual insurance
organization (Pool Re) to accommodate claims following terrorist activities (Fleming, 1993).
Pool Re charges a separate, optional premium for terrorism coverage that can be calculated
as a percentage of the total sum insured under a fire and accident policy and mainly depends
on the location of the property. The four different rates established by Pool Re are based on
the risks, with the highest rate in Central London and the second highest in the rest of the
city. The Treasury as the reinsurer of last resort backs Pool Re.
        Until September 11, 2001 terrorism exclusions within insurance policies in the UK
were usually limited to property policies. They were based on the Terrorism Act of 1993 and
designed to deal with the IRA bombing campaign on mainland Britain. Fire and explosion
were excluded by insurance companies, but were covered under Pool Re. The scale of 9/11
attacks in the US led to the need for an extending protection under Pool Re to “all risks”
(including damage caused by chemical and biological as well as nuclear contamination, with
effect on January 1, 2003). This extension in cover to all risks reflected in a doubling of the
pre September 11th 2001 premiums charged by the pool. Moreover, insurers are now free to
set the premiums for underlying terrorism policies, thereby introducing competition into the
terrorist insurance market29.

France
        France suffered several terrorist attacks during the 1980’s. A law enacted in
September 1986 requires the French insurers to provide terrorism coverage up to the overall
limits of a property policy. To avoid problems of adverse selection and low demand for
insurance that may result in large uncovered losses, terrorism insurance is mandatory in
France. After 9/11 French insurers were forced to renew terrorist coverage and retain most of

28
   The first terrorism catastrophe bond was issued in Europe in August 2003. The world governing organization
of association football (soccer), the FIFA, which organizes the 2006 World Cup in Germany, developed a bond
to protect its investment. Under very specific conditions, the catastrophe bond covers natural and terrorist
extreme events that would result in the cancellation of the final World Cup game. (U.S. General Accounting
Office, 2003).
29
   There was also an intention to set the maximum insurance retention for the next four years, with individual
insurers’ retentions being based on market share. It is now set at £30 million (43 million euros) per event and
£60 million (86 million euros) per annum for 2003; it will increase up to £100 million (144 million euros) per
event and £200 million (288 million euros) per annum for 2006.


                                                      27
the risk, as most reinsurers refused to cover acts of terrorism in their policies. Discussions
between FFSA, GEMA30 and the French government led to the creation of the first post 9/11
State backed reinsurance pool for terrorism worldwide, the GAREAT (for Group of
Insurance and Reinsurance against Terrorism, in French), on January 1, 2002. A premium
scale is established nationwide that only depends on the sum insured and not on the location
at risk. All insurers must be members of the pool. (Godard et al., 2002).
         As of 2003, the current partnership between the government and the insurance
industry is a four-layer scheme. Private insurers retain the first portion of losses up to 400
million euros; the next layer is placed in the international insurance and reinsurance market
up to 1.5 billion euros (a 1.1 billion euros trench). A third layer is comprised of reinsurance
covering losses between 1.5 and 1.75 billion euros. Losses greater than 1.75 billion euros are
covered by the government (unlimited guarantee for which the pool pays an annual
premium), and managed by the Caisse Centrale de Réassurance, a public-owned reinsurer.
(Michel-Kerjan and Pedell, 2003).

Germany
        Discussions between the German federal government and the insurance industry led
to the creation of a special insurer for terrorism risks, Extremus AG. The company has been
operating since November 2002. Extremus, which is a corporation whose shareholders are
essentially private insurers and reinsurers operating in Germany, directly insures terrorism
risk through the participating companies. As in France, a premium scale is established
nationwide that depends on the sum insured and not on the location at risk31. Coverage by
Extremus is only offered if the total insured value per policy is at least 25 million euros and it
is non-compulsory.
      As of 2003, the annual reinsurance capacity is limited to 13 billion euros and is
provided in three layers. The shareholders of Extremus provide the first layer of 1.5 billion
euros. International reinsurance companies provide the second layer of another 1.5 billion
euros. The Federal Government of Germany would provide an additional capacity of 10
billion euros32.

Israel
        The government administers two programs for dealing with terrorism risk. The Israeli
Income and Property Tax Commission levies a national property tax predominantly on Israeli
business. The Commission pays for claims on property damages from a terrorist attack, but
indirect damages (including business interruption) must be covered by private insurance. The
second government program, administered by the National Insurance Institute, provides for
medical care, lost wages, payments to the families of attack victims and personal injury.
(General Accounting Office, 2001).




30
    The French Federation of Insurance Companies and the French Group of Mutual Insurance Firms,
respectively; the two major representative institutions from the French insurance market.
31
   The idea here is that a larger chemical plant, for instance, may be a higher target whatever its location.
32
   For a comparative analysis of the current terrorism insurance schemes developed after 9/11 in the US, France
and Germany (relative to each country’s market), see Michel-Kerjan and Pedell (2003).


                                                      28
5.4. A Proposed Program for the United States
        Currently it is unclear what type of terrorism insurance program will emerge in the
United States after 2005. One possibility is that TRIA will be renewed with a new risk
sharing arrangement between the insurance industry and the federal government. However, if
the program is terminated on December 31, 2005, alternative solutions will need to be found.
The challenge is to develop an efficient program that will satisfy the different interested
parties, each of whom has their own set of values and concerns. In addition to insurance
coverage, there are ways of providing protection prior to an event, so as to reduce the need
for the public sector to provide financial aid following a disaster. Federal funding provided to
the airlines after 9/11 suggests that actions could be taken now rather than waiting until the
next catastrophe occurs. Four elements of such a program are set forth below.
        First, existing institutions, such as banks and financial institutions, could require
terrorism coverage as a condition for loans and mortgages. By having these institutions
protect their own investments, then those who are at risk will be eligible to receive insurance
claims after a catastrophic event to aid their recovery process. Furthermore the potential costs
of terrorism will be borne by those at risk33. For example, rents to tenants in commercial
buildings may increase to reflect the extra cost of terrorist insurance coverage since 9/11.
        Second, private insurer exposure to losses from terrorism could be limited so that
coverage could be offered at reasonable rates. Insurers may want to require risk reduction
measures as a condition for coverage. If insurers know that their losses from a terrorist attack
will be capped at a certain amount, much of the uncertainty regarding the event will be
reduced. Insurers will then focus primarily on the probability of certain events occurring
rather than on the entire distribution of potential losses.
        Third, the government could provide some type of federal catastrophe bond given the
reluctance of private investors to provide capital to insurers and/or reinsurers and the high
return they require on private catastrophe bonds. Such a federal program could be designed
so that it does not discourage the private sector from entering the market.
        Finally, solutions in other countries could be examined to see how well they are
working in practice and whether some features would be appropriate for the United States.
One option could be the creation of a pool arrangement between insurers and reinsurers with
some type of federal role if the losses were extremely large. One may want to examine the
performance of GAREAT created in France, the German Extremus, or the recent
modifications established on January 1st, 2003 with Pool Re in the UK.

6. FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
        This concluding section builds on the discussion of terrorism insurance to suggest
future research for dealing with extreme events by focusing on two areas: Risk Assessment
and Vulnerability Analyses and Risk Perception and Risk Management Strategies.

6.1. Risk Assessment and Vulnerability Analyses
       Risk assessment needs to be supplemented by vulnerability analyses that characterize
the forms of physical, social, political, economic, cultural, and psychological harms to which

33
   That question was already raised in the aftermath of the World War II in the context of war damage insurance
to cover against nuclear weapons (Hirshleifer, 1953).


                                                      29
individuals and modern societies are susceptible. Many millions of dollars have already been
spent on a variety of actions that are designed to reduce vulnerability to terrorism.
        As one moves from events where considerable historical and scientific data exist (e.g.
earthquakes) to ones where there is greater uncertainty and ambiguity (e.g. terrorism), there
is a much greater degree of discomfort in undertaking risk assessment. Constructing
scenarios that may lead to the occurrence of specific events is a useful first step.
        A meaningful example of work in this regard is a study undertaken over 25 years ago
by Warner North and his colleagues on estimating the likelihood of microbial contamination
of Mars from the first Viking Mission where a landing on the planet was planned on July 4,
1976. They first constructed a series of scenarios characterizing how microbes could
contaminate Martian soil based on the possible location of microbes on the spacecraft and
Martian environmental conditions. They then assigned probabilities of contamination to each
of these scenarios and undertook extensive sensitivity analyses to determine how changes in
the inputs to these scenarios would lead to changes in these probabilities. On the basis of
these analyses they determined that the probability of contamination was more than one order
of magnitude below the predetermined acceptable level of risk of 1 in 10,000. Scientists who
had initially expressed concern about the risk of contamination agreed that the mission
should proceed without the need for further steps to reduce the microbial burden on the
Viking Lander. The Viking successfully landed on Mars in the summer of 1976.

6.2 Risk Perception and Risk Management Strategies
        The terrorist attacks of 9/11 have raised the question as to what one should do to
mitigate the consequences of future catastrophes and aid the recovery process should another
disaster occur. In order to develop a strategy, one needs to incorporate the growing
knowledge of how individuals process information on extreme events and then make choices.
        As illustrated by the examples of Hurricane Andrew and the Northridge earthquake,
people are not very concerned about the possibility of catastrophe events before they occur.
Only after the event, when it is often too late, do they want to take protective action.
Moreover, this concern dissipates over time. Thus, it is very common for people to cancel
their flood or earthquake insurance policies if they have not experienced losses from one of
these events for several years.
        To mitigate against the consequences of natural disasters safer structures can be built
and/or people can move out of harm’s way. In the case of chemical accidents, the inventory
level and/or production of specific toxins can be reduced to lower the risk of another mishap
occurring. When it comes to developing a strategy to reduce the risks of future terrorist
activities, considerable uncertainty exists with respect to who the perpetrators are, their
motivations, the nature of their next attack and where it will be delivered. Terrorist groups
can attack anything, anywhere at any time, and one cannot protect everything. Hence, as we
discussed above, it is extraordinarily difficult to know what efficient protective actions to
take.
        There is an additional challenge associated with allocating resources for dealing with
terrorism. The government may be tempted to invest huge sums of money in protection to
provide reassurance for its citizens (reassuring expenditures). Educating the public on the
current likelihood of attacks might reduce such costs.




                                              30
        Future research should also address the appropriate strategies that need to be
developed for dealing with situations where there are interdependencies between agents. In
these situations there may be a need for the public sector to take the leading role with respect
to providing protective measures because the private sector may have few economic
incentives to take these steps on their own. Kunreuther and Heal (2003) and Heal and
Kunreuther (2003) have addressed this issue by asking the following question: What
economic incentives do residents, firms or governments have for undertaking protection if
they know that others are not taking these measures and that their failure to do so could cause
damage to them?
        To illustrate this point, suppose Airline A is considering whether to institute a
sophisticated passenger security system knowing that passengers who transfer from other
airlines may not have gone through a similar screening procedure and could cause damage to
their airplane. If there is a relatively high probability that these dangerous passengers could
get on board Airline A due to the failure of other airlines to adopt screening systems and
there is no screening process for passengers who transfer from one airline to another, then
Airline A will also not want to invest in such a system. The interdependent risks across firms
may lead all of them to decide not to invest in protection.
        The same logic applies to the incentive of divisions of firms to invest in protection
against a catastrophic accident that could bankrupt the entire organization. The actions of
Nick Leeson and the traders he hired at the Barings Futures Singapore office were primarily
responsible for bringing down Barings Bank. Arthur Andersen was sent into bankruptcy
mainly by the actions of its Houston branch. If a division knows that other divisions in the
firm are not investing in protection or in good risk management, then it has less incentive to
incur these costs than if the other units were investing in safety measures. This is another
example of interdependent risks (Kunreuther, 2003).
        The 9/11 events, as well as the anthrax attacks, also demonstrated a new kind of
vulnerability: terrorists can use the capacity of a country’s infrastructures to have
immediately a large-scale impact on the nation by reversing the diffusion capacity of our own
networks against ourselves34, each element of the network becoming at risk, a potential
weapon (every aircraft, every piece of mail). Those are crucial questions as the large
operating networks of the country (water supply, electricity35, transportation networks,
telecommunications, energy, emergency and defense services, etc36) become more and more
interdependent with each other when, at the same time, the social and economic continuity of
a nation’s activities critically depend on their operation (Michel-Kerjan, 2003; OECD, 2003;
White House, 2003).
        The development of public-private partnerships is clearly recognized as a way of
decreasing the vulnerability of infrastructures. As discussed in section 2.2, the question of
information sharing may constitute, however, one of the main limitations to the development

34
   During the anthrax episode, for example, the terrorists did not attack a specific postal office but used the
whole USPS network itself to spread threats. Indeed, in that case, the whole network was potentially at risk as
any envelope could have been considered as contaminated by anthrax, a potential weapon (Boin, Lagadec,
Michel-Kerjan and Overdijk, 2003). The emerging vulnerabilities in critical infrastructures raise some of the
most challenging questions related to mitigation of terrorism and interdependencies.
35
   As illustrated by the August 14, 2003 power failure in the U.S. and the September 27, 2003 one in Italy.
36
   In 1998, U.S. Presidential Decision Directive 63 classified those sectors, among others, as “critical
infrastructure sectors” for the social and economic continuity of the country.


                                                      31
of such partnerships. What type of information could government agencies actually share
regarding ongoing threats with the private sector without violating national security rules?
Conversely, as nearly 85% of critical infrastructures is owned or operated by the private
sector in the U.S., private firms have obtained considerable information about the
infrastructures themselves, the level of security as well as their clients. What are the
incentives for the private sector to share such sensitive information with government
agencies? What specific risk-sharing rules or schemes will emerge from a specific
distribution of information about risks between all the interested parties of a public-private
partnership?
        Future research should examine these questions in more detail as well as the
appropriate role of regulations, standards, third party inspections and insurance to encourage
individuals and firms to take protective actions. Without some type of coordinating
mechanism or economic incentive such as a fine, subsidy or tax it may be difficult to
convince any individual agent to invest in mitigation because they know they may be
contaminated by others.        By developing public-private partnerships to deal with
interdependencies associated with extreme events, one should be able to provide substantial
benefits to the affected individuals and firms as well as improving the social welfare.




                                             32
REFERENCES

Adler, Michael and Ziglio, Erio (eds) (1996) Gazing Into the Oracle: The Delphi Method and Its
Application to Social Policy and Public Health London, Kingsley Publishers.
Bantwal, Vivek and Kunreuther, Howard (2000) “A Cat Bond Premium Puzzle?”, Journal of Psychology
and Financial Markets, 1:76-91.
Boin, Arjen, Lagadec, Patrick, Michel-Kerjan, Erwann and Werner Overdijk (in press) “Critical
Infrastructures under Threat: Learning from the Anthrax Scare” Journal of Contingencies and Crisis
Management.
Brown, Jeffrey, Kroszner, Randall and Jenn, Brian (2002) “Federal Terrorism Insurance” NBER
Working Paper 9271, Cambridge, MA, October 2002.
Cauley, Jon and Im, Eric Iksoon (1988) “Intervention Policy Analysis of Skyjackings and Other
Terrorist Incidents” American Economic Review, 78 (2): 27-31.
Council of Insurance Agents and Brokers (2003) “Commercial Market Index Survey” News Release,
July 22.
Council of Insurance Agents and Brokers (2003) “Many Commercial Interests Are Not Buying
Terrorism Insurance, New CIAB Survey Show” News Release, March 24.
Cummins, J. David, Doherty, Neil and Lo, Anita (2002) “Can Insurers Pay for the ‘Big One?’
Measuring the Capacity of an Insurance Market to Respond to Catastrophic Losses.” Journal of
Banking and Finance, 26: 557-583.
Cummins, J. David and Doherty, Neil (2002) “Federal Terrorism Reinsurance: An Analysis of Issues
and Program Design Alternatives” Paper Presented at the NBER Insurance Project Workshop,
Cambridge Mass. Feb. 1.
Eeckhoudt, Louis and Gollier, Christian (1999) “The Insurance of Low Probability Events” Journal
of Risk and Insurance, 66: 17-28.
Enders, Walter and Todd, Sandler (2000) “Is Transnational Terrorism Becoming More Threatening
Journal of Conflict Resolution, 44 (3): 307-332.
Enders, Walter and Todd, Sandler (1993) “The Effectiveness of Anti-terrorism Policies: A Vector-
Autoregression-Intervention Analysis” American Political Science Review, 87 (4): 829-844.
Fleming, Alan (1993) “The Role for Pool Re”, Proceedings of Property Owners, Insurance
Conference: Problems and Solutions, pp. 35-40.
Froot, Kenneth. (ed.) (1999) The Financing of Catastrophe Risks. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Godard, Olivier, Henry, Claude, Patrick Lagadec and Erwann Michel-Kerjan (2002) Treatise on New
Risks. Sustainability, Crisis, Insurance (in French). Paris: Editions Gallimard.
Gollier, Christian (2000) “Towards an Economic Theory of the Limits of Insurability” Assurances,
January, pp.453-474.



                                               33
Grace, Martin, Klein, Robert, Kleindorfer, Paul and Michael, Murray (2003) Catastrophe Insurance.
Consumer Demand, Markets and Regulation. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publisher.
Grossi, Patricia and Kunreuther, Howard (eds.) (in press) New Approaches to Managing Risks from
Natural Hazards. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Hale, D (2002) “America Uncovered” Financial Times, September 12.
Hartwig, Robert (2002) “September 11, 2001: The First Year. One Hundred Minutes of Terror that
Changed the Global Insurance Industry Forever”. Insurance Information Institute.
Heal, Geoffrey and Kunreuther, Howard (2003) “You only die once: managing discrete
interdependent risks.” NBER Working Paper 9885, Cambridge, MA, July 2003.
Hirshleifer, Jack (1953) “ War Damage Insurance”, Review of Economic Studies, 35(2): 144-153.
Hoffman, Bruce (1998) Inside Terrorism. New York: Columbia University Press.
Hsu, Spencer (2003) “D.C. Disputes Insurance Study Raising Rates For Terrorism” Washington
Post, January 7, page A01.
Jaffee, Dwight and Russell, Thomas (2002) “Extreme Events and the Market for Terrorism
Insurance”: Paper Presented at the NBER Insurance Project Workshop, Cambridge Mass. Feb. 1.
Keohane, Nathaniel and Zeckhauser, Richard (2003) “The Ecology of Terror Defense” Journal of
Risk and Uncertainty, 26(2/3), 2003, 201-229.
Kleindorfer, Paul and Kunreuther, Howard (1999) “Challenges facing the Insurance Industry In
Managing Catastrophe Risks” in The Financing of Catastrophe Risks, edited by Ken Froot, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Kunreuther, Howard (2003) “The pitfalls of an interdependent world” Financial Times, August 28,
p.11.
Kunreuther, Howard and Heal, Geoffrey (2003) “Interdependent Security” Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty , 26(2/3): 231-249.
Kunreuther, Howard (2002) “The Role of Insurance in Managing Extreme Events: Implications for
Terrorism Coverage” Risk Analysis, august 2002, 22: 427-437.
Kunreuther, Howard, Jacqueline Meszaros, Robin Hogarth, and Mark Spranca (1995) “Ambiguity
and underwriter decision processes” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 26:337-352.
Lelain, Patrick, Bonturi, Marcos and Koen, Vincent (2002) “The Economic Consequences of
Terrorism” OECD Working paper 334, Department of Economics, Paris: OECD.
Linstone, Harold and Turoff, Murray (1975)     The Delphi Method. Techniques and Applications.
Addison-Wesly Publishing Company.
Major, John (2002) “Advanced Techniques for Modeling Terrorism Risk” Journal of Risk Finance
4 (1):15-24.
Michel-Kerjan, Erwann (2003) “New Vulnerabilities in Critical Infrastructures: A US Perspective”
Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management 11 (3): 132-140.




                                               34
Michel-Kerjan, Erwann and Pedell, Burkhard (2003) “Terrorism Risk Coverage after 9/11: A
Comparison of the New Public-private Partnerships in France, Germany and the U.S.”, working
paper, Philadelphia: Center for Risk Management and Decision Processes, The Wharton School, in
preparation.
Muto, Sheila (2003) “Lighthouse Battle Starts New Chapter”, Wall Street Journal, October 8.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2003) Emerging Systemic Risks in the
21st Century: An Agenda for Action. Paris: OECD.
Pate-Cornell, Elisabeth and Guikema, Seth (2002) “Probabilistic Modeling of Terrorist Threats: A
Systems Analysis Approach to Setting Priorities Among Countermeasures” Military Operations
Research 7:5-20. December.
Roth, Richard, Jr. (1998) “Earthquake Insurance Protection in California” Chap. 4 in Kunreuther
Howard and Roth, Richard, Sr. (eds.) (1998) Paying the Price: The Status and Role of Insurance
Against Natural Disasters in the United States, Washington, D.C: Joseph Henry Press.
Sandler, Todd and Enders, Walter (2004), “An Economic Perspective of Transnational Terrorism”
European Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Sandler, Todd, Tschirhart, John and Cauley, Jon (1983) “A Theoretical Analysis of Transnational
Terrorism” American Political Science Review, 77: 36-54.
Swiss Re (2002-a) Natural catastrophes and man-made disasters 2001: man-made losses take on a
new dimension, Sigma No1, Zurich: Swiss Re.
Swiss Re (2002-b) Terrorism—dealing with the new spectre Zurich: Swiss Re, Feb.
Trajtenberg, Manuel (2003) “Defense R&D Policy in the Anti-Terrorist ERA”, NBER Working
Paper 9725, Cambridge, MA, May 2003.
Treaster, Joseph (2003) “Insurance for Terrorism Still a Rarity” New York Times, March 8.
U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) (2003) Catastrophe Insurance Risks. Status of Efforts to
Securitize Natural Catastrophe and Terrorism Risk. GAO-03-1033. Washington, D.C.: September 24.
U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) (2002) “Terrorism Insurance: Rising Uninsured Exposure to
Attacks Heightens Potential Economic Vulnerabilities”, Testimony of Richard J. Hillman Before the
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Committee on Financial Services, House of
Representatives. February 27.
U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) (2001) “Terrorism Insurance: Alternative Programs for
Protecting Insurance Consumers”, Testimony of Thomas McCool Before the Committee on Banking,
Housing and Urban Affairs, US Senate. October 24.
White House (2003) National Strategy for Physical Protection of Critical Infrastructures and Key
Assets Washington, DC, February 2003.
White House (2002) National Strategy for Homeland Security Washington, DC, July 2002.
Woo, Gordon (2002) “Quantitative Terrorism Risk Assessment” Journal of Risk Finance, 4 (1): 7-14.




                                                35
