NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW DO ELECTORAL RULES SHAPE PARTY STRUCTURES,
GOVERNMENT COALITIONS, AND ECONOMIC POLICIES?
Torsten Persson
Gérard Roland
Guido Tabellini
Working Paper 10176
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10176
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

This research is supported by the Swedish Research Council, Bocconi University and the Communauté
Française de Belgique, as well as a grant from the Center for Business and Policy Studies financing data
collection. We are grateful to Antonio Merlo, Matthias Messner, Roger Myerson, Fausto Panunzi, Ken
Shepsle and Dan Trefler, and seminar particpants at Bocconi, CIAR, IIES, MIT, Pennsylvania, LSE and Yale
for helpful comments, and to Krister Lundell, Andrea Mascotto and Jose Mauricio Prado Jr. for skillful
assistance with data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Torsten Persson, Gérard Roland, and Guido Tabellini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

How Do Electoral Rules Shape Party Structures, Government Coalitions, and Economic Policies?
Torsten Persson Gérard Roland, and Guido Tabellini
NBER Working Paper No. 10175
December 2003
JEL No. H00, D72, D78
ABSTRACT
We present a theoretical model of a parliamentary democracy, where party structures, government
coalitions and fiscal policies are endogenously determined. The model predicts that, relative to
proportional elections, majoritarian elections reduce government spending because they reduce party
fragmentation and, therefore, the incidence of coalition governments. Party fragmentation can persist
under majoritarian rule if party supporters are unevenly distributed across electoral districts.
Economic and political data, from up to 50 post-war parliamentary democracies, strongly support
our joint predictions from the electoral rule, to the party system, to the type of government, and to
government spending.
Torsten Persson
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
and NBER
torsten.persson@iies.su.se
Gérard Roland
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
groland@econ.berkeley.edu
Guido Tabellini
IGIER Bocconi University
Via Salasco 5
20136 Milano, Italy
guido.tabellini@uni-bocconi.it

1. Introduction
Recent empirical research by economists has demonstrated that electoral rules
exert a strong influence on fiscal policy: majoritarian elections are associated with
smaller government spending, smaller budget deficits and smaller welfare states,
compared to proportional elections. Details of electoral rules seem to matter for
corruption and eﬀectiveness in government service provision, better performance
being associated with larger electoral districts, and with individual rather than
party-list ballots.1
For many years, political scientists have stressed the strong influence of electoral rules on the party structure: majoritarian elections are more likely to lead
to a two-party system, while proportional elections often produce fragmentation
of political parties. Moreover, these implications for party structure naturally
spill over to the formation of governments: single-party majority governments
are more common when parties are few, and coalition (or single-party minority)
governments are the norm when parties are many.2
It is a plausible conjecture that these correlations in the data reflect a common
causal chain. Proportional elections raise the number of parties in the legislature. This raises the incidence of coalition governments, and thereby increases
the likelihood of higher government spending, because policymaking under such
governments is plagued by the so-called common-pool problem.
Despite its plausibility, this conjecture has not really been carefully studied,
neither theoretically nor empirically. One reason may be that the suggested causal
chain is quite complex. Rather than studying the entire chain, researchers have
thus focused on only one or two of its links. Another reason for the lack of encompassing research may be that the issues fall in the cracks between two disciplines.
Political scientists have studied the political consequences of alternative electoral
rules and neglected their economic repercussions whereas economists have focused
on their economic eﬀects in simplified political settings where party structures and
types of government are exogenous or play no significant role.3 The goal of this
1

See, in particular, Milesi-Ferretti, Perotti and Rostagno, 2002, Persson and Tabellini 2003,
2004 and Persson, Tabellini and Trebbi, 2003.
2
See, for instance, Laver and Schofield, 1990, Lijphart, 1984, 1994, 1999, Powell, 1982, 2000,
and Taagepera and Shugart, 1989.
3
Thus Cox (1990, 1997) focused on the link between electoral rules and the number of candidates or parties while neglecting government formation and policy; Austen-Smith (2000) studies
taxation and government formation under alternative electoral rules, but takes party structures
as exogenous; Baron and Diermeier (2001) study government formation and policymaking under

2

paper is to mend these cracks by studying the eﬀects of the electoral rule on political outcomes — party structures and types of government — as well as economic
outcomes — fiscal policies and rents — in a common framework.4
We study the politico-economic interactions in parliamentary democracies as
a multi-stage, extensive-form game. Making use of many simplifying assumptions, we solve this game for equilibrium party structures, types of government
and economic policies under alternative assumptions about electoral rules and
other parameters characterizing the economic and political environment. Our
model rests on two key mechanisms. First, in party formation politicians trade oﬀ
expected electoral gains from a larger party against the sharing of rents when holding oﬃce. Second, policy formation is driven by electoral conflicts: between the
government and opposition (always), and the parties within government (under
coalition governments).
Solutions of the model imply several sharp predictions for the joint eﬀects of
the electoral system on political outcomes and economic policy outcomes. We
then take these predictions to the data, using political and economic data from
up to 50 parliamentary democracies in the post-war period. Our estimates rely
alternatively on the cross-country variation in the data, or the within-country
variation associated with electoral reforms.
The central result of the paper, supported by both theory and evidence, is that
majoritarian elections cause less government spending because, by leading to a less
fragmented party system, they reduce the incidence of higher-spending coalition
governments. Party fragmentation can persist under majoritarian rule, however,
especially if constituencies for the diﬀerent parties are unevenly distributed across
electoral districts and create strong geographical heterogeneity in the electoral
strength of diﬀerent parties.
The next section (Section 2) presents and discusses our (many) assumptions
about party formation, government formation, economic policy formation and the
behavior of politicians and voters. We then solve the model and characterize the
solution under a proportional electoral system (Section 3), as well as a majoritarian electoral system (Section 4). Following this, we extend the basic framework
(Section 5) by introducing asymmetries and heterogeneity among economic and
PR, but also take party structure as exogenous; and Persson and Tabellini (1999, 2000) study
the eﬀects of electoral rules on a variety of policy outcomes, but always take party structure as
given.
4
A recent and very interesting paper by Bawn and Rosenbluth (2002), to which we owe
considerable inspiration, has a similar ambition.

3

political groups. Finally, we present (Section 6) our data and results from empirical tests of the theoretical predictions. Conclusions and suggestions for further
work are collected at the end (Section 7).

2. The model
2.1. Economic policy
A population consists of 4 economic groups of equal size, normalized to unity and
indexed by J. Individuals in group J have preferences represented by:
V J (q) = 1 − τ + H(gJ ) .

(2.1)

Here, τ is a lump sum tax constrained to be non-negative, g J is a local public
good that only benefits economic group J, H is a well-behaved concave utility
function, and q denotes the full vector of policy instruments. Individual income
is normalized to 1 for all individuals. The government budget constraint equates
total tax revenue to total spending:
X
X
4τ =
gJ +
rP ,
(2.2)
J

P

where rP denotes political rents (here, literally taken out of tax revenue) appropriated by political party P.
This is a simple and standard economic policy setting in the literature: see for
instance Persson, Roland and Tabellini
Persson and Tabellini (2000). The
£ © (2000),
ª © ª¤
vector of policy instruments, q = τ , gJ , rP , induces a three-way conflict of
interest: (1) among economic
© J ª groups over the allocation of the (targeted) spending
on local public goods, g ; (2) between politicians and citizens at large over the
total size of political rents, ΣrP , versus (non-targeted)
taxes, τ ; and, (3) among
© Pª
politicians over the allocation of these rents, r .
A benevolent and utilitarian social planner, who assigns no value to the rents
captured by politicians, would implement the following policy (subscripts denote
partial derivatives and −1 an inverse function):
ĝJ = Hg−1 (1),

r̂P = 0

(2.3)

with taxes residually determined from the government budget constraint (we assume an interior optimum). All groups are treated equally and the marginal
4

utility of the local public good g J for a quarter of the population is equated to the
opportunity cost of private consumption for the whole population, namely unity.
Political rents are set at zero.
2.2. The political system
We model the political system as a multistage game. All stages take place within
the single period described in the previous subsection (we discuss below how to
extend the model to a multiperiod framework). We can think of this single period
as the life of a legislature, beginning right after the preceding election and ending
with a fixed election date. The legislature consists of four groups of legislators,
each representing one of the economic groups discussed above.
The game has four consecutive stages: a party formation stage, when the four
groups of legislators can either form group-specific parties, or merge into larger
parties; a government formation stage, when a government supported by a legislative majority is formed; a policy formation stage, when the government (and its
legislative majority) sets economic policy; an election stage, when citizens observe
their welfare and vote for one of the existing parties. The rules of the game are
always the same, except for the electoral rule: we compare equilibria under proportional and majoritarian elections. Before we delve into that comparison, the
remainder of this section describes and discusses the extensive form of the game
in each of its four stages.
2.2.1. Party formation
Just after the previous elections, each political group in the legislature has a simple
choice: whether to form a separate group-specific party, or to merge into a new
and larger party with another group. At the outset, the legislature thus consists of
four political groups, numbered from 1 to 4, each representing one of the economic
groups. The precise meaning of the word “representing” is explained when we
describe the election stage, below. For simplicity, we assume that each political
group has an initial seat share of 1/4 (under suitable assumptions discussed below,
the results can be generalized to arbitrary initial seat shares).
The decision whether to merge or (remain) split is made strategically by these
groups, taking into account subsequent equilibrium outcomes. We simplify the
strategy space by only allowing mergers between groups 1 and 2, and groups
3 and 4 respectively. This restriction could be justified by invoking ideological

5

aﬃnities, but we do not model these explicitly. For a merger to take place, both
merging groups must agree; if not, they form separate parties.5
The outcome of this stage is a party system, where parties are indexed by P. If
a party represents only one economic group, J, we index this party P = J. If two
groups of legislators merge, the resulting party represents two economic groups, I
and J; and we write the party index as P = IJ. Three outcomes are thus possible:
a two-party system, (P = 12 and P = 34), a four-party system (P = 1, 2, 3, 4),
and a three-party system (P = 12, 3, 4, or P = 1, 2, 34). We let N denote the
equilibrium number of parties, and the possible outcomes by N = II, III, IV .
Let N W P denote the expected payoﬀ of party P, at the start of the next
(government-formation) stage of the game, i.e., its continuation utility after party
formation, once N parties have formed. These payoﬀs are described more precisely
below, except for the following natural assumptions: if political group J remains
a party on its own, its expected continuation payoﬀ coincides with that of the
group-specific party: N W J = N W P , with P = J. If instead political groups I and
J merge, each one expects to receive one half of the expected continuation payoﬀ
of the merged party N W J = 12 N W P , with P = IJ.
A four-party system is an equilibrium if — taking into account the expected
equilibrium outcome of subsequent stages — the groups of legislators representing
economic groups I and J find it optimal to remain split, given that the other
two groups have also decided to stay split, i.e., IV W P > 12 III W IJ , for P = I, J.
This condition must hold for I and J = 1, 2 or 3, 4. Equilibrium conditions for a
two-party, or a three-party, system are formulated in an analogous way.6
2.2.2. Government formation
After party formation, but before any policy decisions, a government is formed.
We keep this stage of the game as simple as possible, skipping any strategic
interactions, by just postulating an exogenous stochastic process for government
formation. Any government needs the support of at least half the legislature.
In line with our assumptions about party formation, we only allow governing
5

This assumption only matters when we introduce asymmetries: if the model is symmetric,
the incentives to merge or remain split are the same for the pair contempleting a merger.
6
The assumption of four primitive groups in the legislature is not restrictive. We could
instead have assumed the initial legislature to consist of two or three parties, allowing them to
splinter into smaller group-specific parties. Nothing of substance would change in this alternative
formulation and the same set of equilibrium party systems would result with suitable changes
in notation.

6

coalitions, when relevant, between parties 1 and 2, or between parties 3 and 4. We
thus rule out minority governments, as well as surplus coalitions, by assumption.
Finally, we assume that a government is always formed and that each party is
included in government with a probability equal to its seat share in the legislature,
given the restrictions on feasible coalitions.7
At the end of the government formation stage, each party P can thus be in
one of three states, indexed by G: outside of government (G = O); in a coalition
government (G = C); or in a single-party government (G = S). Given the rules
of the game and the restrictions on feasible coalitions, the three indexes (P, N, G)
summarize all the relevant political outcomes up to this stage.
2.2.3. Policy formation and payoﬀs
Once a government has formed, the parties in government set economic policy.
We start by describing their payoﬀs.
Parties are opportunistic: they care only about political rents in the current
period and seats in the next legislature. Specifically, consider party P, with government status G in a system with N parties, and let N WGP denote its expected
payoﬀ at the start of the policy formation stage. This continuation payoﬀ is linked
to that of the party formation stage by: N W P = E(N WGP ), where the expectations
operator E refers to the uncertainty in government formation. We assume:
P
N WG

P
= rG
+ E(N sPG )RP ,

(2.4)

P
denotes the rents captured by party P in the current legislature and
where rG
RP denotes the expected value of seats in the next legislature, N sPG denotes the
seat share of party P in the next legislature, conditional on current government
status G, and the expectations operator E(·) refers to the electoral uncertainty
remaining at the policy formation stage. Note that current (r) and future (R)
rents do not depend on the number of parties in the legislature, N. This is a
feature of the equilibrium, that will be derived in the next section. But the
expected seat share, E(N sPG ), is indexed by N, because its equilibrium value does
7

Taking minority governments seriously would require specifying a richer model of policy
formation than the one coinsidered below. In particular, we would have to take into account
the strategic interactions in the legislature, given the specific rules for government breakup and
formation. Laver and Shepsle (1996) and Diermeier, Eraslan and Merlo (2003) provide detailed
game-theoretic analyses of government formation, but neglect most of the remaining political
interactions (party formation, policy formation, and elections).

7

depend on the number of parties (at least under some electoral rules).8 Next we
P
discuss the possible outcomes for rG
and RP , while E(N sPG ) is discussed in the
next subsection.
It is easy to show that the parties in government never find it optimal to confer
any rents on the parties in opposition. Rather than deriving this result in every
P
case studied below, we simply set rO
= 0 in the following. The first term in (2.4)
is thus relevant only for a party in government, i.e., for G = C, S.
The expected value of seats in the next legislature, RP , is taken as given when
policy is set in the current period, since it refers to future events beyond the
control of the current government. But as we shall see, the value of seats matters
not only for expected payoﬀs but also for current policy, in particular for the
P
optimal size of current rents, rG
. To pin it down, we let RP be proportional to
total equilibrium rents captured by the government, and we implicitly assume that
the party structure remains the same after the election. The expected value of
seats diﬀers for a small party (P = J) and a large party merging two political
groups (P = IJ), because a small party can only be in a coalition government,
∗P
while a large party can only be in a single-party government. Specifically, let rG
denote equilibrium rents captured by any individual party, conditional on being
in a government of type G = C, S. Then we assume
½
2γrC∗P if P is small (P = J)
P
R =
(2.5)
γrS∗P if P is large (P = IJ) ,
where γ is a positive parameter measuring the payoﬀ from future expected rents.
Thus, by (2.4) and (2.5), the parties want to win seats in the next legislature,
because they are associated with a bigger expected share of future government
rents. Although this formulation is quite plausible, we do not attempt to derive
it from more primitive assumptions about bargaining over government formation
in the next legislature. In this respect, we treat government formation as a black
box in the present as well as future periods.9
8

Note that we use diﬀerent operators to denote expectations at the policy formation stage,
E(·), and the party-formation stage, E(·), since the nature of the uncertainty is diﬀerent.
9
Preserving some symmetry, the results derived in the next section, including the equilibrium
party structure, hold for arbitrary seat shares in the initial legislature (and not just for equal initial shares among all parties). In this sense, the static equilibrium of this game is self-replicating,
and the implicit assumption that the equilibrium party structure remains unchanged after the
election is not too restrictive. Extending the model to an intertemporal set up, however, would
raise deeper questions about the payoﬀs and the rules for government formation. We leave this
extension for future research.

8

We now turn to the extensive form of the policy formation stage. If a single
party holds government, policy formation is straightforward: the party acts in
unison and simply sets the vector of policy instruments q to maximize (2.4) subject
to the economic constraints (2.1) and (2.2), and taking into account equilibrium
behavior at the subsequent election stage, yet to be described.
In the event of a coalition government, the parties in government generally
disagree over the allocation of spending on local public goods, {g J }, and rents,
{rP } — see below. We assume that each member of the coalition has unilateral
decision making power over the relevant dimension of these two variables; thus,
party P representing economic group J unilaterally sets rents for itself, rP , and
local public goods benefiting its group J, gJ , so as to maximize (2.4) subject to
the economic constraints (2.1) and (2.2), and taking into account the equilibrium
at the election stage. As we shall see, all coalition members agree about the
optimal amount of spending on the local public goods benefiting the groups not
represented in government. Hence, it is unimportant who has control over these
policy instruments, and for simplicity we assume that a coin is tossed about who
is entitled to choose them. Finally, we assume that tax revenues τ are residually
determined so as to balance the budget, once all spending decisions have been
made (assuming an interior optimum for the tax rate).
This assumption about the behavior of coalition governments can be interpreted as parties obtaining agenda-setting powers — say, in the form of ministerial
positions — over the policy dimensions they care about the most (such powers
could potentially be derived from bargaining over ministerial positions at a government formation stage, as in Laver and Shepsle, 1996). This agenda-setting
power is strong enough to allow the minister in charge to do what is unilaterally
optimal for her party. This would happen, for instance, if rejection of a policy
proposal led to a government crisis or some very costly outcome for the coalition
members, as in Diermeier and Feddersen (1998) or Persson, Roland and Tabellini
(2000).
As discussed in the next section, the implication of our assumptions about
policy formation is that coalition governments, but not single-party governments,
face a common-pool problem in setting local public goods and rents.
2.2.4. Elections and voters
We assume that citizens vote retrospectively, based on “ideology”, as well as their
economic welfare, rewarding or punishing the incumbent government according to

9

whether their individual utility is above or below a given reservation utility level.
Ideology nevertheless plays a role in that they reward or punish the party representing their group diﬀerently than parties representing other groups. Specifically,
citizen i in group J votes for party J when it is in government if:
V J (q) ≥ ω i + δ + V ∗J .

(2.6)

If the inequality turns the other way, she votes for the opposition; if the opposition has more than one party, each opposition party receives her vote with equal
probability. If party J is not in government and if inequality (2.6) is satisfied,
then in case there is a government coalition, each party in the coalition receives
her vote with equal probability; if the inequality is not satisfied, she votes for her
“own” party. Voters thus reward their own party more often than other parties10 .
The first term on the right hand side of (2.6) depicts an individual component
of reservation utility: ω i is uniformly distributed within each group of voters,
with mean zero and density φ. Individuals with higher values of ωi are more
demanding of the incumbent government. The second term is a random shock to
the popularity of the incumbent government, common to all voters. We assume
that δ is also uniformly distributed, with mean 0 and density ψ. Thus, we can
think of φ as a measure of within-group voter mobility, and ψ as a measure of
aggregate mobility between government and opposition (higher values correspond
to higher mobility). The last term is given by V ∗J = V J (q∗G ), where q∗G denotes the
equilibrium policy vector, for a given party structure, a given type of government
and a given electoral rule — as shown below, the number of parties in the legislature
has no influence on equilibrium policy once we control for the type of government.
It reflects the voters’ expectations of what the government can reasonably be
expected to deliver, given the political circumstances in which policy is set.
As we will see, these assumptions imply that in equilibrium on average half
of the voters vote for the incumbent government while the remaining half votes
for the opposition. When the incumbent government sets policy, it knows the
distributions for ω i and δ, but not the realization of the aggregate popularity
shock δ. As in other probabilistic voting models, this uncertainty creates a smooth
mapping from policy to expected vote shares.
10

As we will see below, this behavioral assumption is important because it induces a conflict
among parties in a coalition government. It creates an electoral incentive for a political party P
in government to please the group it represents, but not the group represented by the coalition
partner.

10

These specific assumptions about voting behavior can be generalized in several
ways, without altering the nature of the results. Two specific aspects are central
to our argument, however. First, voters are not fully intertemporally rational,
and not modeled as strategic players. We are not too apologetic about ruling out
strategic voting. Instances of this phenomenon may certainly be observed in the
real world. Given the low individual stakes for a single, atomistic voter, however,
sophisticated strategic voting is not necessarily more plausible than simple retrospective voting. On the other hand, we believe that it is much more important to
model professional politicians as fully rational, strategic actors.
The second central aspect is that voters reward only their own party (rather
than the whole coalition) when they are pleased with the government performance.
Again, the specific way this behavior is modeled is not so important. The central
idea is that at least some voters are ideologically attached to a party, and that
their voting behavior discriminates between parties in a coalition government.
But if the parties merge, voters become unable to discriminate between them. As
stressed by Bawn and Rosenbluth (2002), the idea that voters can discriminate
between parties in a coalition government, but not between groups inside a single
party, may be at the core of why coalition governments behave diﬀerently than
single-party majorities.
2.2.5. Electoral rules
When votes have been cast, they are translated into seats for the next legislature
according to the electoral rule in place. Under proportional elections, all voters belong to a single national district, and the electoral formula is PR. Thus, each party
receives a seat share in the next legislature directly proportional to its vote share
in the national district. Under majoritarian elections, voters are distributed in a
continuum of single-member districts indexed by d, and the electoral formula in
each district is plurality rule. Thus, district d has one seat in the next legislature,
and the seat is won by the party with the highest vote share in d.
2.2.6. Political-economic equilibrium
A full politico-economic equilibrium is an equilibrium of this multi-stage game.
More precisely, an equilibrium is:
a) a party system resulting from optimal choices by the primitive groups of
legislators at the party formation stage, taking into account the electoral rule and
the expected equilibrium outcomes at stages b)-d).
11

b) a type of government (coalition or single-party majority) selected by nature
at the government formation stage, given the equilibrium party system.
c) a policy optimally selected by the parties in each possible government, given
the equilibrium party system and the type of government, and taking into account
the electoral rule and the expected equilibrium outcome at stage d).
d) an election outcome, given the electoral rule, the equilibrium economic
policy, type of government, and party system.

3. Proportional elections
Under proportional elections, the seat share of each party, N sPG , is identical to its
P
nation-wide vote share, N vG
. In the first subsection, we compute the equilibrium
economic policies under coalition governments and single-party governments, focusing on the last two stages of the game, elections and policy formation. In the
next subsection, we characterize the equilibrium party system and the equilibrium
type of government.
3.1. Equilibrium policy
3.1.1. Coalition government
Consider a four-party system (N = IV ). We assume (without loss of generality
given the symmetry of the model) that parties 1 and 2 form a coalition government,
while parties 3 and 4 make up the opposition. We first describe equilibrium
vote shares and seat shares as a function of economic policy and then compute
equilibrium policies.
Equilibrium seat shares Consider the voters in group J = P, where P = 1 or
2 is one of the two parties in government. Pick a voter in this group, with a value
of ω i exactly equal to V J − V ∗J − δ. By (2.6), this “swing voter” in group I is just
indiﬀerent between voting for P and voting (randomly) for an opposition party.
All voters of the group with a lower value of ωi vote for party P. Let F (·) denote
the cumulative distribution function of ωi in (2.6). The fraction of voters in group
J = P voting for party P is thus F (V P − V ∗P − δ), while the complementary
fraction 1 − F (V P − V ∗P − δ) votes (randomly) for the opposition.
The vote share, and hence also the seat share, for each of the parties in the
coalition government (P = 1, 2) is:

12

1
1X
= [F (V P − V ∗P − δ) +
F (V J − V ∗J − δ)]
4
2 J=3
4

P
IV vC

=

sPC

(3.1)

Among the terms between square brackets, the first reflects the share of voters in
group P whose reservation utility is satisfied, and the second the share of satisfied
voters from other groups (J = 3, 4). As the latter split their vote equally between
the two parties in the governing coalition, the second term is multiplied by 1/2.
Finally, since each economic group constitutes one quarter of the population, the
whole expression is pre-multiplied by this number.
As ω i has the same uniform distribution in each group, F (ω) = 12 + φω. Recall
also that the expected value of the popularity shock δ is zero, at the time policy
is set. After some simplifications, the expected seat share in the next legislature
for party P reduces to:
1 φ
1X J
= + [(V P − V ∗P ) +
(V − V ∗J )] .
4 4
2 J=3
4

E(IV sPC )

(3.2)

Thus, the expected seat share in the next legislature depends linearly on the
weighted indirect utilities of the voters from J = P and from the opposition
parties. As mentioned above, the density φ of the idiosyncratic reservation utilities
measures within-group mobility and hence the response of the expected seat shares
to economic policy. Note that the groups represented by a party in government
receive twice the weight of the groups in the opposition. Finally, whatever the
equilibrium policies at the policy formation stage, V J = V ∗J , by definition of
V ∗J . Equation (3.2) thus immediately implies that the expected equilibrium seat
share in the next legislature for a coalition partner, at the party formation stage
is 14 . Thus, in the expected equilibrium continuation payoﬀ IV WCP , given by (2.4)
above, we will be able to set E(IV sPC ) = 14 . By the symmetry of the model, the
expected seat share at the party formation stage for a small party in opposition
is exactly the same; i.e., in IV WOP we set E(IV sPO ) = 14 .
What would happen if the opposition instead consisted of a single party? It
is easy to verify that the expressions for the expected vote shares for government
coalition parties at the party formation stage are exactly the same: i.e., we have
E(IV sPC ) = E(III sPC ) = 14 for P = 1, 2. A single opposition party can expect to
capture the remaining votes E(III sPO ) = 12 .

13

Equilibrium policy Party P = 1, 2 in a coalition government sets rP and g J ,
J = P, so as to maximize (2.4), subject to (3.2), (2.1) and (2.2), and for a given
value of future seats RP . Since both parties in the coalition government agree
over spending benefiting the groups not represented in government, it is irrelevant
who sets it; we thus let either of P = 1, 2 optimize with regards to gJ , J 6= 1, 2.
Moreover, the policymaking incentives are identical independently of whether the
opposition consists of on or two parties (in the previous section we could omit the
back subscript N from policy outcomes, because they are the same irrespective
of N, given the type of government).
The resulting optimality conditions for spending imply:11
½
Hg−1 [ 12 ] if J = 1, 2
∗J
(3.3)
gC =
Hg−1 [1], if J = 3, 4 .
Retrospective voting induces opportunistic politicians to enact a suboptimal allocation of local public goods, relative to the choices of a social planner. The groups
represented in government have an advantage, and spending on the local public
good benefiting them exceeds the social optimum: gC∗J > ĝ J = Hg−1 (1), J = 1, 2.
Intuitively, the disproportionate electoral response by its own voters induces each
party in government to give them more weight. Since coalition members chose
local public goods unilaterally, we have a common-pool problem: the necessary
financing comes out of taxes levied on all groups, and the electoral losses from
this are also borne by the coalition partner. This leads both parties in government to overspend on their constituencies. Conversely, the economic groups not
represented in government (J = 3, 4) receive the eﬃcient amount of public goods
although they pay higher than optimal taxes. Intuitively, the parties in government agree to give less weight to groups 3 and 4 because electoral support in these
groups is less sensitive to their welfare compared to one’s “own” constituency.
It remains to determine the rents extracted by each party. In deciding on rP ,
party P trades oﬀ the direct gain of higher rents today against the loss of a lower
expected seat share (recall that the future value of oﬃce is taken as given by the
party). The optimum condition can be written:
1 + RP
11

and

∂E(IV sPC )
=0.
∂rP

In deriving (3.3), we use (2.1) and (2.2) which imply that
∂V J
∂g I

= −1/4 for I 6= J.

14

(3.4)
∂V J
∂g I

= Hg (g J ) − 1/4 for I = J,

>From (2.5) and the fact that P is a small party, we have RP = γ2rC∗P .
Imposing the consistency condition that future and current equilibrium rents (per
party) are the same, and using (3.2), we can solve (3.4) for the equilibrium rents
captured by each party in a coalition government:12
rC∗P =

4
.
γφ

(3.5)

Thus, equilibrium rents tend to be higher: (i) the smaller is the relative weight,
γ, assigned to future rents; (ii) the lower is within-group mobility, φ, and hence
the responsiveness to welfare losses among voters.
Total equilibrium rents in a coalition government are given by
rC∗

=

2
X

rC∗P =

P =1

8
.
γφ

3.1.2. Single-party government
Given the symmetry of the model, it does not matter for the policies chosen by
the single-party majority whether its opposition consists of a single party or two
distinct parties. Thus, the results presented in this section refer to a two-party
system, as well as a three-party system. Thus, we omit the N back subscript,
whenever there is no risk of confusion.
Equilibrium seat shares To fix ideas, consider the choices by party P = 12,
resulting from the merger of legislative groups 1 and 2, when in government.
Compared to a party in coalition government, this large party twice as large a
vote share among its own voters (now groups 1 and 2) and among the opposition
groups. Its seat share and vote share is thus given by an expression similar to
(3.1) above:
4
X
1
sPS = vSP = [2 +
F (V J − V ∗J − δ)] .
4
J=1
J

Here, we used the result that ∂V
= −1/4 for all J. Note that here we pin down equilibrium
∂rP
rents through our assumption that current and future equilibrium rents are equal. But similar
results would be obtained if we took the expected value of seats as parametrically given by
RP , and assumed that the parties’ marginal utility of rents was strictly decreasing (rather than
constant as assumed here).
12

15

Repeating the same steps as in section 3.1.1, we can rewrite the expected seat
share of party P = 12 in the next legislature, given that it forms a single-party
government today, as:
1 φX J
= +
(V − V ∗J ) .
2 4 I=1
4

E(sPS )

(3.6)

As before, the expected seat share is a linear function of the weighted utilities of
all the voters, but now all economic groups receive the same weights.
It is easy to see that in equilibrium the expected seat share for the party in
government at the party formation stage entering the continuation payoﬀ, N WSP
must be E(sPS ) = 12 , since in equilibrium V J = V ∗J for all J. By symmetry, 12 is
also the expected equilibrium seat share of a single party in opposition. If the
opposition has two parties, they split the remaining expected equilibrium seats
equally; i.e., E(III sPO ) = 14 in III WOP
Equilibrium policy When the government is supported by a single party, conflicts of interest inside the government disappear, because voters can only punish
or reward the party in government. Whereas they could discriminate between
party 1 and party 2 in a coalition government, such discrimination is no longer
possible between the groups of legislators forming the large party. Even though
the voters of groups 1 and 2 still have conflicting interests, this conflict remains
latent in policy formation.13
Specifically, equilibrium policy now results from the maximization of (2.4) with
regard to all policy instruments, subject to (2.1), (2.2), and (3.6), taking the value
of expected future seats, RP as given. Repeating the steps in section 3.1.1, the
optimality conditions imply:
gS∗J = Hg−1 (1),

J = 1, .., 4 .

(3.7)

Comparing (3.7) and (3.3), we find that the overspending on groups represented in
government disappears. Intuitively, the type of government matters for spending
13

If politicians were not opportunistic, but instead motivated directly by all aspects of policy
(e.g., as ”citizen candidates”), there would be a conflict between the legislators inside a singleparty government. But the diﬀerences between single-party and coalition governments induced
by voting behavior would still remain. With conflicting interests between legislators in merged
parties, it would also be central to model within-party bargaining (and its diﬀerences from
within-coalition bargaining).

16

because coalition governments are subject to an electoral common-pool problem,
whereas single-party governments are not. As noted above, the reason is that the
voters must now treat the single party as an entity.
Finally, consider equilibrium rents. Taking as given the value of future seats
and maximizing the single government’s payoﬀ, gives the following optimality
condition:
∂E(sPS )
1 + RP
=0.
(3.8)
∂rP
Using RP = γrS∗P and (3.6), and imposing the condition that future and current
equilibrium rents are the same, it is easy to show that equilibrium rents in a singleparty government are given by the same expression as (3.5): rS∗P = rC∗P . But as
rC∗P denote the rents per party, total rents with a single-party government are half
of those with a coalition government: rS∗ = 12 rC∗ . This stark result is due to the fact
that a single-party government internalizes all the electoral costs of rent extraction,
whereas each party in a coalition internalizes only half the electoral costs and sets
policy unilaterally, ignoring the electoral costs of its coalition partner.
We can summarize the above discussion as follows:
Proposition 1
In a proportional electoral system, the overall size of government, as measured
by total taxes, is larger under coalition governments than under single-party governments. Coalition governments spend more on programs favored by the groups
represented in government and collect larger political rents than single-party governments. Spending on programs favored by opposition groups are the same under
the two types of government.
3.2. Equilibrium party structure
Having determined equilibrium economic policy under both types of government,
we turn to the first two stages of the game: party formation and government
formation.
3.2.1. Government formation
We need to determine the equilibrium expected payoﬀs of the parties represented
in the legislature at the outset of the government formation stage for all possible
party systems.

17

Four party system Suppose that the legislature consists of four parties P =
1, 2, 3, 4 . Given the rules of government formation, only coalition governments are
possible in this case: coalitions of parties 1 and 2, and 3 and 4, are formed with
the equal probability, 12 .
By (2.4), the expected utility for any of these parties, at the start of the
government formation stage, is thus:
IV W

P

¤ 1£
¤
1£ P
rC + E(IV sPC )RP + E(IV sPO )RP .
2
2

= E(IV WCP ) =

(3.9)

With probability 1/2, party P is in a coalition government in the current period,
earning an expected utility given by the first square-bracketed term; with probability 1/2, the party is out of government in the current period, earning expected
utility given by the second term.
We established in the previous section that, in a four-party system, E(IV sPC ) =
E(IV sPO ) = 1/4. As seen from the government formation stage, the expected equilibrium votes share is the same for the parties in government and opposition.
Using the expression in (2.5) for the expected value of seats in the next legislature, RP and the expression in (3.5) for equilibrium rents, rC∗P , the right hand side
of (3.9) simplifies to:
IV W

P

1
2(1 + γ)
= (1 + γ)rC∗P =
.
2
γφ

(3.10)

Two party system Instead suppose that the legislature consists of two parties,
P = 12, 34. Only single party governments are possible, with equal probabilities,
1/2. By (2.4), the expected utility of a generic party P, at the start of the
government formation stage, is:
II W

P

= E(II WSP ) =

¤ 1£
¤
1£ P
rS + E(II sPS )RP + E(II sPO )RP .
2
2

(3.11)

The first term is the expected utility of party P when in government, in the current
period, and the second term is its expected utility when out of government.
We established in the previous section that E(II sPC ) = E(II sPO ) = 12 . Carrying
out the same kind of calculation as in the four-party system, the right hand side
of (3.11) simplifies to:
II W

P

=

1
2(1 + γ)
[1 + γ] rS∗P =
,
2
γφ
18

(3.12)

which is exactly the same expression as in the four-party case. This should not
come as a surprise. As shown in the previous section, the rents appropriated
in equilibrium by each party in government are exactly the same, rC∗P = rS∗P .
Moreover, the probability of being included in government is the same ( 12 ), as is
the expected value of future rents. Future expected rents are the same because the
higher expected seat share of a single party, E(II sPS ) = 12 = 2E(IV sPC ), is exactly
compensated by the lower value of total future rents accruing to a single party
government, rS∗ = 12 rC∗ .
Three party system Finally, consider a three-party legislature, say P = 12,
3 and 4. Then both a single-party government and a coalition government are
possible, with equal probabilities, 1/2. Here the parties diﬀer, and we have to
keep track of their identity. The large party, P = 12, can only be in a single-party
government. As argued in Section 3.1, however, equilibrium rents for a singleparty government, rS∗P , do not depend on the number of parties in the opposition,
and neither does the value of future seats, RP = rS∗ . Moreover, the expected seat
share of a large party is always equal to 1/2, irrespective of the number of parties
in the legislature. Thus it follows that the expected payoﬀ of a large party is
the same as in the two-party system, III W P =II W P , for P = 12, as given by
the expression in (3.12). By similar reasoning, the smaller parties, P = 3, 4, can
only be in a coalition government, and their expected payoﬀ is the same as in a
four-party system III W P =IV W P as given by the expression in (3.10). All in
all, the number of parties represented in the legislature does not matter for the
parties’ expected payoﬀs.
3.2.2. Party formation
It is now straightforward to compute the equilibrium of the party formation stage.
As we have just seen, the expected equilibrium payoﬀs for parties are the same
independently of the number of parties in the legislature: each party formed during
the course of the party formation stage always has a continuation utility given
by both (3.12) and (3.10). But this payoﬀ accrues entirely to the members of
legislative group J if it forms a group-specific party, while it is divided in half
between two groups merging into a large party. Therefore, no party will ever want
to merge. Indeed, remaining split is a dominant strategy at the party formation
stage. Applying the equilibrium conditions in Section 2.2.1, a four-party system
is thus the unique equilibrium of the game under proportional elections.
19

We thus have:
Proposition 2
In a proportional electoral system, the unique equilibrium outcome has four
parties represented in the legislature. As a result, only coalition governments are
observed.
The fact that small parties in coalition governments extract as much rents
as large parties in single-party governments keep parties from merging. Note
that the electoral rule plays an important role here: as PR makes vote shares
equal to seat shares, merging yields no particular advantage by extending the
voter base. As we shall see in the next section, this is no longer the case under
plurality rule. Note also that the model suggests that it may be hard to test
the prediction in Proposition 1 about the behavior of coalition and single-party
governments under proportional elections. In the model the prediction concerns
an unobserved counterfactual: by Proposition 2, we should not observe any
single-party governments under proportional elections. Of course, the model is
very symmetric and simple, and with enough asymmetries, say in the seat shares
of voters across economic groups, or in the size of the groups, we may be able to
generate equilibria with two or three parties — see Section 5 below.

4. Majoritarian elections
Under majoritarian elections, the population is divided in a continuum of singlemember electoral districts. Each of these districts carries out a plurality-rule
election where the party winning the largest vote share wins the single seat. In
the event of a tie in a district, a coin is tossed between the parties with the same
vote share. In this section, we assume that the distribution of economic groups is
the same in all districts. But this assumption is relaxed in Section 5.
4.1. Equilibrium policy
4.1.1. Coalition government
Equilibrium seat shares Suppose that parties 1 and 2 are in a coalition government. Equilibrium vote shares, vP , are still given by (3.1) in the previous
section, which relates votes to government policy and the popularity shock, δ.
But now the formula for translating votes into seats is plurality rule. Because
of the model’s symmetry including the eﬀects of the single random shock δ, the

20

two parties in government always have the same vote share in equilibrium: equation (3.1) implies that N vC1 = N vC2 . Moreover, since all electoral districts are
homogenous, either the two parties in government win the whole legislature, or
the opposition wins the whole legislature, depending on the realization of δ. If the
two parties in government win, a coin is tossed to award the seat to one of them
district by district. With a continuum of districts, in equilibrium each winning
party in government ends up with half the seats in the legislature.14
This argument implies that the equilibrium expected seat share of party P =
1, 2 in a coalition government, is:
1
(4.1)
E(N sPC ) = Prob[N vCP ≥ N v̄C ] ,
2
where N v̄C denotes the minimum threshold needed to win the election in any one
of the identical districts given the number of parties. As before, the expectation
and the probability refers to the uncertainty regarding the realization of δ. If the
opposition is also split in two parties (i.e., N = IV ), we have IV v̄C = 14 . To win,
the coalition parties in government thus need to carry at least half the votes in any
district; since the votes are split equally between them (as they are between the
opposition parties), any one of the parties in government needs to win a quarter
of the votes in any district. If instead the opposition consists of a single party
(i.e., N = III), III v̄C = 13 . As the vote for the government is split in half between
the coalition parties, the government parties win the elections only if each of them
has a vote share at least as large as that of the single opposition party.
Recall that the random variable δ has a uniform distribution with mean 0 and
density ψ. Using (3.1) and simplifying, we then obtain the expected seat share
in the next legislature, at the policy formation stage, for a party in a coalition
government:
1
1
ψ
E(N sPC ) =
+ ( −N v̄C ) +
(4.2)
4
4
φ
4
ψ
1X J
P
∗P
+ [(V − V ) +
(V − V ∗J )] .
4
2 J=3

This expression is similar to that under proportional elections, equation (3.2).
The diﬀerences are that: (i) the density φ of the idiosyncratic reservation utility
14

The reader may wonder why, then, the coalition parties do not strategically agree to split
the districts among themselves running only a single coalition candidate in each district. But in
our simple model, these agreements would not be self-enforcing. To satisfactorily address this
issue, a richer model is needed.

21

ω i is replaced in the third term (4.2) by the density ψ of the popularity shock
δ; (ii) the constant in (4.2) depends on the number of parties in the opposition,
through the second term in N v̄C .15
Whatever the equilibrium policies at the policy formation stage, we have V J =
V ∗J . As explained above, in a four party system we have IV v̄C = 1/4. Hence, the
equilibrium seat share in the next legislature expected by each coalition partner at
the party formation stage is E(IV sPC ) = 14 . By the symmetry of the model, this is
also the expected seat share of each of the two parties in the opposition, E(IV sPO ) =
1
. In a three party system, III v̄C = 1/3. Here, the expected equilibrium seat share
4
of each small party (P = 1, 2) when in government is:
E(III sPC ) =

1
1 ψ
−
,
4 12 φ

(4.3)

while the single party in the opposition has an expected seat share of 2(1 −
E(III sPC )), namely:
1 1ψ
E(III sPO ) = +
.
(4.4)
2 6φ
These two expressions illustrate an important diﬀerence between majoritarian and
proportional elections, where we had E(III sPC ) = 14 and E(III sPO ) = 12 . In terms of
expected seats, plurality rule implies an extra gain for a large party, and an extra
loss for a small party. This disproportionality eﬀect raises the incentives to merge
into large parties under majoritarian elections.16
Finally, note that the term N v̄C enters additively in the right hand side of (4.2).
Hence, the partial derivatives of E(sP ) with respect to the policy instruments
do not depend on v̄. This implies that the optimal policy choices of a coalition
government do not depend on the number of parties in the opposition, even though
its equilibrium expected seat share does.
15

Note that (4.2) gives us the equilibrium expected seat share: it was derived from (4.1), under
the assumption that the vote shares of the two parties in government are equal, so that the seats
gained by the whole coalition are split in half between them. Out of equilibrium, the coalition
partner with more votes gets all the seats accruing to the coalition, and his expected seat share is
given by the right hand side of (4.2) pre-multiplied by 2. We return to this point when deriving
the equilibrium policies in the next subsection, since there we also evaluate out-of-equilibrium
payoﬀs.
16
Since the expected seat shares must always lie between 0 and 1, (4.3) and (4.4) imply that
ψ
1 ≥ 3φ
.

22

Equilibrium policies Consider first targeted government spending. When setting these policy instruments, each coalition member P maximizes its expected
seat share, E(N sPC ), as given by (4.2), taking as given the equilibrium policies set
by its partner. As we have seen, the weights of the diﬀerent voters in (4.2) are the
same as under proportional elections — cf. (3.2). This means that the allocation
of equilibrium targeted spending coincides with that under proportional elections.
In equilibrium, a coalition government under majoritarian elections thus sets gCJ
according to (3.3) in Section 3.1.1. In other words, when electoral districts are
homogenous, coalition governments make the same spending decisions, independently of the electoral rule.17
Next, consider the choice of political rents. Here, the electoral rule has a
direct eﬀect on equilibrium policy. Following the same approach as in Section
3.1.1, the first order conditions for equilibrium rents are still given by (3.4). But
the trade-oﬀ between rents and expected seats is somewhat diﬀerent. Imposing
the condition that future equilibrium rents and current equilibrium rents are the
same, and using (3.4) and (4.2), we obtain equilibrium rents captured by each
party in a coalition government under majoritarian elections18 :
rC∗P =

4
.
γψ

(4.5)

Comparing this expression and the corresponding one under proportional elections, equilibrium rents in the two systems depend on the relative magnitude of φ
and ψ. Without additional assumptions on these parameters, we cannot tell how
the electoral rule shapes political rents. We can think of each of these density parameters as measuring the inverse of the variability in the distribution expressed
in units of reservation utility. Because a uniformly distributed variable with den. It follows from
sity θ has variance proportional to θ12 , we know that ψφ = Std(ω)
Std(δ)
17

To be precise: when party P chooses g I , I being a group in the opposition, the eﬀect
on his vote share and on that of his coalition partner are the same. Hence, to maximize his
expected vote share, he maximizes the right hand side of (4.2). But when choosing g J , party
P = J maximizes the right hand side of (4.2) multiplied by 2, since the eﬀect on his vote share
can diﬀer from that on his coalition partner’s vote share - cf. footnote 15. This change in
the objective function does not aﬀect the first order conditions that define the optimal policy,
however, and thus has no behavioral implications.
18
Recall that, by the government budget constraint, higher rents grabbed by party P imply
exactly the same loss of votes for both coalition partners. Hence, the remark in footnotes 15
and 17 do not apply, and it is correct to evaluate the eﬀect of higher rents on expected seats on
the basis of (4.2), as we have done.

23

(3.5) and (4.5) that rents are more likely to be higher under proportional elections, the higher is the standard deviation of reservation utility within economic
groups relative to the standard deviation of the popularity shock. As mentioned
above, the latter is negatively related to aggregate mobility across parties, while
the former is negatively related to within-group mobility. Summarizing, more
aggregate mobility and less within-group mobility make more likely higher rents
under proportional elections.
4.1.2. Single-party government
Equilibrium seat shares Let us compute equilibrium seat shares and policies
for a government supported by a single-party majority, say P = 12.
As in the case of coalition government, the electoral formula makes a diﬀerence. The single-party incumbent wins the whole legislature if its vote share is
bigger than some threshold N v̄S that depends on the number of parties in the
opposition. Thus, the expected seat share in the next legislature for the single
party in government is:
E(N sPS ) = Prob(vP ≥

N v̄S )

.

If the opposition is also made up by a single party, then we have II v̄S = 12 ; if
instead the opposition is split in two parties, we have III v̄S = 13 .
Using the distributional assumptions on the random popularity shock and
(3.1), we can rewrite the expected seat share of the single party in government as:
E(N sPS )

4
1
ψ ψ X J
1
= + ( −N v̄S ) +
(V − V ∗J ) .
2
2
φ
4 J=1

(4.6)

Once more, the expression for the expected seat share is similar to that already
derived for the single-party government under proportional elections, equation
(3.6), and the term N v̄S enters as a constant, so the number of parties in the
opposition does not influence policy decisions.
The equilibrium expected seat share in the next legislature for the incumbent
does depend on the number of parties in the opposition, however. In a two-party
system, II v̄S = 12 , and the equilibrium expected seat share at the party formation
stage is the same for both parties: E(II sPS ) = E(II sPO ) = 12 . In a three-party
system, with a single party in government and two parties in the opposition,
1
III v̄S = 3 . Equation (4.6) then implies that the incumbent (large) party has an
24

equilibrium expected seat share given by (4.4) above, while each one of the small
parties in the opposition has an equilibrium expected seat share equal to (4.3)
above.
Equilibrium policies As for coalition governments, it is easy to verify that
targeted spending on public goods is not aﬀected by the electoral rule, once we
control for the type of government. Specifically, the equilibrium expressions for
gSJ are identical to those in (3.7) for a single-party government under proportional
elections. Combining this with the earlier results for coalition governments, we
thus have a sharp and testable prediction: only the type of government, and not
the electoral rule shapes government spending on public-goods programs. Once
we hold constant the type of government, the electoral rule should have no independent influence on this aspects of fiscal policy.
Political rents collected by single-party governments do depend directly on the
electoral rule, however, as in the case of coalition government. Repeating the steps
in the previous subsection, it is easy to verify that rS∗P = rC∗P , where the latter is
given by (4.5). Thus, a single party in government collects the same equilibrium
rents as each member of a coalition government, so that total political rents are
half of those collected under coalition government, just as it was the case under
proportional elections. The ambiguity over which electoral rule generates more or
less rents remains.
We summarize the foregoing discussion as follows:
Proposition 3
(i) Equilibrium public spending only depends on the type of government (coalition vs. single party), as described by Proposition 1, and not on the electoral
rule or the number of parties in the opposition.
(ii) Equilibrium rents collected by each party in government only depend on
the electoral rule, not on the type of government or the number of parties in the
opposition. Under both electoral rules, total political rents collected by coalition
governments are higher than the rents collected by single-party governments. The
eﬀect of the electoral rule on equilibrium rents is ambiguous, but greater withingroup voter mobility and smaller aggregate voter mobility make higher rents under
proportional elections more likely.

25

4.2. The equilibrium party system
We now turn to party formation and government formation under majoritarian
elections.
4.2.1. Government formation
We start by computing equilibrium expected payoﬀs at the start of the government
formation stage, for all possible party systems.
Four party system Suppose that we have four parties (N = 4): P = 1, 2, 3,
and 4. The government can either be a coalition of parties 1 and 2, or of parties
3 and 4, with equal probabilities. Moreover, as shown in section 4.1.2, E(IV sPC ) =
E(IV sPO ) = 14 . The expected payoﬀ for any party P, at the start of the government
formation stage follows from (2.4) and (2.5):
IV W

P

=

1
2(1 + γ)
[1 + γ] rC∗P =
,
2
γψ

(4.7)

where the right-most expression follows from (4.5).
Two party system In the case of two parties (N = 2), P = 12 and 34,only
single-party governments are possible, both with equal probabilities, 1/2. Their
expected seat share in the next legislature are the same in government and opposition E(II sPS ) = E(II sPO ) = 12 . By (2.4), (2.5) and (4.5), we compute their expected
payoﬀ as:
1
2(1 + γ)
P
[1 + γ] rSP =
.
(4.8)
II W =
2
γψ
As with proportional elections, this turns out to be exactly the same expression
as in the four-party case above (4.7). The intuitive explanation is also the same,
namely a higher expected vote share is balanced by lower expected rents.
Three party system Finally, suppose we have a legislature with three parties
(N = 3), say P = 12, 3 and 4. Then, both single-party governments and coalition governments are possible, with equal probabilities, 1/2. But the expected
equilibrium payoﬀs are no longer the same for all parties in the legislature.
Consider first the large party, P = 12. Its expected payoﬀ is still given by
(3.11). But, as shown in the previous subsection, the expected seat share of the
26

large party is larger than 1/2, and given by (4.6). Using (2.5) and (4.5), his
expected payoﬀ simplifies to:
III W

P

=

2(1 + γ)
2
+
, P = 12 .
γψ
3φ

(4.9)

Next, consider the two smaller parties, P = 3, 4. Again, their expected payoﬀs
at the start of the government formation stage are the same as in (3.9). But their
expected seat share in the next legislature is now given by (4.3). Using (2.5) and
(4.5), the equilibrium expected payoﬀs of the small parties simplify to:
III W

P

=

2(1 + γ)
2
− , P = 3, 4 .
γψ
3φ

(4.10)

Of course, this diﬀerence between the expected welfare of the small and large
parties in a three-party system reflects the extra electoral bonus for a large party
facing two small parties that we discussed in Section 4.1.
4.2.2. Party formation
We now turn to the party formation stage. As we shall see, there is no universally
dominant strategy for the four existing groups. Because of this, we can find
conditions for two-party equilibria as well as four-party equilibria, while threeparty equilibria are ruled out by symmetry.
Specifically, we have a four-party equilibrium if all groups of legislators prefer
to remain split rather than to merge, given two group-specific parties on the
opposition side. More precisely, using the above notation, a four-party system is
an equilibrium if, say,
1
1
12
.
(4.11)
IV W ≥
III W
2
The left-hand side of (4.11) is the expected payoﬀ of party(=group) 1 in a fourparty system. The right-hand side of (4.11) is the expected payoﬀ accruing to
group 1 if it merges with party 2, given that the opponents have remained split:
the term III W 12 is the expected payoﬀs of the large party P = 12 in a three-party
system, divided equally between the merging groups. Given the symmetry of the
model, if condition (4.11) holds for party P = 1, it also holds for all the other
parties.
Given the results stated above, condition (4.11) can be re-written as:
(1 + γ)
ψ
≥
.
γ
3φ
27

(4.12)

If this condition is met, the four-party system is an equilibrium under majoritarian
elections. But this condition is always the case, since as noted in Footnote 16 the
right-hand side of (4.12) is smaller than 1, while the left-hand side is above 1.
Hence, under majoritarian elections too, a four party equilibrium always exists.
But now, it is not the only equilibrium. A two-party system is also an equilibrium if all groups prefer to merge rather than to remain split, given that the two
opposition groups have also merged, namely if :
1
2

II W

12

≥

III W

1

.

(4.13)

The right-hand side of (4.13) is the expected payoﬀ to group 1 of remaining a
group-specific party while the opposing groups have merged. The left-hand side
of (4.13) is the expected payoﬀ accruing to group 1 if it merges with group 2:
the term II W 12 is divided in half because each group gets half the party payoﬀ
resulting from the merger.
Given the results stated above, condition (4.13) for a two-party equilibrium
can be re-written as:
1+γ
2ψ
≤
.
(4.14)
γ
3φ
Note that the left-hand sides of (4.14) and (4.12) are the same, but the right-hand
side of (4.14) is twice as large as the right-hand side of (4.12). Hence, for some
parameter values both a two-party and a four-party equilibrium exist (since the
left hand side of (4.14) cannot exceed 2, this requires that γ ≥ 1).
A two-party equilibrium is more likely to exist if ψ/φ = Std(ω)/Std(δ) is
large. That is, if aggregate voter mobility is large relative to within-group voter
mobility. As the reader may recall, the same conditions make it more likely that
equilibrium rents are higher under proportional elections. This makes intuitive
sense. If, say, aggregate voter mobility is large (Std(δ) small), the election outcome
is very uncertain. Then, the electoral advantage of a large party facing two small
parties is very significant, cf. (4.4) and (4.3), which naturally raises the incentive
to merge. At the same time, rent extraction is punished much more strongly by
the voters under majoritarian elections: recall that voter utilities are multiplied
by ψ rather than φ in the expression for expected seat shares. Similarly, small
within-group voter mobility (Std(ω) large) raises the electoral advantage of a large
party.
We summarize the results of this section as follows:
Proposition 4
28

Under majoritarian elections, a four-party system is always an equilibrium.
But for some parameter values, a two-party system is also an equilibrium outcome. The two-party equilibrium is more likely to exist under the conditions enumerated in Proposition 3, that also make rents higher under proportional than
majoritarian elections.
Before turning to the case of heterogeneity, let us try and summarize the empirical implications of the four numbered propositions above. According to Propositions 2 and 4, the equilibrium number of parties and hence the incidence of
coalition governments can be smaller under majoritarian elections, particularly
under the conditions listed in Proposition 3 (ii). According to Proposition
3 (i), overall government spending is always larger under coalition governments
than under single-party governments, and the electoral rule aﬀects spending only
via its eﬀect on the incidence of coalition governments. When it comes to rent
extraction, the electoral rule has an independent eﬀect, but the sign is ambiguous.
By Propositions 3 and 4, however, the smallest rents are likely to be observed
in those majoritarian democracies where two-party systems and single-party governments are most often observed.
At a general level, these predictions rhyme well with the general idea in the
political-science literature, that proportional elections go hand in hand with “representativeness” and majoritarian elections go hand in hand with “accountability”.
But the predictions are sharper than general insights, and give quite clear guidance on how we may want to take the model’s implications for party structures,
types of government, and economic policies to the data.

5. Heterogeneity
Heterogeneity in the distribution of voters across districts can be represented in
many ways. This section presents a simple model, which illustrates that equilibria
under majoritarian elections can be quite diﬀerent when electoral districts are
heterogenous.
As before, we assume that groups J = 3, 4 are homogeneously distributed
across districts and, each, constitute one fourth of the electorate. But group
J = 1 now has 1+β
of the votes in half of the districts, d ∈ [0, 12 ] and 1−β
of the
4
4
votes in the other half while the distribution for group J = 2 is the mirror image
of this. Parameter β ∈ [0, 1] represents the degree of geographical concentration
of groups J = 1 and 2. When β = 0, we have the prior homogeneity case, and
when β = 1, we have maximum heterogeneity: groups J = 1 and 2 each represent
29

one half of the electorate in one half of the districts, but are not represented at all
in the other half. This parametrization has the advantage of preserving symmetry
between J = 1 and 2 while creating asymmetry between the first two and the last
two groups.
Intuitively, one would expect parties 1 and 2 to have a ”home advantage ” in
their districts and therefore to have less incentives to merge, while 3 and 4 would
have a strong incentive to merge to compete successfully with parties 1 and 2 in
their districts. This raises the possibility of a three party equilibrium.
To keep this section short, we present the main results in the form of propositions and intuition for these results. The Appendix gives the details of the
underlying calculations. Since proportional elections have only a single national
district, heterogeneity cannot be an issue. Hence, we only discuss majoritarian
elections.
Proposition 5 compares the equilibrium policy under heterogeneity with the
benchmark of the previous section, where all districts are homogeneous. We focus on the policy choices of governments formed by parties J = 1, 2 when in
government, i.e., the parties with geographically concentrated representation.
Proposition 5
When geographical party concentration, as measured by β, increases:
(i) Coalition governments formed by parties representing geographically concentrated groups spend more on their own groups and even more so when the
opposition is split, but spend less on the groups in the opposition, and even more
so when the opposition is split;
(ii) Single-party governments formed by a party representing geographically
concentrated groups spend the same amount as single-party governments under
homogeneous districts, irrespective of the number of parties in the opposition;
(iii) Equilibrium rents are the same as under homogeneity for single-party government, but higher for coalition governments.
The most important result is the first one. Each coalition member has a
relatively stronger incentive to please voters from their own constituency in the
districts where these voters are overrepresented. The total eﬀect on spending is not
clear a priori, however, because higher spending for the groups in government may
be more or less than oﬀset by reduced spending for the groups in the opposition.
Under heterogeneity, equilibrium policy can vary with the number of parties, in
contrast to Proposition 1 and 3. Indeed, when the opposition (J = 3, 4) is
divided, each opposition party receives only half of the votes of the dissatisfied
voters, which gives less incentives for the coalition parties to target those groups.
30

But the incentive turns the other way if the opposition is united. Note that this
result is directly related to the first past the post character of the electoral rule
and should be robust to other representations of heterogeneity.
Result (ii) is more directly related to the specific modeling assumptions. When
parties 1 and 2 merge, we are back to the homogeneity case with the groups
represented in the coalition representing half of the electorate in each district.
This result should not be robust to diﬀerent representations of heterogeneity.
Result (iii) says that total rents are higher under heterogeneity cum coalition
governments. This is because, contrary to the case of homogeneity, parties in
government mainly compete with the opposition rather than with each other about
electoral seats.
The results on equilibrium party formation are expressed in:.
Proposition 6
Under the above assumptions on heterogeneity:
Std(δ)
(i) A two-party equilibrium exists only if 1+γ
≤ 2−β
+ 13 ;
γ Std(ω)
6+β
(ii) A three-party equilibrium with P = 1, 2 remaining split and P = 3, 4
2β
2−β
merging always exists if (4+β)
− 2(6+β)
≥ 16 .
The appendix gives the analysis. When β increases, the condition for a 2-party
equilibrium becomes more stringent. The main and intuitive insight is that the
two parties, P = 1, 2, with a ”home advantage” in concentrated districts have
less incentives to merge than under homogeneity, because the electoral benefits
from doing so are smaller. The main benefit from merging is that reward votes
to the coalition partner not well represented in a district are not ”lost ” but
accrue to the merged party. This is not a huge advantage. On the other hand,
the cost of sharing power in a merged party remains the same. Therefore, one
is less likely to see a two party equilibrium and might see instead a three party
equilibrium, as stated in part (ii) of Proposition 6. Note also that the conditions
for a three-party equilibrium become more easy to fulfill as heterogeneity goes up
(β increases).
The result in Proposition 6 leads to the empirical prediction that two party
equilibria and single-party governments are less likely to be observed under majoritarian rule if electoral districts are suﬃciently heterogeneous in the distribution
of voters. As a corollary, coalition governments should be more frequent, which
in turn could lead to a larger government spending. Of course, this prediction
may be diﬃcult to take to the data since district heterogeneity is very hard to
measure for a large sample of countries. Note that, by Proposition 5, if districts
are heterogeneous the electoral rule might exert a direct eﬀect on the overall size
31

of government spending, under coalition government. This direct eﬀect of the
electoral rule is of ambiguous sign, however, because by Proposition 5 higher
spending targeted towards groups represented in government may be more than
oﬀset by lower spending on opposition groups.

6. Empirical evidence
In this section, some of the model’s predictions on the causal chain from electoral
rules, via political outcomes, to economic policy outcomes, are taken to the data.
We use both cross-sectional and panel data for about 50 democracies in the postwar period. The only economic policy variable is overall government spending.
6.1. The Data
Our samples As the model in the preceding sections deals with decision-making
in a parliamentary democracy, we limit the empirical investigation to democracies
with this form of government. Here, we follow Persson and Tabellini (2003), who
use the existence of a confidence vote for the executive as the main basis for
classifying diﬀerent forms of government.
We use data from two diﬀerent data sets, each of which combines information
from a variety of second-hand sources and first-hand constitutional documents.
For many of the variables, we rely on a broad cross sectional data set assembled
and presented in detail in Persson and Tabellini (2003). For some measures of
political institutions and outcomes, we use another data set resulting from a collaborative data collection eﬀort jointly with political scientists from Åbo Akademi
(see Lundell and Karvonen, 2003).
Our first data set is a cross section of about 50 parliamentary democracies in
the 1990s, where each observation is the average of annual data over the period
1990-98. Here, democracies are countries labelled as free or semi-free according to
the surveys published by Freedom House. The so-called Gastil indexes of political
rights and civil liberties (gastil) vary on a discrete scale from 1 to 7, with low
values associated with better democratic institutions. We include a country in the
sample if the average of these two indexes in the 1990-98 period does not exceed
5.
Our second data set covers the period 1960-98 for a smaller group of about
40 parliamentary democracies. Here, we mainly rely on the Polity IV data for
the classification into democracies, as this data set goes farther back and is more
32

comparable over time than the Freedom House data. Specifically, we use the encompassing polity index, which assigns to each country and year an integer score
ranging from -10 to +10 (higher values associated with better democracies), restricting the panel to countries and years with positive values of polity (censored
observations are treated as randomly missing). Persson and Tabellini (2003) provide further details on our sample selection criteria.19 We use this data set in
three ways: First, we average yearly observations throughout the whole period,
1960-98, to draw inference from cross-sectional variation. Second, we use it as a
panel, taking the theoretical model literally and defining the relevant time period
as a whole legislature (i.e., for all variables we take averages over the yearly outcomes between two consecutive elections). Of course, this does not correspond to
the same calendar time for diﬀerent countries. Third, we use the data set as a
standard panel with yearly data.
The variables The model predicts that proportional elections should induce
higher government spending. If we ignore the eﬀect on political rents, this is
entirely an indirect eﬀect, however, working through a larger number of parties
and, thereby, a larger incidence of coalition governments. We should thus find no
direct eﬀect of the electoral rule on the size of government, once we account for
the diﬀerent political outcomes caused by diﬀerent electoral rules. In addition,
of course, the model has specific predictions about the signs of various political
and economic eﬀects. How do we measure the variables needed to confront these
predictions with the data?
Electoral rules In the model, the most important aspect of the electoral
system (at least in the sections which abstract from heterogeneity) is the electoral
formula: plurality rule versus PR. To capture this, we rely on the binary indicator variable maj, defined and discussed in Persson and Tabellini (2003). The
indicator is coded 1 for countries relying exclusively on plurality rule in the elections to the lower house, and 0 otherwise. A few parliamentary democracies rely
on a mixed-majoritarian electoral system, with some version of plurality rule in
certain districts and proportional rule in others. We code these mixed systems
with the dummy variable semi, taking a value of 1 if the electoral system is mixed,
19

For a few small countries, the Polity IV data are not available. We thus interpolate Polity
IV with the Freedom House data to make an out of sample prediction. See Persson and Tabellini
(2003).

33

and 0 otherwise. The default is thus the group of proportional countries. Mixedproportional systems such as Germany, for which the electoral formula is strictly
proportional at the level of the whole nation, are coded as proportional.20 The
model also assumes that proportional elections are performed in a nation-wide
district and majoritarian elections in single-member districts. In the empirical
work, we include the variable district to allow for the positive association expected (from earlier work) between large districts and party proliferation. This
variable codes district magnitude in the conventional way, namely as the number
of seats awarded in the average electoral district, re-scaled to vary between 0 and
1. These three variables vary both across countries and over time, and they are
not very highly correlated with each other (their simple correlation coeﬃcients
are always below 0.34 both in the cross sections and in the panel on legislatures).
But the time variation is small: there are only seven electoral reforms relevant
enough to change our classification of maj or semi, including two reforms in
France (that switched from majoritarian and then back to proportional in the
mid 1980s) District magnitude varies more frequently over time, although the
size of these changes is often small.
Party structure When it comes to the party structure in the legislature,
our simplified model has only three possible outcomes: two, three or four parties. To normalize real-world party structures into a comparable measure, we use
a Herfindahl-like index of party fragmentation, which is commonly used in the
political science literature. It is labeled party_frag and defined as 1 − ΣP (sP )2 ,
where — as in the model — sP is the seat share of party P and the summation runs
over all parties in the legislature (lower house). As an alternative measure, we
also use the number of parties in the lower house, nparties.
Types of government Our simple model only allows for two types of government: single-party majority and coalition governments; minority governments
are not observed. We follow the model, and we classify these types of government through simple indicator variables, called single and coalition, respectively,
omitting minority government. Thus, for instance, single takes a value of 1 if
the government consists of single-party majority in that year and country, and 0
otherwise. Of course, these two variables do not always sum to 1 for any given
country and year, since we sometimes observe minority governments. We never
20

In this respect, our definition of semi diﬀers slightly from the variable mixed in Persson
and Tabellini (2003), that instead classified mixed-proportional systems as mixed.

34

include both single and coalition in the same regression, but we use them as alternatives to assess the robustness of the results. (The two measures correspond
to alternative definitions of the default type, minority governments being lumped
together with single-party governments when coalition is used, and together with
coalition governments when single is used.) When we take the average of these
two indicator variables (in the cross sectional estimates or in the course of a legislature), we thus obtain two incidence measures: coalition measures the incidence
of coalition governments over the relevant time period, and likewise for single. As
an alternative measure of government type, we use the number of parties in the
governing coalition, ngov.
Other constitutional variables To identify some of the causal eﬀects described in the theory, we need to measure some other features of the constitution
likely to influence either the party structure or the type of government. In particular, in some electoral systems a party has to overcome a minimum electoral
threshold to gain representation in the legislature. We call this variable threshold,
and measure it as a percent of the total vote at the national level. A higher threshold is expected to reduce party-fragmentation. We also construct (0,1) indicator
variables for three additional constitutional features: investiture, set to 1 if a new
government must win majority support in an investiture vote; constructive, set
to 1 if the government can be dismissed only by electing a replacement; bicam, set
to 1 if the legislature has two chambers (irrespective of their relative strength).
Bicameralism raises the probability of surplus coalitions (since it increases the majority required to form a government or to pass legislation), and thus we expect
it to have a positive eﬀect on the incidence of coalition governments, a negative
eﬀect on that of single-party majority governments. The investiture vote and the
constructive vote of no confidence reduce the probability of minority governments,
and thus, for a given party structure, are expected to increase the incidence of
coalition governments, but have no expected eﬀect on single-party majority governments — see, in particular, the recent work by Diermeier, Eraslan, and Merlo
(2003a and b).21
Both political outcomes and government spending may be influenced by the
quality of democracy. We measure it by the Polity IV variable discussed above, interpolated with the Freedom House data set when missing. The resulting variable
is called polity_gt.
21

The variable constructive should be treated with care, however, since only two countries
in our sample have this constitutional feature.

35

Finally, when time periods are defined as the whole legislature in our panel
data, we also measure the length of the legislature, leg_length, in years, to control
for diﬀerent durations of legislatures.
Economic and social variables To measure the overall size of government,
we rely on central government spending as a percent of GDP, cgexp, defined and
discussed in Persson and Tabellini (2003). This measure is based on data from the
IMF. Since government spending is aﬀected by many other determinants, we also
control for several variables that reflect the economical, political, geographical,
and historical characteristics of the countries in the sample. These variables are
discussed and defined more extensively in Persson and Tabellini (2003). Some
of them are only used in the cross-sectional estimates, some only in the panel
estimates, some in both.
The following variables refer to economic and social determinants of fiscal policy or of political outcomes: openness to international trade, measured as exports
plus imports over GDP (trade), population size measured in logs (lpop), the percentage of the population above 65 years of age (prop65 ), the log of real per capita
income (lyp), the output gap (ygap), measured as the log-deviation of output from
the country specific trend, a measure of ethno-linguistic fractionalization (avelf ).
These variables have been shown to correlate with measures of fiscal policy in previous studies, such as Cameron (1978), Rodrik (1998), and Persson and Tabellini
(2003).
To measure the influence of colonial history, and since many majoritarian
countries are also former British colonies, we typically control for British colonial
origin. Because the influence of colonial heritage is likely to fade with time,
we weigh colonial origin by the time since independence, giving more weight to
colonial history in young independent states and no weight at all to colonial rule
more than 250 years ago. The colonial history variable is called col_uka.
Finally, since spending refers to central government, we also use an indicator
variable for federal political structures (federal).
The results reported below are very robust to alternative specifications of these
control variables. To save on degrees of freedom, we generally include these controls only when they are statistically significant, or when we have strong priors
that they really belong to the specification.
Preliminary inspection of the data Table 1 displays means and standard
deviations of the main variables of interest, in the three types of electoral sys36

tems, majoritarian, mixed and proportional. Each observation corresponds to a
particular legislature in a particular country in the 1960-98 panel. The statistics
in the table are computed from pooling together these observations. Most observations are either classified as majoritarian or proportional. Comparing these
two more extreme electoral systems, we immediately find large diﬀerences in line
with all the predictions of the theory. Majoritarian electoral systems have a less
fragmented party system, a smaller incidence of coalition governments, a larger incidence of single party government, and smaller government spending, compared
to proportional systems. The few mixed electoral systems display outcomes in
between the polar types. Interestingly, 63% of the observations from majoritarian
countries exhibit single-party government, whereas the incidence for proportional
countries is only 17%. Taking our model literary, the residual presence of coalition
governments under majoritarian elections might reflect either the multiplicity of
equilibria or heterogeneity of districts in a subset of countries. Note also that
the standard deviation of the type of government is large within each class of
electoral rules, suggesting that there may also be independent shocks to coalition
formation, a feature not present in our model (see further below).
As discussed above, however, the theory has additional and precise predictions
that go beyond such simple cross tabulations. Moreover, in Table 1 we are not
controlling for other diﬀerences across countries or time periods. In the remainder
of this section we show that more sophisticated statistical analysis confirms the
simple message of Table 1 and provides support for the precise predictions of the
theory.
6.2. Cross sectional estimates
We first confront the predictions of the theory with the cross country-variation in
the data. We use both our cross sections: the one for the 1990s includes a larger
number of countries for a single decade; and the one for 1960-98 includes a smaller
number of countries for (at most) four decades.
First, we study the predictions of the theory concerning the political variables,
asking how party structure and type of government vary with electoral rules.
Second, we study the economic predictions, asking how the electoral rules influence
government spending. Since we have relatively few observations, we keep the
specification with regard to other variables as parsimonious as possible.

37

Political eﬀects of electoral rules Table 2 reports our estimates of the political eﬀects, part a for the 1990s cross section, part b for the 1960-98 cross section.
Since the layout of both tables is the same, we comment on them together.
First, we ask how the electoral rule shapes the party structure, as measured
by party fragmentation (party_frag) and by the number of parties (nparties).
We use a slightly more parsimonious specification in the longer cross section in
Table 2b, where we have fewer observations, but we always control for UK colonial
origin and for country size. Ethno-linguistic fragmentation is only available in the
1990s, so we control for it in Table 2a. Columns 1 and 2 of both tables display the
results. As expected, plurality rule (as measured by maj) is associated with less
party fragmentation and fewer parties. Mixed electoral systems also seem to lead
to less fragmented party systems (compared to the proportional default), although
the eﬀect is marginally significant only in the larger sample from the 1990s. Also as
expected, larger electoral districts (typical of proportional elections) are associated
with a more fragmented party system and a larger number of parties. Finally,
electoral thresholds influence the party structure as expected (higher thresholds,
fewer parties), but the eﬀect is only significant for the number of parties.
Next, we estimate a reduced form for the type of government. Here, besides
the features of the electoral rule and the other regressors, we also control for
the constitutional features mentioned above: bicameralism, investiture vote, and
constructive vote of no confidence.22 The results are displayed in columns 3-5 of
Tables 2 a and b, with coalition governments, single-party majority governments,
and number of parties in government, as the dependent variable. Only some
of the electoral rule variables are statistically significant, and the results vary
according to the sample and the type of government indicators. This might be
due to some correlation between some of these indicators (in particular between
district magnitude and the indicators for the electoral formula). Nevertheless,
the overall eﬀects go in the expected direction. Larger electoral districts raise
the incidence of coalition governments and the number of parties in government,
and tend to reduce the incidence of single party-majority government (the last
eﬀect is only significant in the 1960-98 cross section). Plurality rule raises the
incidence of single-party majorities. Among the other constitutional variables,
22

We do not include investiture and constructive in the regression where single is the dependent variable, because these two variables are expected to reduce the incidence of minority
government, and thus should have no eﬀect on single-party majority, given the party system see the dicussion above. We also omit bicameralism from the longer cross sections for 1960-98,
because it is not available over such a long period.

38

bicameralism and the constructive vote of no confidence raise the incidence of
coalition governments, as expected, while the investiture vote is not statistically
significant.
Finally, the theory predicts that the electoral system influences the type of
government only through its eﬀect on the party structure. To test this prediction,
we estimate the type of government regressions by two-stage least squares, using
the electoral rules variables as instruments for party fragmentation (or the number
of parties in government). Because we have an additional variable (threshold)
measuring the electoral rule, beyond maj, semi and district, and given that the
electoral rule variables are not highly mutually correlated (and measure diﬀerent
features of electoral rules) we can test the over-identifying restriction that they are
valid instruments, i.e., that electoral rules do not exert an independent influence
in the second-stage regression for the type of government.
The results are displayed in columns 6-8 of Tables 2a and 2b. Party fragmentation has a strong and significant eﬀect on the type of government, with the
expected sign, and the number of parties in the legislature have a significant eﬀect
on the number of parties in government. The estimated coeﬃcients of the party
structure variables on the type of government are precisely estimated, and their
size is similar across the two samples, a sign of robustness. Moreover, we cannot
reject the over-identifying restrictions that the electoral-rule variables have no
direct eﬀect on the type of government once we allow for the eﬀect of party structure, except in the case of coalition governments in Table 2a, where we marginally
reject at the 5% confidence level — cf. the row labelled Over-id.
This last set of results also give some comfort against the risk of misspecification. As mentioned in connection with Table 1, the observed variation in the
type of goverment within electoral rules suggests stochastic shocks to government
formation. Such shocks might be systematically correlated with electoral rules,
through strategic decisions in government and/or party formation. Ideally, these
issues should be analyzed in the context of our model, but unfortunately the mechanical government formation stage does not permit such analysis. Neverthelss,
our general inability to reject the over-identifying restrictions reassures us that
neglecting these issues does not bias our inference.
Overall, these estimates are remarkably consistent with the predictions of the
theory.
Economic eﬀects of electoral rules We now turn to the second set of predictions, concerning the eﬀects on the size of government spending, cgexp.
39

Throughout, we control for the economic, social, historical and geographic variables listed in Section 6.1, such as federalism, demographics, and British colonial
origin; the specification is a bit more parsimonious in the 1960-98 sample, because
we have fewer degrees of freedom and because some controls are not available over
this longer time period (see the notes to Table 3 for details). The results are very
robust to alternative specifications of the set of controls.
The reduced-form estimates are displayed in columns 1 and 2 of Table 3, for
the 1990 and the 1960-98 samples respectively. To save on degrees of freedom, we
omit the variable for mixed electoral system (semi) for the 1960-98 sample; we also
omit the constitutional variables, bicam, investiture and constructive. District
magnitude (district) has a very strong positive eﬀect on the size of government,
as expected. Plurality rule (maj) also has the expected (negative) eﬀect, but
the estimated coeﬃcient is not statistically significant. We omit the electoral
threshold variable, as it is never statistically significant.
The remaining columns of Table 3 ask whether the eﬀect of the electoral rule on
government spending operates through the type of government, and only through
that channel. As before, we measure the type of government alternatively as the
incidence of coalition governments (coalition), the incidence of single party majority government (single), and the number of parties in government (ngov). The
instruments for the type of government are the electoral-rule variables as displayed
in columns 1 and 2 of Table 3 respectively, plus the investiture vote variable when
the type of government is measured by coalition, and the electoral threshold variable when it is measured by the number of parties in government.23 The estimated
eﬀects of the type of government on government spending are strongly significant
with the predicted sign. The coeﬃcients are not very precisely estimated, but the
point estimates are often large enough to keep them comfortably away from zero
(at 95% confidence). Finally, we cannot reject the over-identifying restrictions,
that the electoral-rule variables have no direct influence on government spending,
beyond their indirect influence through the type of government.
In summary, then, the cross-sectional estimates support all the predictions
of the theory. Altogether, they suggest that proportional electoral rules indeed
cause larger government spending than majoritarian electoral rules in the way our
model predicts: they lead to more fragmented party systems and hence to more
frequent coalition governments.
23

Given the caveats above, we prefer not to use the constructive vote variable as an instrument,
although its inclusion makes no diﬀerence. Here we also skip the intervening step of the party
structure, regressing the type of government directly on the electoral rule variables.

40

6.3. Panel estimates
In this subsection we turn to the time variation in the data. On the one hand,
this exercise is more demanding, as electoral rules only exhibit limited variation
over time. There have been a few reforms of electoral formulas, generally towards
a mixed system from both extremes (plurality and strict proportionality), mainly
but not exclusively in the 1990s. Variations in the magnitude of electoral districts
have been somewhat more common. But variations in the type of government
occur more frequently.
On the other hand, using the time variation in the data is also more rewarding.
Inference about true causality drawn from time-series variation may be more reliable than inference from cross-country variation, because simultaneity bias due
to omitted (time-invariant) confounding variables is less likely.
We confine the analysis to the 1960-98 data set. As discussed above, we define
a time period as either a whole legislature, or a calendar year. Defining time
periods to conform with legislatures allows us to remain more faithful to the theoretical model. This is the unit of time over which our political and institutional
variables remain constant (in practice, for party structure or type of government,
or by definition, for the electoral rules variables). Time measured in legislatures
seems particularly appropriate when studying the political eﬀects of electoral rules.
Because almost all the reforms are clustered in the two most recent decades, we
include at most six legislatures in each country in the legislatures panel. When
it comes to government spending, however, it may also be relevant to consider
calendar time, because diﬀerent countries may be aﬀected by worldwide events in
similar ways, and because the duration of legislatures varies across countries. For
government spending we thus show results also for a yearly panel.
Our empirical strategy is similar to the one in the previous section. We start
by the political eﬀects of electoral rules, then go on to study their eﬀects on government spending. In both cases, we estimate reduced forms, as well as structural
forms. Panel data analysis raises a few new estimation issues. All our endogenous variables (party structure, type of government, spending) move slowly over
time. The endogenous variables are also likely to reflect the eﬀect of unobserved,
country-specific determinants. To cope with these features of the data, we report
on estimates obtained by two alternative methods.
One method is to estimate in levels, including country fixed eﬀects and lagged
dependent variables (but no correction for serial correlation). This is equivalent
to estimating the parameters of interest from variables measured as deviations
from country means. It is well known that fixed-eﬀects estimates are biased in
41

the presence of lagged dependent variables. But the bias becomes negligible if the
panel is suﬃciently long. In our yearly panel, we have on average 25 years per
country so the problem is likely to be negligible.
With only six observations per country in the legislature panel, however, the
bias can be more serious. In these cases, we instead estimate in first diﬀerences
by GMM, with the procedure pioneered by Arellano and Bond (1991). Here, we
use lags of dependent and endogenous variables, and exogenous variables as instruments. This method produces consistent estimates even if the error term has
first-order serial correlation, and makes eﬃcient use of the instruments. But it
makes some demanding assumptions on the validity of the instruments. Because
of the uncertain finite-sample properties of GMM estimators with many overidentifying restrictions, we choose a parsimonious set of instruments, exploiting only
one extra lag of dependent or endogenous variables (rather than the full set of
lags to the beginning of the sample).
We comment more extensively on these methods in context. Generally, and
luckily, they produce similar estimates.
Political eﬀects of electoral rules Table 4 displays the political eﬀects of
alternative electoral rules as estimated from the legislatures panel. The structure
of the table is similar to that of Table 2. Thus, we first ask how electoral rules influence party fragmentation (here we omit the number of parties); then, how they
(and other electoral /constitutional variables) influence the type of government on
reduced form; finally, how party structure influences the type of government, including the test of whether electoral rules aﬀect the type of government exclusively
through party structure.
Columns 1 shows GMM estimates (for first diﬀerences) of the eﬀect of electoral
rules on party fragmentation. We include lagged party fragmentation, and control
for country size (measured by population) and quality of democracy (measured
by polity_gt), as many countries in the sample have become better democracies in
more recent periods. As expected, district magnitude raises party fragmentation,
confirming the cross sectional results in Table 2. Plurality rule (measured by maj)
has the expected negative sign, but is at best borderline significant (p-value of
0.11). We cannot reject the assumptions of no second-order serial correlation or
validity of the lagged values used as instruments.
The reduced form results for coalition and single-party governments are displayed in columns 2-3. We now include two lags of the dependent variable in the
specification, plus the quality of democracy and population size. The constitu42

tional variables used in the corresponding cross-sectional estimates (bicameralism,
investiture vote and constructive vote of no confidence), can no longer be included
since they exhibit too little time variation.24 The results again remind of the results in Table 2. Larger district magnitude significantly raises the likelihood of
coalition governments, while plurality rule raises the likelihood of single-party
governments. The coeﬃcients are not very precisely estimated. Evidently, there
is considerable time variation in the type of government, which cannot be easily
explained on the basis of the sluggish electoral rule variables.
Columns 4 and 5 report on the structural estimates for the type of government.
In the specification, we thus treat party fragmentation as endogenous, and use
the electoral-rule variables (in first diﬀerences) as additional instruments (beyond
one additional lag of the dependent variable and one lag of endogenous party
fragmentation). The estimated coeﬃcients on party fragmentation are significant
with the expected sign: more fragmentation increases the likelihood of coalition
governments and reduces the likelihood of single-party majorities. Moreover, we
cannot reject the over-identifying assumptions on the validity of the instruments,
meaning that the electoral rule variables do not exert a direct eﬀect on the type
of government.
While these panel estimates are not as precise as the cross-sectional estimates,
they still confirm our earlier inference and give further support to the predictions
of the model.
Economic eﬀects of electoral rules Last, we return to the eﬀects of the
electoral rule on government spending with a similar specifications as in the cross
sectional regressions. Table 5 reports on estimates based on the legislature panel
as well as the yearly panel. The dependent variable is always overall government
spending. But in the legislature panel, we always measure the size of government
spending in the last year of the legislature (rather than on average throughout
the legislature), to allow the political variables to exercise their full eﬀect. In the
GMM estimates where the data are diﬀerenced, the dependent variable is thus
defined as the change in spending from the end of the previous legislature to the
end of the current one. Since the duration of legislatures varies across countries
and time periods, these regressions include a variable measuring the length of the
legislature, in years. Lagged spending is also included in the specification: one
(diﬀerenced) lag in the GMM estimates on the legislature panel, and two (level)
lags in the fixed-eﬀect estimates on the yearly panel.
24

Constructive actually varies over time, but only for Belgium in 1993.

43

The specifications always include other time-varying determinants of government spending, such as the output gap (to measure cyclical influences on government spending), openness to international trade, and the proportion of the elderly
in the population. Finally, to reduce collinearity among the electoral rule variables, we omit the indicator variable for mixed electoral rules, including only the
indicator for plurality rule (maj) and the measure of district magnitude (district).
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 5 show the reduced form of spending on the electoral
rule variables. As expected, district magnitude has a positive and strongly significant coeﬃcient (larger districts implying more spending). But the coeﬃcient on
plurality rule is insignificant.
The remainder of the table displays the structural estimates. Columns 3 and
4 show the GMM estimates of the type of government (coalition or single party
majority) on government spending for the legislature panel, where the type of
government is endogenous and the electoral rule variables of column 1 are used
as additional instruments. Columns 5 and 6 show the fixed-eﬀect, instrumentalvariable estimates; here the lagged type of government and the electoral-rules
variables are used to instrument for the current type of government.
The estimated coeﬃcients all have the expected sign: coalition governments
spend more, single party majority governments spend less. The eﬀect of coalition
governments is precisely estimated and large in value. Given the coeﬃcients on
lagged spending, the implied long-run eﬀect is 10% of GDP in column 3, and 6%
of GDP in column 5, thus of the same magnitude as the cross sectional estimates.
The eﬀect of single-party government is smaller and much less precisely estimated.
However, note that the over-identifying restrictions now can be rejected for the
fixed eﬀect estimates (time periods measured in years), while they cannot for the
GMM estimates.
All in all, the panel estimates are a bit more fragile than the cross-sectional
estimates, but that is perhaps to be expected given the paucity of real-worldreforms in our data. On the whole, they give additional support to the main
insights from the theory: proportional electoral rules are associated with more
fragmented party systems, more coalition governments, and these spend more
than single-party majority governments.

7. Concluding remarks
This paper investigates the eﬀects of electoral rules in parliamentary democracies.
In line with the recent paper by Bawn and Rosenbluth (2002), we study a formal
44

model that incorporates two key ideas. The first idea is that plurality rule gives an
electoral advantage to larger parties, since they are more likely to gain plurality
in each district. For this reason, strategic politicians have a strong incentives
to merge into a large party under plurality rule, whereas they prefer to splinter
in many smaller parties under proportional elections. This strategic behavior of
politicians has obvious implications for the type of government. Under plurality
rule, we are more likely to see governments supported by single party majorities,
whereas coalition governments are more likely under proportional rule.
The second idea is that single-party governments and coalition governments
diﬀer in a crucial respect. When the government is supported by a single-party
majority, voters cannot easily discriminate between diﬀerent politicians in government. Therefore, the main electoral conflict runs between government and
opposition. A coalition government allows voters to discriminate at the polls
between the coalition parties, and this creates electoral conflicts within the government coalition. As we have seen, that intra-government conflict induces higher
spending under both electoral rules.
To model these two ideas in a simple way, we have had to rely on simplifying
assumptions, restricting the feasible alliances among politicians and simplifying
the voters’ behavior. But we think that the main insights of the paper are robust to alternative modelling assumptions. Our simplifications enable us to study
a complete politico-economic equilibrium, which yields precise predictions on the
whole chain of causal eﬀects, from electoral rule, to party structure, to type of government, to economic policy. Moreover, we obtain additional insights. According
to the theory, if electoral districts are homogeneous, the electoral rule influences
economic policy and type of government exclusively through its eﬀect on party
structure. If the electoral districts are heterogeneous, party fragmentation and
coalition governments are likely to arise also under plurality rule.
Empirical evidence, based on the observed variation across parliamentary
democracies and across time in connection with electoral reforms, strongly supports the main theoretical predictions. Proportional rule is indeed associated with
more fragmented party structures, which in turn lead to more frequent coalition
governments, which spend more than single-party majority governments. Moreover, the electoral rule does not seem to exert direct influence on the type of
government, nor on the size of government spending. The chain of causation in
the data appears to coincide with the causal chain predicted by the theory.
The theoretical model also has other predictions, that we have not yet exploited
in the empirical analysis. In particular, political rents are predicted to be higher
45

under coalition governments. And heterogeneity of political districts should influence government spending, as well as political outcomes, but only under plurality
rule. Moreover, we have confined the theoretical and empirical analysis to the
overall size of government spending. But the crucial diﬀerence between coalition
and single-party governments emphasized in this paper is likely to influence other
economic policy dimensions, such as the size of budget deficits or the composition
of spending and taxation. We leave these promising and exciting topics for future
research.

46

8. Appendix: Heterogeneity and majoritarian elections
In districts d ∈ [0, 12 ], J = 1 constitutes a share 1+β
of the electorate while J = 2
4
1−β
constitutes only a share 4 of voters while in districts d ∈ ( 12 , 1], it is the opposite.
Groups J = 3, 4 each form a quarter of the electorate in each district.
8.1. Equilibrium policy choices
As in sections 3 and 4, we derive first the equilibrium policy under coalition and
single-party government and then analyze equilibrium party formation.
8.1.1. Coalition government.
We first look at the case where parties P = 3, 4 remain split.
Split opposition (4 parties) In districts d ∈ [0, 12 ],the competition will be
between P = 1 and P = 3 or 4. The latter are expected to have an equal number
of votes so let us focus on the competition between P = 1 and P = 3. The vote
share for P = 1 is given by
v1 =

1+β
F (V 1 − V 1∗ − δ) +
4
4
X
1
F (V J − V J∗ − δ)
8 J=3

(A1)

Similarly, the vote share of P = 3 is given by

1+β
(A2)
(1 − F (V 1 − V 1∗ − δ)) +
8
1−β
(1 − F (V 2 − V 2∗ − δ))
(8.1)
8
1
(1 − F (V 3 − V 3∗ − δ))
4
Note that P = 3 gets only half of the votes of the disgruntled voters from
J = 1 since P = 4 gets the other half. We can then calculate
v3 =

ψβ
ψ
3
1
+
+
[(1 + β) (V 1 − V 1∗ )
2 2φ(4 + β) 4 + β
2
1−β 2
3
1
+
(V − V 2∗ ) + (V 3 − V 3∗ ) + (V 4 − V 4∗ )]
2
2
2

Pr ob(v 1 ≥ v3 ) =

47

(A3)

Therefore, the expected seat share of P = 1 is half that amount since it has
no chance of winning in the second half of the districts:
1
ψβ
ψ
3
E(IV s1C ) =
(A4)
+
+
[(1 + β) (V 1 − V 1∗ ) +
4 4φ(4 + β) 2(4 + β)
2
1−β 2
3
1
(V − V 2∗ ) + (V 3 − V 3∗ ) + (V 4 − V 4∗ )]
2
2
2
2
E(IV sC ) is defined analogously.
Assuming a similar competition between P = 2 and 4, one easily derives the
equilibrium policies under a four party equilibrium:
(
4+β
] if J = 1, 2
Hg−1 [ 6(1+β)
J
g
=
(A5)
IV C
β
−1
Hg [1 + 4 ], if J = 3, 4
4
1
2
IV rC = IV rC =
γψ
As one sees, spending on voters represented in the coalition increases with β
but spending on voters from the opposition decreases with β.
Merged opposition (three parties) We now look at the equilibrium policies
when the opposition merges and the coalition faces opposition party P = 34.We
proceed as above.
In districts d ∈ [0, 12 ],the vote share for P = 1 remains the same and is given
by (8.1). On the other hand, the votes for P = 34 are given by
1+β
(1 − F (V 1 − V 1∗ − δ)) +
4
1−β
(1 − F (V 2 − V 2∗ − δ))
4
4
X
1
(1 − F (V J − V J∗ − δ))}
4 J=3

v 34 = +

(A6)
(8.2)

This is exactly the double of v3 as given by (8.1). We can then derive the
expected seat share of P = 1.
E(III s1C )

ψ(1 − β2 )
ψ
1
−
+
[(1 + β)4(V 1 − V 1∗ )
=
4 2(6 + β)φ 4(6 + β)
4
X
2
2∗
+(1 − β)2(V − V ) + 3
(V J − V J∗ )]
J=3

48

(A7)
(8.3)

Clearly the equilibrium expected seat shares for P = 1, 2 will be lower when
the opposition is united. Equilibrium policies will however also be diﬀerent:

J
III gC
1
III rC

(

6+β
] if J = 1, 2
Hg−1 [ 8(1+β)
β
−1
Hg [1 + 6 ], if J = 3, 4
4
= III rC2 =
γψ

=

(A8)

One sees that compared to (8.2), J = 3, 4 receive more public goods and
J = 1, 2 receive less even though there is still overspending for the former and
underspending for the latter. The reason is that a united opposition is a more
serious contender because it receives more votes than a single party in a divided
opposition. On the other hand, reward and punishment votes from voters not
represented in government are split between the coalition parties. This gives an
incentive to the incumbents to please more the groups from the opposition and to
spend less on its constituencies.
One sees here that in a coalition government, the equilibrium policy does
change with the number of parties in the opposition. This is thus diﬀerent from
what we have under homogeneity where equilibrium policy depends only on the
government structure and not on the number of parties.
As above, an increase in β leads to an increase in spending on voters from the
coalition parties and to an decrease in spending on voters from the opposition.
8.1.2. Single party government
We now analyze the case where J = 1 and 2 merge to form a single party P = 12.
Analyzing first the case with a split opposition, the vote share of that party
in the first half of the districts will be

v 12 =

1+β
F (V 1 − V 1∗ − δ) +
4
1−β
F (V 2 − V 2∗ − δ) +
4
4
1X
F (V J − V J∗ − δ)
4 J=3
49

(A9)

In the other half of districts, the expression will be similar with V 2 replacing
V 1.
On the other hand, the vote share for P = 3 is given by (8.1).
The expected seat share of P = 12 is then
4
ψ
ψ X J
1
+ ( (V − V J∗ )
E(s ) = +
2 6φ 4 J=1
12

Note that the expression between square brackets has the same "weights " for
the groups represented in government and for those in the opposition. The equilibrium policy is thus the same as in proportional and majoritarian homogeneous
elections! Heterogeneity thus does not aﬀect the equilibrium policy when there
is a single-party government. The reason is that the single party is represented
equally in all districts. We are back to a case with symmetry. We do not expect
this result to hold under alternative representations of heterogeneity.
One verifies easily that the case with merged opposition will deliver similar
results. In essence, it becomes a 2-party contest like the one analyzed in the
homogeneous case.
8.2. Equilibrium party formation
Let us now look at possible equilibria. We first inspect the conditions for a two
party equilibrium.
Let us first look at the incentives for P = 12 to merge or to split given that
P = 34 has merged. In a two party equilibrium, the expected seat share of P = 12
will be 12 whether it is in the opposition or not. The expected payoﬀ of a merger
. In a three party equilibrium where P = 1 and 2
for party 1 is then 12 II WG12 = 1+γ
γψ
4
4
+ 12 E(III sPO ) γψ
γ2.
remain split, party P = 1 or 2 gets III WGP = 12 [1+E(III sPC )γ2] γψ
ψ(1− β )

2
From (8.3) we know that E(III sPC ) = 14 − 2(6+β)φ
. Assuming that P = 34 are in
ψ
1
P
. One can then derive the
power, one can then derive that E(III sO ) = 4 − 12φ
condition for P = 12 to merge:

1 + γ Std(δ)
2−β 1
1+γ φ
=
<
+
γ ψ
γ Std(ω)
6+β 3

(A10)

The right hand side unambiguously declines with β making the condition more
diﬃcult to fulfill as β increases.
50

To prove the existence of a two party equilibrium, not only must (A10) be
verified, but P = 3 and 4 must prefer to be merged rather than to stay split given
that P = 1, 2 are merged. When merged, the payoﬀ to P = 3 or 4 will be (1+γ)
γψ
and when split, it will be
have merged is thus

2(1+γ)
γψ

−

2
.
3φ

The condition to merge given that 1 and 2

1+γ φ
2
<
γ ψ
3

(A11)

Note that inequality (A10) is more stringent than (A11).
For a three party equilibrium with P = 3, 4 merging to exist, one must verify
whether P = 3 and 4 prefer to merge when 1 and 2 prefer to remain split. Reversed
inequality (A10) gives the condition for 1 and 2 to remain split when P = 3, 4
have merged.
4
1
34 4
Under a three party equilibrium, 12 III WG34 = 14 [1+E(III s34
S )γ] γψ + 4 E(III sO ) γψ γ.
We derive:
1
1
2−β
(1 + γ)
+
+
WG34 =
2 III
γψ
6φ 2φ(6 + β)
4
+
With four parties, the payoﬀ to party P = 3, 4 is IV WGP = 12 [1+E(IV sPC )γ2] γψ
1
P 8
E(IV sO ) γψ γ. We get
2
P
IV WG

Therefore,

P
IV WG

<

1
WG34
2 III

=

2β
2(1 + γ)
−
γψ
φ(4 + β)

if and only if

2β
2−β
1
1+γ φ
<
+
+
γ ψ
(4 + β) 2(6 + β) 6
Note that the right hand side increases with β.
For a three party equilibrium, given (A10), we must thus have
2−β 1
2β
2−β
1
+ <
+
+
6+β 3
(4 + β) 2(6 + β) 6
2β
2−β
i.e. (4+β)
− 2(6+β)
> 16 . This inequality will not hold for β = 0 but will hold
for β = 1. One also sees that the left-hand side monotonically increases with β.
There is thus a threshold β ∗ ∈ (0, 1) above which a three party equilibrium will
exist. Heterogeneity can thus lead to a three party equilibrium.

51

References
[1] Arellano, S. and M. Bond 1991. “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data:
Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations.” Review of Economic Studies 58, 277-297.
[2] Austen-Smith, D. 2000. “Redistributing Income under Proportional Representation.” Journal of Political Economy 108, 1235-1269.
[3] Baron, D. and D. Diermeier. 2001. ”Elections, Governments, and Parliaments
in Proportional Representation Systems.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
116, 933-967.
[4] Bawn, K. and F. Rosenbluth. 2002. ”Coalition Parties versus Coalitions
of Parties. How Electoral Agency Shapes the Political Logic of Costs and
Benefits ”, working paper, Yale.
[5] Besley T. and S. Coate. 2003. ”Elected versus Appointed Regulators: Theory
and Evidence”, Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.
[6] Cameron, D. 1978. “The Expansion of the Public Economy: A Comparative
Analysis.” American Political Science Review 72, 1203-1261.
[7] Cox, G. 1990. ”Centripetal and Centrifugal Forces in Electoral Systems”
American Journal of Political Science 34, 903-935.
[8] Cox, G. 1997. Making Votes Count. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
[9] Diermeier, D., and T. Feddersen 1998. “Cohesion in Legislatures and the Vote
of Confidence Procedure.” American Political Science Review 92, 611-621.
[10] Diermeier, D.and A. Merlo, 2000. ”Government Turnover in Parliamentary
Democracies ”, Journal of Economic Theory 94, 46-79.
[11] Diermeier, D., H. Eraslan, and A. Merlo. 2003a. “A Structural Model of
Governmment Formation.” Econometrica 71, 27-70.
[12] Diermeier, D., H. Eraslan, and A. Merlo. 2003b. “Bicameralism and Governmment Formation.” working paper, University of Pennsylvania.

52

[13] Laver, M. and N. Schofield. 1990. Multiparty Government: The Politics of
Coalition in Europe, paperback edition Oxford.
[14] Laver, M. and K. Shepsle. 1996. Making and Breaking Governments - Cabinets and Legislatures in Parliamentary Democracies. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
[15] Lijphart, A. 1984a. Democracies. New Haven: Yale University Press.
[16] Lijphart, A. 1984b. “Advances in the Comparative Study of Electoral Systems.” World Politics 36, 424-436.
[17] Lijphart, A. 1994. Electoral Systems and Party Systems. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
[18] Lijphart, A. 1999. Patterns of Democracy: Government Forms and Performance in Thirty-Six Countries. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
[19] Lundell, K. and L. Karvonen. 2003. A Comparative Data Set on Political
Institutions, mimeo, Åbo Akademi.
[20] Milesi-Ferretti G-M., Perotti, R. and M. Rostagno 2002. “Electoral Systems
and the Composition of Public Spending.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
117, 609-657.
[21] Persson, T., G. Roland and G. Tabellini 2000. “Comparative Politics and
Public Finance.” Journal of Political Economy 108, 1121-1161.
[22] Persson, T. and G. Tabellini 1999. “The Size and Scope of Government:
Comparative Politics with Rational Politicians, 1998 Alfred Marshall Lecture.” European Economic Review 43, 699-735.
[23] Persson, T. and G. Tabellini 2000. Political Economics: Explaining Economic
Policy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[24] Persson, T. and G. Tabellini 2003. The Economic Eﬀects of Constitutions.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[25] Persson, T. and G. Tabellini 2004. “Constitutional Rules and Economic Policy Outcomes” American Economic Review, forthcoming

53

[26] Persson, T., G. Tabellini, and F. Trebbi 2003. “Electoral Rules and Corruption” Journal of the European European Economic Association 1, 958-989.
[27] Powell Jr., G. Bingham 1982. Contemporary Democracies: Participation, Stability and Violence. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
[28] Powell Jr., G. Bingham 2000. Elections as Instruments of Democracy. New
Haven and London: Yale University Press.
[29] Rodrik, D. 1998. “Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments?” Journal of Political Economy 106, 997-1032.
[30] Taagepera, R. and M. Shugart 1989. Seats and Votes: The Eﬀects and Determinants of Electoral Systems. New Haven: Yale University Press.

54

Table 1
Political and economic outcomes
in alternative electoral systems
Majoritarian

Mixed

Proportional

party fragmentation

0.54
(0.17)

0.54
(0.12)

0.70
(0.09)

coalition governments

0.24
(0.41)

0.33
(0.47)

0.55
(0.47)

single-party governments

0.63
(0.47)

0.40
(0.50)

0.17
(0.37)

government spending

25.94
(9.05)

33.45
(11.3)

35.12
(9.30)

138

7

N. obs.

Simple averages; standard deviations in parenthesis.
Observations pooled across countries and legislatures.

187

Table 2a
Party Structure, type of governments and electoral rules
OLS and instrumental variable estimates in 1990s cross section
Dep. Var.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

party_frag

nparties

coalition

single

ngov

coalition

single

ngov

2.01
(0.71)***

-2.78
(0.50)***

party_frag
nparties
maj
semi
district
threshold

0.25
(0.10)**
-0.12
(0.05)**
-0.22
(0.09)**
0.11
(0.07)
0.00
(0.01)

-2.10
(1.31)
-3.76
(2.23)*
3.20
(1.56)**
-0.39
(0.16)**

bicam
investiture
constructive
Over-id
Estimation
Adj.R-sq.

N. Obs.

-0.16
(0.23)
0.32
(0.22)
0.66
(0.26)**
0.03
(0.03)
0.23
(0.10)**
-0.16
(0.21)
0.47
(0.14)***

0.42
(0.17)**
-0.28
(0.10)***
-0.30
(0.19)
-0.01
(0.02)
-0.11
(0.09)

0.08
(0.85)
0.98
(1.03)
2.22
(1.15)*
-0.09
(0.12)
0.06
(0.33)
0.95
(0.84)
-0.04
(0.77)

0.15
(0.11)
-0.08
(0.12)
0.53
(0.10)***

-0.01
(0.08)

0.28
(0.24)
0.84
(0.35)**
0.19
(0.33)

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

7.91(3)**
2SLS

4.33(3)
2SLS

4.52(3)
2SLS

0.47
52

0.44
52

0.39
47

0.51
47

0.22
47

47

47

47

Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Controls included in all OLS specifications, cols (1)-(5): avelf, lpop, col_uka
Second-stage variables in 2SLS regressions, cols (6)-(8): avelf, lpop, col_uka, bicam, investiture, constructive
First-stage variables in the 2SLS specifications: maj, semi, district, threshold, and all second-stage variables
Over-id is Hansen’s J test statistic of the over-identifying restriction implied by the electoral rule variables having no direct effect on the type government;
critical values at 5% significance 7.81, cols (6)-( 8)

Table 2b
Party Structure, type of governments and electoral rules
OLS and instrumental variable estimates in 1960-98 cross section
Dep.Var

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

party_frag

nparties

coalition

single

ngov

coalition

single

ngov

2.62
(0.74)***

-2.63
(0.43)***

party_frag
nparties
maj
semi
district
threshold

0.24
(0.06)***
-0.09
(0.05)*
-0.01
(0.06)
0.14
(0.07)**
-0.01
(0.01)

-1.88
(1.48)
-1.29
(1.81)
5.02
(1.79)***
-0.77
(0.27)***

investiture
constructive

Over-id
Estimation
Adjust. R-sq.

N. obs

0.07
(0.20)
0.25
(0.19)
0.75
(0.20)***
-0.01
(0.04)
0.04
(0.19)
0.71
(0.20)***

0.20
(0.18)
0.02
(0.20)
-0.43
(0.23)*
-0.00
(0.03)

0.44
(0.83)
0.39
(0.74)
2.22
(0.74)***
-0.16
(0.13)
0.84
(0.81)
0.42
(0.51)

-0.10
(0.11)
0.78
(0.12)***
2.76(3)
2SLS

3.65(3)
2SLS

36

36

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

4.25(3)
2SLS

0.40
38

0.49
38

0.25
36

0.34
36

0.11
36

36

0.35
(0.34)
0.77
(0.48)

Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Controls included in all OLS specification, cols (1)-(5): lpop, col_uka
Second-stage variables in 2SLS regressions, cols (6)-(8): lpop, col_uka, investiture, constructive
First-stage variables in the 2SLS specifications: maj, semi, district, threshold, and all second-stage variables
Over-id is Hansen’s J statistic for test of the over-identifying restriction implied by the electoral rule variables having no direct effect on the type of government;
critical values at 5% significance are 7.81 in all columns

Table 3
Size of government in the cross sections
OLS and instrumental variable estimates
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Dep. Var.

cgexp

cgexp

cgexp

cgexp

cgexp

cgexp

cgexp

cgexp

maj

-4.76
(3.39)
8.31
(4.53)*
14.52
(2.05)***

-2.73
(2.55)

semi
district

17.29
(2.29)***

coalition

17.00
(3.72)***

single

30.07
(10.79)***
-17.17
(5.58)***

ngov

Over-id
Sample
Estimation
Obs.
Adj. R-sq

-24.47
(14. 97)
7.74
(4.06)*

1990s
OLS
46

1960-98
OLS
34

0.67

0.55

2.16(3)
1990s
2SLS
46

2.26(2)
1990s
2SLS
46

0.02(2)
1990s
2SLS
46

10.01
(5.47)*
1.29(2)
1960-98
2SLS
34

1.60(1)
1960-98
2SLS
34

1.70(2)
1960-98
2SLS
34

Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Variables included in OLS specification, col (1), and second stage of 2SLS specification, cols (3)-(5): lyp, trade, prop65, federal, avelf, col_uka
Variables included in OLS specification, col (2), and second stage of 2SLS specification, cols (6)-(8): lyp, prop65, federal, col_uka
First-stage in 2SLS specifications: as displayed in cols 1-2 plus investiture (in cols 3 and 6) and threshold (in cols 5 and 8), plus all second-stage variables
Over-id is Hansen’s J test statistic for test of the over-identifying restriction implied by the electoral rule and constitutional variables having no direct effect
on the size of government; critical values at 5% significance are 7.81(col 3), 5.99(cols 4, 5, 6 and 8), 3.84 (col 7)

Table 4
Political outcomes in panel - periods correspond to legislatures
GMM estimates
Dep. Var.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

party_frag

coalition

single

coalition

single

1.35
(0.81)*

-1.26
(0.63)**

party_frag
maj
district
threshold

Over-id
AR(2)
Estimation
Obs.
N. countries

-0.06
(0.04)
2.31
(0.24)***
-0.00
(0.00)

0.37
(0.48)
6.31
(3.02)**
0.16
(0.10)

0.14
(0.09)*
-0.10
(0.56)
-0.00
(0.01)

4.16 (3)
0.68
GMM
141

0.01 (1)
-0.02
GMM
97

2.48 (1)
0.93
GMM
97

3.83 (6)
0.01
GMM
97

3.70 (6)
0.46
GMM
97

37

35

35

35

35

Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Estimation method: Arellano-Bond GMM estimates (all variables in first differences).
Specification: always included, constant, lpop; polity_gt , and lagged Dep. var., once in col (1), twice in cols (2)—(5)).
In cols (1)-(5), instruments for lagged Dep. Var. is one additional lag of this variable.
In cols (4)-(5), party_frag is treated as endogenous with additional instruments: one lag of party_frag, maj, district, .and threshold..
AR(2) Arellano-Bond test for absence of second-order serial correlation.
Over-id: Sargan test of over-identifying restrictions, distributed as Chi2 with degrees of freedoms in parenthesis;
critical values at 5% confidence: 7.81 col (1), 3.84 cols (2)-(3), 12.59 cols (4)-(5).

Table 5
Size of government in panel
GMM and FE estimates
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Dep var

last_cgexp

cgexp

last_cgexp

last_cgexp

cgexp

cgexp

maj

1.08
(1.67)
0.25
(0.08)***
-0.12
(0.17)

-0.86
(0.60)
0.42
(0.15)***
-0.18
(0.19)

district
threshold
coalition

6.51
(3.12)**

single
L(1) dep var

0.53
(0.21)**

0.93
(0.03)***
-0.08
(0.03)**

0.46
(0.18)**

-1.79
(4.31)
0.66
(0.17)***

legislatures
5.35(3)
0.76
GMM
111

years

FE
889

legislatures
10.24(9)
0.52
GMM
105

34

36

32

L(2) dep var

Periods
Over-id
AR(2)
Estimation
Obs.
N countries

0.94
(0.38)**

0.98
(0.04)***
-0.14
(0.04)***

-0.52
(0.33)
0.98
(0.04)***
-0.13
(0.04)***

legislatures
7.11(9)
0.96
GMM
105

years
8.66(3)**

years
9.49(3)**

FEIV
822

FEIV
822

32

34

34

Standard errors in parentheses, robust in cols (1),(3)--(4) * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Estimation methods: FE: with country fixed effects. FEIV: fixed-effects instrumental-variable estimates.
GMM Arellano-Bond estimates (all variables in first differences).
Specification : always included: constant, lpop, prop65, ygap; in cols (1), (3)-(4) leg_length.
In col (1), instruments for lagged last_cgexp is one further lag of this variable.
In cols (3)-(4), type of government (coalition or single) is treated as endogenous with one lag of this variable plus maj, district, and threshold as instruments.
In cols (5)-(6), instruments for type of government is lagged type of government, plus maj, district, and threshold.
AR(2) Arellano-Bond test for absence of second order serial correlation.
Over-id: Test of over-identifying restrictions, distributed like Chi2 with degrees of freedoms in parenthesis;
critical values at 5% confidence: 7.81 cols (1), (5)-(6); 16.92 cols (3)-(4).

