                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            STRESSED OUT ON FOUR CONTINENTS:
                             TIME CRUNCH OR YUPPIE KVETCH?

                                         Daniel S. Hamermesh
                                            Jungmin Lee

                                         Working Paper 10186
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10186


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2003




Edward Everett Hale Centennial professor of economics, University of Texas at Austin, research associate,
National Bureau of Economic Research, and program director, Forschungsinstitut zur Zukunft der Arbeit
(IZA); Ph.D. candidate, University of Texas at Austin. We thank Lisa Dickson, Abe Dunn, Yuqian Lu and
Mark Pocock for helpful assistance, and Jennifer Hunt, Gerald Oettinger, Stephen Trejo and participants in
seminars at a number of universities for very useful comments. The Australian Department of Family and
Community Services and Mark Wooden of the Melbourne Institute for Applied Economic and Social
Research kindly made the first wave of the HILDA available expeditiously. Jürgen Schupp of the Deutsches
Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung graciously gave us the 2002 German data on an accelerated basis, and Gert
Wagner added the question to that data set. Thomas Crossley provided access to the Canadian GSS data
during Hamermesh’s tenure as the Hooker Professor at McMaster University. The Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
supported the research underlying this study. None of these organizations is responsible for any of the
findings. (“Kvetch” is defined in the Merriam-Webster Dictionary as “habitual complaint.”) The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Daniel S. Hamermesh and Jungmin Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Stressed Out on Four Continents: Time Crunch or Yuppie Kvetch?
Daniel S. Hamermesh and Jungmin Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 10186
December 2003
JEL No. J220, J160

                                           ABSTRACT

Social commentators have pointed to problems of women workers who face “time stress” – an

absence of sufficient time to accomplish all their tasks. An economic theory views time stress as

reflecting how tightly the time constraint binds households. Time stress will be more prevalent in

households with higher incomes and whose members work longer in the market or on “required”

homework. Evidence from Australia, Canada, Germany, Korea and the United States corroborates

this view. Adults in higher-income households perceive more time stress for the same amount of

time spent in market work and household work. The importance of higher full incomes in generating

time stress is not small, particularly in North America – much is “yuppie kvetch.” While time stress

is most prevalent among working wives, a decomposition suggests that women would perceive more

time stress than men even if both worked the same number of hours in the market and at home.

Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu

Jungmin Lee
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712
junglee@eco.utexas.edu
I. Introduction

           Substantial attention has been paid in the popular media and among social commentators

(e.g., Hochschild, 1997) to the issue of a “time crunch.”—a “shortage” of time faced by today’s

worker/consumers.1 This issue generates much concern about the problems of working people,

and working couples in particular, who have two market jobs and may be unable or unwilling to

substitute purchased services for time spent maintaining a household. It is tied to surprise at the

possible failure of annual market work hours to decline (Schor, 1991) and at the increasing

fraction of adults who participate in the labor market (so that market work per adult in the United

States has probably risen since 1950). The essence of the problem was captured by a young

working mother of three pre-school children, “With the kids and the house, I often feel I have

four hours of tasks and only two hours to do them in.”2

           Economists have not studied this problem at all, other than to observe changing patterns

of time use. There has, however, been some research by social psychologists and sociologists on

the subject. Much simply uses time-budget surveys to identify demographic correlates of total

time spent in market and household production, equating stress (a subjective outcome) with time

use (an objective outcome). A few studies (Lochhead, 2002, and Holz, 2002) have used small

representative surveys (for Canada and Germany respectively) to relate subjective feelings of

time stress to demographic characteristics and to hours of market work.

           Time stress is a problem analogous to poverty: Both reflect the scarcity of resources,

time in the former case, goods in the latter. The only difference is that in a growing economy the

goods constraint will relax over time, while the time constraint cannot. The time crunch will

become relatively more binding for more people. Once one thinks about time stress in this


1
 Newspaper stories discussed the issue, e.g., http://www.pressdemo.com/outlook98/stories/39353.html, and
are legion today. Government publications such as http://www.ed.gov/pubs/PFIE/constrat.html became
noticeable during the 1990s, although Linder (1970) pointed it out a generation earlier. That there may be a
link to economic variables is suggested by recent publicity for Alain Ducasse’s gourmet lunch boxes, “The
big question in our lives is how to be at the same time a hedonist and in a hurry.” (The Economist, August
2, 2003, p. 49)
2
    Personal communication from Hannah E. Hamermesh, July 5, 2002.
economic way, the approach to its study is immediately apparent: Greater time stress should

result from an increasing relative abundance of goods, since time and purchased goods are not

perfectly substitutable. It is not only the leisure class that will be “harried” (Linder, 1970): Any

group, regardless of its hours of work, will perceive itself under increasing time stress as its

ability to purchase market goods increases.

        There are two central issues here for economists: 1) Do economists have anything useful

to add to the discussion (other than more complex statistical techniques) beyond what scholars in

other disciplines have offered? 2) If so, what is our comparative advantage? The former issue is

crucial: While economists are increasingly engaged in empirical studies of subjective outcomes,

in many cases our research addresses questions that scholars in other disciplines have already

addressed, is not linked to economic theory, and/or uses different data sets but employs methods

and approaches used many times before by others.3 On the second question, as in most cases in

which economists have successfully addressed areas that had previously been considered outside

our purview (e.g., Becker, 1976), our comparative advantage surely lies in adducing a

maximizing theory to describe and predict behavior.

        In Section II we thus derive an economic theory of time stress and generate predictions

from it. The essential novelty is to link time stress to the shadow price of time, which allows us

to treat it in the context of a model of the representative consumer who purchases goods and

allocates time. Because the outcome is subjective, it is even more important than usual to test the

theory on several data sets and allow for the possibility that the framing of the survey questions

might incorrectly be seen as supporting or refuting the theory.           Section III thus discusses a

variety of data sets that are used in the subsequent analyses, which are presented in Section IV for

each of Australia and Germany, Korea and Canada, and the United States. Section V explores the

titular question of this study.

3
 A careful exception is DiTella et al (2001). Frey and Stutzer (2002) discuss a variety of determinants of
subjective well-being, while Diener and Biswas-Diener (2002) survey the long-standing social-
pscyhological literature.


                                                    2
II. An Economic Theory of Time Stress

         “Stress” has a large number of dictionary definitions; but the most relevant here is

“physical, mental or emotional strain or tension.” Time stress should thus be interpreted as strain

or tension that is generated by feelings that the available time is insufficient to accomplish the

desired activities. Time, like goods, is always insufficient—because time is limited, everyone is

to some extent stressed.

        While some of the predictions derived here could be generated if we define the household

as maximizing some utility function defined over leisure and goods consumption, the particular

role of a time constraint is clarified if we follow Becker (1965), introduce time explicitly into the

model, and view households as producing commodities by combining home time, T-H, and goods

X. Commodities Zi are produced according to the household production functions:

(1)     Zi = Zi(Ti , Xi), i = 1, 2.

We assume that the household’s utility function is:

        U(Z1 , Z2 ) + V(Hm, Hf) ,

where the subscripts m and f denote the husband and wife, and the Hi denote market work. The

function reflects the disutility of market work, with U and V assumed additively separable for

simplicity.   As usual, we assume that Vj < 0 and Vjj < 0, Ui> 0 and Uii < 0. Perhaps most

important, for now we do not examine the internal distribution of consumption within the

household, implicitly thus assuming a unitary model of household decision-making.

        As is usual in the time-goods model, let household production functions be characterized

by fixed coefficients:

(2)     Ti = tiZi and Xi = biZi , i = 1, 2,

and let goods prices be pi.    The household’s income, which is entirely spent on the Xi, is:

(3)     ΣpiXi = Hmwm + Hfwf + I ,

where I is unearned income, and the wj are the spouses’ wage rates. The household faces this

goods constraint and the total time constraint:


                                                   3
(4)      ΣTi = T- Hm- Hf .

         The household’s problem is then to maximize:

(5) U (.) + V (.) + µ (wm H m + w f H f + I − p1b1 Z 1 − p 2 b2 Z 2 ) + λ (T − H m − H f − t1 Z 1 − t 2 Z 2 )

where µ is the Lagrangean multiplier on the goods constraint, and λ is the Lagrangean multiplier

on the time constraint. It seems reasonable to assume that time stress, a subjective measure, is

positively related to the shadow price of time, λ. In order to simplify matters we assume that the

husband’s hours of market work are fixed, consistent with the widely observed near-zero

elasticity of labor supply of married men.

         One can show that ∂λ/∂I >0 if:

(6) w f U 11U 22 < V22 [ p 2 b2 t 2U 11 + p1b1t1U 22 ] .

The left-hand side of (6) is proportional to the change in the marginal utility of an hour of market

work by the wife in response to a unit change in the household’s unearned income; the right-hand

side stands in the same proportion to the change in the marginal utility of an hour of her time at

home in response to the same change in unearned income. So long as the value of home time

increases more in response to an increase in unearned income than does the value of time in the

                                                                                     ∂λ      ∂λ
market, the shadow price of time rises with unearned income. Consider                   and      , the
                                                                                    ∂wm     ∂w f

comparative-static effects of changes in wage rates. From the first-order condition, we have:

        ∂λ      ∂λ
(7a)       = Hm    ,
       ∂wm      ∂I

 and

        ∂λ        ∂λ
(7b)        =µ+Hf    .
       ∂w f       ∂I

Both of these are positive if (6) is satisfied. Finally, it is trivial to show that ∂λ/∂T < 0 always.

         The results suggest that, if husband’s hours of work are held constant, anything that raises

the household’s income—higher wage rates for either spouse, or additional unearned income—


                                                           4
will increase the degree to which the time constraint binds. Obviously hours in the day are fixed,

so that the economic meaning of the prediction ∂λ/∂T < 0 cannot be about a pure increase in

available time. Rather, anything that makes the household more efficient in its home activities

can be viewed as equivalent to an increase in effective time and should thus reduce the extent to

which the time constraint binds.

           Relaxing the assumption of fixed hours of work by the husband makes the predictions

generally ambiguous. If, as seems consistent with evidence on labor supply elasticities,

∂Hm/∂wm≥0, the positive impact of higher husbands’ wage rates on λ becomes even larger when

his work hours are allowed to vary. Obversely, the evidence on income effects suggests that

∂Hm/∂I≤0, so that the ceteris paribus positive impact of increases in unearned income on λ is

attenuated by the changes in husbands’ work hours that they may induce.

           We have implicitly treated the household as being characterized by a unitary model of

household decision-making—we have assumed that there is a family utility function. A massive

literature (summarized, e.g., by Lundberg and Pollak, 1996) suggests that families are more

complex than this. So long as we assume that the household’s maximization is a two-step

process—determine hours of market work and the amount of the commodities to be produced

independent of the sharing rule—the basic predictions of the model do not change when we

assume a more complex decision-making process within the household.

           This economic model describes the effects of several variables on the extent to which the

time constraint binds the household. It presents a theory of the determination of the Lagrangean

multiplier on the time constraint, λ.4 For a given allocation of time to “work” activities, the

predictions about the impacts on λ of the wj, I and T can be carried over, mutatis mutandis, into

predictions about their effects on perceived time stress. Anything that reduces the time available

for the production of household commodities, such as additional market work, will also increase




4
    Theorizing about the determinants of a Lagrangean multiplier is unusual, but see Weinberg (2001).

                                                       5
time stress. We are thus equating subjective time stress with the unmeasurable, but predictable

tightness of the time constraint that the household faces.

        We wrote the production functions Z as identical across households, which much

research has shown to be incorrect. Perhaps the major problem is the implicit assumption that

people are equally efficient in combining goods and time regardless of their other characteristics.

An important determinant of the productivity of time in the household is its members’ health

(Grossman, 1972). Better health makes one more efficient in producing commodities in the

household, effectively raising the productivity of time and thus reducing time stress (and financial

stress as well). Thus for theoretical reasons, and because health is likely to be correlated with the

central variables on which we focus, full incomes and hours of work, it is crucial to account for

differences in health in describing time stress.

III. Data Sets for Studying Time Stress

        No large recent nationally random sample of Americans contains information on

perceptions of time stress. Thus the predictions of Section II cannot be tested thoroughly on

current or recent U.S. data. To compensate for this (ethnocentric) difficulty we use large data sets

from several different countries (and a small data set from the U.S.). Because the samples of

single individuals are not very large, and because the popular discussion of time stress revolves

around the behavior of married couples, we restrict the analysis to male-female partnerships.

        The Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) survey contains

information on perceived time stress and standard household demographic/economic variables

(Wooden et al, 2002). Modeled after the U.S. Panel Study of Income Dynamics, the first wave,

from 2001, obtained responses from 13,969 members of 7682 households. It addressed to each

adult respondent a questionnaire including, “How often do you feel rushed or pressed for time?

Almost always; often; sometimes; rarely; never.”

        The German Socio-economic Panel (SOEP) has 19 years of data, with the current sample

containing approximately 12,000 households. (Wagner et al, 1993) Its sponsors included in the


                                                   6
2002 wave a version of the same question on time stress that was contained in the HILDA. The

question and possible responses are: “Think about the last four weeks. How often during this

period did it happen that you felt rushed or under time pressure? Always; often; sometimes;

almost never; never.”

        Neither of these data sets reports actual time spent in market work and on household

tasks. In both respondents state how many hours per day or per week they usually spend in these

activities. Thus like any retrospective data that are unconstrained by the need to sum to a fixed

available time, they are subject to potential reporting problems. Fortunately the 1999 Korean

Time Use Study (KTUS) includes the question: “How often do you feel rushed or pressed for

time? Always; often; rarely; never.” The survey covered 17,000 households, including all adult

members. It obtained time diaries for each person for two days, as well as some demographic

data. Unfortunately it lacks information on wages and incomes, which we must impute using a

large contemporaneous Korean data set covering individuals.

        In 1998 the Canadian General Social Survey included a time-diary component, so that

like the KTUS the CGSS provides both actual and recall information on time use. Moreover,

information is available on each respondent’s income and that of her/his spouse. The drawback is

that it included only one adult in each household, so that we cannot examine the time stress of

spouses jointly. Also, the question on time stress was somewhat different from that in the other

surveys: “How often do you feel rushed? Would you say it is every day; a few times a week;

about once a week; about once a month; less than once a month; never.”

        Two small national U.S. surveys in the 1970s, the Quality of American Life Surveys

(QAL) of 1971 and 1978 (Campbell, Converse and Rodgers, 1975; Campbell and Converse,

1984) included questions on time stress as part of their small samples of individuals. The

question was: “In general, how do you feel about your time—would you say you always feel

rushed even to do the things you have to do, only sometimes feel rushed, or almost never feel

rushed?” The QAL contains no information on the time use of respondents’ spouses other than an


                                               7
indicator of whether or not the spouse works; and there is no information on the respondents’

allocation of non-market time. The analysis for the United States is thus based on individuals on

whose spouses and on whom there is relatively little information.5

IV. The Determinants of Time Stress

        Our purpose is to link the data on perceived time stress to measures of time use, the

scarcity of time for household production and the income used to purchase goods to combine with

that time. We group Australia and Germany together because of the similarity of the questions

about time stress and the underlying data on time use, and we group Korea and Canada together

for the latter reason. In each Part we examine the distribution of perceived time stress and how it

differs by sex. Each then proceeds to analyze the determinants of interpersonal differences in

time stress. We restrict the analyses to couples in which at least one of the partners is working in

the labor market. We also analyze married couples with both spouses working in the labor

market—the archetypal couple in the social-psychological “time crunch” literature. Since the

theory in Section II ignored corner solutions to the household’s maximization problem, these

latter results are especially worth attention.

        In addition to their diversity in the questions about time stress and the data on time use,

the data sets contain different measures of incomes or earnings. To make the results more

comparable across all five data sets, we include the single measure, total household income (or

total household earnings) in the equations describing time stress. (Since we restrict the analyses

to households with at least one working partner, the differences between income and earnings are

unlikely to be important.)      By including this measure and hours of market work we are

approximating as closely as possible full income, the theoretical construct in Section II.6 The



5
 Questions similar to those in the QAL were asked of some of the respondents in the 1982 and 1996 U.S.
General Social Surveys. Because these samples are smaller even than the QAL, and because the data may
not be entirely comparable, we do not include them in the analysis.
6
 Time prices—hourly wage rates—are unavailable in any of the data sets; and creating them by dividing
earnings by hours of market work generates the usual problems of division bias (Borjas, 1980).


                                                  8
basic equations thus describe perceived time stress by hours of market and non-market work, and

income, health status and a large number of control variables.

        A. Australia, 2001, Germany, 2002

        The distributions of responses on perceived time stress in the 2001 wave of the Australian

HILDA and the 2002 German SOEP are shown in Table 1, first for partners in all couples with a

working spouse, then for partners in two-earner couples.7 In all cases perceived time stress is

greater among women than men. The differences by sex are slightly greater in two-earner

couples, suggesting (since women are less likely to be the worker in one-worker households) that

differences in the incidence of market work are an important determinant of differences in time

stress. In these data most members of couples that are not entirely out of the labor force perceive

substantial time pressure (perhaps a recognition of the time constraint that everyone faces). That

pressure is somewhat greater when both partners are in the labor market.

        Of particular interest is the relationship between the partners’ stress. As the chi-squares

show, these are not independent: Where one partner is more stressed for time, so is the other.

This provides an empirical basis for the view in Section II that perceived time stress should be

analyzed in the context of the family’s time constraint. Whether these interactions are determined

by similar underlying tastes, by objective unmeasurable variables, or by the impacts of one

partner’s observable activities on the other’s time stress cannot be inferred from this simple test.

        Given the wealth of information on time use in the HILDA and the SOEP, it is worth

examining some of the crucial variables. Table 2 presents the means and standard deviations of

these variables separately by gender for the two types of couples. (Where the definitions differ

between the two countries, the categories in parentheses describe Germany.) In both countries

one set of questions asks the respondent about his/her main job, both the weekly hours worked



7
 Throughout this Part we include both married couples and the substantial number of (typically younger)
couples who state they are in permanent partnerships. This recognizes the nature of contemporary
household relationships in Australia and Germany. Eleven (12) percent of the couples in the larger sample
in Australia (Germany) are partnered rather than married, as are 13 (14) percent of the couples in the two-
worker sample.

                                                    9
and the number of days on which work is performed.8 Another series of questions asks how

hours in a typical day are distributed across a set of seven categories of activities. We aggregate

those that might be viewed as household work or as dependent (child and elder) care and

concentrate on those aspects of non-market work. We multiply these responses by 7 to make

them comparable to the data on weekly hours of market work.

        Most of the statistics seem quite reasonable: Where both spouses work in the market,

men’s total hours on all jobs are longer, and they work more days per week. Among two-earner

households Australian men’s hours of dependent care and errands/housework are far below those

of women, to the point that the total of these and market work hours is somewhat less (62 hours

per week) than that of their partners (66 hours per week). Among two-earner German households

the comparable figures are 58 and 69 hours. The excess of female over male total work hours is

about the same among all couples in Australia as it is in two-earner couples, but it is even larger

in the sample of German couples with at least one working partner. Unsurprisingly, given the

relatively small dispersion of hours of market work in Germany (Hamermesh, 1996, Ch. 2), the

deviation from a five-day workweek is much smaller in the German sample.

        The HILDA provides information on each partner’s income, and we use the sum of these

throughout the analysis. For the SOEP we use twelve times the sum of the partners’ gross

monthly pay, computed as monthly pay plus 1/12 of extra pay (13th and 14th month pay,

Christmas pay and vacation bonus), in recognition of German wage-payment institutions. The

resulting averages accord with published reports (Borland, 1999; Gerlach, 1987).

        For Australia we define the person as stressed if he/she responds as being always or often

stressed for time, thus including about half of the samples as being stressed. Aside from the

central variables of interest, in this and the subsequent Parts we also adjust for a number of


8
 Data are also available on weekly hours of moonlighting. Only 6 percent of the men and 5 percent of the
women in each country report such other work, with the mean weekly hours on second jobs equaling 12 for
men and 10 for women (7 for both sexes in Germany) among those who moonlight. Since days worked on
the second job are not reported, and since the fractions working such jobs and the hours worked on them
are quite small, we ignore them in the analysis that we present. Replacing hours on the main job with hours
worked on all jobs has, unsurprisingly, only minute effects on the estimates in Tables 3 and 4.

                                                    10
demographic variables that might affect perceived time stress.            In Australia these include

indicators of urban residence, immigrant status and whether the couple is married. Also included

here, but not presented in the tables, are indicators of the number of pre-school and school-age

children. Finally, here and later we also include measures of the partner’s hours of market work

and hours spent on each of the aggregates of non-market work.

        Table 3 presents estimates of the probit functions relating whether the respondent is

always or often stressed for time to the major variables of interest. Each coefficient shows the

impact on the probability of being stressed of a one-unit increase in the variable. The estimates

are presented separately for men and women, and for all couples with a worker and for two-

earner couples only.     The sample sizes are substantially smaller than those implied by the

statistics in Table 1, mainly because data on the broad measure of household incomes are missing

in about 20 percent of the cases.

        The central contribution of economic analysis to the discussion of time stress is its

emphasis on the role of command over market goods in generating stress. The crucial prediction

is that, other things equal, respondents in higher-income households will state that they are more

stressed for time. Except for men in two-worker households, where we find no effect, the

estimates corroborate this prediction: The effect of additional household income, holding all

other characteristics constant, is positive, and it is statistically significant for Australian women.

        Working the same number of hours per week spread over additional days, has a negative,

but statistically insignificant effect on perceived stress. Additional housework has no effect on

men’s perceived time stress, but it does have a small and statistically significant effect on

women’s stress. Additional hours of dependent care each week surprisingly have no impact on

women’s time stress, but they do raise men’s perception of time stress. It is worth noting (not

shown here) that, holding constant weekly hours of dependent care, additional children have little

effect on men’s perceived stress. An additional pre-school child, however, generates a significant




                                                  11
increase in a woman’s probability of being stressed for time of 0.09, while each school-age child

increases this probability by 0.07.

        The theory in Section II implied that factors that generate greater efficiency in producing

commodities at home are equivalent to increases in endowments of goods and time and lead,

other things equal, to a reduction in time stress. The results in Table 3 corroborate this view: The

roughly 60 percent of the sample that is in excellent or very good health is from 6 to 13

percentage points less likely to be stressed for time than otherwise comparable respondents.

Moving from poor to very good or excellent health has the same effect on perceived time stress as

a ten-hour reduction in weekly hours of market work.

        To isolate the effects of differences in income and time use on perceived time stress in

the German data, we again control for a set of demographic and related factors. These include

indicators of residence in the former East Germany, location in a city of at least 100,000 people,

presence of pre-school children, and a measure of the number of children. We capture potential

differences between types of couples by an indicator of whether the partners are married and

include measures of the partner’s hours of market and homework. Finally, since pressures on

self-employed workers may differ from those on employees, an indicator of self-employment

status is also included.

        As in the Australian data, we capture perceived time stress in Table 4 by estimating

probits describing the impacts of these variables on the probability that the person responds that

he or she is always or often stressed for time, thus defining between one-third and 40 percent of

the partners as stressed. Table 4 lists the estimated derivatives of the probit functions and their

standard errors for individuals in couples with at least one working partner, and for those in

couples with two working partners. Additional household income generates significant increases

in the time stress perceived by men and women, both in the sample of all working couples and

among two-earner couples.




                                                12
        Hours of work have significant and essentially identical positive effects on perceived

time stress for both sexes. As in Australia, spreading work over additional days reduces time

stress, but here some of the estimates are statistically significant. Among men additional time

spent in dependent care and cleaning-cooking-shopping has little effect on time stress.

(Remember from Table 2 that German men devote almost no time to these activities.) Among

women, however, additional time in dependent care has a substantial and significant positive

impact on time stress. While the impacts of additional time spent cleaning-cooking-shopping are

not statistically significant, they are positive (and larger for women in two-earner households).

        Being in at least good (self-reported) health has very large negative effects on the

probability of being stressed for time. Moving from less than satisfactory to satisfactory self-

assessed health has the same impact on perceived stress as at least a ten-hour decline in weekly

work hours. Although the variable is not quite comparable to that defined for Australia,

redefining it to make it as closely comparable as is possible does not alter the conclusion that self-

reported good health is very strongly negatively related to perceived time stress.

        B. Korea, 1999, Canada, 1998

        The distributions of the four possible responses to the question, “How often do you feel

rushed or pressed for time?” in the Korean Time Use Survey of 1999 are shown in Table 5. For

Canada we combine responses indicating time stress once a week and once a month, and those

indicating stress less than once a month or never, since those individual responses were

uncommon. In the KTUS only those couples that filled out time diaries for two days are included

in the samples used here, and only those for whom both days were weekdays. The paucity of

respondents in the Canadian GSS and the existence of time diaries for only one day require us to

use all respondents, including those who kept time diaries for weekend days.

        Among couples with at least one worker perceived time stress is greater among men than

among women in the Korean data. Even in this group for Canada we find the same result as in

Table 1 for Australia and Germany—greater time stress among women. The unusual finding in


                                                 13
Korea probably stems from the lower female participation rate than in the West, so that a larger

fraction of couples in the upper left part of Table 5 contains only male workers. When we

examine responses of two-earner couples, shown in the bottom of Table 5, we find for both

countries that time stress is far greater among working wives than among their working husbands,

with the differences being even larger than those found in Australia and Germany. As in

Australia and Germany, the responses of the Korean spouses are not independent:                      A

husband/wife whose spouse says she/he is more stressed for time is more likely to respond that

he/she is stressed for time.

        The main reason for using the KTUS and the Canadian GSS is that, unlike the other data

sets used here, they contain information from time diaries. This departure allows us to examine

whether the measurement error inherent in the CPS-type recall data on work hours used in Part A

of this Section might be biasing the estimated impacts of market and other work hours toward

zero and thus overstating the relative importance of full-income differences in affecting time

stress. To reduce measurement errors still further, in the Korean data we average the time-use

variables over the two weekday diaries.

        Table 6 presents the means and standard deviations of the time-diary measures of market

work, household care and family care for Korea and Canada, along with statistics on CPS-type

(recall) measures of weekly work hours. (Where the definitions differ between the countries, the

Canadian definition is in parentheses.) For Korea the diary measures are daily hours, while for

Canada, where diaries for all 7 days are used, we multiply daily hours by 7.9 Korean men do

remarkably little at home, much less even than their Australian or German counterparts. In two-

worker households on a typical workday the wife spends close to two more hours than her

husband in market work, household work and family care. In Canada the time diaries also




9
Rather than use hours of work on the weekend, for the 2/7 of the sample that is surveyed on the weekend
we calculate their daily hours of market work as 1/5 of their reported weekly hours.


                                                  14
indicate that women do more work than men. The differences, roughly two hours per week, are

remarkably similar to the respondents’ recollections in the Australian data.10

         For Korea the bottom rows of each half of Table 6 describe the family’s imputed

earnings, imputations that are necessitated by the absence of any earnings or income information

in the KTUS. We took a 10-percent random sub-sample of the 1999 Korean Wage Structure

Survey to estimate standard log-earnings regressions separately by sex for working married

persons, including all the variables that might affect wages and that are common to both

surveys.11 Using the parameter estimates, we imputed monthly earnings for each respondent in

the KTUS, summed each spouse’s imputed earnings and multiplied by 12 to obtain imputed

annual earnings. The Canadian GSS does not provide earnings data but, like the Australian

HILDA, we use information on each spouse’s income.

         For Korea the totals, roughly 18 and 24 million won (US$15,000 and US$20,000), accord

well with information on household incomes.12 The small standard deviations, induced by our

using imputations, underscore the point that the absence of income or earnings measures means

that we are necessarily introducing errors into the income variables used to predict perceived time

stress. Exactly opposite the case of the measures of time use, the income measures contain more

measurement error than those in the previous Part, so that for Korea we will understate the


10
  A major reason for using these data sets was to compare the results of basing the estimates on time-diary
reports of hours as opposed to the recall data that were available for Australia and Germany. We know that
Koreans do not work in the market on Sundays, and Saturday workdays are typically not so long as
weekday schedules. An upper bound for actual weekly work hours in Korea is thus six times average daily
hours, roughly 50 for men and 42 for working women. These estimates are far below the CPS-type
answers about weekly hours worked that are included in the data set and whose means are shown in the
second rows of the left half of Table 6. For Canada the comparisons are direct, and there too the recall data
indicate far longer hours of market work than the diary data. These shortfalls reproduce within data sets
inferences drawn from comparisons of time-use and CPS surveys in the U.S. (see Juster and Stafford,
1991).
11
  The regressions are estimated over 13,353 married men and 2851 married women respectively. Each
includes quadratics in monthly work hours and age, and vectors of indicators of educational attainment,
occupation and industry. The adjusted R2 in the equation for men is 0.42, in that for women, 0.53. Annual
bonuses, on which the data may be less reliable, are excluded from the earnings variable.
12
 The National Survey of Household Income and Expenditures shows that the average household with
earners has 1.49 earners and has an average labor income of 22.48 million won.


                                                     15
relative importance of income differences in determining time stress. The sample data on total

incomes for husband-wife households in Canada in which the wife works in the market are close

to the average family income of such households in the 1995 Census, $67,894.

        Table 7 shows the results of estimating probits describing the chance that a respondent in

the KTUS states that he/she is always under time pressure (between 26 and 42 percent of the

samples). The estimates are presented in exactly the same form as those in Tables 3 and 4. In

these equations we also include indicators of location and metropolitan residence, of the presence

of pre-school children, a continuous measure of the number of household residents age 10 and

over and measures of the spouse’s time use.          The essential results are remarkably similar

qualitatively to those in the first Part of this section. Additional (diary) hours of market work

have highly significant positive effects on perceived time stress. Household work also has

significantly positive effects on time stress, but additional time spent in family care affects time

stress significantly among women only if we include both one- and two-earner households.

        Holding market and non-market work hours constant, individuals with higher (imputed)

household earnings are more likely to respond that they are always stressed for time. These

results replicate perfectly the findings for Australia and Germany—higher full income, like

additional market and household work, leads to greater perceived time stress.

        The coefficient estimates in Table 8 are from probits on the Canadian GSS data

indicating whether the respondent states that he/she is always rushed (between 52 and 59 percent

of the respondents). The samples are substantially smaller than those on which the statistics in

Tables 5 and 6 are based, because the health measure and information on the spouse’s hours are

missing for many respondents. Despite the fairly small samples, however, the results on hours of

market work look very much like those we have generated for the other countries, with highly

significant positive effects on the probability of being stressed. Additional time spent on non-

market work activities increases the probability that the respondents claim to be rushed, but the

effects are much less on a per-hour basis than those of additional hours of market work.


                                                16
        Holding hours of market and non-market work constant, for Canada too we find that

additional income increases household members’ feeling of being rushed.              The effects are

positive in all four samples, significantly so for men. As the discussion in Section II predicted,

and as in Part A, those respondents whose self-assessed health is better (about 40 percent of the

samples) are less likely to state that they are rushed, with the effects being substantial for men.

        The data for these two countries allow us to examine whether using time-diary instead of

recall data affects the results. For Korea we re-estimated the equations by replacing the time-

diary measures of market work with the CPS-type responses (since recall data on non-market

work times were not available).        As expected, the parameter estimates were not quite so

significantly nonzero, and their implied impacts on time stress were slightly lower. The Canadian

GSS contains recall data on all non-market work (similar to the HILDA and the SOEP), and we

used recall measures for all three time-use variables. The estimates using these recall measures

typically implied larger effects of market work hours on time stress, but the differences were not

great. The estimated coefficients on the income/earnings measures were hardly affected in either

country. Overall these additional results suggest that using CPS-type measures of hours instead

of diary measures does not induce large biases in the parameter estimates.

        C. United States, 1971 and 1978

        The American QAL allowed only three possible responses to the question about time

pressure. Moreover, having fewer respondents, these surveys are less likely to generate the kind

of convincing results shown above and should thus be viewed as providing weaker tests of the

theory, and somewhat less information on time stress. Nonetheless, because they are the only

large-scale data sets available to analyze this issue for the U.S., it is worth using the information.

Because the QAL samples are fairly small, we pool the data for 1971 and 1978.13




13
 The 1978 QAL contained a longitudinal component that included some of the respondents in the 1971
QAL. We include each such respondent once here, using his/her data for 1978 only.


                                                  17
         The distributions of perceived time stress across the three possible responses are shown

in Table 9. Even in the sample of people in couples with one or two working spouses, in most of

which it was the wife who was not working, women are less likely than men to state that they are

sometimes rushed or almost never rushed. When both spouses work in the labor market, a

substantially higher fraction of the women indicated that they are always rushed for time, and a

much smaller fraction indicated that they are almost never rushed. As in the other samples,

women, especially wives who work in the labor market, are more stressed for time.

         Unlike in the previous Parts, in Table 10 we present ordered probits describing the effects

of hours of market work, health (no health problems) and annual household income on perceived

time stress. We use ordered probits because the large majority of respondents are in the middle

category (rushed sometimes) and because the number of possible categories is small. We include

indicators for geography (location in the South and in an SMSA), for whether the person or one

of his/her parents is an immigrant, for self-employment status and for the presence of a preschool

child, and a continuous measure of the number of children in the household.

         Despite the small samples and the lack of detailed data on spouses, the results are quite

similar to those in the previous Parts. Additional hours of market work significantly shift

respondents to categories indicating more time stress.       As in the other samples additional

household income generates additional perceived time stress. In both samples the positive effects

are statistically significant at least at some low level of confidence. The health measure does not

consistently produce the expected negative impact on perceived time stress (although the only

statistically significant effect is negative).

         D. Additional Tests, Robustness Checks and Extensions

         We have restricted ourselves to specifications that allow the greatest commonality across

the many data sets we have used in order to test the central and surprising prediction of the

economic model—that, other things equal, people with higher full incomes will feel more time

stress. A large variety of alternative specifications suggest themselves, and here we examine


                                                 18
these on the data sets that allow the testing (in most cases the HILDA and the SOEP, the most

extensive of the data sets we have used).

        Perhaps the simplest and potentially most convincing check comes from a unique aspect

of the German data: In addition to the regular sample, a special large sample of high-income

households (97th percentile or above) was drawn. Among married nonworking (in the market)

women with working husbands in the high-income sample, 18.8 percent felt stressed always or

often, while only 14.2 percent of the married nonworking women with working husbands in the

random sample did. Obversely, only 39.4 percent of the rich nonworking wives felt never or

almost never stressed, while 49.4 percent of average nonworking wives did.             This stark

comparison suggests the role of additional household income in increasing the Lagrangean

multiplier in the household’s time constraint.

        While we have combined the earnings/income measures for spouses into household

earnings/income, the model in Section II suggested that their effects might be expected to differ.

We thus re-specify the probits for Australia and Germany to separate out the partners’

earnings/incomes. In none of the eight probits can we reject the hypothesis that the effect of

one’s spouse’s full income on one’s perceived time stress is the same as the effect of one’s own

full income. Implicitly, at least in terms of the time stress that is generated by household

production, an income-pooling model cannot be rejected.

        Among the potential misspecifications of the estimating equations are several that would

arise outside an economic model. Perhaps most important, what if time stress is not caused by

the rush to spend higher incomes in the same amount of time, but is instead linked to

occupation—that high-pressure occupations generate more time stress? For Australia and the

United States we added vectors of one-digit occupational indicators to the estimating equations to

examine this hypothesis. In neither country can we reject the hypothesis that this vector as a

whole is zero, and including it reduces only slightly the impacts of the measures of household

income/earnings on perceived time stress. This re-specification is an especially stringent test of


                                                 19
the underlying hypothesis, as the occupational indicators are related to household

income/earnings in both countries.14

         Time stress may diminish even for the same hours of market work as individuals become

more accustomed to their workplaces and their jobs. To examine this possibility (which does not

stem from the model), we add measures of job tenure to the probits for two-earner households in

Australia and Germany. Neither linear nor quadratic versions of this variable have any impact on

perceived time stress, and their inclusion does not alter our inferences about the role of household

income/earnings.      A related argument, that perceived time stress is a biological outcome

stemming from aging, is refuted: Using the same data sets, linear and quadratic forms in the

respondent’s age had no significant impacts on the probability of being stressed for time and did

not qualitatively affect our inferences about the effects of full income.

         While a measure of health—essentially proxying the efficiency of household

production—is suggested by our model, those we have used have two unavoidable problems: 1)

They are inherently subjective, meaning that we are relating a subjective measure (perceived time

stress) to another subjective measure (self-reported health)15; 2) They are based on current health,

not long-term efficiency in the household. The former concern cannot be circumvented, but the

positive correlation between good health and income suggests that any bias that it may induce in

the estimated parameters of the crucial income/earnings variables is negative. In re-estimates of

the basic model for all countries for which we had health measures this is exactly what we find—

excluding measures of health increases the estimated impacts of income/earnings on time stress.

Finally, if in the longitudinal SOEP we use last year’s perceived health instead of its current

value, again we find that the estimated effects of household earnings on time stress increase.


14
  We also modified the model to include quadratics in own hours of market work. While the quadratic
terms were sometimes significant statistically, their signs were not uniform across the equations, and the re-
specifications did not alter our conclusions about the role of household income/earnings.
15
 Some evidence (Butler et al, 1987) suggests that at least for workers objective measures are very highly
correlated with self-reported health.



                                                     20
        Although it is difficult to construct a scenario by which simultaneity between time stress

and full income might arise, it is worth trying, within the limits of the available data, to construct

an instrument for current full income. The only sensible possibility is provided by the SOEP,

whose 2001 wave contains each household’s gross annual pay. We used Year 2001 earnings to

re-estimate the probits over all couples that responded to the 2001 and 2002 surveys. Compared

to the same equations estimated over these (reduced) samples, but with Year 2002 earnings, the

equations described differences in time stress better: In all cases the coefficients on household

pay in Year 2001 exceeded the corresponding coefficient in Table 4 (and also in untabled

equations on these same reduced samples), and the coefficients were generally more significant

statistically than those presented in Table 4. The estimates indicate that at least one possible,

although seemingly not very plausible concern about simultaneity is not a problem in these data.

        The estimates exclude one possibly stressful activity—commuting time—that may be

correlated with earnings. To examine whether this exclusion affects our results, we re-specified

the basic equations for Australia and Korea, for which data on hours spent commuting were

available. For Australia commuting time had positive but insignificant effects on time stress and

no qualitative impact on the estimated effects of household income. In Korea increased

commuting time did raise time stress significantly, but there too it had no effects on our

inferences about the role of additional earnings.

        Except for the United States the estimates are presented for simple binary definitions of

stress in order to aid in interpreting the results. We re-estimated the equations using ordered

probits describing all possible responses to the questions on time stress in each survey. In nearly

all cases the coefficients on household incomes in the ordered probits were more significant

statistically than those in the simple probits. The estimates we present in Parts A and B thus

understate the statistical significance of the effects of differences in household incomes/earnings.

        In the estimation for Australia, Germany and Korea we have treated the equations

describing partners’ perceived time stress as independent, despite the evidence in Tables 1 and 5


                                                    21
that they are not. Additional statistical efficiency can be gained if instead we view each partner’s

perceptions as jointly determined and estimate each of the pairs of equations in Tables 3, 4 and 7

jointly as a bivariate probit. The re-estimates never generate changes in the parameter estimates

of more than one in the second significant digit, nor do they alter the statistical significance of the

parameter estimates. They do, however, allow us to examine the cross-partner correlations in the

errors. The estimated correlation coefficients (and their t-statistics) are 0.211 (5.43) and 0.193

(4.07) in Australia, 0.307 (9.52) and 0.357 (8.89) in Germany, and 0.424 (13.16) and 0.513

(12.76) in Korea. They indicate the clear presence of unobservable characteristics that stress both

partners simultaneously in all three countries.

        One might argue that all we have shown is that adults in high-income families complain a

lot—higher income may lead people to complain about everything or may be correlated with

complaints in a variety of areas. If that is true, higher-income people will be more likely to

complain about their incomes than other people, other things equal. Contrariwise, in the theory in

Section II the Lagrangean multiplier µ on the income constraint becomes less binding as full

incomes rise. Following the same argument that linked predictions about impacts on λ to changes

in incomes, we can link increases in incomes to effects on µ and infer that they will reduce

people’s income stress. People in households with high incomes will perceive more time stress

but should be less likely to feel that their incomes are inadequate.

        The Australian and German surveys ask respondents, “How satisfied are you with your

financial situation [household income];” the Canadian GSS asks, “Please rate your feelings about

your finances.” We estimated ordered probits describing satisfaction with income, including the

same regressors as in Tables 3, 4 and 8. They make it clear that respondents with higher

household incomes are more satisfied with their incomes than other people. Not surprisingly too,

members of the higher-income households exhibit greater satisfaction with life, other things

equal. A higher full income increases our proxy for the shadow value of time, reduces the proxy

for the shadow value of goods, and increases a proxy for the level of the value function.


                                                  22
V. Crunch or Kvetch, and Whose?

        The results make it clear that additional hours of market work increase perceived time

stress. They also demonstrate the fundamental economic point that, holding hours of market and

household work constant, additional income also leads to greater time stress. People do perceive

themselves as being in a time crunch, but they are kvetching because they have too much money

given the time that they have chosen to leave over from market and household work to combine

with their incomes. This kvetching does not mean that people could enhance their utility by

giving up income: We assume that we are dealing with people who are maximizing utility but

who are simply unhappy about the exogenous limits on their available time.

        The more interesting question is the relative importance of the effects of limits on time

and increases in income on perceived time stress. To examine this question in comparable ways

across the data sets we use the results in Tables 3, 4, 7, 8 and 10 along with the order statistics of

the underlying variables to estimate the impact of increases in market hours and incomes on the

probability of stating one is stressed for time. Consider:

(8)     ∆YH = - βY∆Y/βH∆H,

where the β are the estimated probit coefficients (ordered probit in the case of the U.S.), and ∆Y

and ∆H are changes along the quantiles of the distributions of household income/earnings and

hours. We present calculations for movements from the 25th to the 75th and the 10th to the 90th

percentiles of the underlying variables. For all countries except Korea this is straightforward:

We just use the distributions for the particular samples used in the estimation. Because we

imputed earnings in Korea, we assume that the earnings distribution in this sample exhibits the

same inequality as in the Korean National Survey of Household Income and Expenditures and use

our sample means and the parameters of that distribution to simulate the impact of changes across

earnings quantiles.16


16
  Quantile differences in earnings in Korea in the late 1980s look similar to those in Western Europe
(Topel, 1999); and the survey data on which we base the simulations look very much like those in Topel.


                                                  23
         Table 11 presents estimates of ∆YH for each of the four samples in all five countries.

They demonstrate that increases along the distribution of hours of market work generate greater

increases in perceived time stress than do increases across the same percentiles of the distribution

of household income/earnings. Nonetheless, increases in full income do substantially increase

time stress.    Because the definition of time stress differs among the five countries, as do the

distributions of hours of work and income, comparisons across the data sets must be considered

highly tentative. The greater relative importance of income differences in North America, and

particularly in the United States, may, however, explain why the notion of time crunch is

discussed more widely here.

         Although the comparisons in Table 11 implicitly treat increases in hours of work and in

full incomes as exogenous, the former surely are not. So long as labor supply curves are upward

sloping, even these comparisons mean that we are understating the relative importance of

increases in full incomes in generating complaints about being stressed for time. In the end we

cannot really answer whether there is a time crunch or whether the complaints are yuppie

kvetching. We can be sure, however, that at least some of the complaints result from differences

across households in their members’ full incomes.

         As Tables 1, 5 and 9 showed, among two-earner couples the probability of stating one is

time stressed is greater among wives. Taking the couples from the three countries whose data

describe both partners, we can ask whether the sex difference arises from differences in the

responses to each spouse’s characteristics, or from differences in the characteristics themselves.

We thus estimate a standard decomposition, asking how the predicted mean fraction stressed

would differ if the males’ outcome were determined the same way as the females’ and vice-versa.

         Table 12 presents this decomposition for each of the three countries, with the actual

fraction stressed shown in italics on the prime diagonals.17 In both Australia and Germany if the

17
  The fractions are not exactly those listed in Tables 2 and 6, because the probits are nonlinear and because
for Australia the samples used in the probits differed very slightly from those for which the means are
tabulated.


                                                     24
wives had their partners’ characteristics (same hours of market and non-market work, and same

health) they would express still greater time stress (lower left in each part); if husbands had their

wives’ characteristics, they would express less time stress (upper right). At least in terms of this

standard decomposition it appears that women in two-earner Western households are more likely

to complain of being stressed for time at a given amount of market and non-market work than are

their partners. This arises partly because in both countries the biggest measurable determinant of

time stress is hours of market work, and men work more hours in the market; partly too in

Australia it stems from a larger intercept in the probit for wives. The results differ in Korea: If

husbands or wives switched roles, both would be more stressed.

        This decomposition in the two Western economies suggests that working wives complain

more about being rushed for time than would working husbands placed in an observably similar

situation, but interpreting this result requires care. While we have included measures of time

spent in childcare and of the number and ages of children, we know (Gronau and Hamermesh,

2001) that women do more different things during the day and may spend more time coordinating

activities. It is also possible that wives maintain general responsibility for the household’s

operation independent of the number of children, their ages and the time spent caring for them

and the household. This managerial effect may generate women’s greater feelings of time stress.

It is clear from the decomposition, however, that they are not caused by differences in measured

characteristics.

VI. Conclusions

        We have proposed an economic theory that yields specific predictions about the impact

of additional income on individuals’ perceived time stress and have tested the model on a large

variety of data sets covering five developed economies. The results are qualitatively remarkably

consistent across countries: While additional market work does generate additional time stress,

additional income, holding hours of market and homework fixed, also increases time stress. The




                                                 25
relative sizes of these effects vary, but the impact of higher full incomes seems greater in North

America than elsewhere.

        The results suggest that at least some of the concern about a time crunch may be

misplaced: Complaints about insufficient time come disproportionately from higher full-income

families, partly because their members choose to work more hours, partly too because they have

higher incomes to spend during each day.        Whether one should be concerned about these

complaints or simply view them as yuppie kvetching is a matter of values. In a world in which

sympathy is scarce, however, it seems reasonable to argue that the time crunch—a more tightly

binding time constraint—may have a smaller claim on public sympathy than poverty—a more

tightly binding goods constraint.

        The theoretical model and most of the empirical analyses have yielded some surprising

results, and also some mysteries that clearly call for additional research that can profit from

economic thinking. Particularly interesting among the latter is the stark gender difference in

perceived time stress, one that cannot be explained at all by differences in observable

characteristics. The analysis can also be extended to consider satisfaction with income in a more

rigorous way than has been seen in the burgeoning economics and immense psychology

literatures. More important, however, thinking about the predictions for subjective psychological

outcomes that result from consumers’ utility maximization is something that should be useful in a

variety of areas that are widely discussed in the other social sciences, that concern many

laypeople, and to which economists have paid very little attention.




                                                26
REFERENCES

Gary Becker, “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal, 75 (June 1965): 492-517.

----------------, The Economic Approach to Human Behavior. Chicago: University of Chicago
          Press, 1976.

George Borjas, “ The Relationship Between Wages and Weekly Hours of Work: The role of
       Division Bias,” Journal of Human Resources, 15 (Summer 1980): 409-23.

Jeff Borland, “The Equal Pay Case—Thirty Years On,” Australian Economic Review, 32 (Sept.
        1999): 265-72.

J. S. Butler; Richard V. Burkhauser; Jean M. Mitchell; Theodore P. Pincus, “Measurement Error
        in Self-Reported Health Variables,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 69 (Nov. 1987):
        644-50.

Angus Campbell and Philip Converse, The Quality of American Life, 1978. Ann Arbor: Institute
       for Social Research, 1984.

Angus Campbell, Philip Converse and Willard Rodgers, The Quality of American Life. Ann
      Arbor: Institute for Social Research, 1975.

Edward Diener and Robert Biswas-Diener, “Will Money Increase Subjective Well-Being?”
      Social Indicators Research, 57 (2002): 119-69.

Rafael Di Tella, Robert MacCulloch and Andrew Oswald, “Preferences Over Inflation and
       Unemployment: Evidence from Surveys of Happiness,” American Economic Review, 81
       (March 2001): 335-41.

Bruno Frey and Alois Stutzer, Happiness and Economics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
       Press, 2002.

Knut Gerlach, “A Note on Male-Female Wage Differences in West Germany,” Journal of Human
       Resources, 22 (Fall 1987): 584-92.

Reuben Gronau, and Daniel Hamermesh, “The Demand for Variety -- A Household Production
       Perspective,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 8509, Sept.
       2001.

Michael Grossman, “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health,” Journal of
       Political Economy, 80 (March/April 1972): 223-55.

Daniel Hamermesh, Workdays, Workhours and Work Schedules. Kalamazoo, MI: The W. E.
       Upjohn Foundation, 1996.

Arlie Russell Hochschild, The Time Bind: When Work Becomes Home and Home Becomes Work.
        New York: Metropolitan Books, 1997.

Erlend Holz, “Time Stress and Time Crunch in the Daily Life of Women, Men and Families,”
       Unpublished paper, Statistisches Bundesamt, Wiesbaden, 2002.



                                              27
F. Thomas Juster and Frank Stafford, “The Allocation of Time: Empirical Findings, Behavioral
       Models, and Problems of Measurement,” Journal of Economic Literature, 29 (1991):
       471-522.

Staffan Burenstam Linder, The Harried Leisure Class. New York: Columbia University Press,
        1970.

Clarence Lochhead, “Factors Associated with Time Stess Among Mothers and Fathers in Two-
       Parent Families,” Unpublished paper, Canadian Labour and Business Centre, Ottawa,
       2002.

Shelly Lundberg and Robert Pollak, “Bargaining and Distribution in Marriage,” Journal of
       Economic Perspectives, 10 (Fall 1996): 139-58.

Juliet Schor, The Overworked American. New York: Basic Books, 1991.

Robert Topel, “Labor Markets and Economic Growth,” in. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card,
       Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3C. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1999.

Gert Wagner, Richard Burkhauser and Frederike Behringer, “The Syracuse University English
      Language Public Use File of the German Socio-Economic Panel,” Journal of Human
      Resources, 28 (Spring 1993): 429-33.

Bruce Weinberg, “An Incentive Model of the Effect of Parental Income on Children,” Journal of
       Political Economy, 109 (April 2001): 266-80.

Mark Wooden, Simon Freidin and Nicole Watson, “The Household, Income and Labour
      Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) Survey: Wave 1,” Australian Economic Review, 35
      (2002): 339-48.




                                             28
Table 1. Percent Distributions of Time Pressure, Married/Partnered Individuals in
Couples, Australia, 2001 (Germany 2002)

                              AUSTRALIA                                GERMANY

                         MEN               WOMEN                   MEN            WOMEN

                                  ONE OR TWO WORKING PARTNERS
Under time pressure:a
Almost Always             10.67            14.72                      5.62             5.40
(Always)

Often                     32.76            35.77                     28.67            30.98

Sometimes                 41.89            39.27                     38.20            41.74

Rarely                    13.07             9.15                     17.07            13.88
(Almost Never)
Never                     1.61              1.09                     10.44             8.00

N=                                2869                                       3076

Chi-squared of Independence
 of Partners’ Distributions 157.91, p<.001                              417.77, p<.001

                                         TWO WORKING PARTNERS

Almost Always             10.70            16.10                      6.41             6.41
(Always)

Often                     34.23            38.98                     31.44            35.98

Sometimes                 41.48            37.07                     40.91            42.64

Rarely                    12.27             7.39                     14.05             9.87
(Almost Never)

Never                      1.32             0.45                      7.19             5.18

N=                                1943                                       1796

Chi-squared of Independence
 of Partners’ Distributions 132.55, p<.001                              252.11, p<.001
a
 The question in Australia is: “How often do you feel rushed or pressed for time?” The responses are:
“Almost always, often, sometimes, rarely, never.” The question (in translation) in Germany is: “Think
about the last four weeks. How often during this period did it happen that you felt rushed or under time
pressure?” The responses are: “Always, often, sometimes, almost never, never.”
Table 2. Means and Standard Deviations of Crucial Variables, Married/Partnered
Individuals in Couples, Australia 2001 (Germany 2002)

                            AUSTRALIA                       GERMANY

                     MEN                 WOMEN           MEN            WOMEN

                                   ONE OR TWO WORKING PARTNERS

Weekly Work           43.64               22.97           39.38               21.67
 Hours               (17.58)             (19.13)         (17.59)             (18.19)

Days Worked               4.84                3.14         4.52               3.37
                         (1.69)              (2.30)       (1.72)             (2.34)

Weekly Errands,           8.93                25.10        9.80               28.70
 Housework Hours         (8.40)              (16.72)      (9.31)             (14.42)
(Shopping, Eating
 Cleaning Hours)

Weekly Dependent      7.23                14.97            4.62               19.11
 Care Hours          (10.71)             (21.83)          (8.96)             (32.76)

Gross Annual Pay      41.017              19.287          33.01               13.26
(A$1000) (€1000)     (35.463)            (21.065)        (36.58)             (22.84)

Household Income (Pay)             74.269                           46.11
 (A$1000) (€1000)                 (48.852)                         (43.26)

                                        TWO WORKING PARTNERS

Weekly Work           46.99               31.61           44.81               30.83
 Hours               (14.04)             (15.33)         (10.46)             (13.66)

Days Worked               5.21                4.33         5.12               4.78
                         (1.18)              (1.49)       (0.50)             (0.97)

Weekly Errands,           8.66            22.35            9.17               24.78
Housework Hours          (7.45)          (14.73)          (7.63)             (11.90)
(Shopping, Eating
 Cleaning Hours)

Weekly Dependent          6.54                12.26        4.41               13.80
 Care Hours              (9.95)              (18.54)      (9.26)             (25.82)

Gross Annual Pay      42.504              26.862          36.73               18.98
 (A$1000) (€1000)    (33.539)            (20.563)        (38.51)             (27.05)

Household Income (Pay)             80.014                           55.47
 (A$1000) (€1000)                 (47.271)                         (47.52)
Table 3. Probit Estimates of the Determinants of Time Stress, Australian Couples, 2001,
(Dependent variable is whether stressed almost always or often)a

                        ONE OR TWO WORKERS                                  TWO WORKERS

                            MEN              WOMEN                        MEN              WOMEN
Variable:
Weekly Work                 .00824             .00773                     .00833            .00801
 Hours                     (.00111)           (.00133)                   (.00138)          (.00142)

Days Worked                -.00591            -.0152                     -.00544           -.0138
                           (.01112)           (.0111)                    (.01544)          (.0137)

Weekly Errands,             .00009            .00177                     -.00037            .00185
 Housework Hours           (.00148)          (.00083)                    (.00196)          (.00116)

Weekly Dependent            .00525            .00091                      .00550            .00013
 Care Hours                (.00136)          (.00069)                    (.00189)          (.00105)

Excellent or Very           -.0893           -.0968                      -.0578            -.1287
 Good Health               (.0248)           (.0261)                     (.0305)           (.0313)

Gross Annual House-    .00034                 .00052                     -.00004            .00078
 hold Income (A$1000) (.00026)               (.00026)                    (.00033)          (.00034)

Pseudo R2                   .0709             .0827                       .0589             .0789

N=                                   1864                                          1246
a
 Here and in Tables 4, 7 and 8 the coefficients are the effects of a one-unit increase in X on the probability
of being pressed for time. Standard errors are in parentheses. The equations also include indicators of
immigrant status, residence in one of the five major cities, married versus partnered, number of children
under age 6, and number of school-age children. Also included are measures of the spouse/partner’s health
status, weekly hours and days of market work, dependent care and errands/housework.
Table 4. Probit Estimates of the Determinants of Time Stress, German Couples, 2002,
(Dependent variable is whether stressed always or often)a

                       ONE OR TWO WORKERS                              TWO WORKERS

                           MEN              WOMEN                     MEN             WOMEN
Variable:
Weekly Work                .0107             .0090                    .0106            .0099
 Hours                    (.0011)           (.0010)                  (.0014)          (.0013)

Days Worked              -.0340             -.0088                   -.0278           -.0417
                         (.0114)            (.0074)                  (.0279)          (.0150)

Weekly Shopping,       -.00029               .00091                  -.00175           .00183
Eating, Cleaning Hours (.00113)             (.00075)                 (.00166)         (.00115)

Weekly Dependent          -.00106            .00157                   -.00046          .00176
 Care Hours               (.00119)          (.00035)                 (.00156)         (.00063)

At Least Good             -.1342            -.1459                   -.1247           -.1272
 Health                   (.0304)           (.0287)                  (.0416)          (.0414)

Household Gross          .00064              .00058                   .00053           .00057
Annual Pay (€1000)       (.00023)           (.00021)                 (.00027)         (.00025)

Pseudo R2                 .0790             .0797                    .0512             .0620

N                                    3006                                      1754
a
 The equations also include indicators of residence in the former East Germany, location in a city with
population above 100,000, whether a worker is self-employed, married versus partnered, whether the
youngest child is under 6, and a continuous measure of the number of children. Also included are
measures of the spouse/partner’s health status, weekly hours and days of market work, dependent care and
errands/housework.
Table 5. Percent Distributions of Time Pressure, Married Individuals in Couples, Korea,
1999 (Canada, 1998)

                              KOREA                                        CANADA

                          MEN              WOMEN                     MEN            WOMEN

                                           ONE OR TWO WORKERS
Under time pressure (rushed)a
Always                  28.18              26.34                      51.86            54.05

Often (A Few Times        42.58            42.18                      25.14            26.43
a Week)

Rarely (About Once a      20.58            22.82                      15.77            13.52
 Week or a Month)

Never (Never or Less 8.67                    8.65                       8.22            6.00
 Than Once a Month)

N=                                 4,241                              2092             2285

Chi-squared of Independence
 of Spouses’ Distributions  689.87, p < .001

                                                 TWO WORKERS

Always                    33.37            41.68                      53.99            59.06

Often (A Few Times        44.63            42.68                      26.24            24.81
A Week)

Rarely (About Once a      17.16            12.31                      13.88            12.26
 Week or a Month)

Never (Never or Less       4.85              3.33                       5.89            3.88
 Than Once a Month)

N=                                 2,104                              1189             1314

Chi-squared of Independence
 of Spouses’ Distributions 458.19, p < .001
a
 The question (in translation) in Korea is: “How often do you feel rushed or pressed for time?” The
responses are: “Always, often, rarely, never.” The question in Canada is: “How often do you feel rushed?”
The responses are: “Every day; a few times a week; about once a week; about once a month; less than once
a month; never.”
Table 6. Means and Standard Deviations of Crucial Variables, Married Individuals in
Couples, Korea, 1999 (Canada, 1998)

                                 KOREA                              CANADA

                        MEN                WOMEN            MEN         WOMEN

                                            ONE OR TWO WORKERS
Market Work, Average     7.65               3.84           35.75          22.55
Daily Hours, Weekday    (3.86)             (4.15)         (31.73)        (27.10)
(Weekly)

Weekly Work              48.69              26.09            39.79       23.76
Hours (CPS-type)        (24.92)            (29.04)          (11.69)      (8.45)

Household Care , Average 0.45               3.71             15.70        26.57
Daily Hours, Weekday (0.93)                (1.93)           (18.32)      (19.21)
(Weekly)

Family Care, Average      0.24              1.32              4.12        7.39
Daily Hours, Weekday     (0.62)            (1.70)            (8.32)      (12.26)
(Weekly)

Annual Earnings, million 13.55               4.79            50.48        22.85
 won (Income C$1000) (0.62)                 (5.43)          (32.82)      (22.49)

Annual Household Earnings         18.34                      69.58        61.59
million won (Income C$1000)       (9.51)                    (39.87)      (36.79)

N=                                4241                      2092         2285
                                               TWO WORKERS
Market Work, Average      8.37              6.89            39.10         30.55
Daily Hours, Weekday     (3.10)            (3.29)          (30.91)       (27.50)
(Weekly)

Weekly Work              56.08              49.14            46.95        35.70
Hours (CPS-type)        (18.77)            (21.23)          (13.11)      (12.59)

Household Care , Average 0.40               3.03            15.15         23.22
Daily Hours, Weekday (0.81)                (1.61)           (17.39)      (17.79)
(Weekly)

Family Care, Average      0.18              0.74              4.00        6.04
Daily Hours, Weekday     (0.45)            (1.09)            (8.01)      (10.30)
(Weekly)

Annual Earnings, million 14.62              9.02             50.71        29.22
 won (Income C$1000) (5.01)                (4.17)           (29.84)      (21.76)

Annual Household Earnings         23.64                      76.41        68.78
million won (Income C$1000)       (8.01)                    (39.36)      (37.25)

N=                                2104                       1189        1314
Table 7. Probit Estimates of the Determinants of Time Stress, Korean Couples,
1999(Dependent variable is whether stressed always)a

                        ONE OR TWO WORKERS                                TWO WORKERS

                           MEN               WOMEN                      MEN              WOMEN
Variable:
Average Weekday             .0364             .0471                     .0368             .0544
Work Hours                 (.0024)           (.0024)                   (.0042)           (.0050)

Average Weekday            .0219              .0181                      .0310             .0342
Household Care            (.0091)            (.0046)                    (.0141)           (.0091)

Average Weekday            -.0162             .0316                     -.0003            .0168
Family Care                (.0151)           (.0057)                    (.0256)          (.0141)

Gross Annual                .00482            .00660                     .00271            .00793
Household Earnings,        (.00091)          (.00090)                   (.00142)          (.00154)
million won

Pseudo R2                  .1021              .1805                     .0531             .0788

N=                                    4241                                        2104
a
 Gross annual household income is calculated as 12 times monthly income imputed from a 10% sample of
the Korea Wage Structure Survey 1999. The equations also include the number of household members age
10 or over, and indicators for the presence of pre-school age children, residence in Seoul, and residence in
metropolitan cities except Seoul. Also included are measures of the spouse’s weekly hours of market work,
family care and household care.
Table 8. Probit Estimates of the Determinants of Time Stress, Canadian Couples, 1998
(Dependent variable is whether rushed always)a

                          ONE OR TWO WORKERS                             TWO WORKERS

                            MEN             WOMEN                       MEN              WOMEN
Variable:
Average Weekday            .0320             .0269                     .0287              .0235
Work Hours                (.0042)           (.0051)                    (.0065)           (.0070)

Average Daily              .0161             .0021                      .0193             .0009
Household Care            (.0066)           (.0068)                    (.0100)           (.0094)

Average Daily              .0216             .0242                      .0188             .0159
Family Care               (.0153)           (.0118)                    (.0222)           (.0182)

Very Satisfied            -.0945             -.0327                    -.1697             -.0355
 with Health              (.0294)           (.0304)                    (.0406)           (.0384)

Gross Annual               .00081            .00053                     .00107            .00070
Household Income          (.00038)          (.00046)                   (.00054)          (.00054)
(C$000)

Pseudo R2                  .0690             .0442                      .0737            .0593

N=                          1268             1176                        654               748
a
 Also included in the equations are a measure of the spouse/partner’s hours of market work, and indicators
of marital status and the presence of pre-school, and school-age children, of major region, of metropolitan
location, and of whether the diary is on a weekday.
Table 9. Percent Distributions of Time Pressure, Married Individuals, United States, 1971
and 1978

                        MEN           WOMEN                       MEN          WOMEN

                      ONE OR TWO WORKERS                           TWO WORKERS

Rusheda

Always                   23.15           23.20                    23.70           28.12

Sometimes               58.15            61.29                    59.04           62.40

Almost Never            18.70            15.52                    17.26            9.48

N=                      1123             1276                      481             601
a
 The question is: “In general, how do you feel about your time—would you say you always feel rushed
even to do the things you have to do, only sometimes feel rushed, or almost never feel rushed?”
Table 10. Ordered Probit Estimates of the Determinants of Time Stress, Married
Americans with at Least One Working Spouse, 1971 and 1978a

                        ONE OR TWO WORKERS                                TWO WORKERS

                           MEN              WOMEN                       MEN             WOMEN
Variable:
Weekly Work                .0131             .0138                     .0187             .0118
 Hours                    (.0025)           (.0019)                   (.0051)           (.0043)

No Health Problems         -.0167           -.1407                     .0053            -.3018
                           (.0845)          (.0816)                   (.1319)           (.1248)

Gross Annual               .0040             .0082                     .0039             .0047
 Income ($1000)           (.0024)           (.0026)                   (.0042)           (.0039)

Pseudo R2                  .0262            .0398                      .0195            .0318

N=                         1073              1145                       456               547
a
 The coefficients are the estimated effects of one-unit increases in the X variables on the ordered probit
index. Standard errors are in parentheses. The equations also include indicators of whether the spouse
works, the presence of children under age 6, residence in the South, location in an SMSA, health status,
whether a worker is self-employed, of immigrant or first-generation American, and for 1978, as well as a
continuous measure of the number of children.
Table 11. Ratio of Decreased Household Earnings/Income Needed to Offset Interquantile
Increases in Work Hours to Hold Constant Perceived Time Stress, 5 Countries

                AUSTRALIA       GERMANY       KOREA     CANADA UNITED STATES

                             ONE- OR TWO-WORKER HOUSEHOLDS
 Males
 25th→75th          0.138           0.189      0.275      0.151         0.706
 10th→90th          0.091           0.079      0.268      0.274         0.280

 Females
 25th→75th          0.083           0.058      0.199      0.088         0.344
 10th→90th          0.139           0.119      0.321      0.142         0.410

                                TWO-WORKER HOUSEHOLDS
 Males
 25th→75th         -0.012           0.163      0.162      0.560         0.238
 10th→90th         -0.013           0.158      0.168      0.382         0.229

 Females
 25th→75th          0.201           0.093      0.277      0.188         0.381
 10th→90th          0.226           0.119      0.304      0.359         0.376
Table 12. Decomposition of the Gender Difference in Time Stress, Two-Earner Couples,
Australia, 2001, Germany, 2002, Korea, 1998a

                              Predicted Fraction Stressed

                                       Means
                              Male             Female
Coefficients

AUSTRALIA
     Male                     0.447            0.387

            Female            0.675            0.560


GERMANY
    Male                      0.371            0.230

            Female            0.528            0.420


KOREA
    Male                      0.324            0.368

            Female            0.422            0.408
a
    The actual means are italicized.
