                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     ASSESSING THE BENEFITS TO DEVELOPING
                  COUNTRIES OF LIBERALIZATION IN SERVICES TRADE

                                             John Whalley

                                        Working Paper 10181
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10181


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2003




This is a draft of a report prepared for the OECD Trade Directorate. I am grateful to Ken Heydon, and his
colleagues at OECD for extensive comments and help with logistical and bibliographical support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Assessing the Benefits to Developing Countries of Liberalization in Services Trade
John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 10181
December 2003
JEL No. F1

                                          ABSTRACT

       This paper discusses the potential impacts of services trade liberalization on developing
countries and reviews existing quantitative studies. Its purpose is to distill themes from current
literature rather than to advocate specific policy changes. The picture emerging is one of valiant
attempts to quantify in the presence of formidable analytical and data problems yielding only a
clouded image of likely impacts on trade, consumption, production, and welfare.

John Whalley
Department of Economics
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario, N6A 5C2
Canada
and NBER
jwhalley@uwo.ca
                                               2


1.      Introduction

1.1     Background

      This paper assesses the present state of quantitative literature which seeks to

evaluate the potential impacts which would follow from global services trade

liberalization as it relates to developing countries. It is important to emphasize that what

are frequently referred to as developing countries are themselves also a heterogeneous

group of countries. They span rapidly growing economies in Asia, negative growth

economies (in GDP/capita) in Africa, middle income and very poor countries, small and

large, landlocked and ocean access; heavily regulated and recently liberalized. I prefer

the term poorer countries, and use this interchangeably with the term developing

countries in the text. Much of the literature at issue is relatively recent, and is scattered in

working papers and other less accessible sources. Policy makers clearly need help in

unraveling this at times confusing and fragmentary picture of what the research

community has to offer to guide their deliberations. This paper aims to do this rather

than to advocate particular policy positions on global services liberalization.



1.2     Nature of Services

        The paper begins by characterizing services as a majority of activity for most

OECD economies (as measured by employment, and by value added originating), and a

smaller but still large portion of activity for poorer developing countries. It suggests that

so-called “core” services can best be thought of (see Melvin 1989) as relating to

intermediation through time (banking, insurance) or space (telecoms, transportation,

retailing, wholesaling), with a wide range of diverse additional service items making up
                                                3

the balance of what most people refer to as services (tourism, consulting services,

government services, utilities). This diverse range of activities is typically treated in

quantitative studies as a single homogenous entity, frequently labeled as services for

analytical convenience, when in fact its heterogeneity suggests a different treatment for

each. This heterogeneity is, in my view, key to better understanding how services trade

liberalization could affect poorer countries.



1.3    Impacts of Liberalization on Poorer Countries

       There is a general presumption in the poorer countries that they will lose from

global services trade liberalization since their domestic service industries are inefficient

and non-competitive. This view is despite the arguments from economists as to the gains

to domestic consumers from lower prices and the joint benefits which accrue to both

exporting and importing countries from exploiting comparative advantage and improved

market access opportunities abroad. It is also despite the commonly held view that the

production of many services are labour intensive, which economists believe should be the

source of comparative advantage for poorer developing countries in services provision.

There unfortunately appear to be few if no studies of the relative inefficiency of local

versus foreign service providers in developing country service markets which allow the

strength of these arguments to be evaluated on empirical grounds.

       This caution towards global services trade liberalization in the developing world

seems to reflect two concerns. One is the general assumption in the developing world

that any future negotiated global liberalization of services trade will be largely one sided

in the results it will yield. Their belief is that if new WTO multilateral (or even regional)
                                             4

services liberalization is negotiated, developed country service providers will likely gain

significantly improved access to developing country service markets, but the converse

(significantly improved access for developing country service providers to developed

country service markets) will likely not happen. Asymmetry in negotiating power is one

reason cited for this possible outcome. The presumption is that the present regulatory

structure for most service market segments will remain in place in OECD countries, and

few significant improvements in access to developed country markets for developing

country service providers will occur. This outcome, for instance, is reflected in recent

US bilateral agreements, including the US-Chile agreement.

       In reality, through the process of ongoing regulatory reform in the OECD,

changes are in fact being made in market access arrangements for developing country

service providers, though these are not necessarily reflected in scheduled commitments in

GATS in the WTO. Another important and neglected dimension to this conclusion is

South-South trade, and the potential that developing countries have much to gain from

liberalization of markets in other developing countries. The point is that in terms of

model based (or quantitative) evaluations of the impacts of services trade liberalization,

were genuine two sided liberalization to take place with their low wage rates developing

country providers could well benefit. This is especially so if there are scale economies in

service provision (as in banking, for instance). Most of the available studies of what

benefits might flow from services liberalization assume there will be full multilateral

opening of service markets, and results of studies must be interpreted in light of this

presumption. If one-sided liberalization is the expected outcome, developing countries
                                                 5

may well remain opposed to liberalization on the grounds it is non-reciprocal despite the

results of studies.

        The second caution that developing countries express is the nature and size of the

adjustments in domestic economies which services liberalization may imply. One

dimension of adjustment relates to potential foreign majority ownership and control of

provision in key service sectors, and the related security and cultural concerns. Foreign

entities having access to and control over bank records and financial information of

domestic residents, for instance, is seen in some countries as unacceptable. Also, a

vibrant and vital domestic broadcast or film industry may be viewed as integral to

national cultural identity. Added to such concerns is the potential size of labour market

adjustments if domestic banks are displaced by foreign banks, domestic by foreign

airlines, and other large changes in the organization of labour intensive sectors which

might follow after liberalization.



1.4     Issues Addressed in the Paper

        Against this background, the paper identifies three central issues which existing

literature on the quantification of the potential benefits to developing countries of

services trade liberalization raises. For simplicity in the discussion of studies I assume,

as in the literature, that this is in fact multilateral liberalization rather than the unilateral

liberalization developing countries presume it may well be in reality.

        The first is the representation of and measurement of barriers to services trade in

individual countries, and the associated issue of measuring the size of services trade

itself. Both the level and composition of global services trade is poorly measured at
                                                6

present because there is no formal customs clearance for services trade. Despite this, the

literature consensus is that services trade is large (the WTO put it at 30% of combined

trade in goods and services), and growing (at perhaps double the rate of goods trade).

Current information on barriers to flows of services trade reflects a number of sources.

One measures the quantity impacts from various restrictions as estimated by economic

models. Another uses estimates of price differentials for across domestic and foreign

service providers across national markets. Yet another is frequency data showing how

often regulatory measures are used in particular service segments in particular countries

(see Hoekman (1995)). Tax equivalents are used in some of the literature to capture

associated barriers to FDI flows which might otherwise accompany freer service trade

flows (see Dee and Hanslow (2000)).

        In the paper I suggest that these are major conceptual problems with all of these

estimates of the size of barriers, while acknowledging that no other meaningful data exist

which can be used and many problems inevitably arise with whatever approach is

followed. By way of illustration, frequency data1 do not allow users to differentiate

between those barriers which restrict trade (i.e. are binding constraints on trade), and

those which do not restrict trade because they are redundant (i.e. are non binding

constraints). Neither do studies substantively enumerate and represent the various ways

in which restrictions on services trade apply and how these affect the assessment of

impact, nor do they assess the relative severity of barriers. To an economist working on

the impacts of distortions of trade, available barrier estimates from frequency data in no

way provide meaningful estimates of marginal barriers to trade. Another example is that


1
 The UNCTAD MAST (Measures Affecting Services Trade) dataset is one of the more recent and
comprehensive of these frequency data sets.
                                               7

if data on costs of service provision in different markets are obtained, any differences

across markets may merely reflect differences in domestic regulatory environments and

not barriers to entry for foreign service providers. Price differences across countries for

services can also reflect quality differentials across countries rather than barriers. Using

model results to infer barriers to trade can yield outcomes that quantity impacts from

barriers may be negative from model residuals even where it is clear that binding

restraints on trade apply.

       A second issue discussed is the interpretation of results from existing model based

literature seeking to quantify the impacts of trade liberalization in services (see Robinson

et al (1999), Dee and Hanslow (2000) and Brown, Deardorff and Stern (2002)). Most of

what is available involves numerical simulation exercises using (typically global) general

equilibrium models based on conventional models of trade liberalization in goods (see

Whalley (1985)). In these exercises, producer services are typically identified as an input

into intermediate production and barriers to service trade are represented in the form of

advalorem tariff like restrictions. These can be in tax equivalent (for FDI flows) or tariff

equivalent (for service flows) form. The size of initial barriers, how they change under

liberalization, elasticities, and the size of service trade flows, along with relative country

size and any differences in market structure then determines results much as in

conventional goods models of trade.

       Several problems are encountered in interpreting the results from available

studies. One is that even taken on their own merits results appear to be confusingly

contradictory, and especially so for individual developing countries. For example, Dee

and Hanslow (2000) produce results showing extremely large gains from services
                                               8

liberalization in the Uruguay Round for certain developing countries (a 14.6% of GDP

gain for China, and 5.1% gain for Indonesia). They also suggest globally, that over one

half the total gains from goods and services liberalization accrue from services

liberalization. In contrast, Robinson et al (1999) using similar GTAP data put the gains

to China at 0.34% of GDP, ASEAN and 1.29%, and South Asia at 1.13%. Another

example is that Verikios and Zhang (2000) suggest losses to Malaysia from telecom

liberalization, and losses to Indonesia from financial services liberalization using the

same data as Dee and Hanslow. They show only small gains for China. There are

important differences in approach between these studies. Dee and Hanslow explicitly

incorporate GATS mode 3 restrictions while Robinson et al. use a modeling approach

which does not differentiate between cross country factor flows and provision of goods

and services. Also, different estimates of barriers are incorporated in the two models.

Brown, Deardorff and Stern suggest global gains from Doha Round liberalization of $574

billion per year with the large majority ($413 billion) arising from services, and the

largest absolute gains going to developed countries. Fully explaining all the differences

in the magnitude of the results is difficult, and reconciling disparities in results is difficult

when seemingly similar data sources are involved.

        Another problem is that there is analytical literature which purports to show that

when intermediation services are explicitly represented in their true economic form,

rather then being represented in advalorem equivalent form, the two fundamental

theorems of welfare economies need not hold. Because of this property, welfare impacts

from liberalization in services trade (even in small open economies) can be negative

rather than positive as generally presumed in the goods like models used in the literature.
                                              9

Ryan (1990) was an early piece to point this out. Chia and Whalley (1997) provide an

example of welfare worsening liberalization in the case of trade liberalization in banking

services. Bhatterai and Whalley (1998) show how explicitly modelling telecoms

liberalization in a network structure can change perceptions as to the division of the gains

from liberalization between small and large countries. The implication seems to be that

only limited confidence can be attached to results obtained from the advalorem

equivalent modelling used in numerical literature because the analytical structures used

rule out alterative results. This problem would arise even were the results of individual

studies not contradictory one with another.



1.5    Key Features of Model Results

       Despite these problems, even though they are contradictory across countries, a

central broad feature of results taken as a whole is that in models where services are

treated as akin to goods and there is no factor mobility, effects are positive but small for

most countries. However, where FDI flows enter (effectively capturing capital flows)

effects are much larger and more variable across countries. This suggests that it may be

the case that as surrogate liberalization of global factor markets, services liberalization

can have big effects and this could be the best way to view it in assessing the potential

impacts on poorer developing countries. Both some earlier and recent models capture

FDI effects (effectively GATS Mode 3 commercial presence and ownership restrictions)

and more recent work captures labour mobility effects (GATS Mode 4 restrictions on

mobility of service providers). Existing literature estimates suggest very large global

gains from the removal of immigration restrictions to cross border flows of labour
                                             10

services, and seem to point to a conclusion that this could be the biggest part of the

services liberalization nexus for developing countries. It perhaps suggests that

developing countries should push for immigration and worker mobility restrictions to be

included in GATS negotiations in the WTO, even though developed countries are

cautious about doing so.

       The paper also discusses recent econometric literature linking growth

performance to services trade liberalization (see Francois and Schuknecht (1999) and

Mattoo, Rathindran, and Subramanian (2001)). Importantly, Mattoo et al, claim that

growth rates of up to 1.5 percentage points higher occur for economies that liberalize

their telecoms and financial services sectors: Francois and Schuknecht also claim strong

growth effects follow empirically from services liberalizations. While seemingly

powerful in their policy thrust, there are problems once again in interpreting the results.

One is that excluded variables can be the larger source of higher growth. For example,

higher growth rates may largely reflect higher savings and investment rates, which

generate more intermediation and hence more service use. So it could be that the higher

investment rates drive higher growth rates more so than larger use of services following

upon liberalization. This work is also generally a theoretical and does not differentiate

between once and for all level effects from liberalization and permanent growth effects.

It also needs to be borne in mind that endogenous growth literature also provides

arguments as to why protection can be welfare improving if there are uninternalized

externalities (as in so-called A-K models) (see Young (1996)) and these may also apply

to services as well as to goods.
                                              11

       The bottom line conclusions offered are that while services liberalization is

indeed an important issue for developing countries, the dominant issues for them are

likely to be how much access improvement will they experience in service markets

abroad (both in OECD and other developing country markets), and what will be the

impacts for them if there are changes in labour mobility restrictions. For now studies

which address these issues remain informed by poor data, major conceptual difficulties,

and in the modelling area are characterized by contradictory results. On the other hand

the limited econometric studies available point to strong growth effects. The outcome is

that their contribution to policy debate in the area may seem unclear and confusing to

outsiders but this often is the state of academic research as it relates to current policy

debates. The key themes of potentially viewing services trade liberalization as surrogate

liberalization of factor (capital and labour flows), and focusing on mode 3 and

(especially) mode 4 GATS liberalization might be the most important insights for policy

makers to draw.
                                              12


2.      General Considerations in Evaluating the Impacts of Services

       Trade Liberalization on Developing Countries

       Prior to reviewing existing literature relevant to the developing country interest in

global services trade liberalization, it may be helpful to first highlight a number of wider

conceptual issues relevant to the discussion.



2.1     The Developing Country Interest in Trade Liberalization in General

       The presumption behind most discussion of potential developing country interests

in services trade liberalization is that countries gain from more open services trade in

ways which are similar to trade liberalization in goods. This reflects the idea that

countries have differing comparative advantage in the production of both goods and

services, and more open trade will allow comparative advantage to be more fully

exploited in all countries. Put simply, the thinking is that propositions regarding the

gains from freer trade apply equally to both goods and services. There are, however,

many complications with this line of argument even though it is instinctively where most

academic economists finish up in their thinking.

       First, accepting for now the proposition that trade in services and goods can be

treated as analytically similar in this way, the issue of how developing countries benefit

from services trade liberalization is subject to all of the nuances set out in the literature on

trade policy. While most academic economists instinctively believe that there are

benefits for all countries from freer trade, over the years they have nevertheless devoted a

considerable portion of their intellectual energy to producing arguments as to why the

contrary may be true. These include arguments for an optimal tariff (terms of trade
                                              13

improvement from protection), for infant industry protection, for tariffs which transfer

rents (rent shifting), and tariffs that offset other domestic distortions. These arguments

presumably apply equally to trade in services and goods if they are analytically similar,

and hence qualify the presumption that freer global trade in service is a good thing.

       Second, there are a series of arguments about protection of trade in goods that

relate in one way or another primarily to developing countries and these presumably also

come into play in discussing trade in services. Examples are that increased trade can be

immiserizing due to a terms of trade deterioration; in a Lewis model with traditional

practices in agricultural sectors (average rather than marginal product pricing of labour)

protection of traded goods sectors is called for to pull labour into import competing

modern sectors; in a Harris Todaro model with an urban sector specific downward rigid

real wage and unemployment, an import subsidy can be beneficial.

       In addition there are many broader issues identified in the literature about the

form global trade liberalization takes and hence its impacts on developing countries, and

these would again apply equally to services and goods. If, as is usually argued, countries

gain more from improved access to larger foreign markets (given the larger size of OECD

markets) than from their own liberalization, what they should seek is genuinely

multilateral liberalization rather than only participate in unilateral liberalization. This

should include freer South-South trade in services, as well as OECD/non OECD trade.

Being smaller economically, developing countries have less bargaining power than larger

developed countries in trade negotiations, and this applies equally to trade in goods and

services and hence globally negotiated outcomes may well be asymmetric.
                                             14

        Developing countries also often argue that both trade liberalization and its

impacts need to be evaluated in the context of its wider impacts on the developmental

process, including implications for growth and poverty, which are not typically centrally

discussed in conventional trade literature. These arguments also presumably apply

equally to trade in goods and services.

        Hence while the presumption is that global liberalization of trade in services will

yield gains for both developed and poorer developing countries, and hence the central

issue is to evaluate the size of any resulting gains, it needs to be borne in mind that the

arguments even from conventional literature on trade in goods are more nuanced than

this.



2.2     Differences between trade in services and trade in goods

        Accepting for now that there is a general presumption that global trade

liberalization in either goods and services is broadly beneficial for developing countries

(a contention some would challenge), the next issue is whether goods and services differ

in some important way. Do they need to be approached differently in evaluating the

quantitative impacts involved?

        This is a key issue in discussing the impacts of services liberalization on poorer

developing countries, since much if not most of the existing quantitative literature treats

services as analytically similar to goods. The approach is to define a single product,

commonly called producer services, which is an input into production and against which

trade protection operates with a tariff like instrument. Liberalization is then a reduction

in or elimination of the tariff. Not surprisingly numerical results from models are similar
                                             15

to those of trade liberalization in goods. Small positive gains accrue to most countries if

there are no factor mobility effects captured, as in goods liberalization models.

       In reality, however, the term services captures a heterogeneous group of activities

spanning banking, insurance, transportation, telecoms, consulting services, retail and

wholesale trade, and several others. Much of this activity facilitates transactions,

providing the economic function of intermediation either through time or space which, as

pointed out by Melvin (1989), when explicitly modelled as such can produce different

implications for trade liberalization.

       Ryan (1990, 1992), for instance, shows that when banking is explicitly modelled

as intermediation services that themselves do not directly provide utility, but instead

facilitate intermediation between borrowers and lenders, liberalization of trade in banking

services can reduce GDP, and even welfare. Chia and Whalley (1997) have produced a

numerical example of welfare worsening trade liberalization in banking services based on

this approach. The results from such examples reflect the use of specific formulations

and parameter values and functional forms and are hence not general results. They do,

however, suggest a weakening in the general presumption that gains will be automatically

shared between developed and poorer developing countries if global liberalization of

services trade occurs. Bhatterai and Whalley (1999) provide a related analysis of the

implications of liberalization in network services (effectively telecoms) where the same

theme emerges that recognition of the special features of individual services changes the

analysis of the impacts of services liberalization.

       Another difference is that to achieve meaningful trade liberalization in services

may require modifications of factor mobility restrictions which may not be needed for
                                             16

goods liberalization. This is recognized in Modes 3 and 4 of GATS which effectively

relate to capital (FDI) mobility and labour (service provider) mobility. With restricted or

segmented global factor markets (and especially labour markets), large effects can come

from services liberalization if such liberalization becomes an indirect mechanism for

liberalizing global factor markets. This is a central issue for the poorer developing

countries who have long pushed for liberalization of immigration controls in OECD

countries, since global services liberalization may be a vehicle for them to achieve this

end.

       Thus whether services are treated as being different from goods, whether their

economic characteristics are explicitly modelled, and how factor flows are treated can all

make a large difference to the perceived effects of trade liberalization in services (and

both to sign and magnitude).



2.3    Types of services trade liberalization; deregulation/competition/barrier

       reduction

       A further key issue in discussing trade/liberalization in services and its impacts on

poorer developing countries is that the types and forms of liberalization need to be fully

and carefully specified. As a result, these often have to be discussed in ways which do

not arise with liberalization in goods trade. Barriers to the flow of goods typically arise

as customs and other physical restraints on trade are administered at national borders.

Thus, for goods trade, most discussion of liberalization focuses on tariffs (and less so) on

other instruments.
                                              17

        Within the services trade community and in the policy literature in general, there

is an understanding that the outcomes of services liberalization will depend heavily on

the regulatory environment and the need for liberalization to be underpinned by a sound

regulatory framework. Restraints on trade no longer apply in the same way as for goods

at borders; a wider variety of restraints than those typically applicable to goods apply

beyond borders and hence within national markets. Also, since services generally have

no tangible form and hence cannot be physically restrained at the border, but typically

foreign service providers need to have to have entry to the national market either for the

service itself. The entity that provides the service, or service providers themselves may

be restricted in terms of their mobility, and it is here that restraints on services trade

effectively operate.

        Barriers to service provision may operate through entry barriers to local markets

(rights to establish, or to provide services), rules on conduct (regulation), on the number

and size of competitors in a market (competition rules), and in other ways. As a result

many more barriers come into play with services than with goods trade. They are more

complex, and their effects more numerous. Market structure, conduct, and performance

are all key and all need to be evaluated when discussing quantitative impacts of global

liberalization of services trade on poorer developing countries.



2.4     How different are barriers across developed and developing countries?

        The actual numbers for barriers to service trade flows used in different studies for

barriers to service trade flows are discussed in more detail below, but it is worth pointing

out at this stage that the general perception is both that services trade is considerably
                                              18

more heavily restricted than goods trade (and in manufactures in particular, rather than in

agriculture where high barriers still apply), and considerably more so in the poorer

developing countries than in developed countries. As noted in the introduction,

developing countries in reality are an extremely heterogeneous group of countries with

sharply differing characteristics and use of restrictions on service provision, but for now

we will use this terminology in discussing barrier differences across broad country types.

       The precise extent of market segmentation across countries in services is not well

documented, but is often claimed to be large. For example, despite claims of ever

growing globalization, in most countries around the world branch banking is still

provided by local banks, insurance policies are still written by local companies, internal

air transportation is by local carriers, as is road, rail, and maritime. Retailing continues to

be dominated by domestic retailers in most country markets.

       Among developed countries, there seems to be evidence of growing cross country

service trade. Some of this reflects cross country foreign direct investment, or

buyouts/mergers of local service providers by foreign entities. Thus, growing market

integration in the services areas seems to be occurring in these countries, even though

domestic regulations often seem slow to change. In the developing countries in contrast,

less market integration and cross market penetration in services seems to have occurred

although the process would be poised to accelerate more rapidly than in the developed

world. For now, local service providers remain as locally owned entities, and

interdeveloping country service trade is small in part because of barriers to foreign

service providers. Service trade as a share of total trade is also correspondingly smaller

in developed than in developing countries.
                                             19

       The presumption in any quantification of impacts of global liberalization of

services trade on poorer developing countries is that barriers to service trade are currently

large in both developed and developing countries, and while relaxing a little, probably

are more restrictive on average in developing than in developed country markets. This

presumption underlies arguments from the policy community for large potential effects to

follow from services trade liberalization as it relates to South-South trade.
                                             20


3.     The Representation and Measurement of Barriers to Services

       Trade

       As noted earlier, both characterizing and measuring the size of barriers to the

international flow of services is considerably more complex and nuanced than is true for

barriers faced by international trade in goods and the problems encountered in this area

also affect any discussion of the quantitative impacts of services trade liberalization on

developing countries.

       Thinking on barriers facing international trade in goods in part reflects the

structure of the 1967 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade incorporated into the

Charter of the WTO as GATT 1994. The GATT structure tries to limit barriers to goods

flows to transparent and bound tariffs which can then be negotiated down to

progressively lower levels.

       The principle of National Treatment (no discrimination against foreign goods

within national economies) in the WTO Charter implies that all barriers apply only at the

border as goods enter national markets. This is typically through a tariff or quota,

although quotas are formally banned under Article 11 of GATT 1994 in the WTO

charter. For services the structure under the 1994 GATT is different. No national

borders apply for services trade since there is no customs clearance. Barriers to the free

international flow of services take many other forms in place of tariffs; regulation, entry

barriers, restrictions on the mobility of service providers. The structure of the GATS thus

differs from the GATT; for instance, National Treatment does not stand as an automatic

right and must be bargained for. This all makes discussion of and classification of

barriers to service flows more difficult than for goods, since trade economists are usually
                                              21

drawn back to analogies with restrictions on goods flows, and look for tariff like

measures of barriers. Many of analogies can be misleading and even ultimately

uniformative.



3.1     Approaches to Classifying and Measuring Barriers to Services Trade

        There are basically two different approaches used in the literature to classify

barriers to trade in service items for the purposes of both measurement of their size and

wider liberalization discussion. One is to separately examine the structure of regulation,

entry barriers, and mobility restrictions for in each service market. Different

restrictions/regulations apply, say, in banking from, say, road transport because of the

differences in the characteristics of the service. Under this approach, a restriction on the

value of reserves of a foreign bank to be retained within a country is a different restriction

to one which requires, say, that trucks at the border must enter with a full tank. If they

are converted into any comparable form in terms of economic impact, this can be

attempted by examining their cost implications. However, some restrictions imply a

fixed cost for entering a market, others change marginal costs, others effectively set

upper bounds on the quantity of service provided, or establish minimum quality

standards. Comparing barriers and evaluating their impacts is thus inherently difficult,

and the heterogeneity among broad service types (banking, transportation, for instance) is

a further complication, as is the heterogeneity within categories (types of services offered

by financial institutions).

        The other approach is that which has been taken in most of the numerical

modelling literature on trade in services and is to treat all services as a single
                                             22

homogeneous entity. Unfortunately, this forced and artificial generality can yield

misleading results if used as the basis for policy debate on global services trade

liberalization and its impacts on developing countries. In some more recent literature

there are partial modifications to the approach, such as attempts to differentiate among

the various ways that services can be supplied. The typical treatment is to model FDI

flows as linked to services provision (along the lines of GATS Mode 3 (commercial

presence)). Labour mobility arrangements under GATS Mode 4 (temporary movement

of service providers) has also been separately modelled. But classifying functional

barriers which may be service category specific as part of a general categorization by

mode of supply remains as the central feature of the approach.



3.2    The GATS Modes of Supply

       Because of the key role played by negotiation in the WTO in the services area, the

approach to services taken in General Agreement of Trade in Services (GATS) becomes

relevant to both the discussion of and quantification of the impacts of services trade

liberalization. This is because it provides the broad framework within which the policy

community (as distinct from the research community) discuss trade liberalization in

services. Until relatively recently the different modes of supply for services have made

relatively little difference to how economic modelers view services, and this has been one

of the central weaknesses of their work. Markusen, Rutherford, and Tarr (2000)

represent one recent attempt to deal with Mode 3 restrictions; Winters (2002) discusses

the modelling of Mode 4 restrictions. These are discussed below.
                                             23

     The GATS classifies services into 155 service types, and differentiates between

four modes of supply. The modes provide a devise to facilitating the making of

commitments in negotiation. These modes are:

Mode 1:        Cross border supply. This is where a service is supplied directly to a

               consumer’s country of residence from a supplier’s country of residence

               (eg. legal advice from abroad given by letter or telephone).

Mode 2:        Consumption abroad. This is where a service is supplied to a consumer

               by the consumer physically moving to the suppliers country of residence

               to receive the service (eg, a visit to a law office abroad).

Mode 3:        Commercial presence. This is where supply of a service by a commercial

               organization involves moving to a consumer’s country of residence (FDI,

               for instance).

Mode 4:        Presence of Natural Persons. This is where a service is supplied by the

               (typically temporary) movement of a services provider to the consumer’s

               country of residence (eg. labour mobility of the service provider).

       Thus under this approach barriers to trade in services are effectively categorized

both by the type of service to which they apply and by mode of supply. The idea is that

in negotiation countries will schedule commitments on barriers to service trade using this

categorization. Thus, by way of example, a country which commits to always allow five

star hotels to operate within their territory schedules a commitment under a type of

service (tourism) and a mode of supply (commercial presence). The aim is to have

negotiations occur through which countries can jointly agree to schedule commitments

under the structure of the GATS. This involves a different procedure from the bilateral
                                              24

exchange of concessions on goods trade (extended via MFN) as practised in the old

GATT.

        For the purposes of the discussion here, the key point is that while the GATS, in

effect, provides a vehicle for classifying and cataloging restrictions to the free

international flow of services; it does not provide an analytical framework for evaluation

of their impacts. It is description and classification, not analysis.



3.3     Analytical Issues with the Treatment of Services When Representing Trade

        Barriers

        To evaluate the impacts of service trade restrictions on developing (or other)

countries, some method of grouping restrictions on service trade captured by the GATS

classification scheme must be used which allows their impacts to be assessed within a

meaningful analytical structure. One way to proceed is to assume that all service trade

restrictions have effects equivalent to those of a tariff as they apply to the flow of services

across borders even though no customs clearance applies and tariffs do not formally

apply to services. This is the treatment adopted in most quantitative literature (see

below) which uses advalorem equivalent treatment of barriers to services trade.

        In analytical literature, however, barriers to free international flows of services are

considerably more multifaceted than this, and so alternative formalizations and

conceptualizations of the barriers at issue are involved. Many are regulatory in nature,

and perhaps fit more comfortably within the large literature on industrial organization

more so than within conventional trade literature.
                                             25

       Thus, by way of example, there may be barriers to entry to domestic markets for

foreign service providers. These barriers may be classified under mode 3 of GATS but

may include not only rights to establish, but also sector specific rules on entry and

conduct. Examples would be the scheduling of domestic banks in banking legislation;

domestic asset rules for insurance policy writers and other such arrangements. Each of

these rule regimes is typically sector specific and operates in different ways.

       There may also be regulations which relate to performance requirements for

participants in domestic markets. These may not necessarily discriminate against foreign

firms, but if domestic practices differ from those used abroad and there are scale

economies the effect can again be to retard trade. Further barriers may arise with limits

on the mobility of service providers (both forms and persons), perhaps requiring use of

local rather than foreign forms and or local labour in service provision. Ownership

barriers, such as in airlines and (in some cases) telecoms and insurance are one example

of such barriers. Immigration and visa arrangements yielding GATS mode 4 supply

restrictions are another. The latter play a large and central role as far as the impacts of

service trade flow restrictions on developing countries are concerned.

       Analytically, all these different barrier treatments will yield different predictions

as to the effects on trade in service flows relative to modelling which uses ad valorem

equivalent tariff forms. Relatively little is known numerically as to the differences in the

orders of magnitude involved, and/or the signs of the effects from explicit barrier

representation compared to ad valorem treatment. In the goods area (especially in

agriculture) it is thought the differences between advalorem equivalent form and explicit

representation can be major.
                                                    26


3.4      Ad Valorem Treatments of Barriers, Frequency Indices, Price Based and

         Quantity Based Measures2

         As noted above, the approach followed in most of the numerical modelling

literature on services is to treat barriers to services trade in advalorem form, as either

tariff or non tariff equivalent instruments. A widely used approach to gauge their

quantitative impact is to construct frequency measures showing the extent of usage of

service trade restrictions, from which the severity of the impacts of such measures on

trade flows are loosely inferred. To be fair to this work, no major claims are made that

these measures tell one very much about the true quantitative impact of restrictions on

trade flows. They appear to be both constructed and used as few alternatives seem

available and there is an understandable demand for some form of quantitative

assessment.

         The key paper here, is by Hoekman (1995) who uses the GATS commitment of

schedules of member countries to make a series of calculations. He utilizes all 155

service categories in GATS and the four modes of supply for each importing country and

gives values of 1, 0.5, or 0 to each category/mode possibility for each country depending

upon frequency of use of measures. If no restrictions apply for a given mode of supply in

a given sector a value of 0 is assigned. If restrictions operate for a given mode of supply

in a given sector a value of 0.5 is assigned. These scores are labeled openness/binding

factors. He then aggregates the resulting assigned values across modes and across service

categories.




2
 This section draws on the discussion of the literature attempting to use these various approaches these
measures set out in Copeland (2002).
                                             27

       Hoekman uses these assigned scores to calculate three ratios for each sector. The

first sums indices and divides them by 620 (155 × 4) for each country. The second

calculates the sectors/modes listed with restrictions as a share of the maximum possible,

weighted by the openness/binding factors. The third calculates the share of no restriction

entries in either a member country’s total commitments or relative to the universe of 155

possible sectors.

       A number of subsequent authors (particularly those associated with extensive

work undertaken by the Australian Productivity Commission) have extended this

approach and constructed more elaborate frequency measures which they label as trade

restrictiveness indices. The basic approach, however, remains the same and most of the

difficulties of interpretation which the Hoekman frequency measures encounter remain.

Since Hoekman’s paper these measures have been calculated in a series of industry

studies; for telecoms by Warren (2001a and 2001b); for banking by McGuire and Schnele

(2001a); for maritime transport by McGuire et al (2001b); for education by Kemp (2001);

for distribution by Kalirajan (2000) and for professional services by Nguyen-Hong

(2000). Hardin and Holmes (1997) also use frequency indices to evaluate barriers to FDI

across service industries. The edited volume by Findlay and Warren (2001) contains an

accessible and helpful compilation of some of this work.

       In calculating these extended frequency indices, information on actual restrictions

on trade and investment in specific service industries is typically drawn on from a wider

range of sources than just the GATS schedules. Restrictions receive subjective scores

and are then grouped into categories, and each given a numerical weighting. These

typically reflect some form of subjective assessment of the costs of these restrictions in
                                             28

terms of economic inefficiency. Several indices are typically calculated for each industry

to yield measures for different notions of barriers to trade.

       As an alternative to the frequency index approach to measuring barriers, price

based measures of barriers to service trade have been proposed, but thus far little

calculated. Ideally they should reflect differences between domestic and foreign prices

for key service categories across supplying and using countries. Francois and Hoekman

(1999) propose (but do not construct) a measure based on gross operating margins. They

suggest these should be measured in ratio form as (total sales revenue minus total average

costs)/total average costs. Alternatively, price based measures have been constructed

using econometric methods to construct cross country cost measures by Trewin (2001)

for telecoms, Kalirajan et al (2001) for banking, Kang (2001) for maritime transport,

Kalirajan (2000) for food distribution, and Nguyen-Hong (2000) for engineering services.

       Quantity based measures of the severity of service trade restrictions are typically

based on results of econometric models. The idea is that these should in some way

reflect the determinants of service trade and hence be able to predict what service trade

flows would be if there were no restrictions in place. This work typically extends earlier

work of this type used for goods trade to measure barriers to goods flows by residual.

Francois and Hoekman (1999), for instance, fit a gravity model to bilateral trade flows in

services between the United States and its trading partners. Differences between

predicted and actual trade are then taken to imply the effects of barriers to trade. Warren

(2001) uses an alternative econometric procedure to develop quantity based measures for

barriers facing trade in telecommunications services.
                                               29


3.5     Pitfalls in the Measurement of Service Trade Barriers

        These measures of barriers to service trade flows, while clearly defensible on the

grounds that this is all there is, nonetheless encounters numerous pitfalls and must

therefore be used with great care. This makes any quantitative discussion of impacts of

services trade liberalization on developing countries using them difficult to interpret with

confidence.

        First there is the issue that with multiple restraints on trade it is not clear which

restrictions are binding and which are not. While frequency data only evaluate whether

restrictions apply for each of 620 GATS cells for a given service type and across all four

modes of supply, it is not clear that all aggregated restrictions are, in fact, binding

restraints on trade. Some may restrict trade, some may not. Some may compound one

with another, others may offset each other. In the literature on economic distortions in

general, such as tax policy, the extent to which curious legal instruments of intervention

in practice compound or offset is a major theme of literature. None of this appears to be

present in the literature on service trade restrictions.

        Second, just because restrictions are present their quantitative significance need

not be the same across restrictions. Their marginal effects on trade will typically differ.

And yet in frequency measures they are aggregated as if they are all in some sense

equiproportional in impact. There seems no logical reason why this need be the case.

        Other problems can also arise. Frequency measures may mask country

discrimination in the application of barriers, even though both de jure and de facto

discrimination are considered breaches of national treatment under the GATS. Offsetting

subsidy type and restrictive measures may apply and these offsets will need to be taken
                                              30

into account. Defacto application of regulation and dejure form can differ, just as applied

and bound tariff rates differ for trade in goods.

       As far as quantity based measures are concerned, measures are typically based on

model generated residuals given by observations relative to econometric model

predictions. Not only is there much debate as to which is the most appropriate model for

such purposes, barrier estimates obtained in this way can be negative even when no trade

restricting interventions apply. Also, quantity based measures can be positive even when

frequency indices are zero.

       Price based measures also have problems of interpretation. Not only is price data

on service types extremely hard to obtain, at a conceptual level differences in domestic

regulation can imply differences in costs of service provision in different markets and

hence prices across countries even if there are no formal barriers. Thus price differences

across countries for services need not be related to barriers, even if they could be

measured. Moreover, the price changes generated by a barrier depends on demand and

supply elasticities, and without elasticity estimates (which are not available) it is not

possible to move easily between observed price differences and ad valorem barriers

which models implicitly assume generated them.

       Thus interpreting barrier measures for services trade faces many pitfalls. One can

argue this is true in general for most observations of economic phenomena interpreted in

some analytical model equivalent form, but at the end of the day the problems with

barrier estimates for service trade seem especially severe. They seem to be used solely as

the best alternative given the policy prerogative of providing some form of numerical

assessment of impact of proposed policy change. Evaluated their reliability relative to
                                            31

any form of absolute standard is clearly difficult, but it would seem that for now they can

only be described as wanting.
                                             32


4.     Quantifying the Impacts of Trade Liberalization in Services on

       Developing Countries

       Beyond measuring the size of service trade barriers, a number of studies also

attempt to quantify the impacts which would follow if global liberalization involving

lowering them were to occur. Some of the results from these models explicitly relate to

poorer developing countries. These quantitative studies in the main involve the use of

numerical general equilibrium models. They are used to make counterfactual equilibrium

calculations in which barriers to service trade flows are allowed to change and base case

data and simulated equilibria compared. This involves calibration to a base case data set

and the use of various loosely specified and quasi literature based elasticities which are

key to the counterfactual behaviour these models predict. The use of these models to

analyze liberalization barriers to the full international flow of goods is reviewed in

Shoven and Whalley (1984) and Reinert and Francois (1997).



4.1    Model Features

       There are a range of model treatments used in the these models. Key papers are

Robinson, Wang, and Martin (1999), Dee and Hanslow (2000), and Brown, Deardorff

and Stern (2002). Typically, services are treated in these models very much like goods

with producer services modeled as an intermediate good, and some models also allow

trade to be generated by differences in factor endowments as well as by product

differentiation as in more recent goods trade models. As in the modelling of goods trade,

some models (such as Markusen, Rutherford, and Tarr (1999)) allow for multinational

activity and endogenous choice by multinational forms of whether to export or set up a
                                             33

branch plant. Models typically do not explicitly represent the different modes of supply

in the GATS, although FDI flows (close to mode 3) and labour mobility restrictions are

captured in more recent models. Winters (2002), and Winters, Walmsley, Wang, and

Grynberg (2002) explicitly discuss the modelling of mode 4 GATS restrictions to service

flows. It is not a feature of these models that they employ explicit characterizations of

individual service elements (banking, insurance, etc.) and these are typically not

explicitly recognized.



4.2    Overview of Model Results

       The results from these models typically show that multilateral liberalization of

services trade will increase global income and welfare, but they also show that the

distribution of the resulting gains is sensitive to the model specification used. This point

is important in understanding what the model implications of global liberalization in

services are for developing countries.

       Overall, there tend to be global gains from liberalization of service flows and they

tend to accrue to all countries, but the effects are sometimes relatively small. Reductions

in barriers are typically much larger than occurs for goods, but the magnitudes of gain are

of a similar order to those obtained from earlier simulations of the effects of freer goods

trade. By way of example, Dee and Hanslow report results which they suggest show the

world would be better off by $260 billion if all post Uruguay Round barriers to trade in

both goods (manufactures and agriculture) and services were eliminated. About $50

billion of gains comes from agricultural liberalization, $80 billion comes from

manufactures liberalization, and around $130 billion form services liberalization. Simply
                                                   34

put global gains from remaining goods liberalization (including agriculture) and services

liberalization are of a similar magnitude. The $260 billion global gain compares to initial

GATT estimates of $500 billion/year form Uruguay Round liberalization (see Francois,

McDonald, and Nordstrom (1994)), and later ranges of $90-$300 billion (see Whalley

(2000)). The Uruguay Round estimates had no meaningful estimates of gains from

services trade liberalization.

        A possible explanation of the seeming paradox of equal size effects across goods

and services in Dee and Hanslow’s results is that larger barriers apply to a smaller

fraction of trade in the service area, and so gains relative to GDP are similar for goods

and services (accepting the analytical structure and parameter values used). An important

characteristic of this set model results is that where as in Brown et al (1996), Chadha

(2000), and Benjamin and Diao (2000) there is no endogeneity in foreign direct

investment, gains tend to be positive throughout the world.3 Where, however, studies

explicitly incorporate foreign direct investment flows results are considerably different

(as in Markusen et al (2000)), suggesting that liberalization involving commercial

presence (mode 3 in GATS) could well be an important factor in services trade

liberalization.

        Robinson et al (1999) report no welfare effects from services trade liberalization

but instead focus on output and trade effects. They show small output effects in most

regions (I 2%) with perhaps surprisingly negatives in service industries and positives in

manufacturing and agriculture. The largest positive effect is a +8.3% output increase for

trade and transportation in the Asian NICS; the largest negative is a 3.37% fall in output


3
  Copeland (2002) emphasizes this point, and the related point below concerning results from models that
incorporate FDI flows.
                                             35

of public housing in ASEAN. They do, however, show very large export effects (over

50% increases in trade, transport, private and public services) in most countries. Their

model also captures induced effects on total factor productivity growth.

       Brown, Deardorff and Stern (2002) assume a 33% reduction in all barriers to

global trade in both goods and services to characterize an eventual outcome of the WTO

Doha Round. They show a small welfare loss from liberalization in agriculture

(seemingly due to the elimination of export subsidies), global welfare gains of $103

billion from reductions in manufactures tariffs, and a much larger gain of $413 billion

from services liberalization. The largest absolute gains go to the developed countries.



4.3    Interpreting Model Results

       Both interpreting model results and understanding why they occur is

unfortunately often difficult and authors do not always provide clear explanations for all

features of their analyses. The results in Dee and Hanslow produce a good example of

the many pitfalls that can. They show that of the additional US $130 billion of gains

arising from services trade liberalization, about $100 billion would accrue in China alone.

Global services trade liberalization in their model results seemingly imply that effects

involving access for foreigners to the Chinese market will dominate all other aspects of

services trade liberalization.

       Dee and Hanslow seemingly offer no explanation for this result in their text other

than to say large barriers are involved in the Chinese case. The barriers are indeed large;

a little over 250% as tax equivalent barriers to foreign affiliate capital in the Chinese

market. These seemingly come from a strong assumption that barriers to all services in
                                             36

China can be represented as tax equivalents (mark ups of price over cost) for banking and

telecommunications. They use a Kalirajan et al (2001) study which measures the effects

of trade restrictions on the net interest margins of banks, a direct measure of banks mark

up of price over cost. They also use Warren’s measures of the effects of trade restrictions

on the quantities of telecommunications services delivered, converting these to a price

impacts using estimates of price elasticities of demand for telecommunication services.

Dee and Hanslow’s results seemingly follow directly from the very large barrier

estimates for China.

       Not only is it highly questionable whether barriers in banking and

telecommunications reflect barriers generally to service providers in the Chinese market,

one can also query whether these barrier measures really make sense. In China, four

large state owned banks provide most of the financing to the large state owned enterprise

sector and suffer from major non performing loans and make losses. Rate spreads at the

margin are high, but foreign entrants to the market lending under similar conditions

would also require large spreads. Smaller private banks lending only to the commercial

sector have much smaller spreads. At the margin, a 250% barrier may make no sense.

Also, in telecommunications converting quantity impacts to barrier estimates using only

demand elasticities (for which estimates are anyway unreliable) and not also supply

elasticities is hard to interpret. Everything in the results seemingly follows from barrier

estimates, but one is unsure one can believe them. And sellers do not comment on their

reliability when discussing model results.

       Dee and Hanslow (2000) also find that while service trade liberalization raises

overall world income the US and other developed countries can experience welfare losses
                                             37

with no explanation provided for this feature of model results. In contrast certain

developing countries, and particularly China as noted above, experience large welfare

gains (14% of GDP for China) largely due to the large asymmetry in initial barrier sizes

in services across developed and developing countries.

       Brown, Deardorff and Stern explicitly modify their earlier analyses to incorporate

foreign direct investment flows, and also obtain considerably larger welfare effects from

services liberalization, showing that the world as a whole gains while some countries

lose. Economies such as Japan and Hong Kong show large gains; the US loses under

some specifications gains under others; Canada loses. The larger size of service barriers

then goods barriers and their relative size assumed countries seems to be key. They do

not seem to report the barrier estimates they use in their text, and neither do Robinson et

al.



4.4    Possible Themes of Results

       Discounting the issue of the reliability of the barrier estimates, these modelling

results can be taken as suggesting that a removal of service trade restrictions which

implies barriers towards foreign investment flows whose removal attracts capital to

countries that had earlier had large barriers towards inward investment flows can yield

significant gains, as in China. Barriers to entry for service providers in these markets can

also in some cases generate rents part of which accrue to foreign investors; liberalization

of services trade can erode these. While there are also terms of trade effects generated by

induced FDI flows, as discussed in Brown et al (1996), these also arise in non FDI

models. Hence the added feature of factor flow liberalization which mode 3 and 4 GATS
                                              38

liberalization facilitates seem to be key to model results. If developing countries are able

to use service trade liberalization to attract inward capital flows this suggests

considerable gains to them. At the same time unilateral changes in investment regimes,

independently of changes in trade barriers in services might achieve much the same result

(such as relaxation of equity limits on foreign participation in key sectors). This

differentiation between services trade liberalization and unilateral changes in investment

barriers may seem somewhat confusing given that most FDI is in the services sector; and

that restrictions on FDI (eg screening, equity limits) need to be scheduled as mode 3

restrictions in the relevant GATS sector. But mode 3 GATS liberalization in services is

all about changing the conditions for foreign capital to enter the relevant domestic sector.



4.5    Modeling Mode 4 Restrictions

       This also raises the issue of what might happen were significant liberalization of

services under mode 4 supply to allow significant movement of service providers. Some

years ago, Hamilton and Whalley (1984) produced a calculation of the potential impacts

on the global economy from the elimination of all restrictions on labour mobility. While

clearly extreme as a liberalization scenario, they showed that under some conditions

worldwide income could more than double and there would be major distributional

impacts across countries. Thus, explicitly modelling mode 4 supply services

liberalization would seem to be the potential source of even larger effects.

       This work on mode 4 is not without its difficulties, in particular because most

countries require foreign workers to be paid at the same rates as nationals (thereby

undermining the cost advantage of DC suppliers). This is a limitation on the quantitative
                                             39

studies showing gains from greater labour mobility. Labour market

restrictions/regulations are equally important (regulation of pay and conditions,

recognition of qualifications, etc.). Further mode 4 only covers temporary movement –

permanent migration is explicitly excluded. GATS technical definitions aside, the

economic impact and policy questions are different for temporary and permanent

migration.

        Winters (2001) provides a later calculation which modifies the Hamilton-Whalley

assumption of homogeneous labour across countries, by assuming that when workers

move from low to high income countries only one quarter of the productivity difference

is returned as a higher wage. Under this modified assumption gains fall to only $300

billion/year, but still more than the gains from global liberalization of both goods and

factors reported by Dee and Hanslow (2000). Similar sensitivity analyses in which global

gains from elimination of migration restrictions are reduced when efficiency differences

in labour are assumed across countries were also reported in the original Hamilton-

Whalley paper.

        Winters et al (2002) also indicate that large potential gains would follow from

only a small increase in the movement of people between low and high income countries.

They suggest that increasing developed country quotas for incoming temporary

movement of natural persons (TMNP) by 3% of the existing labour will generate global

income gains of $150 billion/year, emphasizing the large benefits that would follow from

even modest liberalization of mode 4 GATS restrictions of service provider mobility.

Winters (2002) further discusses the economic implications of liberalizing mode 4

restrictions.
                                              40

       At present lower developing country labour costs show up more in services trade

via mode 1 than mode 4, given that many countries require equal pay for mode 4 entrants

compared to nationals. In some sectors, in particular professional and computer services,

out-sourcing has been driven by the lower wages of professionals in DCs. Out-sourcing

of not only data entry, but increasingly research and other more skilled work, involves

service supply via mode 1 and not mode 4 and hence even without mode 4 liberalization

significant gains can occur. Out-sourcing effective poorly captured in existing studies.



4.6     Overview

       So an overview of model themes might be that while all these studies focus on

multilateral liberalization of global trade in services rather than unilateral liberalization as

discussed earlier, they all seem to point in the same direction in terms of general effects.

More precise effects by country differ considerably. They suggest that if services are

liberalized with no accompanying liberalization of factor markets, as in goods trade gains

are small. If, however, services liberalization becomes a mechanism through which

impediments to factor flows (FDI) are removed, then gains are large and uneven across

countries. Importantly, it seems that the large effects in these model results need not

come from liberalization of service trade, per se, but from the assumed accompanying

liberalization of factor markets. This is parallel to work on goods trade, where

accompanying liberalization of factor markets internationally also produces sometimes

large and uneven effects across countries.

       Thus a major role for service trade liberalization may be to serve as surrogate

global factor market liberalization by allowing for freer factor flows under modes 3 and 4
                                            41

of GATS schedules. While such liberalization may be hard to achieve directly, achieving

it indirectly under the name of service trade liberalization may be the source of major

gain and also country impact. It may also be the major issue at stake for the developing

countries in services negotiations in the WTO. Attracting more capital, and achieving a

labour outflow so as to reapportion factor ratios across broad blocs of countries, might be

the source of largest global gain and distributional impact across countries from services

trade liberalization.
                                                      42


5.         Econometric Literature on Growth Performance and Services

           Trade Liberalization4

           Recent econometric work by Mattoo, Rathindran, and Subramanian (2001) and

Francois and Schuknecht (1999) takes a different approach to assessing the implications

of trade liberalization in services and evaluates the links between growth performance

and service sector liberalization. This literature is also relevant to any discussion of the

impacts of services trade liberalization on developing countries.



5.1        Early Literature

           Though this work shows a significant and strong relationship between growth

performance and openness in key service sectors, discussion of these issues is in fact

considerably older. Goldsmith (1969), in a seminal earlier piece, placed heavy stress on

the role of financial services in allowing financial investments to flow to their most

productive uses, and hence in generating growth of output and income. He suggested that

the ratio of the value of financial intermediary assets to GNP was a variable that in some

way represented country performance of the financial sector. He used it in a regression in

which economic growth rates were the dependent variable, and found what he termed a

“rough parallelism” between growth performance and the level of financial development

as represented by this variable. This lead to later work all pointing in the same direction

as recent work, namely that openness and degree of development of the service sectors is

associated with stronger growth performance.




4
    See again the discussion of these issues in Copeland (2002).
                                              43

        King and Levine (1993), in later work subsequently controlled for other factors

influencing long run growth performance. They used further measures of country

development for the financial sector in their growth regressions, including the ratio of

liabilities in the financial system to GDP and the ratio of gross claims on the private

sector to GDP.    They found that these measures played an important role and implied an

econometrically significant relationship. They assessed whether the level of country

financial sector development in 1960 as measured by one of their ratios predicted the rate

of growth for the country over the 1960-1990 period, and found that the level of financial

sector development in 1960 was a significant predictor of later period economic growth.

        In a later paper Levine (1997) further assessed the role that financial sectors

played in economic development. He evaluated five functions performed by the financial

services sector, including facilitating the trading of risk, allocating capital to its most

productive uses, monitoring managerial performance, mobilizing savings through

financial innovation, and easing the exchange of goods and services.



5.2     Recent Work

        It is only in more recent work, however, that the role of trade and openness in

service sectors and their influence on growth surfaces more explicitly. Francois and

Schuknecht (2000) regress growth rates of real per capita GDP on a measure of the

degree of openness in trade, key macroeconomic variables, and a measure of

concentration in the financial sector. They find a strong relationship between growth

rates and financial sector competition, this claim suggesting a positive link between

openness and trade.
                                             44

       Mattoo, Rathindran, and Subramanian (2001) use policy rather than results based

measures of openness of country services regimes (in contrast to Francois and

Schuknecht). They construct such openness measures for two key service sectors, basic

telecoms and financial services and use these in growth regressions. Their econometric

evidence shows that openness in service sectors influences long run growth performance.

This link is relatively strong in the financial sector and less strong (but nevertheless

statistically significant) in the telecommunications sector. Their estimates suggest that

with fully globally open telecom and financial service sectors, growth rates in individual

economies may be up to 1.5 percentage points higher than for other countries with more

closed regimes.



5.3    Issues of Interpretation

       At first sight this evidence seems striking, pointing to liberalization of service

sectors as a route to faster growth and development, and suggesting that trade

liberalization in service sectors can also be key for developing countries in achieving

enhanced growth performance. There are, however, issues this work raises as with earlier

work reviewed here.

       One is that this work is generally a theoretical and does not provide solid

analytical underpinnings for service trade liberalization and its links to growth

performance. Although Francois and Schuknecht emphasize the role of scale economies

and cost structures in financial services and the link to market structure, their theory

points (as in most theoretical work on trade liberalization) to once and for all level effects

rather than permanent growth effects. Thus whether elevated growth from liberalization
                                             45

is only a transitional effect, or a more permanent effect of longer standing is the issue.

Indeed, there are parts of the endogenous growth literature (such as Young (1996)) that

suggest there are ways in which trade barriers which partly internalize an internalized

externalities can raise growth rates and protection can be welfare improving. At first

sight, such arguments might well also apply to services. However, also following

endogenous growth literature, a key characteristic of services trade – the need for

simultaneous production and consumption of the traded service – might imply that

services liberalization moves resources from sectors that do not possess these attributes to

those that do, and long run growth rates rise.

       Also, there are key issues with excluded variables in these analyses. Thus, in

discussing financial services liberalization, there is clear evidence that economies with

higher savings rates grow more quickly as investible funds are channelled into productive

employment. The links between financial structure and development are long discussed,

in both McKinnon (1973) and Shaw (1973), for instance. Financial intermediation will

thus correspondingly grow with savings as intermediation helps these savings flow from

lenders to borrowers. What drives the growth is primarily the higher level of savings and

investment, what facilitates the process is the intermediation. Thus opening up financial

services sectors to international competition where domestic savings rates are low need

not facilitate higher growth, and to attribute higher growth rates to elevated financial

intermediation alone can again potentially be misleading.

       This econometric evidence, however, has been widely cited as showing a strong

link between financial services liberalization and growth performance; and if correct has
                                            46

major implications for policy reform in developing countries. The caveats noted above

should, however be kept in mind in interpreting results.
                                              47


6.       Sectoral Issues: Health and Transportation

         Two key sectors which have attracted attention as possible areas for developing

countries to focus on in their services liberalization are health services and transportation.

These are briefly discussed here, even though model based analyses do not centre on

these.



6.1      Health Services

         Here, it is often claimed that health services represent an area in which developing

countries have the potential to become major exporters; either by attracting foreign

patients to domestic hospitals and health care facilities or by sending health workers

abroad temporarily. As Mattoo (1999) points out, Cuba provides an example of this.

There, government policy is to make Cuba into a world medical leader. A trading

company, SERVIMED, was created by the government to offer tourism/health packages.

In 1995/96, according to Mattoo, 25,000 patients and 1,500 students went to Cuba for

treatment and training generating revenues for Cuba of US $25 million in the year. Cost

savings for both patients and insurers can be very significant. Mattoo suggests that the

cost of coronary bypass surgery in India is about 5% of that in developed countries. The

UN and WHO (1998) estimate the cost of liver transplants in India to be about one tenth

of that in the United States.

         There are many barriers to international trade in health services, not the least of

which is portability of health insurance coverage. For instance, US federal or state

government employee coverage is limited to certified practitioners in the United States

(or a specified state. The UN and WTO (1998)) estimate that 3% of the 100 elderly
                                             48

living in OECD countries retiring to developing countries would bring revenues of

perhaps US $10-15 billion a year in medical expenses to developing countries. Another

barrier is visa and house purchase/registration restrictions in the developing world that

potential longer term patients face. Prima facie, the potential benefits to developing

countries in this area seem large, but there appears to be few or no quantitative studies.



Transport Services

       In the area of transport services, there is a general presumption that no other

services category has such a pronounced effect on both the level and pattern of

developing county trade. Internal transportation is costly and time consuming, and

presents barriers to trade in goods not only in terms of financial cost but also in terms of

spoilage and breakage. In ocean shipping, negotiated bilateral freight rates between ports

of countries often imply large costs for transshipment between ports of developing

countries. Much inter developing country trade can take place via OECD ports (Lagos to

Accra via Rotterdam, for instance), and negotiated freight rates partially drive this. (See

Zerby and Conlon (1983).)

       In addition developing country suppliers of transportation services are restricted

in terms of access to developed country service markets. The higher costs of domestic

providers can be very substantial, and so the benefits of developing country suppliers

gaining access to these markets could be very large. Francois, Acre, Reinert and Flynn

(1996) in analyzing the Jones Act in the US which restricts coastal US shipping to US

vessels suggests local US suppliers of shipping services are perhaps 300% more costly

than low cost foreign suppliers and compute large gains for the US from such
                                            49

liberalization. It follows that large benefits would also accrue to developing country

suppliers.

       Airline transportation represents another area where developing country gains

from improved access could be large due to their lower costs. Exclusionary practices

such as cabotage and denied grant of fifth freedom rights exclude them from internal

developed country service markets. These issues are discussed in Findlay (1997). Thus

as in health services potentially significant gains would accrue to developing countries

from genuine multilateral service liberalization.
                                              50


7.     Concluding Remarks

       This paper both discusses the potential impacts of services trade liberalization on

developing countries and reviews existing quantitative studies. Its purpose is to distill

themes from studies rather than to advocate policy change. The picture that emerges is

seemingly one of valiant attempts to quantify in the presence of formidable analytical and

data problems. The basic intuition seems to be that with genuine two sided (OECD/non

OECD) liberalization in services that are seemingly considerably labour intensive, the

potential may be there for significant developing country gains. This position is

seemingly not endorsed by studies, neither is it contradicted.

       One difficulty with existing studies is that the conceptual underpinnings of trade

in services and how analytically this trade differs from trade in goods, if at all, needs to

be sorted out before impacts on developing countries are discussed. Key here are

mobility issues for service providers (both firms and workers), and the functional

treatment of individual service items (banking, insurance, telecoms, etc.). Recent

analytical work suggests that liberalization in these service items need not always yield

gains. The discussion and measurement of barriers to service trade is also problematic.

One is talking of domestic regulation, entry barriers, portability of providers, competition

policy regimes more so than barriers at national borders as with tariffs. Both representing

and quantifying barriers raise major difficulties, and these are spelled out.

       As a result, numerical modelling work on the effects of service trade barriers

which uses ad valorem equivalent modelling is not fully convincing. In addition,

individual country results vary considerably across studies in ways it is hard for outsiders

to recognize. Studies do, however, point towards a tentative conclusion that effects are
                                             51

small and positive for most countries if FDI flow changes are absent, but much larger and

more variable across countries if they are present. This all perhaps suggests that mode 3

GATS liberalization (roughly captured in some studies) could be very important for

developing countries; Mode 4 GATS liberalization (not covered) is likely even more

important given large barriers to labour flows across countries and recent initial studies

clearly point in this direction.

        If service trade liberalization is a surrogate for improved functioning of global

factor markets in which more capital flows to developing countries and more labour

flows from then, developing countries could benefit in a major way. The paper concludes

by evaluating recent econometric studies on services liberalization growth linkages, and

sectoral issues in health services and transportation.
                                          52


8.     References

Benjamin, N. and X. Diao (2000), “Liberalizing Services Trade in APEC: A General

       Equilibrium Analysis with Imperfect Competition.” Pacific Economic Review

       5(1). (2000): 49-75.

Bhattarai, Keshab and John Whalley (1998) “The Division and Size of Gains from

       Liberalization of Service Networks,” National Bureau of Economic Research

       Working Paper: 6712, August 1998.

Brown, D., A. Deardorff, A. Fox and R. Stern (1996), “Computational analysis of goods

       and services liberalization in the Uruguay Round” in Martin W. and L. Winters

       eds, The Uruguay Round and the Developing Economies, Discussion Paper No.

       307, World Bank, Washington DC, pp. 365-80.

Brown, D., A. Deardorff and R. Stern (2002), “Computational analysis of goods and

       services liberalization in the Uruguay Round and the Doha Development Round”

       Discussion Paper No. 489. Research Seminar in International Economics, School

       of Public Policy, The University of Michigan, 2002.

       http://www.fordschool.umich.edu/rsie/workingpapers/Papers476-500/r489.pdf

Chadha, Rajesh (2000) “GATS and the Developing Countries: A Case Study of India,” in

       Robert M. Stern, (ed.) Services in the International Economy, University of

       Michigan Press, 2000.

Chadha, R., D. Brown, A. Deardorff and R. Stern (2000), “Computational Analysis of the

       Impact on India of the Uruguay Round and the Forthcoming WTO Trade

       negotiations,” Discussion Paper No. 459, School of Public Policy, University of

       Michigan, 2000.
                                           53

Chen, Zhiqi and Lawrence Schembri (2002) “Measuring the Barriers to Trade in

       Services: Literature and Methodologies” in Curtis, J. M. and D. C. Ciuriak, eds.

       Trade Policy Research 2002. Department of Foreign Affairs and International

       Trade, Canada 2002.

Chia, Ngee Choon and John Whalley (1997) “A Numerical Example Showing Globally

       Welfare-Worsening Liberalization of International Trade in Banking Services,”

       Journal of Policy Modelling, April 1997; 19(2): 119-27.

Copeland, Brian (2002) “Benefits and costs of trade and investment liberalization in

       services: Implications from trade theory” in Curtis, J. M. and D. C. Ciuriak, eds.

       Trade Policy Research 2002. Department of Foreign Affairs and International

       Trade, Canada 2002.

Dee, P. and K. Hanslow (2000), “Multilateral Liberalization of Services Trade,”

       Productivity Commission Staff Research Paper, Ausinfo, Canberra.

Findlay, Christopher (1997), “The APEC Air Transport Schedule” Pacific Economic

       Papers No.273 November 1997 Australia-Japan Research Center ANU.

Findlay C. and T. Warren, eds, (2001) Impediments to Trade in Services: Measurement

       and Policy Implications, New York: Routledge.

Fink, C. and A. Mattoo and I. C. Neagu (2001) “Trade in International Maritime

       Services: How Much Does Policy Matter?” World Bank wp.2522,

       http://econ.worldbank.org/files/1338_wps2522.pdf

Francois, J., B. McDonald and H. Nordstrom (1994), “The Uruguay Round: A Global

       General Equilibrium Assessment” Centre for Economic Policy Research,

       Discussion Paper: 1067 November 1994; 44
                                           54

Francois, J. and L. Schuknecht (1999) “Trade in Financial Services: Precompetitive

       Effects and Growth Performance,” CEPR Discussion paper 2144, May 1999.

Francois, J. and L. Schuknecht (2000) “International Trade in Financial Services,

       Competition, and Growth Performance,” Centre for International Economic

       Studies, No. 6.

Francoise, J., and B. Hoekman (1999), “Market Access in the Service Sectors”,

       Tinbergen Institute, manuscript, 1999.

Francois J., H. Acre, K. Reinert and J. Flynn (1996), “Commercial Policy and

       the Domestic Carrying Trade” The Canadian Journal of Economics,

       Vol. 29, No. 1. (Feb., 1996), pp. 181-198.

Goldsmith, Raymond W., (1969), “Financial Structure and Development”, Yale

       University Press, New Haven, 1969.

Hamilton, B. and J. Whalley (1984) “Efficiency and Distributional Implications of Global

       Restrictions on Labour Mobility: Calculations and Policy Implications” Journal

       of Development Economics, 14(1-2) January-February 1984, pp. 61-75.

Hardin, A., and L. Holmes (1997), “Services Trade and Foreign Direct Investment”, Staff

       Research Paper, Industry Commission. Canberra: Australian Government

       Publishing Services.

Hoekman, B. (1995) “Assessing the General Agreement on Trade in Services,” in W.

       Martin and L.A. Winters (eds), The Uruguay Round and the Developing

       Economies, Discussion Paper No. 307, World Bank, Washington DC, pp. 327-64.

Kalirajan, Kaleeswaran (2000), “Restrictions on Trade in Distribution Services,”

       Productivity Commission Staff Research Paper, Ausinfo, Canberra.
                                           55

Kalirajan, K., G. McGuire, D. Nguyen-Hong and M. Schuele (2001), “The price impact

       of restrictions on banking services”, in Findlay C. and T. Warren, eds,

       Impediments to Trade in Services: Measurement and Policy Implications, New

       York: Routledge.

Kang (2001), “Trade in Education Services and the Impacts of Barriers to Trade,” in

       Findlay C. and T. Warren, eds, Impediments to Trade in Services: Measurement

       and Policy Implications, New York: Routledge.

Kemp, S (2001), “Trade in Education Services and the Impacts of Barriers to Trade,” in

       Findlay C. and T. Warren, eds, Impediments to Trade in Services: Measurement

       and Policy Implications, New York: Routledge.

King, R. G. and R. Levine (1993), “Finance, Entrepreneurship and Growth: Theory and

       Evidence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, XXXII (1993).

Levine, Ross (1997), “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and

       Agenda”, Journal of Economic Literature, June 1997.

Markusen, J. and T. Rutherford (2002), “Developing domestiv entrepreneurship and

       growth through imported expertise,” CEBR Discussion paper NO. 2002-12.

Markusen, J., T. Rutherford and D. Tarr (2000), “Foreign Direct Investment in Services

       and the Domestic Market for Expertise,” Policy Research Paper No. 2413, World

       Bank, Washington D.C. August.

Mattoo, Aaditya (1999), “ Financial Services and the WTO: Liberalization Commitments

       of the Developing and Transition Economies”, Policy Research Working Paper

       No. 2184, Developing Research Group, World Bank, September 1999.
                                          56

Mattoo, A., R. Rathindran and A. Subramanian (2001) “Measuring Services Trade

       Liberalization and its Impact on Trade Growth: An Illustration,” World Bank

       Working Paper 2655.

McGuire, G. and M. Schuele (2001a), “Restrictiveness of International Trade in Banking

       Services”, in Findlay C. and T. Warren, eds, Impediments to Trade in Services:

       Measurement and Policy Implications, New York: Routledge.

McGuire, G., M. Schuele (2001b) and T. Smith, “Restrictiveness of International Trade

       in Maritime Services”, in Findlay C. and T. Warren, eds, Impediments to Trade in

       Services: Measurement and Policy Implications, New York: Routledge.

McKinnon, Ronald (1973) Money and Capital in Economic Development. Washington

       D.C., Brookings.

Melvin, James R. (1989) “Trade in Producer Services: A Heckscher-Ohlin Approach,”

       Journal of Political Economy, October 1989, 97(5): 1180-96.

Nguyen-Hong, D. (2000), “Restrictions on Trade in Professional Services”, Productivity

       Commission Staff Research Paper, Ausinfo, Canberra.

Reinert, K. and J. Francois 1997 Applied methods for trade policy analysis: A handbook.

       Cambridge; New York and Melbourne: Cambridge University Press, 1997; xv,

       560.

Robinson, S., Z. Wang and W. Martin (1999) “Capturing the Implications of Services

       Trade Liberalization,” Invited Paper at the Second Annual Conference on Global

       Economic Analysis, Ebberuk, Denmark, June 20-22.

Ryan, C. (1990) “Trade Liberalization and Financial Services,” The World Economy, pp.

       349-366.
                                           57

Ryan, C. (1992) “The Integration of Financial Services and Economic Welfare” in A. L.

       Winters ed, Trade flows and trade policy after 1992. Cambridge; New York,

       Melbourne: Cambridge University Press, 1992; 92-118

Shaw, Edward S. (1973), Financial Deepening in Economic Development, New York:

       Oxford University Press.

Shoven, J. and J. Whalley (1984) “Applied General Equilibrium Models of Taxation and

       International Trade: An Introduction and Survey” Journal of Economic

       Literature, 22(3) September 1984, pp. 1007-51.

Trewin, Ray (2001) “A Price-Impact Measure of Impediments to Trade in

       Telecommunications Services,” in Findlay C. and T. Warren, eds, Impediments to

       Trade in Services: Measurement and Policy Implications, New York: Routledge.

United Nations and WHO (1998), “International Trade in Health Services – A

       Development Perspective,” in S. Zarrilli and C. Kinnon, eds, United Nations

       Conference on Trade and Development (Geneva).

UNCTAD MAST 2.1 (2002)"Measures Affecting Trade in Services (MAST) Database

       Version 2.1" UNCTAD.

Verikios, G. and X. Zhang (2000) “Sectoral impact of liberalising trade in services,”

       paper presented to the Third Conference on Global Economic Analysis,

       Melbourne, June 27-30, http://www.monash.edu.au/policy/conf/53Verikios.pdf

Warren, Tony (2001a), “The identification of impediments to trade and investment in

       telecommunications services,” in Findlay C. and T. Warren, eds, Impediments to

       Trade in Services: Measurement and Policy Implications, New York: Routledge.
                                           58

Warren, Tony (2001b), “The impact on output of impediments to trade and investment in

       telecommunications services,” in Findlay C. and T. Warren, eds, Impediments to

       Trade in Services: Measurement and Policy Implications, New York: Routledge.

Winters, L. Alan (2001), “Assessing the Efficiency Gain for Further Liberalization: A

       Coment” in Sauve, P. and A. Subramanian, eds, Efficiency, Equity and

       Legitimacy: The Multilateral Trading System at the Millennium, Chicago

       University Press, Chicago, 2001.

Winters, L. Alan (2002), “The Economic Implications of Liberalizing Mode 4 Trade”,

       Joint WTO-World Bank Symposium on ‘The Movement of Natural Persons

       (Mode 4) under the GATS’, WTO, Geneva, 11-12 April, 2002.

Winters, A., T. Walmsley, Z.H. Wang and R. Grunberg (2002), “Negotiating the

       Liberalization of the Temporary Movement of Natural Persons”, Discussion paper

       87, University of Sussex, October 2002.

Whalley, John (1985) Trade Liberalization Among Major World Trading Areas.

       Cambridge Mass: MIT Press, 1985.

Whalley, John (2000) “What can the Developing Countries Infer from the Uruguay

       Round Models for Future Negotiations” Policy Issues in International Trade and

       Commodities, Study Series No.4, UNCTAD, New York and Geneva, 2000.

Young, Alwyn (1996) “Invention and Bounded Learning by Doing,” in Grossman, Gene

       M. (ed), Economic growth: Theory and evidence, Volume 1, Elgar Reference

       Collection, International Library of Critical Writings in Economics, No. 68,

       Cheltenham, UK: Elgar, distributed by Ashgate, Brookfield, VT, 1996, pp. 506-

       35. Previously published: 1993.
                                          59

Zerby, J., and R. Conlon (1983) “Joint Costs and Intra-Tariff Cross-Subsidies: The Case

       of Liner Shipping.” Journal of Industrial Economics, June 1983, 383-96.
