NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE SIZE AND COMPOSITION OF WEALTH HOLDINGS
IN THE UNITED STATES, ITALY, AND THE NETHERLANDS
Arie Kapteyn
Constantijn Panis
Working Paper 10182
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10182
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

Both authors are at RAND, 1700 Main Street, Santa Monica, CA 90401; e-mail to <kapteyn@rand.org> or
<panis@rand.org>. This paper benefited greatly from the expert input of Rob Alessie and Luigi Guiso
throughout the course of the conceptualization and analysis. We are also very grateful to Nicholas Souleles
for his thoughtful comments and to Delia Bugliari for her excellent research support. This research was
sponsored by the Department of Labor, Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, under Contract J-9-P-70045. We thank Patricia Willis for her encouragement and support. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Arie Kapteyn and Constantijn Panis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Size and Composition of Wealth Holdings in the United States, Italy, and the Netherlands
Arie Kapteyn and Constantijn Panis
NBER Working Paper No. 10182
December 2003
JEL No. D91, J14, J26
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes retirement saving and portfolio choice in the United States, Italy, and
the Netherlands. While these countries enjoy roughly the same standard of living, they vary widely
in their institutional organization of retirement income provisions. Building on extensions of the life
cycle model, we derive hypotheses on the implications of institutional differences for wealth
accumulation and portfolio composition. Examples of implications are that the ratio of net worth and
gross wealth should be highest in Italy, that Dutch households should hold the lowest wealth levels
at retirement and that the ownership of risky assets should be highest in the U.S. We investigate
these and other hypotheses at both the macro and micro level and find that the data are generally
consistent with the hypotheses.
Arie Kapteyn
RAND
1700 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90401
kapteyn@rand.org
Constantijn Panis
RAND
1700 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90401
panis@rand.org

1

1.

Introduction

This paper analyzes retirement saving and portfolio choice in the United States, Italy, and
the Netherlands. In addition to relying on public retirement provisions, households
prepare for retirement through tax-sheltered and after-tax savings. They may invest these
funds in a wide variety of assets, including housing, stocks, bonds, savings accounts, etc.
These asset types differ in their risk, return, and liquidity characteristics as well as in their
fiscal treatment. Economic theory postulates that households allocate their portfolios
according to their risk aversion, time horizon, uncertain out-of-pocket medical
expenditures, income risk, informal (family) risk sharing arrangements, etc. While the
literature has tested various parts of the theory, both testing and quantification of the
theory are hampered by the fact that some of the major variables do not exhibit sufficient
variation within a country to establish their relative importance for portfolio choice, or,
more generally, for retirement saving and investment. This paper partially fills that gap
by exploring three countries with widely varying institutional arrangements for retirement
income.
Portfolio allocation behavior is important for a number of reasons (e.g., Bertaut and StarrMcCluer, 2000). Returns vary across asset types, so portfolio composition has important
implications for the pace of wealth accumulation and the degree of retirement
preparedness; risks vary across asset types, so portfolio composition has important
implications for the distribution of retirement income; portfolio decisions illuminate how
tax policy affects household spending and saving; portfolio decisions illuminate how
macro variables (interest rates, stock prices, inflation, unemployment) affect household
spending and saving; and understanding households’ portfolio decisions may provide
deeper insight into theories of consumption and saving behavior.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 poses a theoretical framework and briefly
reviews the literature on the size and composition of the wealth holdings of the (nearly)
retired. Section 3 highlights relevant aspects of the legal and institutional environments
of the three countries under study. Section 4 describes the three countries’ microdata that
we use. Section 5 draws together the theoretical framework and the institutional
differences to formulate four hypotheses about expected patterns in the microdata from
the different countries. Section 6 presents the empirical analysis with particular emphasis
on Section 5’s hypotheses. Section 7 concludes.

2.

Theoretical Framework and Literature

Our point of departure to study retirement savings is the life cycle hypothesis (LCH)
formulated by Modigliani and Brumberg (1954). The basic tenet of the LCH is that
rational consumers will try to smooth consumption over the life cycle in such a way that
the marginal utility of consumption is equalized across periods. Since individuals usually
have a life cycle income pattern that is inversely U-shaped (at young ages, earnings are
modest but grow until roughly retirement, after which income declines), the life cycle
pattern of wealth is also inversely U-shaped. In its simplest form, sometimes referred to

2

as a ‘stripped-down’ version (Browning and Lusardi, 1996), the LCH fails to explain
several well-known facts. Several extensions have therefore been introduced. These
include the incorporation of uncertainty, bequest motives, borrowing constraints,
precautionary motives, transaction costs associated with the reshuffling of portfolios,
taxes, and lack of financial sophistication. We discuss several of these extensions below,
in so far as they shed light on the portfolios of the (near-)retired. Our interest is primarily
in the implications of institutional arrangements for individuals’ wealth accumulation and
profile.
2.1.

Retirement Income Replacement Rates and Wealth

As documented below, the United States, Italy, and the Netherlands vary greatly in the
fraction of pre-retirement income that is replaced by social security and private pensions.
To illustrate the implications of varying replacement rates for wealth accumulation, we
take a simple version of the LCH with time preference rates equal to the interest rate, a
constant household composition, no uncertainty, no bequest motives, and no liquidity
constraints.1 Consumers live until they are 85 years old (which is known with certainty).
In that case the optimal consumption profile over one’s life is flat, i.e., one should plan to
spend the same amount of money each period. This amount should be chosen in such a
way that wealth is zero at the time of death.
Figure 1 illustrates the implications for saving and wealth accumulation for two different
levels of retirement annuity incomes. The income paths have been chosen in such a way
that lifetime resources are equal, so that they both imply the same consumption level.
Clearly, the income path with the less generous retirement income leads to more wealth
accumulation. Thus, the theory in its simple form would imply that those households
with relatively meager pension provisions would save the most.
Panel A: Different replacement rates

Income, consumption

70
Income 2

60

Income 1

50
Consumption 1, 2

40
30
20
10
0
20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

Age

1

The exposition is similar to illustrations by Bernheim, Skinner, Weinberg (2001).

80

85

3

Panel B: Corresponding wealth paths
700
600

Wealth

500
400

Wealth 2

300
200

Wealth 1

100
0
20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

Age

Figure 1. Income and Wealth Paths under Different Replacement Rates
2.2.

Precautionary Saving

In its simplest form, the introduction of uncertainty leads to a straightforward extension
of the LCH. Consumers still want to equalize the marginal utility of consumption across
periods, but since they cannot control or foresee the future perfectly, they can now only
equalize marginal utility in expectation. If in each period, the world would turn out to be
exactly as expected, the expectation would be realized perfectly and we would be back in
the world illustrated by, for instance, Figure 1. However, expectations are generally not
realized exactly and on the basis of new information one has to re-optimize. For
example, an unanticipated adverse income shock will lead to a revision of the consumer’s
expected income path over the life cycle, which in turn leads to a fall in consumption and
a new trajectory for saving and wealth. Clearly, consumers would like to guard
themselves against unpleasant surprises. An obvious strategy to do this is to save more as
a matter of precaution. A vast literature has developed this so-called “precautionary
saving motive”.
The extent to which consumers increase their saving when facing future risk is governed
by “prudence” (Kimball, 1990; Gollier, 2001). By definition, a consumer is prudent if
adding a zero-mean risk to her future wealth raises her optimal saving. An example of a
zero-mean risk would be one where a consumer’s next year’s endowment has an equal
probability of being higher or lower with respect to a baseline by, say, $1,000. Whether a
consumer is prudent depends on her preferences.2 Consumers may not be prudent and
hence will decrease saving if we make future financial resources more risky.
2

To be precise, a necessary and sufficient condition for prudence is that an agent’s marginal utility of
future consumption is convex (Gollier, 2001, Proposition 60). Prudence is related to, but not the same as
risk aversion. A consumer is prudent if absolute risk aversion is decreasing in wealth; in the special case of
constant relative risk aversion, (relative) prudence is equal to (relative) risk aversion + 1.

4

While there is no logical reason why consumers would have to increase saving in the face
of increased future uncertainty, empirical work suggests that generally an increase in risk
leads to more saving. The estimated sizes of precautionary saving vary considerably
across studies (e.g., Dynan 1993; Guiso, Jappelli, Terlizesse, 1992; Lusardi 1997;
Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes, 1994a, 1994b, 1995; Banks, Blundell, and Brugiavini,
2001).
2.3.

Liquidity Constraints and Wealth Accumulation

Liquidity constraints can take various forms. The simplest form is a ceiling on the
amount of money one can borrow. In many instances such a ceiling is not cast in stone
and if one is willing to pay higher interest on the money borrowed, it is possible to
increase the loan amount. More generally, the term “liquidity constraint” refers to the
fact that borrowing rates are higher than lending rates. Liquidity constraints induce extra
saving in several ways. The most straightforward case is where in a given period one
would like to borrow, but cannot do so because of insufficient collateral or insufficient
prospects of being able to pay back a loan in the future. However, even if a constraint is
not binding in a given period (i.e., income is higher than planned expenditures), the fact
that one may face liquidity constraints in the future may increase saving in the current
period. In particular, liquidity constraints interact with income uncertainty since it
increases the probability that adverse income shocks may necessitate the need to borrow
in some future period.
The intuitive effect of liquidity constraints is that it shortens one’s time horizon. Without
liquidity constraints, the consumption effects of an adverse income shock in a given
period may be spread out over many periods by borrowing money to pay for consumption
in a given period and then reducing consumption in all subsequent periods by a little bit,
rather than immediately cutting consumption by the total shortfall in income. This
mechanism is known as time diversification and tends to reduce risk aversion (e.g.,
Gollier, 2001). If liquidity constraints are binding, the possibility to spread out the
consumption shortfall over many periods is absent, or at least more limited, and this acts
as a shortening of the time horizon with a resulting increase in risk aversion. The only
way to reduce the risk of such a forced reduction in consumption is to save more.
Savings then act as a “buffer stock” (Deaton, 1991; Carroll, 1992, 1997). Thus, liquidity
constraints increase saving, even if they are not binding in the current period.
2.4.

Portfolio Composition and Saving

Commonly in economic models, consumers are assumed to be risk-averse. That is,
whenever a consumer is given a choice between a fixed amount of money and a gamble
with expected payoff equal to the fixed amount, she will prefer the fixed amount. As a
result of this, a risk-averse consumer will only be willing to invest some of her savings in
a risky asset if the expected return of the risky asset is higher than of a riskless asset. The
extent to which an individual is willing to invest in risky assets is determined by this
individual’s risk aversion. The literature distinguishes several measures of risk aversion,
including coefficients of absolute and relative risk aversion. For the current discussion,

5

the exact definitions of these risk aversion measures are of no great consequence.3 If a
risky asset is available with an expected return larger than of an available riskless asset
(e.g., putting money in a savings account), the standard theory predicts that an individual
will always put some money into the risky asset. How much is put in the risky asset is a
function of the risk aversion of the individual: the more risk-averse the agent is, the less
she will put in the risky asset.
Since risky assets on average have a higher rate of return, it is of interest to know which
people have the lowest risk aversion, as, on average, these are the people that will realize
the highest return on their investment portfolio. On the other hand, even though the
average return on risky portfolios is higher, this of course does not carry over to every
individual portfolio and the higher riskiness implies a higher dispersion in outcomes than
for less risky portfolios.
One “stylized fact” is that people with more wealth own more risky assets, such as stocks
(e.g., Hochgürtel 1998, Barsky et al. 1997, Carroll 2001, Hurd 2001). Under reasonable
assumptions on the form of the utility function, this is indeed predicted by the theory.
The theory predicts that for risk-averse consumers an increase in wealth increases the
amount of stocks if individuals have decreasing absolute risk aversion. However,
following an increase in wealth, the share of risky assets may or may not increase. For
the share to increase, relative risk aversion must decrease with wealth. The usual
assumption is that it is constant, and thus the portfolio share should be independent of
wealth. Empirically, the evidence is not clear-cut: evidence on relative risk aversion
sometimes points at an increasing relationship to wealth (e.g., Guiso and Paiella, 2001);
correlations between portfolio shares of risky assets and wealth are sometimes positive,
consistent with decreasing relative risk aversion. However, a positive correlation
between a risky asset portfolio share and wealth may also arise because of fixed portfolio
management costs. Altogether, the relation between theory and the share of risky assets
in total wealth is not yet clear-cut.
Given that we are interested in the size and composition of portfolios with which people
reach retirement age, the natural context in which to consider risk aversion is
intertemporal. That is, one should consider investments with an eye on their contribution
to the financial resources at retirement. The first implication of that viewpoint is that
young people should invest in a more risky way than older people. This is due to time
diversification, i.e., the possibility for younger people to spread out any bad investment
outcome over a longer period of their life. This supports the usual advice by financial
planners to reduce exposure to risk when one gets older.
Another consequence of using an intertemporal framework is that we have to consider
saving and investment decisions jointly. Consider a case where an individual can divide
savings into riskless and risky assets (with higher expected return than the riskless asset).
3

Formally, a utility function exhibits risk aversion if the function is concave. The degree of absolute risk
aversion is defined as minus the ratio of the second derivative of the utility function and the first derivative.
If we multiply this quantity by the argument of the utility function we obtain the degree of relative risk
aversion.

6

Will this individual save more than if only a riskless asset were available? This is
relevant to assess the effects on saving decisions of financial innovation, such as the
addition of new instruments. The answer depends on the structure of the individual’s
preferences, and in particular on this individual’s prudence and risk aversion. If her
prudence is sufficiently large relative to her risk aversion, the presence of a risky asset
will increase saving. If not, the availability of a risky asset will reduce saving.4
To understand this result, recall that if a risky asset is available, an agent will always
invest something in it. By investing something in the risky asset the total expected return
on assets increases. In itself, the increase of resources in the future due to the higher
expected return of the investment in the risky asset will lead to a fall in saving in the
current period. However, also recall that precaution leads to more saving currently if
uncertainty about the future goes up. The investment in the risky asset does exactly that:
It increases uncertainty about the future. Whether the increase in current saving as a
result of increasing future uncertainty dominates the fall in current saving as a result of
the higher expected lifetime resources depends not only on the strength of the
precautionary motive, but also on how much is invested in the risky asset. The more riskaverse the individual is, the smaller the amount she will invest in a risky asset. Thus, in
the case of high risk aversion and small precaution, the investment in a risky asset will be
modest with little effect on the amount of precautionary saving. Hence, current saving
will fall as a result of higher expected future resources. In the opposite case of a strong
precautionary motive and low risk aversion, a considerable amount will be invested in the
risky asset; this increases uncertainty considerably and through a strong precautionary
motive, this will lead to positive effect on current saving that dominates the negative
effect caused by the increase in expected lifetime resources.
Which effect dominates empirically is a somewhat undecided issue, but under plausible
assumptions about individual utility functions, it appears likely that the introduction of
risky assets will decrease saving.
Of course, investment risk is not the only risk that affects consumption possibilities.
Different people are exposed to different amounts and different kinds of risk and one
would expect this to affect an individual’s investment portfolio. Intuitively, one might
think that when one is exposed to risk in one dimension, one becomes more averse to risk
in another dimension. For instance, other things being equal, an individual with a very
uncertain income may want to invest in a safer portfolio than someone whose income is
virtually guaranteed. It turns out that such an effect of “background risk” on risk
aversion will only hold if preferences satisfy certain logical conditions (Kimball, 1993;
Gollier and Pratt, 1996; Gollier, 2001). Empirical work by Guiso, Jappelli, Terlizesse
(1996) indicates that the presence of background risk lowers the willingness of
households to hold risky assets. Similarly, Haliassos and Bertaut (1995) find that people
in risky occupations are less likely to hold stocks. Using a self-reported measure of risk
aversion, Guiso and Paiella (2001) find that the presence of background risk increases

4

Saving will increase if and only if the degree of absolute prudence is larger than twice the degree of
absolute risk aversion. See Gollier (2001).

7

measured risk aversion. Thus, we tentatively conclude that individual preferences do
satisfy the logical conditions for an increase in background risk to increase risk aversion.
As noted above, the presence of liquidity constraints works as if risk aversion increases.
Guiso, Jappelli, Terlizesse (1996) indeed find some evidence that the presence of
liquidity constraints reduces the demand for risky assets. Liquidity constraints may also
have other implications for portfolio choice. For instance, if an individual faces
borrowing ceilings this may induce her to hold more assets in liquid form than she would
otherwise (Paxson, 1990).
Recall that if a risky asset (that pays a premium) is offered, a consumer will always invest
something in it. This statement can be generalized to the case where one can choose
from an array of risky assets. Unless the returns on these assets are perfectly correlated,
an investor should have a portfolio that has at least a little of each. Of all the predictions
of the theory, this is probably the one that is most clearly false. For example, a majority
of households does not own any stock. One can think of various reasons why portfolios
are incomplete, i.e., do not contain all assets. Haliassos and Bertaut (1995) list a number
of reasons, including the cost of acquiring information about stocks, transactions costs
(see also Vissing Jørgensen, 2000), minimum investment requirements, and deviations
from the expected utility models underlying the LCH. They find a strong effect of
education, which suggests that stocks, being fairly complicated products, require a certain
amount of knowledge that may be lacking in some parts of the population. This is
supported by a finding by King and Leape (1998) that about 40 percent of the nonstockholders in their sample (of Canadian respondents) state that they did not know
enough about the stock market.
Somewhat in line with the interpretation of these education effects, Benartzi and Thaler
(2001) provide strong empirical evidence that portfolio choice may be a much less
rational and forward-looking process than economic theory suggests. In particular, they
provide evidence for what they call the “1/n strategy” among participants in defined
contribution saving plans: participants tend to divide their contributions evenly across
the funds offered in the plan. Thus the extent of stockholding may be expected to be
influenced not only by the behavior of individual investors, but also by the behavior of
institutions offering different investment options.
2.5.

Retirement Saving, Tax Incentives, Social Security, and Pensions

Bernheim (1999) provides an excellent review of the literature on taxation and saving.
Here we briefly touch on three important issues: (1) the saving effects of various forms of
tax-deferred saving vehicles such as IRAs and 401(k)s, (2) the displacement effects of
pensions and social security on private retirement saving, and (3) the effect of implicit
taxes in income maintenance programs on saving behavior.
Theoretically, the effect of tax deferred saving vehicles on private saving is ambiguous.
For instance by putting money into an IRA an individual avoids paying taxes on part of
her income now, but will have to pay taxes on the money taken out of the IRA later. Not

8

having to pay tax on the income put in an IRA amounts to an increase in the rate of return
on saving. Such an increase in the rate of return has two effects. First, the higher return
on the investment in an IRA makes it attractive to save, because it lowers the price of
future consumption relative to the price of current consumption. Next to this
“substitution effect” there is also an “income effect.” The higher rate of return amounts
to an increase in lifetime resources, which in itself raises current consumption, and hence
lowers saving. In view of this theoretical ambiguity, empirical research has to settle the
issue of the direction and the strength of the tax subsidy effect on private saving.
Different researchers have reached very different conclusions. Authors such as Engen,
Gale and Scholz (1996) find that these saving incentives have little or no effect, whereas
others, notably Venti and Wise (1990, 1991, 1995) find very substantial effects. Clearly
the answer to the question of the effectiveness of saving incentives is very important in
view of the total amount of taxes foregone as a result of these incentives.
One of the clear implications of the above graphical illustration of the LCH is that people
should save more for retirement the lower their retirement income will be relative to their
pre-retirement earnings. Conversely, the more generous pensions or social security
income will be, the less incentive there is to save for retirement. This is known as the
“displacement effect” of pensions and social security on private savings (Feldstein,
1974). Yet, empirical research has shown repeatedly that households with relatively
generous pensions are also the households that save the most or at least do not save less
than other households (e.g., Gustman and Steinmeier, 1998). However, this may simply
reflect differences in tastes: some people have a stronger taste for saving than others.
And those that do tend to both arrange for more generous pensions and to accumulate
more private wealth. Assuming that on average the tastes for saving do not differ
substantially across countries, a cross-country comparison should bear out that in
countries with more generous old age pensions systems people save less than in countries
with less generous systems. See below.
Government regulations may impose various implicit taxes on saving. A particularly
important class of implicit taxes consists of asset-based means tests in various income
maintenance programs, like Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF), Medicaid,
or Food Stamps. As a result, someone with low and uncertain income has a strong
incentive not to save if income maintenance is asset-tested, because every time she
experiences a bad income draw, she first has to run down her assets before qualifying for
income support. She can maintain a higher consumption level on average by not saving
and drawing income support if income falls below the cut-off point for qualification.
Hubbard, Skinner, Zeldes (1994a, 1994b, 1995) show that a model incorporating these
features along with uncertainty and liquidity constraints is able to reproduce the observed
wealth distribution and its evolution over time quite well.

9

3.

Legal and Institutional Environments

Kapteyn and Panis (2002) provide a detailed discussion of legal issues and institutional
features that affect retirement income in the United States, Italy, and the Netherlands.
This section highlights the features that are relevant for our purposes. In separate
subsections, we highlight the three legs of the proverbial retirement income stool: social
security, occupational pensions, and private savings.5 We then discuss capital market
imperfections (transaction costs and liquidity constraints) and exposure to financial risks
in retirement.
3.1.

Social Security

In the United States, social security is mainly provided as Old-Age and Survivors
Insurance (OASI).6 It makes cash payments to retired workers, spouses of retired
workers, and widows and children of deceased workers. A separate program,
Supplemental Security Income (SSI), makes cash payments to, among others, needy
elderly. The Italian social security program, Programma Nazionale di Sicurezza Sociale,
makes cash payments to retired workers and widow(er)s of deceased workers; it also
guarantees a minimum benefit for the poor. The Italian program does not have a spousal
benefit. In the Netherlands, cash payments are made to elderly individuals—regardless
of their work history—on the basis of the General Old-Age Act (Algemene Ouderdoms
Wet, AOW). We use the term “social security” to refer to all programs that pay cash
benefits to the elderly, regardless of whether the entitlement originates from contributive
insurance or social assistance.
All three social security programs are predominantly funded on a pay-as-you-go (PAYG)
basis. The United States maintains a buffer in the form of an OASI trust fund. There is
no trust fund in Italy. Italian social security outlays currently exceed contributions by
about 8-17 percent of payroll (Brugiavini 1999); the difference is funded from general tax
revenues. The Netherlands instituted a trust fund in 1996.
In all three countries, participation in social security is mandatory, and coverage is nearly
universal. Almost all elderly (are eligible to) receive some benefits.
Table 1 gives an indication of the generosity of social security in the three countries. The
first column shows social security expenditures as a percentage of GDP. Italy spent
approximately 15.7 percent of GDP on social security in 1999, far higher than the United
5

Laws and institutions are changing continuously. As a general rule, we describe the status around the
time of our household surveys, i.e., from roughly 1995 to 1999, and note major changes over time only
where relevant. All amounts are in 1998 currencies, unless stated otherwise. We converted all amounts in
Dutch guilders (NLG) or Italian liras (ITL) into euros (€) at the exchange rates that were irrevocably fixed
at the euro’s conceptual introduction in the beginning of 1999: € 1 = NLG 2.20371 = ITL 1936.27. On
1/1/1999 the exchange rate of the euro and the U.S. dollar ($) was $ 1 = € 0.857. The dollar exceeded
parity with the Euro for several years, but had declined to $ 1 = € 0.953 by 1/1/2003. For purposes of
comparing purchasing power, an exchange rate of one-to-one is probably a reasonable approximation.
6
Unless noted otherwise, our discussion does not extend to public support for the disabled and their
dependents.

10

States (3.9 percent in 2000) and the Netherlands (5.0 percent in 1999). This is in minor
part explained by the age structure of its population. The second column shows the
elderly dependency ratio, i.e., the size of the population that is at least 65 years old as a
fraction of the working age population. Italy again tops the list, but the differences are
not large.7 The third column shows the ratio of social security outlays as a fraction of
GDP and the dependency ratio. It may be interpreted as a measure of the generosity of
each country’s social security program. Italy remains far above the other two countries.
This is largely because occupational pensions, which play a significant role in the United
States and the Netherlands, are negligible in Italy—see below. In addition, until recently,
early retirement was very widespread in Italy, especially in the public sector. Several
categories of public employees could retire after 15-20 years of contributions. Early
retirement essentially increases the dependency ratio.
Table 1. Social Security Outlays and Dependency Ratios

United States
Italy
Netherlands

(1) Social security
outlays as percentage
of GDP (1999)
3.9
15.7
5.0

(2) Population age 65+
as percentage of pop’n
age 25-64 (1994)
24.8
29.6
24.4

Ratio of
(1) and (2)
0.156
0.523
0.208

Sources: Board of OASI Trustees (2001), Social Security Administration (2000); Franco (2000);
Kapteyn and De Vos (1999); Bureau of the Census (1996).

Social security benefits are paid in the form of a life-long annuity in all three countries.
In the United States, OASI benefits are a function of historical earnings, retirement age,
and marital status. They may be claimed at age 62; delayed claiming results in higher
benefits according to a schedule that is roughly actuarially fair. In 2001, average retired
worker benefits were $845 per month. Aged couples received an average of $1,410 per
month, and single elderly widow(er)s $811. Benefits are adjusted annually for inflation.
The replacement rate for unmarried individuals with average wages was approximately
44 percent. The nationwide average replacement rate, including spousal and other
derived benefits, was approximately 56 percent in 1995 (Blöndal and Scarpetta, 1998).
There is no minimum OASI benefit. However, regardless of their earnings history,
elderly individuals (couples) are eligible for a monthly SSI benefit of $530 ($796).
In Italy, private sector workers may retire with full benefits at age 60 (men) or 55
(women) or after 35 years of social security tax payments, whichever is earlier.8 For
7

Italy’s fertility rate was very low during the 1990s, well below the replacement level. While the
dependence ratio is only somewhat larger in Italy than in the U.S. and the Netherlands, the difference is
expected to increase markedly in the future.
8
Italian social security benefit calculations changed materially in 1992 and, to a lesser extent, in 1995. The
changes will be phased in over a long period. Workers with at least 18 years of contributions in 1995 will
receive benefits computed on the basis of the rules applying before the 1992 reform (Franco 2000). For
purposes of our analysis, which focuses on individuals age 50 and older, the pre-1992 regime therefore
applies.

11

public sector employees, only 20 (men) or 15 (women) years of tax payments are
required. Benefits are a function of number of years worked and so-called pensionable
earnings. For private sector employees, pensionable earnings are equal to the average
earnings of the last five years prior to retirement. (For public sector employees,
pensionable earnings are based on the last paycheck only.) Pensionable earnings are
converted into social security benefits by applying a 2 percent factor (referred to as the
rate of return) for each year of social security tax payment up to a maximum of 40 years
(Brugiavini 1999). A worker can thus get at most 80 percent of his pensionable earnings.
Earnings that enter the calculation of pensionable earnings are capped. Benefits are
therefore also capped, at approximately €6,000 per month in 2000. Contributions are not
subject to any maximum. There is no actuarial adjustment for retirement age.9 There are
no spousal benefits in Italy. However, the entire benefit becomes payable to a surviving
spouse upon death of the retiree. The benefit is never lower than a means-tested
minimum benefit of approximately €370 per month in 2000. A substantial fraction of
retirees receive this minimum benefit. Benefits are adjusted regularly for nominal wages.
In the Netherlands, social security benefit rules are very simple. Earnings history does
not play a role: the benefits are almost exclusively a function of marital status and
residency history. In 2001, unmarried individuals age 65 or older receive €883 per
month; married couples with both spouses at least age 65 receive €1,206 per month.
Married couples with one spouse below age 65 receive between €603 and €1,206,
depending on the younger spouse’s income (Social Insurance Bank 2000). The eligibility
age is 65 and there is no provision for early retirement.10 There is no link between labor
force participation and entitlement to social security. The full benefits apply to residents
who have lived their entire working life (age 15-64) in the Netherlands; benefits are
reduced by 2 percent for every year spent abroad (Kapteyn and De Vos, 1999). Benefits
are adjusted annually for nominal wage growth.
Table 2. Contribution and Replacement Rates

United States
Italy
Netherlands

Contribution rate (% of taxable income)
Average
Employer Employee
Total
replacement
rate
5.26
5.26
10.52
56.0
18.93
8.34
27.27
80.0
0.00
17.90
17.90
45.8

Source: Blöndal and Scarpetta (1998)

Table 2 summarizes social security contribution rates and average replacement rates for
the three countries. The replacement rates are the average over four scenarios and may
therefore differ from the average nationwide replacement rates.11
9

The 1992 and 1995 reforms made fundamental changes to benefit calculations. Benefits are now
uncapped but progressive and there is an actuarial adjustment for retirement age. On average, the new rules
will reduce benefits by 27-29 percent (Beltrametti 1996; Rostagno 1996).
10
Occupational pensions often offer bridge benefits between the (early) retirement age and age 65.
11
The replacement rates are computed as averages of four scenarios: two earnings levels (average and two
third of average) and two household compositions (single worker and worker with a dependent spouse).

12

3.2.

Occupational Pensions

Occupational pensions are retirement income schemes that are sponsored by employers.
The United States, Italy, and the Netherlands vary widely in the role of occupational
pensions. They are widespread, well funded, and generous in the Netherlands; largely
immaterial for most Italians (except for so-called severance pay arrangements, see
below); and at roughly equal footing with social security in the United States. Table 3
shows pension assets as a percentage of GDP, the fraction of retirees with any pension
benefits, and the fraction of the working population that is covered by a pension plan.
Table 3. Importance of Occupational Pensions (Late 1990s)

Italy
Netherlands
U.S.

Funds
(% of GDP)
Negligible
118
66

Percent of retirees
receiving pension
Negligible
76 (men) 23 (women)
48 (men) 26 (women)

Percent working
pop’n covered
0.02
90
44

Source: Johnson (1999)

Traditionally, employer-sponsored pensions in the United States have been of the defined
benefit (DB) type. The plans are specific to individual employers, not to industry groups
such as is mostly the case in the Netherlands.12 Given that there are tens of thousands
different plans, their features vary widely. Portability is very limited. The benefit is
typically fixed in nominal terms upon job separation. An increasing fraction of DB
plans—64 percent in 1993—offers the option of a lump sum distribution upon job
separation (Scott and Shoven, 1996). Workers who take that option may leave the
distribution tax-sheltered by investing it in an IRA or they may cash it out (Hurd, Lillard,
and Panis, 1998).
In 1978, 38 percent of American workers were covered by a DB pension, compared to
only 21 percent in 1997 (Department of Labor, 2001). Instead, defined contribution (DC)
plans are becoming more widespread (up from seven percent in 1978 to 25 percent in
1997). Under DC plans, retirement income depends on the level of contributions and the
rate of return earned on those contributions. Workers typically decide on the allocation
on their plan balance and bear the investment risk.
In Italy, the social security program was traditionally intended to provide comprehensive
retirement income. In light of its social security program’s dire financial outlook, Italy
established DC pension plans in 1992. These plans are still in their infancy. As of March
1999, only approximately 400,000 workers were enrolled in a DC plan and total assets

The earnings profile is assumed to be flat and earnings are revalued according to changes in average
earnings. The rates refer to basic pensions, means-tested supplements, and mandatory occupational
pensions only. See Blöndal and Scarpetta (1998).
12
The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, a federal agency, guarantees pension payments to retirees
whose pension plan ended.

13

represented only 0.015 percent of GDP (Banca d’Italia, 1999). With few exceptions,
there are no DB plans.
While not strictly a pension plan, so-called severance pay arrangements have long played
an important role in Italian retirement income security. They are somewhat similar to DC
plans, but are paid out upon job separation, regardless of age. Employers contribute 6.9
percent of workers’ wages into a self-administered fund (Franco 2000). Workers earn a
legally determined return on those funds of 1.5 percent plus three-fourths of the inflation
rate. While this severance entitlement is accruing, the worker has a secure but
uncollectable credit with his employer, who retains full discretionary powers over the
funds (Franco, 2000). Upon job separation, there is a lump sum severance payment.
Severance pay credits comprised 5.2 percent of household financial wealth in 1997
(authors’ calculations, based on the 1998 Survey of Household Income and Wealth).
In the Netherlands, occupational pensions are widespread and large. Plans are organized
by industry sectors and administered by industrial organizations. Virtually all pensions
are DB pensions. They are easily ported across employers. If a worker’s previous and
new employers belong to the same industrial organization, portability is merely an
administrative issue. If the employers belong to different industrial organizations, the
plan administrators settle internally such that the previous administrator disburses a lump
sum to the new administrator. The employee receives credit for accumulated pension
rights as part of the new pension.13 All benefits are paid in the form of a lifelong annuity;
lump sum distributions upon job termination are not allowed.
Table 4. After-Tax Median Replacement Rates
Country
Italy
Netherlands
U.S.

Replacement rate
75
91
41

Source: Gruber and Wise (1999)

Of course, what matters for individual households is the combined replacement rate
resulting from the combination of social security and occupational pensions. Table 4
provides an estimate of the after tax replacement rates in the three countries for a
“typical” (median) household. Clearly, the replacement rate is highest in the Netherlands
and lowest by far in the U.S..14 Based on microdata from the three countries, we
calculated and report below an alternative measure of replacement rate.

13

For example, suppose someone worked for 12 years under a plan which promises a benefit equal to 1.5
percent of last earned salary for every year worked. His new plan promises 2.0 percent of last earned salary
per year worked. The worker receives credit in his new plan for 12*1.5/2.0=9 years of work, as-if those
years were worked at the new employer under the new pension plan.
14
There are many ways to calculate replacement rates. Table 4 is therefore not directly comparable to
Table 2. However, within table, the rates are computed in the same manner.

14

3.3.

Private Savings

In addition to claims on social security and occupational pensions, individuals build up
private savings to support them during retirement. Private savings may take many forms.
They may be held in financial instruments, in real estate, or other. They are not restricted
to after-tax funds. Specifically, we include IRAs, term life insurance, and similar taxsheltered accounts among private savings. The largest differences in private saving
across United States, Italy, and the Netherlands lie in opportunities to save in taxsheltered instruments.
Americans may accumulate retirement savings in Individual Retirement Accounts
(IRAs). Individuals may contribute up to $2,000 annually to IRAs.15 In traditional IRAs,
contributions are tax-deductible; distributions (including interest) are taxed at the time of
the distribution. Contributions are fully tax deductible only for persons whose income
falls below certain phase-out levels, which depend on whether the person is covered by
an occupational pension. Since 1997, so-called Roth IRAs allow for after-tax
contributions; distributions (including interest) are tax-free. By the end of 1999, the
assets in IRAs amounted to $2.47 trillion (Copeland 2001). By comparison, assets of
private DB and DC pension plans amounted to $2.14 trillion and $2.53 trillion,
respectively (Federal Reserve 2001).
There is no Italian equivalent of IRAs. However, all Italians are eligible for term life
insurance contracts. The general principle of taxation on these contracts is very
favorable: both contributions and benefits are partially tax-exempt. The value of life
insurance contracts comprised 5.5 percent of household financial wealth in 1997
(authors’ calculations, based on the 1998 SHIW).
The situation is similar in the Netherlands. Dutch law does not recognize IRAs, but
offers tax advantages for term life insurance policies. The limit up to which contributions
are tax-deferred has fluctuated widely. Prior to 1992, the limit was €7,300, fixed in
nominal terms. In 1992, the limit was lowered. For the year 2000, it was €5,600 for a
married couple. (Starting in 2001, the limit is lower yet at only €1,000; it is higher for
individuals with income over which no pension rights are accumulated, such as the use of
a company car.) Dutch term life insurance payments must take the form of a lifelong or
fixed-term annuity. The annuity benefits are subject to income tax.
Rates of return in the stock market have varied substantially across the three countries.
Consider the Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) index, representative of large
companies and computed consistently over time and across countries. Between 1970 and
mid-2001, the overall annual rate of return, including re-invested dividends, was highest
in the Netherlands (13.8 percent nominal, 10.9 percent real), followed by the United
States (11.9 percent nominal, 8.3 percent real) and Italy (11.2 percent nominal, 2.3
15

Individuals who separate from a job with a pension plan may often take a lump sum distribution of their
pension rights. Such distributions may be rolled over into an IRA and remain tax-sheltered. There is no
limit on the amount that may be contributed to IRAs in this manner.

15

percent real). The Italian market exhibited markedly more volatility. For example, the
standard deviation of annual nominal returns in Italy was 34.4 percent, compared to 16.6
percent in the U.S. and 21.7 percent in the Netherlands.
3.4.

Capital Market Imperfections

Access to capital markets for households varies across the three countries. We discuss
housing transactions and mortgages and transaction costs of stock purchases.
Transaction costs of housing in the United States consist largely of real estate agent fees
(approximately 6 percent of the house price) and legal fees (roughly 2 percent). Transfer
taxes are negligible in most areas. In the Netherlands, transaction costs are largely real
estate agent fees (typically 1.5 percent of the house price) and transfer tax of 6 percent.
Legal fees are minimal by comparison. House transaction costs are higher in Italy than in
the United States and the Netherlands. Real estate agent fees are 8-10 percent and a
transfer tax of 6-7 percent applies.
There is a well-developed mortgage market in the United States, including a standardized
secondary market. Buyers may choose variable or fixed interest rate loans of up to 30
years’ maturity. The typical down payment is 10 or 20 percent of the value of the house,
but full financing is available. Interest payments are generally fully deductible for
income tax purposes. The mortgage market is much less developed in Italy, perhaps due
to banks’ limited ability to sell the house in case of default on mortgage payments.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that the associated legal proceedings may take as long as 10
years. Banks therefore typically require a down payment of 40-50 percent of the price of
the house. In the Netherlands, the mortgage market is well-developed with a wide variety
of loan options available. Many mortgage products are tied to life insurances, largely to
take maximal advantage of the tax deductibility of mortgage interest. In principle, there
are no down payment requirements. To cover the transaction costs of buying a house,
mortgages of up to 110 percent of the transaction price are available and common. In
1998, per capita mortgage debt in the United States ($15,421) and the Netherlands
(€14,167) were almost identical and about ten times as large as in Italy (€1,415) (De
Nederlandsche Bank 2001; Federal Reserve 2001).
The three countries may also face different transaction costs for the purchase and sale of
stocks. An informal Internet search in March 2002 revealed roughly comparable fees for
unassisted stock transactions via online brokers. In the United States, E-Trade
(us.etrade.com) charges $14.95-19.95 per transaction and Charles Schwab
(www.schwab.com) $29.95 for up to 1,000 shares. In the Netherlands, Robeco
(www.robecodirect.nl) charges 0.3-0.4 percent of the total transaction, often with a €15
minimum. In Italy, Twicetrade (www.twicetrade.it) charges €12 plus the lower of €0.019
per share and €19. The differences are not large. However, they reflect current online
trades only. Actual average commissions during our analysis period (mid to late 1990s),
when online banking was far less developed, are likely much higher. We do not have
comparable information on trends in transaction costs.

16

3.5.

Exposure to Financial Risks Before and After Retirement

We now turn to financial risks before and after retirement. Before retirement, the main
source of financial risk is earnings uncertainty. Casual observation would suggest that in
the U.S., earnings uncertainty is considerably larger than in Italy or the Netherlands.
Social insurance programs (unemployment, sickness, disability) in the two European
countries are generally more generous than in the U.S., and employment protection laws
make it relatively hard to fire employees in Italy and the Netherlands. An interesting
piece of direct evidence on earnings uncertainty comes from a common question asked in
household surveys in the three countries. The question asks respondents directly for the
amount of income uncertainty they face. Guiso, Jappelli and Pistaferri (1999) analyzed
the coefficient of variation of income uncertainty for the U.S., the Netherlands, and Italy.
They found that income uncertainty across respondents had about the same distribution in
Italy and the Netherlands. By contrast, U.S. respondents reported much more income
uncertainty than the respondents in the two European countries.
Loss of earnings due to disability is another important financial risk before retirement. In
all three countries, workers may count on long-term disability insurance in case of
disability. Generally, public disability insurance schemes are more generous in Italy and
the Netherlands than in the United States. In many cases, workers are covered by private
disability insurance in all three countries.
After retirement, the main source of financial risk is health-related. Americans face
greater risks of large out-of-pocket medical expenses than their Dutch and Italian
counterparts. In the Netherlands, virtually all elderly are covered by comprehensive
health insurance with negligible out-of-pocket expenses. In Italy, the public health
system grants essentially free assistance to the entire population in case of illness.
However, only in-patient assistance is provided, implying substantial out-of-pocket
expenses for the elderly in case of a serious illness that requires little hospital care. In the
United States, the elderly may face serious out-of-pocket medical expenses, depending on
their insurance coverage. Elderly with low income and financial assets are typically
eligible for Medicaid, which offers fairly comprehensive insurance, including for
deductibles. The risks are also limited for elderly that are covered by both private health
insurance and Medicare, a public health insurance program for the elderly and disabled.
However, American elderly who rely only on Medicare face substantial risks of large outof-pocket expenses. Medicare consists of two components. Coverage for Part A is
almost universal; it covers in-patient expenses in hospitals and skilled nursing facilities.
Most elderly also have supplemental (Part B) coverage, purchased at subsidized rates.
Medicare requires co-payments that can be substantial, especially in the case of long
hospital stays.

17

4.

Data

Our analysis is based on microdata on individuals age 50 and older from each country.
For the United States, we use the Health and Retirement Study (HRS); for Italy, the
Survey of Household Income and Wealth (SHIW); and for the Netherlands, the
SocioEconomic Panel (SEP). We briefly describe each survey.
For the United States, we use the HRS, including all its cohorts. The HRS is a national
longitudinal sample of households with at least one person born in 1931-1941 (51-61
years old at the 1992 baseline) or 1923 or before, i.e., with at least one person aged 70 or
over in 1993. The 1998 interview added the 1924-30 and 1942-47 birth cohorts, so that
the most recent data cover all individuals over age 50. We use the 1998 data and rely on
other waves (1992-2000) where longitudinal information is needed. The principal
objective of the HRS is to monitor economic transitions in work, income, wealth, and
changes in health status. The first wave of data was collected in 1992 (1993 for the pre1923 birth cohort), with follow-ups fielded at approximately two-year intervals. Blacks,
Hispanics, and Florida residents were over sampled at a rate of two to one. The 1998
HRS contained 21,351 respondents: 8,949 men and 12,402 women.
The main wealth data for Italy is the Survey of Household Income and Wealth (SHIW),
collected by the Banca d’Italia, Italy’s central bank. Its main purpose is to collect
detailed data on demographics, household consumption, income, and balance sheets.
This survey is representative of the Italian population and has been fielded biannually
since 1984. Financial wealth data have only been publicly available since 1989.
Beginning in 1989, some but not all of the households were re-interviewed in subsequent
panels. The panel component has increased over time—in 1989, 29 percent of the
households were re-interviewed and by 1995, 45 percent were re-interviewed. The
sample size is about 8,500 households. The SHIW contains questions on detailed asset
and debt categories.
For the Netherlands, we rely on the SocioEconomic Panel (SEP), a representative panel
survey conducted by Statistics Netherlands. The SEP covers about 5,000 households and
is representative of the non-institutionalized Dutch population. It contains detailed
information about a number of household demographic characteristics and collects data
on household income and wealth. The SEP has been collected annually since 1984. It is
a panel data set. Since 1987, the SEP contains a wealth module with fairly detailed
questions on asset and debt categories. These categories have varied somewhat during
the course of the panel. Because of problems collecting the data, no asset and debt
information has been collected on the self-employed since 1990. In 1997, the SEP
contained 8,904 respondents: 4,385 men and 4,519 women.

18

5.

Method and Hypotheses

The aim of this paper is to exploit institutional variation across countries to shed light on
the effect of different policies on the wealth accumulation and portfolio choices of
households near or in retirement. Since, at this stage, we are only considering three
countries, we have in a sense only three data points to generalize from. Thus, if we were
to take a completely a-theoretical approach we would have very few degrees of freedom
to establish any empirical regularity with reasonable confidence. We therefore take a
different approach. Drawing on our review of the literature and the description of
institutional differences across countries we formulate a number of stylized predictions,
which are next confronted with the data at hand. The more these predictions are
corroborated by the microdata, the more confident we can be that the policies in the
different countries help explain the differences in wealth accumulation and portfolio
composition that we observe.
An important caveat in our analysis will be that we generally assume that policies are
exogenous. Thus, for example, we exclude the possibility that social security benefits are
generous because citizens of a country have an innate tendency to save too little for
retirement.
We briefly characterize a number of stylized facts that we expect to hold in the microdata
across the three countries as a result of their institutional differences and the theoretical
framework. We formulate our “predictions” as rather informal hypotheses, with
generally a ceteris paribus clause to account for other counteracting institutional effects.
Hypothesis 1: The displacement effects of retirement benefits
A straightforward implication of the LCH is that more generous retirement benefits will
induce less saving for retirement. We will therefore consider replacement rates at
retirement in the three countries and predict that the country with the lowest replacement
rate will be the country with the highest saving rate, ceteris paribus. Based on the
discussion in Sections 3.1 and 0 we expect retirement savings to be most prominent in the
U.S. and least prominent in the Netherlands, at least at the median.
Hypothesis 2: The effect of earnings and consumption uncertainty
Saving for precautionary reasons should be most prominent in a country with the highest
earnings uncertainty. We will invoke subjective information on earnings uncertainty to
support the assumption that earnings uncertainty is highest in the U.S. and hence that we
would expect to have the highest level of precautionary saving in the U.S., again under
ceteris paribus conditions. In addition to earnings uncertainty, consumption uncertainty
may be important as well. A prime example of consumption uncertainty would be the
possibility of unforeseen large out-of-pocket medical expenses. It appears that this kind
of consumption risk is considerably larger in the U.S. than in Europe. Hence, even after
retirement, when earnings uncertainty presumably does not play a role anymore, we

19

would still expect precautionary motives to lead to a stronger desire to hold bequeathable
wealth in the U.S. than in Italy or the Netherlands.
Hypothesis 3: The role of capital market imperfections
In the basic, stripped down, version of the LCH, consumers may be borrowing to finance
consumption at young age and enter middle age with negative wealth. Only after
earnings exceed optimal lifetime consumption, will saving become positive. Clearly such
a pattern will not be observed if capital market imperfections prevent substantial
borrowing at young ages. A point in case is the possibility to obtain home mortgages.
As observed in Section 3.4, the typical minimum down payment requirement in the U.S.
is 10-20 percent. In Italy the minimum down payment is on the order of 40-50 percent.
In the Netherlands one can buy a house with a negative down payment up to 10 percent
(i.e., one can borrow 110 percent of the market value of the house). Differences in
capital market structure in the three countries thus predict that Italy should have the
highest saving rate and the Netherlands the lowest. In addition, when considering net
household wealth, Italy should be the country where net wealth, as a percentage of gross
wealth, is highest.
Hypothesis 4: Portfolio composition
The preceding hypotheses imply higher levels of private wealth in Italy and the U.S. upon
retirement than in the Netherlands. Our review of the literature then suggests that stock
ownership in Italy and the U.S. should be higher than in the Netherlands. On the other
hand, the less well-developed capital market in Italy may reduce stock ownership in Italy.
Similarly, the existence of more earnings and consumption uncertainty (e.g., medical
expenses) in the U.S. may depress stock ownership in favor of more secure assets. We
hypothesize that stock ownership in the Netherlands will be the lowest among the three
countries, because of the lowest level of private wealth. In the U.S., the combination of a
well-developed capital market and a high level of private wealth for retirement and
precautionary purposes should induce a relatively high level of stock ownership.

6.

Empirical Analysis

We begin by presenting a number of relevant descriptive statistics for the three countries.
We then discuss the evidence in favor of (or against) the hypotheses we have formulated
above. Most of the analyses are in simple tabular form, with sometimes an excursion to
multivariate analyses.
6.1.

Descriptive Statistics

For Italy and the Netherlands, we restrict our analysis to households with a head over age
50. For the United States, we consider the entire 1998 HRS, representative of the
population age 51 and older. Table 5 presents data for 1998 for the United States and
Italy and 1997 for The Netherlands. The table indicates that the age distributions in the
three countries are very similar, with samples roughly equally split between heads of

20

household under and over age 65. Italian and Dutch respondents are somewhat more
likely to be married than American respondents. Based on the educational distributions
reported in Table 5, U.S. respondents appear to be somewhat better educated than their
Italian and Dutch counterparts. The comparison should be interpreted with caution,
though, because the schooling systems differ greatly across the three countries.
Table 5. Demographics and Income
(Unit of observation: Household)
Number of households
Age household head
50-59
60-64
65+
Household Structure
Couple
Single male
Single female
Education household head*
Elementary
Some high school
High school
Some college
HH non-capital income
Mean
Median

U.S.
14,147

Italy

Netherlands
1,487
4,200

35.1
13.7
51.2

38.0
16.8
45.2

33.0
15.4
51.6

53.4
11.1
35.5

67.4
8.8
23.8

60.8
10.6
28.7

33.0a
29.2
37.8

51.8
24.8
16.5
7.0

30.6
18.4b
32.2c
18.8d

$26,500
$18,800

€24,000
€20,400

€24,600
€21,300

Note: Definitions of education categories vary:
a
c
less than high school;
middle vocational;
b
d
lower vocational/junior high school;
at least high school

The mean non-capital after-tax household income in the U.S. was higher than in Italy and
the Netherlands, whereas median income was lower.16 The pattern reversal reflects a
more equal income distribution in Italy and the Netherlands compared to the United
States.
Our hypotheses are couched in terms of accumulated savings and allocation into risky
assets. Given the information in the microdata, we define risky assets as stock and bond
holdings. An intuitive measure of risky asset allocation is the ratio of risky assets to net
worth. Unfortunately, non-negligible subsamples report zero or negative net worth, so
that the ratio of risky assets to net worth cannot be determined or is very difficult to
16

The American HRS collects gross income data, whereas the Italian SHIW and Dutch SEP ask for aftertax income. We estimated tax liabilities to convert the American income data to be net of taxes. Since the
state of residence and many financial details are unknown, we assume standard deductions and account for
federal taxation only. This includes federal income tax and Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA)
liabilities. Incomes after state income tax, where applicable, are therefore slightly lower than reported in
Table 5.

21

interpret. Instead, we define two related measures. Consider households’ balance sheets
in Figure 2.
Assets

Liabilities

Safe (cash, savings accounts) ......... S
Risky (stocks, bonds) .....................R
Gross housing................................. H

Net worth ........................NW
Debts ...................................D
(mortgage and other)

(housing equity + mortgage debt)

Other............................................... O
Gross wealth................................GW

Gross wealth....................GW

Figure 2. Stylized Household Balance Sheet
We decompose the ratio of risky assets to net worth as follows:

R
R GW
R
=
i
=
NW GW NW GW

NW
= Exposure Solvency
GW

Very few respondents report having no gross wealth at all. Both “exposure,” defined as
the ratio of risky assets to gross wealth, and “solvency,” defined as the ratio of net worth
to gross wealth, are therefore straightforward to construct.
Table 6 characterizes the size and composition of bequeathable household wealth in the
three samples. The American and Italian figures are based on 1998 HRS and SHIW, the
Dutch on the 1997 SEP. As predicted, the Netherlands has by far the lowest level of
private household wealth, both in the mean and in the median. Partly this reflects the
lower home ownership rate in the Netherlands for these older cohorts. Stock or bond
ownership is highest in the U.S. (33 percent) and lowest in the Netherlands (19 percent).
Following Figure 2, we aggregated assets in four broad categories: (1) Safe assets (saving
and checking accounts, cash); (2) risky assets (stocks and bonds); (3) housing and other
real estate; (4) other. Since the Dutch sample excludes self-employed, we have excluded
business equity in all countries. U.S. households clearly hold the most risky assets, both
in absolute value and as a fraction of gross wealth. Dutch households hold more of their
gross wealth in safe assets than the Americans and Italians. Again, this partly reflects the
lower home ownership rate in the Netherlands for this age group. In both the U.S. and
the Netherlands, the share of risky assets increased between 1992 and 1997/8 (not
shown). The average solvency ratios are large and negative in the United States and
Italy, because the ratios are dominated by households with negative net worth that is
large relative to their reported gross wealth.

22

Table 6. Assets and Asset Allocation
(Unit of observation: household)
(Monetary values in $ for the U.S. and in € for Italy and the Netherlands)

Gross wealth
Net worth
Owns house (%)
Owns stocks/bonds (%)
Exposure (R/GW)
Solvency (NW/GW)
Housing equity (if owner)
Stocks/bonds (if owner)
Portfolio shares (%)
Safe (S/GW)
Risky (R/GW)
House (H/GW)
Other (O/GW)
6.2.

mean
median
mean
median
mean
median
mean
median
mean
median
mean
median
mean
median
mean
median

U.S.
276,200
130,000
253,400
105,000
76.8
100
33.0
0
0.079
0
-51.8
1
128,200
95,000
169,500
45,000

Italy
168,100
96,500
166,200
95,000
71.8
100
26.8
0
0.051
0
-18.3
1
121,800
100,000
54,483
20,000

20.4
7.9
45.6
26.0

29.4
5.1
53.2
12.3

mean
mean
mean
mean

Netherlands
95,300
45,200
79,300
33,500
46.5
0
18.7
0
0.039
0
0.62
1
111,600
95,800
45,700
16,900
43.4
3.9
38.6
14.0

Empirical Evidence for the Hypotheses

Hypothesis 1: The displacement effects of retirement benefits
Although we have provided some evidence that replacement rates at retirement are lowest
in the U.S. and highest in the Netherlands, it is useful to exploit our microdata to shed
further light on this. The replacement rates given in Section 3.2 above were based on
hypothetical (median) individuals in the three different countries, and on “plausible”
institutional parameters. Here we take a different approach. We exploit the longitudinal
nature of the data to consider incomes in the waves before and after a respondent first
reports being retired to gauge the actual change in income experienced by those who
retire. For example, if someone first reports being retired in 1994, we consider incomes
as reported in 1993 and 1995. (In the American HRS and Italian SHIW data, the waves
are two years apart, except three years for the 1995-8 SHIW.) This approach avoids
contamination from part-year employment. We consider household non-capital income
before and after individual retirement. This assumes resource sharing within a
household, so that for instance a transfer of resources by other household members
compensates for a drop in the new retiree’s income. This assumption acknowledges the

23

joint nature of retirement decisions (e.g., Zweimüller and Winter-Ebmer, 1996; Gustman
and Steinmeier, 1994; Maestas, 2001). Finally, we consider after-tax income,17 expressed
in constant 1998 dollars.
The top panel of Table 7 presents empirical after-tax replacement rates for the United
States based on the 1992-2000 HRS. The table compares incomes in the wave before
retirement and the wave after retirement,18 i.e., at t-2 and t+2. Post-retirement income is
substantially lower than pre-retirement income, both in the mean and the median.19 The
average replacement rate is well above unity, but this is driven by a small number of
respondents with particularly low pre-retirement income. The median replacement rate is
75.7 percent. There is large variation: at the 10th percentile, income dropped by threequarters after retirement, whereas it increased by three-quarters in real terms at the 90th
percentile.
To put these findings in perspective, compare the income changes between the year
before retirement and the year after retirement with income changes of individuals who
did not retire (i.e., who worked in years t-2, t, t+2, or who were retired in all three
waves). We observe that the latter individuals also experienced a decline in real income,
at least at the median. The decline in income is far smaller at the median (2.2 percent)
than the median decline among newly retired individuals (24.3 percent).
The replacement rate improves if we assume that individuals who retire can annuitize
their wealth and consume the annuity. Adding the annuity value of bequeathable wealth
to post-retirement income, possible consumption levels exceed pre-retirement income for
most households. We define the generalized replacement rate as the sum of postretirement income and annuity value of private wealth divided by pre-retirement income.
At the median, the generalized replacement rate is above one (111.4 percent). Even at the
10th percentile, post-retirement consumption may be sustained at almost half the level of
pre-retirement income.
The bottom part of Table 7 presents a similar analysis for household net worth around
retirement and compares changes to wealth changes of households in which no retirement
takes place. Most households experience wealth growth, but wealth grows somewhat
faster for households who do not have a recently retired member. At the median, the
increase is 2.2 percent among households that transitioned through retirement and 6.6
percent among those who did not.

17

See footnote 16 (page 13).
For the United States and Italy, retirement is defined based on respondents’ own report of (complete)
retirement status. For the Netherlands, retirement is defined as receiving some form of income transfer
(pension, disability, or unemployment benefits), being over 50 years old, and not doing any work for pay.
19
In order to exploit the longitudinal feature of the HRS, the sample consists of original HRS respondents,
i.e., those born in 1931-41 and their spouses. The sample is thus younger than the sample used in Table 5,
which included all HRS cohorts. This explains why mean and median income levels in Table 7 exceed
those in Table 5.
18

24

Table 7. Empirical replacement rates, wealth accumulation, and income growth in
the United States

Obs.
Newly retired
Pre-retirement HH noncapital income
Post-retirement income
Post-retirement income +
annuity value of wealth
Replacement rate (%)
Generalized repl. ratea
Not newly retired
Non-capital HH inc. t-2
Non-capital HH inc. t+2
Income ratio (t+2)/(t-2) (%)
Newly retired
Pre-retirement HH net worth
Post-retirement HH net worth
Wealth growth (%)
Not newly retired
Net worth t-2
Net worth t+2
Wealth growth (%)
a

Mean

10th
Percentile

Median

90th
Percentile

1,953
1,797

36,600
26,100

6,900
6,500

30,600
21,200

69,500
47,300

1,797
1,749
1,749

44,100
147.1
261.0

9,000
28.7
47.6

34,100
75.7
111.4

83,100
175.2
271.6

29,442
28,894
19,463

36,800
35,900
213.1

7,000
6,300
33.5

30,000
29,500
97.8

69,200
68,700
179.6

1,982
1,815
1,746

215,200
254,900
41.9

1,100
1,000
-85.1

115,600
124,700
2.2

491,600
594,500
169.0

29,735
29,204
19,936

246,400
267,700
114.3

2,500
3,200
-83.2

113,200
119,900
6.6

552,200
588,000
192.8

Post-retirement non-capital household income + annuity value of wealth divided by pre-retirement noncapital household income. The annuity value assumes a 3 percent interest rate.

Similar to Table 7, Table 8 documents income replacement rates, wealth accumulation,
and income growth in Italy, based on 1987-98 data. Table 7 was in 1998 dollars; Table 8
in 1998 euros. As in the United States, real household non-capital income tends to drop
after retirement. However, the declines are milder. At the median, post-retirement
Italian household incomes replace 85.9 percent of pre-retirement income, about ten
percentage points above the median U.S. replacement rate. While there is substantial
variation, the differences are smaller than in the U.S. For example, at the 10th and 90th
percentile, post-retirement incomes are about 50 percent below and above their preretirement levels, compared to three-quarter differences in the United States. At the
median, real incomes among households that did not transition through a retirement
remained almost exactly constant. Naturally, the replacement rates increase when
including the annuity value of net worth. The median generalized replacement rate for
new retirees in Italy is 124.5 percent, again greater than in the United States (111.4
percent).
Italian households enjoyed greater wealth gains than American households during the
mid and late 1990s. At the median, net worth among households with a new retiree
increased by 24 percent. This gain exceeds the gain among households that did not

25

experience a retirement (14.5 percent), probably because of severance payments (see
above).
Table 8. Empirical replacement rates, wealth accumulation, and income growth in
Italy

Obs.
Newly retired
Pre-retirement HH noncapital income
Post-retirement income
Post-retirement income +
annuity value of wealth
Replacement rate (%)
Generalized repl. ratea
Not newly retired
Non-capital HH inc. t-2
Non-capital HH inc. t+2
Income ratio (t+2)/(t-2) (%)
Newly retired
Pre-retirement HH net worth
Post-retirement HH net worth
Wealth growth (%)
Not newly retired
Net worth t-2
Net worth t+2
Wealth growth (%)
a

Mean

10th
Percentile

Median

90th
Percentile

402
402

33,800
30,300

15,300
11,600

30,150
26,150

55,300
51,800

402
402
402

46,100
97.3
143.7

14,000
49.1
65.5

39,100
85.9
124.5

79,500
147.5
231.9

5,682
5,682
5,673

25,300
26,000
112.0

9,800
9,600
57.9

21,500
21,400
100.8

45,100
46,300
170.0

402
402
398

187,200
225,000
320.8

7,700
11,100
-68.4

122,650
153,650
24.0

435,200
515,400
350.6

5,682
5,682
5,595

154,600
189,900
305.2

3,800
4,400
-73.3

87,900
110,000
14.5

350,600
431,500
373.2

Post-retirement non-capital household income + annuity value of wealth divided by pre-retirement noncapital household income. The annuity value assumes a 3 percent interest rate.

Table 9 shows the same set of statistics for the Netherlands, based on 1984-97 income
reports and 1987-97 wealth data. Income and wealth values are in 1998 euros. Dutch
replacement rates generally exceed those of both the United States and Italy. At the
median, fully 102.3 percent of real pre-retirement income is replaced. The spread is
narrower than in the other two countries. At the 10th and 90th percentile, only about onethird of pre-retirement income is lost or gained, compared to one-half in Italy and threequarters in the United States. Dutch households without a new retiree also fared well—at
the median, their real household non-capital income rose by 8.1 percent. The spread is
again small, much smaller than in the United States and Italy. (This is in part explained
by the fact that the Dutch income and wealth figures refer to survey waves that are only
two years apart; the Dutch SEP survey is conducted annually, whereas American HRS
and Italian SHIW waves are generally two years apart.) Adding in the annuity value of
net worth increases the replacement rates, though not by very much. This reflects the
small average wealth holdings among Dutch households.

26

In the Netherlands, households with a newly retired member enjoyed an increase of 4.5
percent in net worth, far lower than in Italy but somewhat higher than in the United
States. The increase among households without a retiring member was one-eighth in two
years time, more than the comparable American and Italian figures.
Table 9. Empirical replacement rates, wealth accumulation, and income growth in
the Netherlands

Newly retired
Pre-retirement HH noncapital income
Post-retirement income
Post-retirement income +
annuity value of wealth
Replacement rate (%)
Generalized repl. ratea
Not newly retired
Non-capital HH inc. t-1
Non-capital HH inc. t+1
Income ratio (t+1)/(t-1) (%)
Newly retired
Pre-retirement HH net worth
Post-retirement HH net worth
Wealth growth (%)
Not newly retired
Net worth t-1
Net worth t+1
Wealth growth (%)
a

Obs.

Mean

10th
Percentile

Median

90th
Percentile

772
772

22,200
21,900

10,500
10,900

18,800
18,600

38,600
37,400

772
772
772

26,900
113.9
137.1

12,100
68.0
80.8

22,900
102.3
114.5

49,700
138.3
187.2

52,333
52,333
52,333

27,300
29,600
124.3

12,600
13,000
81.8

25,900
28,100
108.1

43,200
47,000
138.9

802
802
800

63,400
67,000
-82.0

600
800
-61.2

23,400
23,000
4.5

172,600
175,400
128.3

55,995
55,995
55,995

47,900
57,100
118.2

100
400
-79.7

23,300
31,100
12.5

121,500
141,100
164.2

Post-retirement non-capital household income + annuity value of wealth divided by pre-retirement noncapital household income. The annuity value assumes a 3 percent interest rate.

In summary, replacement rates are lowest in the United States and highest in the
Netherlands, with a gap at the median of 26.6 percentage points. However, American
households accumulate far more private savings than their Dutch counterparts. The
replacement rate gap narrows to just 3.1 percentage points when we include the annuity
value of net worth in the calculations. This is fully consistent with a life cycle model in
which retirement saving is crowded out by institutional old age pension provisions in the
Netherlands, but much less so in the U.S.
Hypothesis 2: The effect of earnings and consumption uncertainty

Section 3.5 argued that Americans face greater financial risks, both before and after
retirement. A problem in a cross-country context with the data at hand is that we do not
have individual information on the amount of uncertainty faced by the individuals in our

27

sample. Since there are at least two different strong incentives for households in the U.S.
to accumulate more private wealth than in Italy or the Netherlands (precaution and to
provide for retirement), it is probably impossible to disentangle the relative influence of
the two different incentives. We have argued above that in any case retirement
provisions provide a powerful explanation for the difference in wealth accumulation
between the U.S. and the Netherlands. Providing further insight into the patterns of
wealth accumulation in Italy, the Netherlands, and the U.S., Table 10 presents results of a
regression of household net worth on a number of household characteristics.
Since both household income and net worth have a skewed distribution, we have applied
a log-like transformation to these variables. A direct logarithmic transformation is not
possible, since both variables can take on negative values. Hence we adopted the inverse
hyperbolic sine: h ( x ) = log

(

)

x 2 + 1 + x . For values of x not too close to zero, h(x) is

approximately equal to log ( 2x ) for positive x and − log ( 2x ) for negative x. The
function h(x) is anti-symmetric: h ( x ) = − h ( − x ) . The drawback of the inverse
hyperbolic sine in comparison to the logarithm is that it is not invariant to a change of
units. The regressions reported involve both quantities measured in U.S. dollars and
quantities measured in euros. If we were to use logs of the monetary variables, the
currency differences would simply be absorbed in the country-specific intercepts. For the
inverse hyperbolic sine, that is only approximately true.20
Table 10 presents two regressions. The first regression involves full interactions of all
variables with country dummies, which is equivalent with having separate equations for
each country. It turned out that the age functions of Italy and the Netherlands are quite
similar, an impression that was confirmed by a statistical test. Hence, the regression was
repeated with identical age functions for the Netherlands and Italy. We specified the
effect of age on wealth accumulation as a fifth degree polynomial. Rather than
presenting the estimated coefficients of the polynomials, we sketch the estimated age
functions in Figure 3.
Netherlands
Italy

U.S.

Netherlands/Italy

U.S.

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

0

-1

-1
50

60

70
HH head age

separate age functions per country

80

90

50

60

70
HH head age

80

90

age functions of It and NL equal

Figure 3. Estimated age functions in the net worth regressions

20

We measure net worth in dollars and euros, so that the outcome is far from zero for most respondents
with nonzero net worth. At zero, there is no scale issue.

28

Table 10. Cross country regressions for net worth

Dependent variables:
Inverse hyperbolic sine h(.) of household net worth
Separate age IT/NL same
functions
age function
Dummy SEP1992
541.482
4.479
(0.74)
(6.26)**
Dummy SEP1997
541.655
4.673
(0.74)
(6.49)**
Dummy HRS1992
622.872
-41.788
(0.86)
(0.56)
Dummy HRS1998
622.080
-42.579
(0.85)
(0.57)
h(non-cap hh inc.) US
0.308
0.308
(17.61)**
(17.61)**
h(non-cap hh inc.) IT
0.668
0.668
(11.80)**
(11.81)**
h(non-cap hh inc.) NL
0.031
0.024
(0.72)
(0.56)
Dummy retired, US
-0.697
-0.697
(11.52)**
(11.52)**
Dummy retired, IT
0.907
0.933
(5.21)**
(5.57)**
Dummy retired, NL
0.530
0.648
(2.05)*
(3.15)**
High school, US
1.073
1.073
(8.68)**
(8.68)**
More than H.S., US
1.682
1.682
(18.07)**
(18.06)**
Some high school, IT
0.900
0.916
(4.73)**
(4.86)**
High school, IT
1.529
1.550
(6.89)**
(7.03)**
Some college, IT
2.016
2.017
(6.47)**
(6.48)**
Lower voc./jr. high, NL
1.034
1.009
(4.02)**
(3.94)**
Middle vocational, NL
2.044
1.989
(8.92)**
(8.82)**
Some college, NL
2.829
2.788
(10.42)**
(10.41)**
Observations
21,517
21,517
R-squared
0.08
0.08
Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses;
Significance: * = 5%; ** = 1%

29

Figure 3 shows that after age 50, American households keep accumulating wealth at a
brisk pace, whereas the age profile in the Netherlands and Italy is approximately flat or
slightly downward sloping. This would be consistent with the prevalence of a
precautionary motive to guard against high out-of-pocket medical costs in the U.S. as
compared to Italy and the Netherlands. Here, and repeatedly in subsequent analyses
below, we have to offer the caveat that we are not controlling for cohort effects, so that
the age effects we observe may be (and probably are) contaminated by cohort effects.
Disentangling age and cohort effects is beyond the scope of the current study.
Since the definitions of education levels differ substantially across the three countries, all
education dummies are country-specific. The lowest education category is always the
reference category. Net worth increases monotonically with education in all three
countries.
The effect of being retired differs substantially across the three countries, with a negative
effect in the U.S. and positive effects in the Netherlands and Italy. We should be
somewhat careful in interpreting these results, as retirement status is correlated with age.
In particular, the negative effect of being retired on net worth in the U.S should be
considered jointly with the strong positive age effect on net worth, shown in Figure 3.
More importantly, retirement may be partly endogenous in the sense that retirement is
more likely for individuals with more wealth. Thus the positive sign of the retirement
dummy in Italy and the Netherlands may simply reflect that people with more wealth are
more likely to retire. With this interpretation, the sign of the retirement dummy in the
U.S. is harder to understand.
Household income has a positive influence on capital accumulation. However, the
strength of the effect varies substantially across the three countries. In the Netherlands
the effect of income is very small and not statistically significant. In Italy and the U.S. it
is much bigger and very significant. The discussion of the next hypothesis interprets this
pattern.
Hypothesis 3: The role of capital market imperfections
The implications of the differences in capital markets in the U.S., the Netherlands, and
Italy are that ceteris paribus, Italy should have the highest saving rate and the
Netherlands the lowest (Section 6). In addition, when considering net household wealth
Italy should be the country where net wealth, as a percentage of gross wealth, should be
highest. The former implication is hard to test directly, because of other factors
influencing saving rates, but the latter implication is easy to verify.

Table 6 shows that median solvency (net worth divided by gross wealth) is equal to one
in all three countries. The ratios of median net worth and median gross wealth in Table 6
are 0.81 in the U.S., 0.98 in Italy, and 0.74 in the Netherlands. Thus, for a given level of
net worth Italian households borrow considerably less money than households in the U.S.
and the Netherlands. The weaker borrowing constraints in the latter countries induce
lower private capital accumulation.

30

Somewhat tentatively, we interpret the high coefficient of non-capital income in the
wealth regressions in Table 10 for Italy as another indication of the relevance of
borrowing constraints. Conceivably, the harder it is to borrow money to invest in
profitable undertakings (e.g., real estate or stocks), the more important income becomes
as a source of capital for investment. Thus ceteris paribus the connection between
income and wealth accumulation would be stronger in Italy than in the U.S. or the
Netherlands.
Hypothesis 4: Portfolio composition
In Section 5, we hypothesized that stock ownership in the Netherlands will be the lowest
among the three countries, because of the lowest level of private wealth. In the U.S., the
combination of a well-developed capital market and a high level of private wealth for
retirement purposes should induce a relatively high level of stock ownership. Italy
should be in between, because it has a relatively high level of private wealth but a lessdeveloped capital market. To shed light on the plausibility of these hypotheses, Table 11
presents results from cross-country regressions of the share of risky assets (stocks and
bonds) in gross wealth. The approach is similar to the approach in Table 10. We start
with separate analyses by country and then simplify the model by imposing equality of
parameters allowed by the data. Since shares are between zero and one by construction,
we use a two-limit Tobit model to estimate the equation, with a lower limit equal to zero
and an upper limit equal to one.

The first column presents estimates of the unrestricted equations. A test for equality of
the age functions across countries is far from rejection and hence the second column
imposes equal age functions. A test of equality of the income coefficients across the
three countries is almost rejected at the 5 percent level (F(2,21419)=2.83, p=.0590).
Similarly, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the net worth coefficients of the U.S. and
Italy are equal (F(1, 21419)=2.73, p=.0984) at the 5 percent level. The last column
presents estimation results with these equalities imposed. Figure 4 sketches the estimated
age function, which turns out to be fairly flat in the age range where most of the data
points are.

common age function risky asset

.01

0

-.01

-.02
50

60

70
HH head age

80

90

Figure 4. A common age function to explain risky asset share across the three
countries

31

Table 11. The share of risky assets across countries
Dependent variables: share of risky assets in gross wealth
(1)
(2)
(3)
Dummy HRS1992
-43.591
0.205
0.062
(0.63)
(2.45)*
(4.19)**
Dummy HRS1998
-43.554
0.244
0.101
(0.63)
(2.92)**
(6.47)**
Dummy SEP1992
-29.098
-0.437
-0.643
(0.42)
(3.60)**
(7.54)**
Dummy SEP1997
-29.077
-0.415
-0.631
(0.42)
(3.39)**
(7.28)**
h(non-cap inc.) US
0.015
0.015
(9.17)**
(9.24)**
h(non-cap inc.) IT
0.018
0.019
(2.83)**
(2.91)**
h(non-cap inc.) NL
0.004
0.004
(1.00)
(0.96)
h(net worth) US
0.052
0.052
(32.30)**
(32.36)**
h(net worth) IT
0.060
0.061
(12.01)**
(12.14)**
h(net worth) NL
0.109
0.109
0.105
(15.32)**
(15.30)**
(14.67)**
Dummy retired, US
-0.000
0.001
0.001
(0.00)
(0.17)
(0.17)
Dummy retired, IT
0.075
0.067
0.068
(4.89)**
(4.87)**
(4.95)**
Dummy retired, NL
0.031
0.047
0.050
(1.10)
(2.39)*
(2.50)*
High school, US
-0.005
-0.006
-0.006
(0.43)
(0.52)
(0.54)
More than H.S., US
0.075
0.074
0.074
(9.45)**
(9.34)**
(9.29)**
Some H.S., IT
0.085
0.089
0.093
(5.14)**
(5.49)**
(5.80)**
High school, IT
0.143
0.146
0.155
(7.83)**
(8.09)**
(8.91)**
Some college, IT
0.154
0.156
0.169
(6.31)**
(6.38)**
(7.35)**
L.voc./j.high, NL
-0.011
-0.015
0.003
(0.33)
(0.46)
(0.10)
Middle voc., NL
0.088
0.084
0.094
(3.38)**
(3.22)**
(3.55)**
Some college, NL
0.170
0.169
0.182
(6.09)**
(6.10)**
(6.49)**
h(non-cap income)
0.015
(9.67)**
h(net worth)
0.053
(34.39)**
Observations
21447
21445
21344
Pseudo R-squared
.21
.21
.21
Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses;
Significance: * = 5%; ** = 1%

32

For convenience, we restrict a discussion of Table 11 to the last column. Household
income has a relatively small but significant direct influence on the share of risky assets
held. Its influence is positive, which would be consistent with a model where income can
be used to buffer risks incurred by investing in the risky assets (i.e., having a higher noncapital income reduces background risk in some informal sense). Of course, there is also
an indirect effect of income via its effect on total net worth, as discussed with respect to
Table 10 above. Net worth has a positive effect on the share of risky assets in all three
countries, as expected.
The share of risky assets in gross wealth increases with education in all countries (except
the difference between high school and less than high school in the U.S.; the difference
between these two education levels is not statistically significant). This can be
interpreted in at least two different ways: (1) owning stocks or bonds requires a certain
level of knowledge which is more likely to be present among the higher-educated; (2) a
higher education level reduces risks in the labor market and this reduction in background
risk makes an individual less risk-averse.
We note that the indicator for being retired is insignificant in the U.S and significantly
positive in both Italy and the Netherlands. A possible interpretation is that after
retirement income and consumption risks have essentially disappeared in Italy and the
Netherlands, whereas in the U.S. consumption risk associated with adverse health shocks
becomes more important. This risk reduction after retirement in Italy and the
Netherlands would allow households to take on more risk in the stock market.
It is tempting to interpret the country- and wave-specific dummies as propensities to hold
risky assets after controlling for the variables listed in Table 11. One should note
however, that in general the values of the dummies are sensitive to the scaling of the
monetary variables. If for instance, we switch from dollars and euros to thousands of
dollars and euros, then to a good approximation all monetary variables are reduced by
ln(1,000)=6.91. Since the monetary variables have different coefficients for different
countries such changes in monetary units affect country- and wave-specific dummies
differentially, without changing the underlying model. The only valid comparison in
Table 11 is between Italy and the U.S. in the last column, because we have restricted the
coefficients of net worth and household income to be equal. We notice that the dummies
for the U.S. are significantly positive, consistent with the notion that a more developed
capital market in the U.S. facilitates stock and bond ownership, controlling for education,
wealth, and demographics.

33

7.

Conclusion

The analysis in this paper is a first attempt at consistently exploiting institutional
variation across countries to improve our understanding of wealth accumulation and
portfolio choice of households at or near retirement. The number of countries considered
is limited, as is the amount of detail in the data that we have been able to use. The
stylized facts that we are able to glean from the microdata are certainly consistent with
the hypotheses that we formulated. In summary, their main implications are as follows:
•
•
•
•
•

Americans should save more for retirement than the Dutch or the Italians;
Americans should save more due to more exposure to uninsurable income and
consumption risk;
Italians should save more due to severe borrowing constraints in their country;
The Dutch should have relatively low stockholdings due to the low level of
private wealth;
Stock-ownership in the U.S. should be higher than in Italy because of more
developed capital markets in the United States.

While each of these implications is borne out by the data, it is in general not possible to
establish the relative magnitude of factors influencing wealth accumulation or portfolio
choice. For instance, both low replacement rates at retirement and higher consumption
and income risk in the U.S. imply that Americans should save more than Europeans.
Without further analysis, we cannot determine what the relative role of these factors is.
It is worthwhile to extend the analysis in two main directions. First, it is very desirable to
add countries to have more institutional variation that can be exploited. Second, the
current data can be analyzed more extensively and more information can be brought to
bear on the hypotheses formulated. In particular, one could exploit the longitudinal
nature of the data more, e.g., to disentangle age and cohort effects but also to exploit time
series variation in addition to cross-sectional and cross-country variation. This will also
permit addressing some endogeneity issues, like the timing of retirement.

34

References
Banca d’Italia (1999), Relazione Annuale, May 1999, Rome.
Banks, J., R. Blundell, and A. Brugiavini (2001), “Risk Pooling, Precautionary Saving
and Consumption Growth”, The Review of Economic Studies 68, 757-779.
Barsky, R.B., F.T. Juster, M.S. Kimball, and M.D. Shapiro (1997), “Preference
Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An experimental Approach in the Health
and Retirement Study,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 537-579.
Beltrametti, L. (1996), Il debito pensionistico in Italia, Bologna: Il Mulino.
Benartzi and Thaler (2001), “Naïve Diversification Strategies in Defined Contribution
Saving Plans”, American Economic Review 91, 79-98.
Bernheim B.D., J. Skinner, and S. Weinberg (2001), “What accounts for the Variation in
Retirement Wealth Among U.S. Households?,” American Economic Review 91,
832-857.
Bernheim, B.D. (1999), “Taxation and Saving”, forthcoming in: A.J. Auerbach and M.
Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, Elsevier Science Publishers.
Bertaut, Carol and Martha Starr-McCluer (2000), “Household Portfolios in the United
States.” Mimeo, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, April 2000.
Blöndal, S. and S. Scarpetta (1998), “The retirement decision in OECD countries. OECD
Economics Department Working Paper no. 202.
Board of OASI Trustees (2001). “The 2001 Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of
the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance Trust
Funds.” Washington, D.C., March 19, 2001.
Browning, M., and A. Lusardi (1996), “Household Saving: Micro Theories and Micro
Facts,” Journal of Economic Literature 34, 1797-1855.
Brugiavini, A. (1999), “Social Security and Retirement in Italy”, in: Gruber, J., and D.A.
Wise (eds.) Social Security and Retirement around the World, Chicago University
Press, 181-237.
Carroll, C.D. (1992), “The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic
Evidence,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 61-156.
Carroll, C.D. (1997), “Buffer Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income
Hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 3-55.
Carroll, C.D. (2001), “Portfolios of the Rich”, in: Guiso, L., M. Haliassos, and T. Jappelli
(eds.), Household Portfolios, MIT-Press, 389-429.
Copeland, Craig (2001), “IRA Assets Continue to Grow.” Employee Benefit Research
Institute, EBRI Notes Vol. 22 No. 1 (January 2001).
De Nederlandsche Bank (2000), Het Bancaire Hyptheekbedrijf Onder de Loep. De
Nederlandsche Bank, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Deaton, A. (1991), “Saving and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica 59, 1221-1248.

35

Department of Labor (2001), “Abstract of 1997 Form 5500 Annual Reports.” Private
Pension Plan Bulletin, Number 10, Winter 2001, U.S. Department of Labor,
Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Office of Policy and Research.
Dynan, K.E. (1993), “How Prudent are Consumers?”, Journal of Political Economy 101,
1104-1113.
Engen, E.M., W.G. Gale, and J.K. Scholz (1996), The Illusory Effects of Saving
Incentives on Saving”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 10, 113-138.
Federal Reserve (2001), Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States: Fourth Quarter
2000. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington DC 20551.
See http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/Z1.
Feldstein, M. (1974), “Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Aggregate Capital
Accumulation”, Journal of Political Economy 82, 905-926.
Franco, Daniele. 2000. “Italy: A Never-Ending Pension Reform.” Presented at the
NBER-Kiel Institute Conference, Berlin, March 20-21, 2000.
Gollier, C. (2001), The Economics of Risk and Time, Cambridge Mass: MIT Press.
Gollier, C., and J.W. Pratt (1996), “Risk Vulnerability and the Tempering Effect of
Background Risk,” Econometrica 64, 1109-1124.
Gruber, J., and D.A. Wise (eds.) (1999), Social Security and Retirement around the
World, Chicago University Press.
Guiso, L., and M. Paiella (2001), “Risk Aversion, Wealth and Background Risk”, CEPR
Discussion Paper 2728.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L Zingales (2000), “The Role of Social Capital in Financial
Development”, NBER Working Paper 7563.
Guiso, L., T. Jappelli, and D. Terlizzese (1992), “Earnings Uncertainty and Precautionary
Saving”, Journal of Monetary Economics 30, 307-337.
Guiso, L., T. Jappelli, and D. Terlizzese (1996), “Income Risk, Borrowing Constraints,
and Portfolio Choice,” American Economic Review 86, 158-172.
Guiso, L., T. Jappelli, and L. Pistaferri (1999), “What determines earnings and
employment uncertainty?,” CEPR Discussion Paper 2043.
Gustman, A.L., and T.L. Steinmeier (1994), “Retirement in a Family Context: A
Structural Model for Husbands and Wives”, NBER Working Paper 4629.
Gustman, A.L., and T.L. Steinmeier (1998), “Effects of Pensions on Savings: Analysis
with Data from the Health and Retirement Study,” NBER Working Paper 6681.
Gustman, A.L., and T.L. Steinmeier (1999), “What People Don’t Know about their
Pensions and Social Security: An Analysis using Linked Data from the Health and
Retirement Study,” Dartmouth College Working Paper 99-11.
Haliassos, M. and C.C. Bertaut (1995), “Why do so Few Hold Stocks?”, The Economic
Journal 105, 1110-1129.
Hochgürtel, S. (1998), Household Portfolio Choices, Ph.D. thesis, Tilburg University.
Hubbard, G.R., J. Skinner, S.P. Zeldes (1995), “Precautionary Saving and Social
Insurance”, Journal of Political Economy 103, 360-399.

36

Hubbard, G.R., J. Skinner, S.P. Zeldes (1994a), “The Importance of Precautionary
Motives in Explaining Individual and Aggregate Saving”, Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series in Public Policy 40, 59-125.
Hubbard, G.R., J. Skinner, S.P. Zeldes (1994b), “Expanding the Life-Cycle Model:
Precautionary Saving and Public Policy”, American Economic Review 84, 174-179.
Hurd, M.D. (2001), “Portfolio Holdings of the Elderly,” in: Guiso, L., M. Haliassos, and
T. Jappelli (eds.), Household Portfolios, MIT-Press, 431-472.
Hurd, M.D., L. Lillard, and C. Panis (1998) “An Analysis of the Choice to Cash Out
Pension Rights at Job Change or Retirement,” RAND DRU-1979-DOL.
Johnson, P. (1999), (ed.), Older Getting Wiser, IFS.
Kapteyn, A. and K. de Vos (1999), “Social Security and Retirement in The Netherlands”,
in: Gruber, J., and D.A. Wise (eds.) Social Security and Retirement around the
World, Chicago University Press, 269-303.
Kapteyn, A. and C. Panis (2002). “The Size and Composition of Wealth Holdings in the
United States, Italy, and the Netherlands.” RAND DRU-2767-DOL, March 2002.
Kimball, M.S. (1990), “Precautionary Saving in the Small and in the Large,”
Econometrica 58, 53-73.
Kimball, M.S. (1993), “Standard Risk Aversion”, Econometrica 61, 589-611.
King, M. A. and J.I. Leape (1998), “Wealth and Portfolio Composition: Theory and
Evidence”, Journal of Public Economics 69, 155-193.
Lusardi, A. (1997), “Precautionary Saving and Subjective Earnings Variance”,
Economics Letters 57, 319-326.
Maestas, N. (2001), "Labor, Love and Leisure: Complementarity and the Timing of
Retirement by Working Couples," mimeo, Department of Economics, UC
Berkeley.
Modigliani, F., and R. Brumberg (1954), “Utility analysis and the consumption function:
An interpretation of the cross-section Data,” in K. Kurihara (ed.), Post-Keynesian
Economics (388-436). New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Paxson, C. (1990), “Borrowing Constraints and Portfolio Choice”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 105, 535-543.
Rostagno, M. (1996), Il percorso della riforma, 1992-1995: Nuovi indicatori di
consistenza e di sostenibilità per il Fondo Pensioni Lavoratori Dipendenti. Rome:
Banca d’Italia.
Scott, Jason and John Shoven (1996), “Lump Sum Distributions: Fulfilling the
Portability Promise or Eroding Retirement Security?”, EBRI Issue Brief,
Washington DC: Employee Benefit Research Institute, October.
Social Insurance Bank (2000), Bedragen AOW per 1 januari 2001, The Hague.
Venti, S.F. and D.A. Wise (1990), “Have IRAs Increased U.S. Saving: Evidence from
Consumer Expenditure Surveys” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, 661-698.
Venti, S.F. and D.A. Wise (1991), “The Saving Effect of Tax-Deferred Retirement
Accounts: Evidence from the SIPP”, in: B.D. Bernheim and J.B. Shoven (eds.)

37

National Saving and Economic Performance, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Venti, S.F. and D.A. Wise (1995), Individual Response of Retirement Savings Programs:
Results from U.S. Panel Data, Ricerche Economiche.
Vissing Jørgensen, A. (2000), “Towards an Explanation of Household Portfolio Choice
heterogeneity: Nonfinancial Income and Participation Cost Structures”, Working
paper, department of economics, University of Chicago.
Zweimüller, J., R. Winter-Ebmer (1996), “Retirement of Spouses and Social Security
Reform”, European Economic Review 40, 449-472.

