                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     DO FIRMS IN COUNTRIES WITH POOR PROTECTION
                         OF INVESTOR RIGHTS HOLD MORE CASH?

                                             Lee Pinkowitz
                                             Rene M. Stulz
                                            Rohan Williamson

                                          Working Paper 10188
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10188


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2003




René Stulz is grateful for the hospitality of the Kellogg School at Northwestern University and of the Stigler
Center at the University of Chicago, where some of this research was conducted. We thank Kathryn-Ann
Bloomfield, Michael Chiang, Mark Ervin, Jennifer Rooke, and especially Aaron Kravitz, for their help with
the data collection. We are grateful to Ole-Kristian Hope, Jan Mahrt-Smith, and seminar participants at the
University of Toronto for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Lee Pinkowitz, Rene M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Do Firms in Countries with Poor Protection of Investor Rights Hold More Cash?
Lee Pinkowitz, Rene M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 10188
December 2003
JEL No. G15, G31, G32

                                            ABSTRACT

Managers make different decisions in countries with poor protection of investor rights and poor

financial development. One possible explanation is that shareholder-wealth maximizing managers

face different tradeoffs in such countries (the tradeoff theory). Alternatively, firms in such countries

are less likely to be managed for the benefit of shareholders because the poor protection of investor

rights makes it easier for management and controlling shareholders to appropriate corporate

resources for their own benefit (the agency costs theory). Holdings of liquid assets by firms across

countries are consistent with Keynes' transaction and precautionary demand for money theories.

Firms in countries with greater GDP per capita hold more cash as predicted. Controlling for

economic development, firms in countries with more risk and with poor protection of investor rights

hold more cash. The tradeoff theory and the agency costs theory can both explain holdings of liquid

assets across countries. However, the fact that a dollar of cash is worth less than $0.65 to the

minority shareholders of firms in such countries but worth approximately $1 in countries with good

protection of investor rights and high financial development is only consistent with the agency costs

theory.

Lee Pinkowitz                        Rene M. Stulz                        Rohan Williamson
Georgetown University                Fisher College of Business           Georgetown University
pinkowitz@msb.edu                    Ohio State University
                                     806A Fisher Hall
                                     2100 Neil Avenue
                                     Columbus, OH 43210-1144
                                     and NBER
                                     stulz@cob.osu.edu
1. Introduction

    Recent work shows that countries where institutions that protect investor rights are weak

perform poorly along a number of dimensions. In particular, these countries have lower growth,

less well-developed financial markets, and more macroeconomic volatility. 1 To measure the

quality of institutions, authors have used, for instance, indices of the risk of expropriation, the

level of corruption, and the rule of law. Since poor institutions could result from poor economic

performance rather than cause it, authors have also used the origin of a country’s legal system (La

Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, LLSV1, 1998), the nature of the activities of its

colonizers (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001), and its culture (Stulz and Williamson,

2003) as instruments for the quality of institutions.

      For the quality of institutions to matter for economic performance, it has to affect the

actions of firms and individuals. Recent papers examine how dividend, investment, asset

composition, and capital structure policies are related to the quality of institutions.2 In this paper,

we focus more directly on why firm policies depend on the quality of institutions. The quality of

institutions can affect firm policies for two different reasons. First, a country’s protection of

investor rights may influence the relative prices or tradeoffs managers face when making

decisions, so that actions that maximize shareholder wealth in countries where investor rights are

well protected may not be optimal in other countries. We call this explanation the tradeoff theory.

Second, poor protection of investor rights makes it more difficult for non-controlling investors to

receive a return from their investment because agency conflicts are harder to govern. We call this

explanation the agency costs theory. With this theory, managers make different decisions in

countries where investor rights are poorly protected because they face fewer constraints in

1
  See Levine (1997), La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2000), and Easterly (2001) for
reviews of the evidence.
2
  See, for instance, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2000) for dividends, Claessens and
Laeven (2003) for the allocation of assets within the firm, Love (2000) for investment, Demirgüc-Kunt and
Maksimovic (1998) for external finance, and Booth, Aivazian, Demirgüc-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2001) for
capital structure.


                                                   2
pursuing policies that do not maximize shareholder wealth. In this paper, we study the relative

importance of the tradeoff and agency costs theories for why firms act differently in countries

with poor protection of investor rights.

    Using a sample that spans 35 countries and twelve years, we find that firms in countries with

poorer institutions hold more liquid assets (which we also call cash) than they would if they were

located in the U.S. The effect is economically important. For instance, in a cross-country

regression that controls for GDP per capita, financial development, stock return volatility, and

inflation, a firm in a country with the worst institutions has from 5% to 25% more liquid asset

holdings in proportion to total assets than a U.S. firm depending on the index of institution

quality used.

    We focus our analysis on cash holdings by firms because, since Keynes (1934), there has

been little controversy in the literature about the determinants of cash holdings when agency costs

are unimportant. Keynes (1934) explains that firms can hold cash to reduce transaction costs (the

transaction motive) and to provide a buffer to absorb adverse shocks (the precautionary motive).

The transaction motive predicts that cash holdings are positively related to economic

development. With the transaction motive, firms hold cash to economize on the costs of

transacting. The transaction motive is a “shoe leather” theory of money demand: it is cheaper to

hold cash than to send somebody to the bank. As a result, cash holdings increase with the cost of

labor. The tradeoff theory therefore predicts a positive relation between cash holdings and

economic development. We find that inferences about the relation between cash holdings and

investor protection depend crucially on controlling for economic development. Without

controlling for economic development, investor protection proxies for economic development in

regressions and there is a negative relation between cash holdings and investor protection.

    Opler et al. (1999) provide evidence on the importance of the precautionary motive for cash

holdings in the U.S. The precautionary motive could explain why firms in countries with poorer




                                                 3
institutions hold more liquid assets. First, Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Thaicharoen (2003)

show that countries with poorer institutions are less stable. In such countries, firms are more

likely to face disruptions that require the use of liquid assets. Some of these business interruptions

might result from breakdowns in law and order, others might be due to political interferences, and

some might just be attempts to shake down firms. Regardless of the source of these business

interruptions, firms have to hold more liquid assets than in more stable countries with better

institutions. Second, countries with poor institutions are less financially developed. Substitutes for

liquid asset holdings are more costly in such countries, or may not even be available. For instance,

firms that have easy access to external capital markets should not have to hold as much of a

buffer stock of liquid assets, but access to external capital markets is limited and expensive in

countries with low financial development. Therefore, the tradeoff theory predicts that firms hold

more cash in countries with poorer institutions keeping economic development constant and that

firms hold less cash in countries with lower economic development keeping the quality of

institutions constant.

    In the U.S., an explanation advanced for high cash holdings, the free cash flow explanation of

Jensen (1986) is that management would rather hold cash than pay dividends to shareholders.

Dittmar, Mahrt-Smith, and Servaes (DMS, 2003) test the free cash flow hypothesis across a

number of countries for two years and show that liquid asset holdings are higher in countries with

a lower value of the anti-director rights index constructed by Lopez-de-Silanes, La Porta, Shleifer,

and Vishny (LLSV1, 1998). The anti-director rights index measures the legal rights of minority

shareholders and has a higher value if laws protect minority shareholders better. They interpret

this result as supportive of the free cash flow explanation for high cash holdings outside the U.S.

Assuredly, there are firms where their explanation applies, but it cannot be the whole story for

three reasons. First, firms in countries with poor institutions hold more cash with the tradeoff

model, so that greater cash holdings in these countries can be explained without recourse to




                                                  4
agency costs. Second, their specifications do not control for differences in economic development

across countries. In contrast to other measures of investor protection, the anti-director rights index

is negatively correlated with economic development in our sample so that the tradeoff theory

predicts that cash holdings are negatively correlated with the anti-director rights index when one

does not control for economic development. Hence, the DMS result could be fully consistent with

the tradeoff model. Third, since non-U.S. firms tend to be controlled by large shareholders,

managers in these firms can be monitored closely by the large shareholders, so that the large

shareholders must want their firms to have high holdings of liquid assets. The large shareholders

would rather keep cash within the firm than give it to minority shareholders. However, they can

also siphon cash from the firm in the form of private benefits, a practice called tunneling (see

Johnson, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, 2000). If the controlling shareholder can easily

extract private benefits from control, we would not expect the free cash flow agency theory to

apply.

    The existing literature typically models private benefits in one-period models (see, for

instance, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (LLSV2), 2002, and Shleifer and

Wolfenzon, 2003). Such an approach assumes that extraction of private benefits takes place with

equal intensity in every period. Though this simplification is often useful, it makes it impossible

to analyze the timing of tunneling. Through aggressive extraction of private benefits now, the

controlling shareholder may reduce the value of future private benefits. Consequently, the

controlling shareholder may choose to refrain from consuming private benefits when he benefits

more from investing resources in the firm to increase his future private benefits. Yet, if the

controlling shareholder has two ways of investing firm funds that have similar expected gross

returns, he will prefer the investment that makes it possible for him to eventually consume more

private benefits, so that investments that make extraction of private benefits easier will be

advantaged. Investment in liquid assets is preferred by controlling shareholders because, as Myers




                                                  5
and Rajan (1998) point out, liquid assets can more easily be used than fixed assets to enrich the

large shareholder at the expense of other investors in the corporation. Johnson, La Porta, Lopez-

de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2000) provide one example of tunneling in Belgium where the

controlling shareholder simply took a substantial sum from the firm’s accounts, i.e., the firm’s

liquid assets. The court did not force him to give the money back after he was sued by the

minority shareholders. Fixed assets can be traced - a plant cannot disappear, but cash can. We

construct a model where we show that, when the quality of institutions is low, the controlling

shareholder will choose to hold more assets that can be more easily expropriated.

    The tradeoff theory and the agency costs theory both can predict that firms hold more cash in

countries with poor institutions. We devise a straightforward test to discriminate between these

hypotheses. Using a modification of the valuation model put forward in Fama and French (1998),

we estimate how much cash holdings contribute to firm value in countries with institutional

quality above and below the median. If firms in countries with poorer institutions hold more

liquid assets because they can more easily be expropriated by controlling shareholders, it should

be that liquid asset holdings do not contribute as much to firm value as they do in countries with

better institutions. In other words, in a country where each dollar of cash belongs to shareholders

regardless of whether they are controlling shareholders or not, a dollar of cash should contribute

approximately a dollar of firm value. However, if part of a dollar of cash will eventually be

expropriated by controlling shareholders, a dollar of cash should be worth less than a dollar to

minority shareholders. Strikingly, while a dollar of cash is worth roughly a dollar of firm value in

the U.S., in countries with poor institutions, a dollar of cash is consistently estimated to be worth

less than 65 cents. We therefore conclude that the larger holdings of liquid assets in countries

with poorer institutions are not the result of decisions made by controlling shareholders to

maximize firm value.




                                                 6
    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we model the cash holding decision for the

controlling shareholder and derive our predictions that liquid asset holdings are inversely related

to the quality of institutions and to the level of financial development of a country, but positively

related to the country’s level of economic development. Additionally, our model suggests that the

value of cash holdings to minority shareholders in a country is inversely related to that country’s

degree of investor protection. In Section 3, we discuss how we construct our sample and measure

liquid asset holdings compared to liquid asset holdings of firms in the U.S. In Section 4, we show

that liquid asset holdings fall as institutions become better. In Section 5, we find that the value of

liquid assets for minority shareholders is positively related to the quality of institutions. We

conclude in Section 6.



2. Liquid asset holdings and the quality of institutions

    In this section, we derive predictions for cash holdings when controlling shareholders or

managers can divert corporate resources for their private benefit. The predictions of the tradeoff

theory are a special case of this model. Since in the international context, large firms are typically

controlled by large shareholders who can impose their will on management (see La Porta, Lopez-

de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 1999), we call the agent who controls the firm the controlling

shareholder for simplicity. The model draws on the insight of Myers and Rajan (1998) that it is

easier for managers and controlling shareholders to extract private benefits from cash than from

plant and equipment. The Myers and Rajan (1998) model builds on Hart and Moore (1994),

where firms cannot raise capital against all of a project’s cash flows because they cannot enter

enforceable contracts to pledge all the cash flows to capital providers. We do not use the Hart and

Moore (1994) model here, but as shown by Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach (2003), that model

provides a motivation for firms to hold liquid assets that is related to Keynes’ precautionary

demand for money. Rather, we follow the approach of LLSV2 to model private benefits. With




                                                  7
that approach, the large shareholder can extract private benefits, but extraction of private benefits

imposes a deadweight cost on the firm. This cost is due to the fact that the extraction of private

benefits has to be disguised, but more so in countries with better institutions.

    In this model, the firm’s cash flow C depends on physical capital K and liquid assets L.

Liquid assets are required for production. This captures the transaction and precautionary motives

for holding cash. The production function is a Cobb-Douglas production function:



                                           C = QK β L1− β                           (1)



    We are only concerned about how firms allocate capital between K and L. To examine this

issue, we assume that the firm has a given amount of capital, A, cannot raise additional capital,

and does not have other productive uses for capital. With this setup, the opportunity cost of

capital is equal to zero once raised by the firm. This setup makes it possible to distinguish sharply

between financing issues and asset allocation issues. As emphasized by Claessens and Laeven

(2003), the literature has focused much more on financing issues than asset allocation issues. Our

paper focuses on the latter issues.

    The controlling shareholder has cash flow rights α, so that he receives a fraction α of the

distributions made to shareholders. Let f be the fraction of cash flow appropriated by the

controlling shareholder at the expense of the other shareholders. The deadweight cost to the firm

of having cash flow diverted by the controlling shareholder is a quadratic function of the amount

diverted, 0.5b(fC)2. The parameter b measures the quality of institutions. A higher value for b

means that cash flow diversion is more expensive. The cash flow received by the controlling

shareholder is (f + α [1 – f – 0.5bf2])C and the minority shareholders receive (1 – α)(1 – f –

0.5bf2)C.




                                                  8
    In LLSV2, the cash flow is a liquidating cash flow. We assume that instead the firm has

assets at date 1 in addition to its operating cash flow. The controlling shareholder can divert some

of these assets for his own use as the firm is liquidated. A natural extension of this model would

be to have more than one period, so that the controlling shareholder could decide each period how

much he expropriates from current cash flow and decide how much of the liquid assets to

expropriate. To emphasize the distinction between cash and other assets, we assume that the

controlling shareholder can divert liquid assets but not physical capital. When the firm is

liquidated, the physical capital is sold for K and the controlling shareholder receives a fraction α

of K. To keep the notation simple, we assume that the cost of diverting liquid assets is the same

as the cost of diverting cash flow. The controlling shareholder diverts a fraction γ of the liquid

assets at a cost to the firm of 0.5bγ2L paid out of the firm’s liquid assets. Consequently, the

controlling shareholder receives (γ + α [1 – γ – 0.5bγ2])L from the firm’s liquid assets and the

minority shareholders receive (1 – α)(1 – γ – 0.5bγ2)L.

    With our notation, the proceeds to the large shareholder, P, at date 2 are:



                 P = ( f + α − α f − 0.5α bf 2 )C + (γ + α − αγ − 0.5α bγ 2 ) L + α K      (2)



    The controlling shareholder chooses f, γ, and L to maximize P subject to the constraints that f

and γ cannot be negative and cannot exceed 1, that L cannot be negative, and that K = A – L. The

first-order conditions for an interior solution for L are:




                                                   9
∂P
     = (1 − α − α bf )C = 0
∂f                                                                                              (3a)
∂P                                                                                              (3b)
     = (1 − α − α bγ ) L = 0
∂γ
∂P                                                                                              (3c)
     = ( f + α − α f − 0.5α bf 2 )Q  − β ( A − L ) β −1 L1− β + (1 − β )( A − L ) β L− β 
∂L
+ (γ + α − αγ − 0.5α bγ 2 ) − α = 0



Solving for f and γ using (3a) and (3b), we obtain:



                                                         1−α                                     (4)
                                                f =γ =
                                                          αb

    As in LLSV2, the rate of diversion falls as the quality of institutions increases and decreases

as ownership increases.

    We cannot solve explicitly for L, but we can obtain comparative statics for L. First, we want

to know how an increase in the quality of institutions, i.e., a decrease in corruption, affects L:



                           dL [0.5α (1 − α ) 2 + α 2 ](1 + Y ) / b 2
                              =
                           db              ∂Y / ∂L                                                   (5)
                           where Y = Q[− β ( A − L) β −1 L1− β + (1 − β )( A − L) β L− β ]



The denominator of equation (5) has the same sign as the second derivative of the large

shareholder’s proceeds with respect to liquid assets, which is negative because P is a concave

function of L. With our assumptions, it therefore follows that:



    Proposition 1: Cash holdings are negatively related to the quality of institutions.



                                                       10
Note that the derivation of Proposition 1 is based on the positive relation between the extraction

of private benefits and the quality of institutions. The introduction provides a second reason for

why cash holdings are negatively related to the quality of institutions. That reason is not modeled

here. With Keynes’ precautionary demand for money, money demand increases with uncertainty

and there is more uncertainty in countries where the quality of institutions is lower. Hence,

Proposition 1 holds even in the absence of agency costs, so that it cannot be used to distinguish

between the tradeoff theory and the agency costs theory.

    In this model, there is an advantage to liquid asset holdings for the controlling investor, which

is that he gets more out of $1 of cash than he gets out of $1 of physical capital when the firm

liquidates. This tilts the firm’s assets towards more cash than in the first best solution. However,

as the cost of diverting cash for his personal benefit increases because of better institutions, i.e.,

as b increases, the large shareholder finds it less advantageous to divert cash and consequently the

cash holdings fall.

    In the literature on money demand by firms, a higher level of “monetary technology” implies

lower holdings of cash (see Mulligan, 1997). By having access to a wide choice of financial

instruments and to the ability to trade securities at lower cost, a firm can economize on cash. In

our model, we can take into account the level of “monetary technology” available in a country by

replacing cash holdings in the production function by f(L, q), where q is a productivity index for

cash, so that f(L, q) increases with q. An increase in q means that a smaller amount of cash leads

to the same cash flow as before. We equate an increase in q to an increase in financial

development. For simplicity, we assume that f(L, q) = L + q. The derivative of liquid asset

holdings with respect to q is negative:



    Proposition 2: Cash holdings are negatively related to financial development.




                                                 11
    There is an extremely large literature on the demand for money. In that literature, cash

substitutes for labor, so that when labor becomes more expensive, cash holdings increase. For

instance, Mulligan (1997) finds for the U.S. that the elasticity of money demand with respect to a

proxy for the cost of labor is about 0.6. The opportunity cost of labor increases with economic

development since human capital increases with economic development. This implies that cash

becomes more valuable as economic development increases:



    Proposition 3: Liquid asset holdings are positively related to economic development.



Propositions 2 and 3 hold irrespective of whether the actions of firms are explained by the

tradeoff theory or the agency costs theory.

    Investors assign a value to the cash holdings of the firm and the issues that impact the level of

corporate cash holdings should also affect the valuation of the marginal liquid asset held by the

firm. Therefore, we also want to know how the value of the firm is related to liquid asset holdings.

We normalize values so that they are in current dollars. The value of the firm’s shares is:



                                                           2            2
                                            1−α            1−α 
                          V = A + C − 0.5b       C − 0.5b       L                         (6)
                                            αb             αb 



    With this valuation formula, the value of the firm is equal to the sum of its assets and its cash

flows minus a discount for cash flow and a discount for cash. The discount for cash flow and for

cash is due to the fact that they are subject to diversion activities from the large shareholder and

that these diversion activities have a deadweight cost. The discount is inversely related to the

quality of institutions. It follows from this that:




                                                      12
    Proposition 4: When the controlling shareholder makes firm decisions to maximize his

welfare, the value of a dollar of liquid assets held by the firm falls for minority shareholders as

the quality of institutions falls. Otherwise, there is no discount for cash.



    The reason the discount for cash increases as the quality of institutions worsens is that more

cash is diverted by the controlling shareholder. With the tradeoff theory, the firm is managed to

maximize its value, so that no diversion takes place and there are no discounts. Proposition 4

therefore makes it possible to distinguish between the tradeoff and the agency costs theory.

    In formulating the tradeoff theory of cash holdings, we have ignored the role of corruption. If

corruption is high, one might be tempted to conclude that firms have to hold cash so that they can

“grease the wheels of commerce” to use the felicitous expression of Kaufman and Wei (1999).

For instance, in a high corruption environment, firms face the need to pay off functionaries and

need to have liquid assets available. This possible explanation for higher cash holdings in

countries with poorer institutions implies that cash holdings are efficient. Though cash is used to

pay off functionaries, doing so makes the firm more profitable and it is therefore optimal for

firms to hold more cash. Consequently, a dollar of cash should be worth at least a dollar to

shareholders.



3. Data

    The firm level data come from Worldscope and span the years 1988-1999.

Because financial firms hold liquid assets for different reasons than other firms, we exclude firms

in SIC codes starting with 6. The country level data come from various sources and represent

measures of institutional quality, financial development, and economic development of the

country. We start from the countries used in LLSV1, but our data requirements force us to limit

the study to 35 countries from 1988 through 1999. Though much of the existing research




                                                  13
investigates the relation between firm policies and the quality of institutions for a one-year cross-

section, investigating the relation between firm policies and institution quality over multiple years

makes it less likely that the estimated relation is spurious.

    To examine institutional quality, we use data from LLSV1 that measures corruption, respect

for the rule of law, expropriation risk, protection of minority shareholders (the anti-director rights

index), and the origin of the legal system. The corruption, rule of law, and expropriation indices

are produced by the country-risk rating agency International Country Risk (ICR). Corruption is

an assessment of the risk of corruption of high government officials, while rule of law is an

assessment of the law and order tradition in a country. Expropriation risk is the threat of outright

confiscation or “forced nationalization.” All ICR indices used by LLSV1 are averages from 1982

through 1995 and are scaled so that their values go from one through ten, with one representing

the worst possible enforcement and ten the highest. The anti-director rights index is built by

LLSV1. The index sums up dummy variables that take value one if a right protecting minority

shareholders is mandated in a country. There are five such rights, so that the highest value of the

index is five.

    Though the LLSV1 indicators of the quality of institutions have been widely used in the

literature, these indicators are averages measured at one point in time. Over a period of 12 years,

the quality of institutions can change across countries and these changes can affect firm policies.

We therefore also use indicators of the quality of institutions that change over time. The

International Country Risk Guide data on the country’s political risk level (ICRGP index) is

available monthly for our sample period. The political risk level is made up of twelve components

that comprise the overall political risk assessment of a country. We use the index for political risk

as well as the components of that index measuring corruption and the rule of law. Our indices are

created annually by taking the average of all the months in a given year. Finally, we use an index

which measures political constraints to assess the probability of corruption or extreme policy




                                                  14
change in a country. The PolconV Index is developed in Henisz (2000) and is available annually

for our countries. The index is a continuous variable ranging from zero, indicating a dictatorship,

to one, indicating democracy, and represents the degree to which checks and balances are present

in a country’s political system. For our purpose, the variable examines institution quality in the

sense that the more centralized the government, the higher the opportunity for corruption (see

Shleifer and Vishny, 1993). As with the LLSV1 variables, the ICRGP and PolconV indexes are

constructed so that a higher index level corresponds to better institutions. The corruption and rule

of law indices from ICRGP are normalized so that they are computed on a scale from 1 to 10 as in

LLSV1.

    Data on GDP and inflation are taken from the World Bank World Development Indicators

(WDI) database. As a proxy for uncertainty at the country level, we use stock market volatility.

We expect the precautionary motive to be more important for countries with greater uncertainty.

We calculate a measure of overall stock market volatility using the standard deviation of the prior

60 months of returns of the country index. Market index return data come from Datastream.

    We also examine several measures of financial development within a country. From the WDI

database, we have data on stock market turnover and stock market capitalization. Stock market

turnover is the ratio of the total shares traded to the stock market capitalization. It is a proxy for

stock market liquidity. Stock market capitalization is normalized by GDP and is a measure of the

size of equity markets in an economy. The description and justification of the use of these

variables are developed in Beck et al. (1999). The Bank for International Settlements (BIS)

Quarterly Review provides total domestic debt outstanding (excluding government) normalized

by the country’s GDP, which we use as a proxy for the level of development of a country’s debt

market.

    If a firm is controlled by large shareholders, these shareholders may want the firm to hold

more liquid assets to reduce the risk of their investment. In other words, the firm may end up




                                                 15
over-emphasizing the precautionary motive for cash. In our country regressions, we use a

measure of ownership concentration by using the closely held shares percentage taken from the

Worldscope database. Closely-held shares correspond to shares held by insiders. Insiders are

considered to be officers, directors, and their immediate families, shares held in trusts, shares held

by another corporation (except shares held in a fiduciary capacity by financial institutions), shares

held by pension benefit plans, and shares held by individuals who hold 5% or more of the

outstanding shares. For Japanese firms, closely held shares represent the holdings of the ten

largest shareholders. For each country, we use a value-weighted average of inside ownership

across firms (see Dalquist, Pinkowitz, Williamson, and Stulz, 2003)).

     In an attempt to benchmark cash holdings controlling for the variation across countries, we

calculate excess cash for each firm each year by comparing the amount of cash the firm holds to

the amount it would be expected to hold if it were incorporated in the U.S. (see Pinkowitz and

Williamson, 2001). This approach is similar to the approach pioneered by Rajan and Zingales

(1998) at the industry level. DMS also use this approach for some of their regressions. Every year,

regressions are run on the full panel of U.S. Compustat industrial firms to compute the

coefficients in a model to determine cash holdings. Cash is defined as cash on hand plus

marketable securities.3 The model is the same as in Opler et al. (1999) except that the regulation

dummy and industry volatility variables are omitted. Further, while Opler et al. (1999) use

market-to-book as a proxy for growth opportunities, we use sales growth. The reason for this

choice is that market-to-book is negatively correlated with investor protection, so that when using

a sample of firms from different countries, market-to-book becomes an inappropriate proxy for

growth opportunities. The model is:


    Cashi = αi + β1Sizei + β2Sales growthi + β3NWCi + β4Capexi + β5Leveragei + β6RDi +


3
  The marketable securities are defined as temporary investments in securities that can be readily converted
into cash. This definition does not include cross-holdings.


                                                     16
    β7Cash Flowi + β8Divi + εi for each year t                                                (7)


where Cash is the natural log of (cash/assets), Size is the natural log of real assets (deflated by the

CPI), Sales growth is the past year’s sales growth, NWC is (current assets – current liabilities –

cash)/assets, Capex is capital expenditures/assets, Leverage is (short-term debt + long-term

debt)/assets, RD is (research and development expense/sales), Cash Flow is (EBIT – interest

expense – taxes – dividends)/assets, and Div is a dummy variable which equals one if the firm

paid a dividend in that year and zero otherwise. When R&D is missing, it is set to zero. Negative

dividends are set to zero. Firm years with negative sales or assets are eliminated.

    The above regression is estimated each year from 1988 to 1999 and the coefficients are used

to determine predicted levels of cash as if the firm were a U.S. firm. Excess cash holdings are

determined by subtracting the exponentiated predicted value from the actual level of cash/assets

(i.e. excess cash/assets = cash/assets – exp(predicted log cash/assets)).        Table 1 shows the

distribution of firm years from each country for which we can calculate excess cash holdings. In

order for a country year to be included in our sample, countries are required to have at least five

firms for which we can obtain excess cash data.



4. The cross-country determinants of liquid asset holdings

    From Section 2, we expect that liquid asset holdings are positively correlated with economic

development and uncertainty, and negatively correlated with expected inflation, financial

development, and the quality of institutions. To test these hypotheses, we compute the difference

between a firm’s liquid asset holdings and its benchmark holdings and call that difference the

firm’s excess cash for simplicity. This allows us to compare cash holdings relative to what they

would be if the quality of institutions, financial development, and economic development were all

high. We then estimate regressions where the dependent variable is excess cash and the

independent variables are country characteristics.


                                                  17
    As shown in Table 1, there is wide variation in the number of firms in our sample across

countries. If we regress excess cash on country characteristics using all firms in our sample, our

results would be driven by the few countries that have most of the firms. To avoid this, we

estimate the relation between excess cash and country characteristics using one observation per

country per year. We choose the representative level of excess cash for a country year as being

equal to the amount held by the firm with the median amount of excess cash from all firms in that

country for that year. With this approach, no country dominates the results and our results do not

have a misleading statistical significance driven by countries with large numbers of firms.

Summary statistics for our full panel of data are shown in Table 2.

    The average level of excess cash across countries varies from -1% in Peru and New Zealand

to 14% in Japan. The average of excess cash is positive for all countries but two. Excess cash is

positive for 366 country years out of 401. The median excess cash is positive for all countries but

two and the average of country medians is positive. There are also differences in the quality of

institutions measured by corruption, political concentration, political risk, rule of law, and risk of

expropriation. Western European countries, the U.S., and Canada have the highest quality of

institutions with perfect or close to perfect scores in the various measures. For our measures of

the quality of institutions, the countries with poorer institutions are generally located in Asia and

South America. The variation in financial development is a function of the measure used.

Measured by activity proxied by turnover, South Korea has the highest activity while Chile is the

most inactive. We will also use the ratio of bond and stock market capitalization to GDP. This

ratio is highest for Hong Kong and lowest for Mexico. Switzerland has the highest GDP per

capita and India has the lowest.

    Our dataset is such that we could estimate the relation between excess cash and country

characteristics using pooled time-series regressions. The problem with this approach is that it

would overstate the significance of the estimates, since the observations in one year are unlikely




                                                 18
to be independent of the observations in a contiguous year. Fama and French (1998) recommend

the methodology of Fama-McBeth (1973) to address this issue. In contrast to the earlier research

investigating implications of the quality of institutions, we can implement this method because

we have 12 years of data available. Hence, the regression coefficients in Table 3 represent the

time-series average of the annual regression coefficients. The t-statistics are computed using the

standard error of the time-series of regression coefficients. We also estimate, but do not report,

pooled time-series regressions using the full panel. Our conclusions are not sensitive to the

regression technique used.

    Propositions 1-3 from our model indicate that excess cash in a country should fall with the

quality of institutions and the degree of financial development, and increase with economic

development. Table 3 tests these three hypotheses using Fama-MacBeth regressions of excess

cash on indices of the quality of institutions, a proxy for financial development, and an index of

economic development, GDP per capita. The measures of the quality of institutions are the

indices of political risk constructed by ICRG, political constraints, corruption, rule of law,

expropriation risk, and anti-director rights. Four of these indices (the country rating, the index of

political constraint, the corruption index, the index for the rule of law) change over time, but the

other two (expropriation risk and anti-director rights) do not. We use stock market turnover to

GDP as the measure of financial development in Panels A and B and capital market capitalization

to GDP in Panels C and D. The natural logarithm of GDP per capita is used as the proxy for

economic development. Additionally, we use inflation as a proxy for the cost of holding liquid

assets and we use volatility of the stock market as a proxy for uncertainty.

    Turnover, used as a proxy for financial development, has a significant negative coefficient in

all regressions in Panels A and B. This result is consistent with Proposition 2. However, in

Panels C and D, we use the combined capitalization of the bond and stock markets divided by

GDP as a proxy for financial development instead. The coefficient on that variable is always




                                                 19
significantly positive, which is inconsistent with Proposition 2. These results have one of two

interpretations. It could be that stock market activity measures financial development better than

stock market capitalization. Alternatively, it could be that there is no reliable relation between

financial development and cash holdings. Earlier studies which find a significant coefficient on

turnover but not on stock market capitalization (see, for instance, Demirgüc-Kunt and

Maksimovic, 1998) lean towards the former view. The log of GDP per capita is used as a proxy

for economic development. The coefficient on this variable is always positive as predicted by

Proposition 3. The coefficient on inflation is negative but not always significant. The coefficient

on stock market volatility is positive and always significant. Proposition 1 states that cash

holdings should be lower in countries with institutions of higher quality. Since all of the indices

we use are constructed so that a higher number means better institutions, we expect a negative

sign on the variables. Panel A reports the coefficients on those measures of the quality of

institutions for which we have yearly data. In each case, the coefficient on the index of the quality

of institutions is negative and significant as predicted.

    The model in Section 2 focuses on the extraction of private benefits by large shareholders

and views holding liquid assets as facilitating the extraction of private benefits. The evidence is

consistent with the model, but an alternative explanation should be examined. It is well-known

that ownership is more concentrated in countries with poorer institutions. If ownership is more

concentrated, controlling shareholders have to bear more diversifiable risk. They might therefore

want the firm to hold more cash as a way of reducing the firm’s risk. In this case, greater liquid

asset holdings would still be a benefit to the controlling shareholder, but a benefit of a different

sort since no tunneling would take place. We examine this possibility by estimating equation (6)

which includes the measure of ownership concentration in the firm’s country discussed earlier.

Though the coefficient on ownership concentration is positive as predicted, it is not significant.

The result suggests that controlling shareholders prefer cash holdings because it allows them to




                                                  20
expropriate wealth from minority shareholders rather than because it reduces the risk of the firm.

A more direct test of this would be to use ownership at the firm level. Requiring reliable

ownership information would reduce our sample substantially. Kalcheva and Lins (2003) find

that there is a positive relation between cash holdings and control rights held by the large

shareholder, suggesting that a more direct investigation of the risk aversion hypothesis is

warranted.4

    Panel B of Table 3 uses averages over the sample period of the measures for the quality of

institutions. The literature averages the institution quality indices, perhaps because of a belief that

yearly measures are noisy. We find that the coefficients are more significant when we use

averages and that the regressions have slightly higher explanatory power. However, the

inferences do not change. Regression (5) uses the anti-director index of LLSV1. The anti-director

index has a negative coefficient, but it is not significant. This finding is not consistent with DMS.

The coefficient on the anti-director rights index is quite sensitive to the control variables. It

becomes significantly negative if we use total market capitalization as our proxy for financial

development and also if we do not include GDP per capita as an explanatory variable. In general,

if we do not include GDP per capita, our institution quality variables switch signs, so that

countries with better institutions have more cash. This is because countries with better institutions

have higher GDP per capita. However, with the anti-director index, this does not happen because

the index is negatively correlated with GDP per capita. Hence, the omitted variable bias makes

the coefficient more significant in this case, so that when we do not control for GDP per capita

and use a pooled regression, we obtain the same result as DMS. Regression (6) uses the

expropriation risk index of LLSV1. As expected it has a significant negative coefficient. Finally,

regression (7) in Panel B shows that firms in countries with a civil law legal system hold more


4
 The paper by Kalcheva and Lins (2003) is contemporaneous to this paper. They investigate the relation
between cash, firm value, and ownership for 1996. They use the anti-director index as their measure of
shareholder protection. In their paper, using this index has no impact on the adjusted R-square.


                                                   21
liquid assets. Overall, the regressions support the idea that in countries with institutions of poorer

quality, firms hold greater levels of cash. The results in Panels A and B of Table 3 seem to

provide strong support for Proposition 1.

    We investigate the robustness of the results using other measures of the quality of institutions

and of financial development. In regressions not reported in a table, we find that other country

indices, other measures of political constraint, and creditor rights all have coefficients consistent

with the regressions reported in Table 3. We then examine further the robustness of the result for

financial development. We use other proxies for financial development, such as stock market

capitalization to GDP, bond market capitalization to GDP, and total stock value traded to GDP.

We find that the coefficient on financial market development is often significantly positive with

the other measures. In Panels C and D of Table 3, we report regressions similar to those of

Panels A and B, but use the sum of the capitalization of the stock market and the bond market

normalized by GDP as our proxy for financial development. This measure is available only from

1989 through 1999. The coefficient on this proxy for financial development is always

significantly positive, which is inconsistent with the tradeoff theory. However, the coefficients on

the institution quality measures are always significantly negative regardless of which financial

development variable we use. The bottom line of the investigation is that the relation between the

quality of institutions and liquid asset holdings is robust, in that it does not depend on which

proxy we use for financial development or whether we even use a proxy.

    We examine whether the variation across years of the financial development proxies is

responsible for the lack of reliability of our inferences about financial development, but that is not

the case. The same conclusions hold if we use the level of financial development at one point in

time. Finally, we add to regression (8) a quality of institutions variable to examine the effect of

simultaneously controlling for ownership structure. When we do that, the quality of institutions

variable still has a negative and significant coefficient irrespective of which variable we use. We




                                                 22
also estimate a regression where we use all the proxies for the quality of institutions. With this

regression, it is not surprising that some of the measures of the quality of institutions are

insignificant since they are all highly correlated. The indices of corruption and law and order have

negative significant coefficients. In virtually all the regressions we estimate, GDP per capita and

stock market volatility have significant positive coefficients, while inflation has negative

coefficients. The conclusion from all these alternate regressions is that the relation between

measures of the quality of institutions and liquid asset holdings is extremely robust.



5.       The market value of cash holdings

     In the previous section, we find strong support for Propositions 1 and 3 of our model, but no

reliable support for Proposition 2. These results are consistent with the tradeoff theory as well as

with the agency costs theory. We therefore have to investigate Proposition 4 which has sharply

different predictions depending on which one of these two theories applies. Proposition 4 predicts

that, in the presence of agency costs, cash will be worth less to minority investors when the

quality of institutions is lower because they expect more of the cash to be expropriated by

controlling shareholders. In contrast, if the tradeoff theory holds, investors should value liquid

asset holdings at roughly a dollar since if they were worth less the firm could pay out the cash it

holds. Data for our firm level analysis come from the Worldscope Database. There are obvious

reasons to be cautious in interpreting the results of the regressions since we are estimating a

regression using data from different countries with different accounting conventions. There is no

clear way to make the data across countries more comparable beyond what Worldscope already

does.

     To estimate the value of cash, it is necessary to have a regression model for the value of the

firm and then to be able to separate cash in that regression model so that its contribution to firm

value can be examined directly. Fama and French (1998) develop a valuation regression that




                                                 23
performs well when subjected to a battery of tests. Pinkowitz and Williamson (2003) show how

to use that valuation regression to estimate the value of cash in the U.S. In this regression model,

cash enters in a straightforward way without altering any of the properties of the regression. This

makes it straightforward to estimate the contribution of cash to the value of the firm. The basic

regression specification is:



     M i ,t = α + β1 E i ,t + β2 dE i ,t + β3 dE i ,t + 1 + β4 dNAi ,t + β5 dNAi ,t + 1 +

     β6 RDi ,t + β7 dRDi ,t + β8 dRDi ,t +1 + β9 I i ,t + β10 dI i ,t + β11dI i ,t +1 + β12 Di ,t +   (8)

     β13 dDi ,t + β14 dDi ,t +1 + β15 dM i ,t +1 + β16 Ci ,t + εi ,t



where M is the market value of equity calculated at fiscal year end; E is earnings before

extraordinary items plus interest, deferred tax credits, and investment tax credits; NA is net assets,

defined as total assets less cash; RD is research and development expense; I is interest expense; D

is dividends defined as common dividends paid; and C is cash and cash equivalents. When R&D

is missing, we set it equal to zero.

    To control for heteroscedasticity, all variables are deflated by total assets. Regarding notation,

in equation (8) we refer to Xt as the level of variable X in year t divided by the level of assets in

year t. We use dXt to indicate the change in the level of X from year t-1 to year t, divided by the

book value of assets in year t ((Xt-1 - Xt)/Assetst). Similarly, dXt+1 indicates the change in the

level of X from year t to year t+1, divided by the book value of assets in year t ((Xt+1 -

Xt)/Assetst). We follow Fama and French (1998) and estimate equation (8) using Fama-MacBeth

regressions. Because we use leads and lags, the t-statistics are somewhat overstated as discussed

in Fama and French (1998). To reduce the effect of outliers, we trim our sample at the 1% tails of

each variable. Our final sample contains 75,232 firm years representing 13,018 unique firms.




                                                               24
    To examine Proposition 4, we need to segment the firms on the basis of the quality of

institutions and financial development. Each year, we separate countries into high and low

classifications based on whether they are above or below the median of the studied variable.

Once the countries are assigned as high or low, all firms within each country are assigned the

same classification as the country itself.

    As an example, when we examine the political risk index, ICRGP, firms are classified as

firms coming from a country with low political risk, i.e., high quality of institutions, if in a

particular year they are in a country which has an ICRGP index higher than the median ICRGP

index of all the countries that year for which we have data. Thus, while the number of countries

classified as high or low quality of institutions is equal each year, the number of firms classified

as high or low quality of institutions can vary greatly. Countries (and hence firms) are reclassified

each year to account for the possibility that the quality of institutions and financial development

in a country may change through time, either absolutely or relative to other countries.

    An alternative approach is to estimate the value of cash using all observations but allowing

for firm valuation and cash valuation to depend on the quality of institutions. From our

classification scheme, we create two dummy variables we call Hi and Low. The variable Hi

(Low) equals one if the firm is in a country which has high (low) quality institutions, and zero

otherwise.   The coefficients of interest in our regression tests are those on the interaction

variables between the Hi and Low dummy variables and our continuous variable C, representing

cash holdings.    In equation (9), these coefficients are shown as β16 and β17.           Because the

dependent variable is essentially the market to book ratio of the firm’s equity, β16 (β17) represents

the market to book value of cash holdings to minority shareholders for firms in countries with

high (low) quality institutions. When cash is carried on the books dollar for dollar, the coefficient




                                                 25
represents the market value of the marginal dollar of cash holdings for the firm.5 To account for

the fact that market to book values are likely to be affected directly by institution quality, the

regression also includes separate intercepts for high and low quality countries:



     M i ,t = α + α1 Hi + β1 E i ,t + β2 dE i ,t + β3 dE i ,t + 1 + β4 dNAi ,t + β5 dNAi ,t +1 +
                                                                                                       (9)
     β6 RDi ,t + β7 dRDi ,t + β8 dRDi ,t +1 + β9 I i ,t + β10 dI i ,t + β11dI i ,t + 1 + β12 Di ,t +

                                                       (              )        (                )
     β13 dDi ,t + β14 dDi ,t +1 + β15 dM i ,t +1 + β16 Hii ,t × Ci ,t + β17 Lowi ,t × Ci ,t + εi ,t


    Because we estimate the regression using firms in both high and low ranked countries

simultaneously, we refer to these tests as the joint regressions.

    Table 4 reports the separate regressions using ICRGP. The third column reports the p-value

for the difference in the coefficients of the two separate regressions. Remember that a high value

for the ICRGP index means low political risk. The coefficient on cash is 1.04 for high ICRGP

index countries and 0.58 for the other countries. Both coefficients are significant and are

significantly different from each other at better than the 5% level. When we investigate the other

coefficients, we find that the coefficient differences that are significant indicate that determinants

of value have more of an impact on value in countries with better institutions. This is consistent

with LLSV2. In particular, there is evidence in the regression that shareholders benefit more from

earnings, tangible investment, and R&D investment in countries with better institutions.

    We estimate joint and separate regressions using each of our institution quality variables. For

brevity and ease of presentation, in Table 5 we only report the coefficients and standard errors on

cash holdings.6 With our methodology and sample, we are able to estimate 11 cross-sectional

regressions for all the quality of institutions proxies as well as GDP per capita. Due to data




5
  In a number of countries, liquid assets are carried at lower of market or cost. In these countries, the
coefficient on cash holdings has an upward bias.
6
  Full results of the estimation are available upon request from the authors.


                                                           26
limitations, we have only 10 cross-sections to test for the relation between the value of cash and

bond market capitalization or total capital market capitalization.

     The first six regressions examine the impact of the quality of institutions on the value of cash

holdings. Countries with poorer quality institutions have a lower market value of cash, which is

consistent with the agency costs theory. The results are quite robust and consistent across each of

the different proxies for the quality of institutions. In countries with institutions of high quality,

the estimates show that a marginal dollar of cash is valued from $1.07 to $1.18 with a standard

error of around seven to nine cents. Hence, it appears that in countries where the risk of

expropriation from controlling shareholders is low, minority shareholders price cash holdings at

their face value. However, the results for countries with higher risk of expropriation indicate a

substantial discount placed on the value of liquid assets. The estimates range from $0.23 to $0.65

depending on the proxy used, with standard errors around eight to sixteen cents. In all six

specifications, the value assigned to cash holdings between high and low quality of institutions

countries is significantly different at the 1% level. Minority investors value cash holdings less in

countries where the incidence of corruption and/or the probability of expropriation are higher.

The impact of the quality of institutions on the intercept of the joint regressions is almost never

significant, but it is positive and significant for the anti-director index.

    We saw that cash holdings are related to economic and financial development. In equation (6),

after controlling for cash flow, there is no relation between the discount for cash and either

economic or financial development. However, the quality of institutions is positively correlated

with financial development and economic development. Because of this correlation, we would

expect cash to be worth more in countries with higher financial and economic development.

Alternatively, however, it could be that firms in countries with lower financial and economic

development are somehow constrained in their cash holdings, so that they hold less cash than

would be optimal for them. If that were the case, cash should be more valuable in countries where




                                                   27
such constraints are important, which would presumably be the countries with low financial and

economic development. We therefore consider how the value of cash is correlated with financial

and economic development.

    We use four variables as proxies for the degree of financial development: stock market

turnover, stock market capitalization, corporate bond market capitalization, and total market

(stock plus bond) capitalization. For normalization purposes, all of the variables are deflated by

the annual GDP of the country. We find that in countries where stock markets are active, cash is

valued at $1.25 with a standard error of $0.13. However, in countries with low market turnover,

the estimate is only $0.62 and the difference between the two coefficients is significant at the one

percent level. We also examine three variables which look at the size of the capital markets

within a country. In countries with greater stock market capitalization, cash appears to be worth

above face value; however, in countries with smaller capitalized equity markets, cash is valued at

a deep discount. Our estimate indicates that the marginal dollar of liquid assets is valued at only

$0.17.   The difference between the two is highly significant.       When we measure financial

development by the size of the corporate bond market, we find no statistical difference among

high and low development countries. Even in economic terms, the difference appears to be small.

In countries with developed bond markets the value of a dollar is $1.09 while the estimate for

lesser developed countries is $0.62. One possibility for the discrepancy between the results

segmenting firms by bond market capitalization rather than stock market capitalization is the

difference in data availability. As mentioned previously, we only have bond capitalizations for

10 years as opposed to 11 years for stock capitalizations. To determine whether this discrepancy

is affecting the results, for those 10 years, we examine a measure of total market capitalization

which is defined as the sum of the stock and bond capitalizations normalized by GDP. The

results are similar to those for bond capitalization alone. Cash holdings are more valuable in

countries with better developed capital markets. In addition, we reexamine stock capitalization




                                                28
using only 10 cross-sections and find that our estimates are very similar to those obtained using

the full sample. Overall, it appears that cash holdings are more valuable in countries with a

greater degree of financial development. The fact that we do not find a difference when financial

development is measured using bond market capitalization suggests that there may be some key

difference between equity and debt capital markets. The last row of Table 5 shows that cash

holdings are valued at face value in highly developed countries but are worth only $0.56 in lesser

developed ones. It follows from this that cash is valued less in countries with poor financial and

economic development. Most likely, this is because in these countries cash is more likely to be

expropriated from minority shareholders. There is no evidence that firms are constrained from

having too little cash in these countries.

    While the joint regressions allow us to use all the data and thus provide for more efficient

estimates, the efficiency comes at a price. Implicitly, the joint regressions constrain all of the

coefficients on the control variables to be equal for both high and low ranked countries. The

separate regressions do not impose this constraint. We reproduce estimates of the cash

coefficients for the separate regressions in the third and fourth columns of Table 5. 7 The

estimates of the value assigned to a marginal dollar of cash are surprisingly similar across the

methods. The estimates for firms from high institution quality or high development countries are

basically identical to those estimated in the joint regressions. For the firms from low institution

quality countries, the separate regression coefficients tend to be even lower than their jointly

estimated counterparts. This same result obtains in the GDP regression, but not in the financial

development regressions where bond market capitalization and total capitalization are not

significantly different.

    We investigated an alternative specification of the regressions reported in Tables 4 and 5. In

that specification, we used the original equation estimated by Fama and French (1998), but

7
 For brevity we report only the coefficients on the cash variable (β16), but the full results of the estimation
are available upon request from the authors.


                                                       29
divided the change of net assets into a cash component and a non-cash component. We find

results consistent with the regressions reproduced here, namely a change in cash is worth less in

countries with poor investor protection.

    In summary, the results in this section show that minority investors assign a lower value to

cash held by firms in countries with poorer quality institutions, those with less developed equity

markets, and countries with lesser economic development. The results persist in different

estimation specifications as well as across a robust set of proxies for institutional quality. Overall,

the results are consistent with the hypothesis that minority investors put a lower value on cash

when he/she feels there may be a high probability of being expropriated.



6. Conclusion

    In this paper, we examine two theories of the determinants of liquid asset holdings of firms

across countries. One theory, the tradeoff theory, assumes that managers maximize firm value.

The other theory, the agency theory, assumes that large shareholders in countries with poor

investor protection have incentives to make decisions that enable them to appropriate more

private benefits from control. Because it is easier to expropriate cash than fixed assets, firms in

countries with poor investor protection are predicted to hold more cash with that theory. We find

that the empirical evidence on the determinants of liquid asset holdings is largely consistent with

both theories. We then turn to an examination of the relation between the liquid assets held by a

firm and the value of that firm. The liquid assets held by firms in countries with poor institutions

contribute substantially less to the value of minority shares than the liquid assets held by firms in

countries with better institutions. This evidence shows that agency costs play an important role in

how minority investors value cash held by corporations.




                                                  30
References

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson, 2001, The colonial origins of comparative

    development: An empirical investigation, American Economic Review 91, 1369-1401.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, J. A. Robinson, and Y. Thaicharoen, 2003, Institutional causes,

    macroeconomic symptoms: Volatility, crises, and growth, Journal of Monetary Economics.

Almeida, H., M. Campello, and M. Weisbach, 2003, The cash flow sensitivity of cash, Journal of

    Finance, forthcoming.

Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt A., Levine, R., 1999, A new database on financial development and

    structure, working paper, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis.

Booth, L., V. Aivazian, A. Demirgüc-Kunt, and V. Maksimovic, 2001, Capital structures in

    developing countries, Journal of Finance, 87-129.

Claessens, S., and Laeven, L., 2003, Financial development, property rights, and growth, Journal

    of Finance, forthcoming.

Dalquist, M., L Pinkowitz, R. M. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 2003, Corporate governance and the

    home bias, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 87 – 110.

Demirgüc-Kunt, A. and V. Maksimovic, 1998, Law, Finance, and Firm Growth, Journal of

    Finance, Vol. 53, pp. 2107-2137.

Dittmar, A., Mahrt-Smith, J., and H. Servaes, 2003, International Corporate Governance and

    Corporate Cash Holdings, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol 38.

Easterly, W., 2001, The elusive quest for growth: Economists’ adventures and misadventures in

    the tropics, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1998, Taxes, financing decisions, and firm value, Journal of

    Finance 53, 819-843.

Fama, E. F., and J. D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests, Journal of

    Political Economy 81, 607-636.


                                               31
Jensen, M., 1986, Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and Takeovers, American

    Economic Review, Vol. 76, pp. 323-339.

Hart, O., and J. Moore, 1994, A theory of debt based on the inalienability of human capital,

    Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 841-879.

Henisz, W. J., 2000, The institutional environment for economic growth, Economics and Politics

    12, 1-31.

Johnson, S., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 2000, Tunneling, American

    Economic Review 90, 22-27.

Kalcheva, I, and K. Lins, 2003, International evidence on cash holdings and expected managerial

    agency problems, unpublished working paper, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Kaufman, D., and S.-J. Wei, 1999, Does corruption grease the wheels of commerce?, unpublished

    working paper, World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Keynes, J.M., 1934, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, in the 1973 edition

    of the Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, Vol. 7. edited by Donald Moggridge,

    London: Macmillan for the Royal Economic Society.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership around the world,

    Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, Law and finance, Journal of

    Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 2000, Investor protection and

    corporate governance, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 3-27.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 2002, Investor protection and

    corporate valuation, Journal of Finance 57, 1147-1170.

Levine, R., 1997, Financial development and economic growth: View and agenda, Journal of

    Economic Literature 35, 688-726.

Love, I., 2000, Financial development and financing constraints: International evidence from the

    structural investment model, working paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.



                                               32
Mulligan, C.B., 1997, Scale economies, the value of time, and the demand for money:

    Longitudinal evidence from firms, Journal of Political Economy 105, 1061-1079.

Myers, S. C., and R. G. Rajan, 1998, The paradox of liquidity, Quarterly Journal of Economics

    108, 733-771.

Opler, T., L. Pinkowitz, R. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 1999, The determinants and implications of

    corporate cash holdings, Journal of Financial Economics 52, 3-46.

Pinkowitz, L., and R. Williamson, 2001, Bank power and cash holdings: Evidence from Japan,

    Review of Financial Studies 14, 1059-1082.

Pinkowitz, L. and R. Williamson, 2003, What is a dollar worth? The market value of cash

    holdings, Working paper, Georgetown University.

Rajan, R. G., and L. Zingales, 1998, Financial dependence and growth, American Economic

    Review 88, 559-586.

Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. W., 1993, Corruption, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 599-618.

Shleifer, A., and D. Wolfenzon, 2003, Investor protection and equity markets, Journal of

    Financial Economics 66, 3-27.

Stulz, R. M. and R. Williamson, 2003, Culture, openness and finance, Journal of Financial

    Economics, forthcoming.




                                               33
                               Table 1 Worldscope Sample
   Firm years are based on number of firms for which excess cash can be computed.

       Country               Years        Mean Firms    Median Firms     Minimum          Maximum
                                           per year      per year      Firms per year   Firms per year
Argentina                  1988-1999         22.33           26               5               38
Australia                  1988-1999        174.25          178             123              206
Austria                    1988-1999         52.08           53             30                65
Belgium                    1988-1999        68.833          71.5             51               72
Brazil                     1988-1999         69.83          76.5             13              119
Canada                     1988-1999        393.00         402.5            332              428
Chile                      1988-1999         44.75           47              20               71
Denmark                    1988-1999        112.00         123.5             52              132
Finland                    1988-1999         96.25         96.25            75               109
France                     1988-1999        406.25         419.5            308              476
Germany                    1988-1999        401.08          416             295              442
Greece                     1993-1998          8.67           9.5              5               11
Hong Kong                  1988-1999        129.25         95.5             49               274
India                      1990-1999        155.38          166             16               296
Ireland                    1988-1999         43.50           46              27               49
Italy                      1988-1999        137.00         137.5            65               162
Japan                      1988-1999        646.58         453.5            105             1232
Korea (South)              1988-1999        139.67         105.5             29              245
Malaysia                   1988-1999        174.67          176              53              314
Mexico                     1988-1999         48.92          53.5             23               70
Netherlands                1988-1999        159.75         165.5            122              184
New Zealand                1988-1999         32.67           30              20               46
Norway                     1988-1999         90.58           91              73              101
Peru                       1992-1998         18.71           19              6                27
Philippines                1988-1999         33.64           34              6                65
Portugal                   1988-1999         28.50           28              9                52
Singapore                  1988-1999         99.33          92.5            37               171
South Africa               1988-1999        124.75         135.5             96              146
Spain                      1988-1999         97.33         108.5            54               116
Sweden                     1988-1999        142.75         151.5            101              159
Switzerland                1988-1999        117.25         127.5             75              139
Thailand                   1990-1999        128.82          172               5              211
Turkey                     1990-1999        22.30            22             11                36
United Kingdom             1988-1999       1177.50         1220             849             1339
United States              1988-1999       2264.92        2507.5            386             2879
                                          Table 2 Means of variables within a country across years.
    Where excash is excess cash to assets, ICRGP is the overall political risk measure taken from the International Country Risk Guide (ICRG),
corruption is the level of government corruption taken from ICRG, law/order is the law and order tradition in each country taken form the ICRG,
and polcon is a measure of government centralization taken from Henisz (2000). From the World Development Indicator comes scap which is the
stock market capitalization to GDP and sturn which is the stock market turnover to GDP. La Porta, Lopez de Salinas, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) is
the source of exprisk which is the risk of outright confiscation and antidir which is an index measure of the protection of shareholder rights. Bond
market capitalization (bcap) comes from the Bank for International Settlements and tcap is the sum of bond market capitalization and stock market
capitalization.
Country        excash icrgp corruption law/order polcon   scap    sturn   sval   exprisk antidirr   gdp    bcap   Tcap
Argentina        0.03 69.65    5.32       6.78    0.59    0.13    0.33    0.04    5.91    4.00     7,246   0.02   0.16
Australia        0.02 81.34    8.33      10.00    0.87    0.63    0.40    0.24    9.27    4.00    20,330   0.17   0.81
Austria          0.04 85.88    7.99      10.00    0.74    0.13    0.58    0.07    9.69    2.00    28,771   0.31   0.45
Belgium          0.06 79.34    7.42       9.56    0.89    0.47    0.17    0.09    9.63    0.00    26,820   0.53   1.01
Brazil           0.01 66.63    6.32       5.47    0.76    0.21    0.47    0.12    7.62    3.00     4,297   0.12   0.39
Canada           0.00 83.33   10.00      10.00    0.86    0.67    0.46    0.31    9.67    5.00    19,624   0.12   0.81
Chile            0.01 70.10    5.30       7.47    0.64    0.81    0.10    0.08    7.50    5.00     4,172   0.14   1.00
Denmark          0.11 85.67   10.00      10.00    0.77    0.38    0.44    0.16    9.67    2.00    33,740   1.01   1.41
Finland          0.05 96.25   10.00      10.00    0.77    0.59    0.35    0.20    9.67    3.00    26,295   0.33   0.94
France           0.06 79.73    8.00       9.02    0.74    0.42    0.56    0.20    9.65    3.00    26,657   0.48   0.92
Germany          0.02 82.77    8.92       9.77    0.84    0.30    1.34    0.35    9.90    1.00    29,594   0.50   0.81
Greece           0.04 75.43    8.33       8.89    0.74    0.26    0.50    0.13    7.12    2.00    11,454   0.02   0.28
Hong Kong       0.08 68.89     7.58      8.24       .     2.12    0.51    1.03    8.29    5.00    21,023   0.08   2.28
India            0.00 59.71    4.79      6.35     0.71    0.33    0.36    0.11    7.75    5.00      387    0.02   0.34
Ireland          0.06 81.52    7.48       8.88    0.76    0.26    0.67    0.33    9.67    4.00    17,834   0.07   0.31
Italy            0.05 75.31    6.03       8.95    0.77    0.24    0.48    0.13    9.35    1.00    18,806   0.30   0.55
Japan            0.14 82.39    7.45       9.38    0.76    0.85    0.43    0.39    9.67    4.00    41,437   0.45   1.25
Korea (South)    0.05 72.13    6.28       6.35    0.65    0.40    1.43    0.55    8.31    2.00     9,746   0.36   0.77
Malaysia         0.03 70.77    6.49       6.68    0.73    1.77    0.42    0.85    7.95    4.00     3,845   0.54   2.17
Mexico           0.03 69.19    4.71       4.78    0.32    0.28    0.39    0.10    7.29    1.00     3,299   0.01   0.12
Netherlands      0.02 86.76   10.00      10.00    0.75    0.84    0.63    0.60    9.98    2.00    26,483   0.25   1.13
New Zealand     -0.01 83.65    9.51       9.95    0.74    0.44    0.29    0.13    9.69    4.00    15,836   0.00   0.45
Norway           0.10 84.71    9.51      10.00    0.77    0.28    0.57    0.16    9.88    4.00    32,407   0.23   0.52
Peru            -0.01 53.46    5.00       4.48    0.40    0.19    0.32    0.06    5.54    3.00     2,181   0.02   0.23
Philippines      0.05 57.62    4.68       5.75    0.50    0.53    0.32    0.15    5.22    3.00     1,092   0.00   0.53
Portugal         0.01 78.54    8.21       8.67    0.74    0.24    0.40    0.11    8.90    3.00    10,667   0.13   0.38
Singapore        0.11 81.02    6.81       9.13    0.68    1.46    0.49    0.68    9.30    4.00    21,342   0.14   1.64
South Africa     0.03 66.08    7.87       4.22    0.51    1.46    0.13    0.19    6.88    5.00     3,964   0.14   1.61
Spain            0.01 73.90    7.24       8.21    0.75    0.37    0.79    0.36    9.52    4.00    14,814   0.15   0.53
Sweden           0.06 84.26   10.00      10.00    0.76    0.75    0.47    0.38    9.40    3.00    27,307   0.54   1.31
Switzerland      0.09 88.64    9.51      10.00    0.84    1.37    0.77    1.21    9.98    2.00    44,437   0.52   1.95
Thailand         0.01 65.24    4.76       7.79    0.69    0.53    0.80    0.36    7.42    2.00     2,501   0.08   0.61
Turkey          0.06 55.56     4.68      6.08     0.68    0.20    1.10    0.20    7.00    2.00     2,838   0.00   0.21
United Kingdom 0.03 81.36      8.32       9.21    0.74    1.24    0.51    0.52    9.71    5.00    18,920   0.19   1.46
United States    0.02 81.10    7.91      10.00    0.85    0.95    0.78    0.76    9.98    5.00    27,487   0.83   1.82


                                                                 36
                         Table 3 Regressions of excess cash holdings
Regressions are run using the method of Fama and MacBeth (1973) where cross-sectional regressions
are run each year and the time series of coefficients are used to make inferences. N is the number of
cross-sectional regressions and the adjusted R2 is the mean of the adjusted R2s of the cross-section
regressions. Values in parentheses are t-values.

          Panel A. Institution quality variables measured annually from 1988 through 1999.

                              (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
    Intercept               -0.206      -0.207       -0.217       -0.224       -0.275        -0.213
                            (-6.70)     (-7.32)      (-6.79)      (-7.94)      (-7.73)       (-5.95)
    Inflation               -0.026      -0.038       -0.119       -0.030       -0.078        -0.014
                            (-0.90)     (-1.40)      (-1.48)      (-0.99)      (-1.62)       (-0.45)
    Stock market            0.569        0.527        0.550        0.474        0.607        0.514
    volatility              (4.75)       (4.15)       (6.06)       (3.85)       (6.36)       (3.73)
    Stock market            -0.011      -0.010       -0.011       -0.016       -0.013        -0.008
    turnover to GDP         (-3.82)     (-3.50)      (-3.67)      (-2.95)      (-3.00)       (-2.16)
    Log (GDP per            0.023        0.035        0.030        0.032        0.038        0.023
    capita)                 (8.72)       (7.31)       (7.52)      (10.89)       (7.83)       (6.87)
    ICRGP                               -0.001
                                        (-2.75)
    Polcon                                           -0.068
                                                     (-2.51)
    Corruption                                                    -0.007
                                                                  (-4.31)
    Law and Order                                                              -0.009
                                                                               (-5.34)
    Closely Held                                                                             0.025
    Ownership                                                                                (1.55)
    Adjusted R2             0.2189      0.2528       0.2475       0.2575       0.2717        0.2059
    N                         12           12           12          12           12            12
                  Panel B. Institution quality variables averaged over 1988-1999.

                        (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)

                      -0.158     -0.155    -0.216     -0.269     -0.206     -0.206    -0.196    -0.212
Intercept
                      (-4.55)    (-2.73)   (-7.13)    (-6.17)    (-6.31)   (-13.73)   (-6.79)   (-5.56)
                      -0.069     -0.142    -0.026    -0.108(-    -0.031     -0.130    -0.036    -0.020
Inflation
                      (-1.70)    (-1.39)   (-0.89)      1.78)    (-0.99)    (-1.59)   (-1.08)   (-0.70)
Stock market           0.516      0.491     0.439      0.615      0.571      0.589     0.580     0.502
volatility             (4.40)     (3.09)    (3.28)     (5.46)     (4.62)     (9.18)    (4.67)   (3.50)
Stock market          -0.014     -0.011    -0.033     -0.014     -0.012     -0.009    -0.012    -0.009
turnover to GDP       (-5.16)    (-4.05)   (-3.78)    (-6.47)    (-3.53)    (-4.52)   (-4.13)   (-2.98)
Log (GDP per           0.036      0.030     0.032      0.042      0.023      0.048     0.021     0.029
capita)               (12.40)     (4.05)   (12.23)     (6.82)     (8.59)     (4.64)    (8.06)   (6.85)
                      -0.002
ICRGP
                      (-4.11)
                                 -0.144
Polcon
                                 (-2.62)
                                           -0.009
Corruption
                                           (-5.28)
                                                      -0.013
Law and Order
                                                      (-5.00)
                                                                 -0.001
Anti-Director Index
                                                                 (-0.14)
                                                                           -0.026
Expropriation Risk
                                                                           (-2.37)
                                                                                      0.011
Civil Law
                                                                                      (2.67)
Closely Held                                                                                    0.029
Ownership                                                                                       (2.11)
Adjusted R2           0.2314     0.2786    0.2525     0.2835     0.1889    0.3204     0.2140    0.2025

N                       12         12         12        12         12         12        12        12




                                              38
            Panel C. Institution quality variables measured annually from 1989 through 1999.
                             (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)              (6)
Intercept                  -0.197      -0.188       -0.212       -0.209        -0.233      -0.1989
                           (-7.10)     (-8.02)      (-7.41)      (-8.07)      (-10.48)     (-6.93)
Inflation                  -0.008      -0.017       -0.051       -0.007       -0.029           -0.001
                           (-0.31)     (-0.73)      (-0.95)      (-0.26)      (-0.91)          (-0.03)
Stock market               0.624       0.581           0.639      0.514        0.653           0.593
volatility                 (6.46)      (4.85)          (7.21)     (4.94)       (6.67)          (5.59)
(Stock+Bond) Market        0.023       0.021           0.023      0.024        0.019           0.023
 Cap to GDP                (3.92)      (4.05)          (4.70)     (4.12)       (3.99)          (4.20)
Log (GDP per capita)       0.019       0.026         0.025        0.026        0.028           0.019
                           (7.15)      (9.08)       (11.36)      (13.12)      (12.26)          (6.90)
ICRGP                                  -0.001
                                       (-2.18)
Polcon                                              -0.056
                                                    (-3.07)
Corruption                                                       -0.007
                                                                 (-4.98)
Law and Order                                                                 -0.006
                                                                              (-5.70)
Closely Held                                                                                   0.005
Ownership                                                                                      (0.50)
Adjusted R2                0.3091      0.3343       0.3235       0.3354       0.3267           0.2986
N                            11          11             11         11            11              11




                                                  39
Panel D. Institution quality variables averaged over the sample period of 1989-1999 with financial
                     development proxied by market capitalization over GDP.
                          (1)        (2)      (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)      (7)       (8)
Intercept              -0.172    -0.174    -0.203      -0.227    -0.179 -0.207 -0.180         -0.195
                       (-4.90)   (-3.03)   (-7.20)     (-7.39)   (-5.82) (-11.24) (-6.70)     (-6.80)
Inflation              -0.026    -0.084    -0.010      -0.042    -0.009    -0.062    -0.035   -0.005
                       (-0.80)   (-0.98)   (-0.36)     (-1.10)   (-0.35)   (-1.06)   (-099)   (-0.18)
Stock market           0.592     0.598     0.488       0.649     0.605     0.640     0.669    0.604
volatility             (5.21)    (3.86)    (4.23)      (5.89)    (6.06)    (9.56)    (6.49)   (5.78)
(Stock+Bond)           0.021     0.022     0.023       0.019     0.026     0.016     0.032    0.023
Market Cap to GDP      (3.86)    (4.73)    (4.34)      (3.99)    (3.74)    (5.75)    (3.67)   (4.08)
Log (GDP per            0.026     0.027     0.026       0.030    0.018     0.039     0.015    0.019
capita)                (10.62)   (10.61)   (14.42)     (10.58)   (6.33)    (4.55)    (4.32)   (5.84)
IGCRP                  -0.001
                       (-2.29)
Polcon                           -0.121
                                 (-2.68)
Corruption                                  -0.08
                                           (-5.56)
Law and Order                                          -0.008
                                                       (-8.15)
Anti-director Rights                                             -0.003
                                                                 (-2.99)
Expropriation Risk                                                         -0.020
                                                                           (-2.00)
Civil Law                                                                            0.023
                                                                                     (3.41)
Closely Held                                                                                  0.004
Ownership                                                                                     (0.61)
Adjusted R2            0.3091    0.3614    0.3404      0.3349    0.2981    0.3666    0.3696   0.2925
N                        11        11        11          11        11        11       11        11




                                                  40
                                 Table 4. The value of cash and political risk.
Regressions are estimated using the method of Fama and MacBeth (1973). Regressions are estimated
independently for each subsample and allow coefficients on control variables to vary across
subsamples. X t is the level of variable X in year t divided by the level of assets in year t. dX t is the
change in the level of X from year t-1 to year t divided by total assets in year t ((X t-1 - X t)/A t). dXt+1
is the change in the level of X from year t+1 to year t divided by assets in year t ((X t+1 - X t)/A t). M
is the market value of equity. E is earnings defined as earnings before extraordinary items + interest +
deferred tax credits + investment tax credits. NA is net assets, which is defined as total assets - cash.
RD is research and development expense. When R&D is missing, it is set to zero. I is interest
expense. D is common dividends. C is cash and cash equivalents. The ICRGP index is high for
countries with low political risk. The estimated regression is:


     M i ,t = α + β1 E i ,t + β2 dE i ,t + β3 dE i ,t +1 + β4 dNAi ,t + β5 dNAi ,t +1 +

    β6 RDi ,t + β7 dRDi ,t + β8 dRDi ,t +1 + β9 I i ,t + β10 dI i ,t + β11dI i ,t + 1 + β12 Di ,t +
    β13 dDi ,t + β14 dDi ,t +1 + β15 dM i ,t + 1 + β16 Ci ,t + εi ,t




                                                              41
                                                      Difference between high
            High ICRGP index        Low ICRGP index    and low ICRGP index
                                                             (p-value)
                  0.461                  0.464
Intercept                                                     0.963
                 (9.10)                  (8.64)
                  3.516                  3.722
   Et                                                         0.723
                (13.03)                  (9.56)
                 -0.475                 -0.498
  dE t                                                        0.904
                (-2.94)                 (-2.54)
                  1.820                  1.199
 dE t+1                                                       0.021
                 (8.51)                  (5.70)
                  0.530                  0.230
 dNA t                                                        0.053
                 (4.79)                  (2.43)
                  0.295                  0.233
dNA t+1                                                       0.353
                 (5.18)                  (2.96)
                  3.579                 -0.162
  RD t                                                        0.045
                 (4.52)                 (-0.11)
                  5.676                  3.482
 dRD t                                                        0.600
                 (2.87)                  (0.76)
                10.628                   6.646
dRD t+1                                                       0.039
                 (6.20)                  (3.60)
                 -8.620                 -6.835
   It                                                         0.151
                (-9.96)                 (-5.73)
                  0.152                  1.173
   dI t                                                       0.469
                 (0.17)                  (0.89)
                 -5.847                 -2.068
  dI t+1                                                      0.005
                (-6.59)                 (-3.58)
                  5.286                  5.596
   Dt                                                         0.804
                 (4.57)                  (6.16)
                  0.518                 -0.751
  dD t                                                        0.115
                 (0.73)                 (-1.13)
                  2.200                  2.569
 dD t+1                                                       0.799
                 (1.88)                  (2.56)
                  0.093                 -0.102
 dM t+1                                                       0.004
                 (1.75)                 (-1.50)
                  1.042                  0.577
   Ct                                                         0.036
                (10.57)                  (3.61)




                               42
                            Table 5. The value of cash and investor protection.
     Regressions are run using the method of Fama and MacBeth (1973) where cross-sectional
regressions are run each year and the time series of coefficients are used to make inferences. Each
regression includes 12 cross-sections except for the bond market capitalization regression where we
have 11 cross-sections. Joint regressions are estimated using the whole sample and have the same
coefficients on control variables. Separate regressions are run independently for each subsample and
allow coefficients on control variables to vary across subsamples. X t is the level of variable X in year
t divided by the level of assets in year t. dX t is the change in the level of X from year t-1 to year t
divided by total assets in year t ((X t-1 - X t)/A t). dXt+1 is the change in the level of X from year t+1 to
year t divided by assets in year t ((X t+1 - X t)/A t). M is the market value of equity. E is earnings
defined as earnings before extraordinary items + interest + deferred tax credits + investment tax
credits. NA is net assets, which is defined as total assets - cash. RD is research and development
expense. When R&D is missing, it is set to zero. I is interest expense. D is common dividends. C is
cash and cash equivalents. The ICRGP index is high for countries with low political risk. The
standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significant difference between the high and low
coefficient at the 10, 5, and 1 percent significance levels.

    Joint Regressions

     M i ,t = α + α1 Hi + β1 E i ,t + β2 dE i ,t + β3 dE i ,t + 1 + β4 dNAi ,t + β5 dNAi ,t +1 +

    β6 RDi ,t + β7 dRDi ,t + β8 dRDi ,t +1 + β9 I i ,t + β10 dI i ,t + β11dI i ,t + 1 + β12 Di ,t +

                                                        (              )      (                )
    β13 dDi ,t + β14 dDi ,t +1 + β15 dM i ,t +1 + β16 Hii ,t × Ci ,t + β17 Lowi ,t × Ci ,t + εi ,t


    Separate Regressions

     M i ,t = α + β1 E i ,t + β2 dE i ,t + β3 dE i ,t +1 + β4 dNAi ,t + β5 dNAi ,t +1 +

    β6 RDi ,t + β7 dRDi ,t + β8 dRDi ,t +1 + β9 I i ,t + β10 dI i ,t + β11dI i ,t + 1 + β12 Di ,t +
    β13 dDi ,t + β14 dDi ,t +1 + β15 dM i ,t + 1 + β16 Ci ,t + εi ,t




                                                              43
                                     Joint Regressions                  Separate Regressions
                          High Institution   Low Institution   High Institution   Low Institution
  Institution Quality
                           Quality (β16)      Quality (β17)     Quality (β16)      Quality (β16)
                                1.07***              0.30            1.08***             0.02
      Corruption
                                (0.072)             (0.138)          (0.080)            (0.174)
                                1.13***              0.65            1.10***             0.69
        Polcon
                                (0.094)             (0.117)          (0.098)            (0.099)
                                1.08***              0.59            1.04***             0.58
        ICRGP
                                (0.093)             (0.156)          (0.098)            (0.159)
                                1.08***              0.47            1.05***             0.50
     Rule of law
                                (0.070)             (0.120)          (0.084)            (0.119)
                                1.07***              0.49            1.05***             0.48
    Expropriation
                                (0.076)             (0.093)          (0.092)            (0.075)
                                1.18***              0.23            1.10***             0.28
  Anti-director rights
                                (0.078)             (0.080)          (0.090)            (0.075)
                         High Development Low Development High Development Low Development
Financial Development
                               (β16)           (β17)            (β16)           (β16)
Stock market turnover           1.25***              0.62            1.19***             0.67
       to GDP                   (0.131)             (0.082)          (0.138)            (0.072)
   Stock Market                 1.15***              0.17            1.08***             0.29
Capitalization to GDP           (0.080)             (0.100)          (0.090)            (0.096)
    Bond Market                 1.09***              0.62             1.04               0.77
Capitalization to GDP           (0.126)             (0.120)          (0.134)            (0.100)
    Total Market                1.04***              0.76             1.02               0.86
Capitalization to GDP           (0.092)             (0.145)          (0.100)            (0.140)
                         High Development Low Development High Development Low Development
Economic Development
                               (β16)           (β17)            (β16)           (β16)
                                1.08***              0.56            1.04***             0.59
    GDP per capita
                                (0.110)             (0.132)          (0.123)            (0.101)




                                               44
