                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             MENU COSTS AND PHILLIPS CURVES

                                           Mikhail Golosov
                                          Robert E. Lucas, Jr.

                                         Working Paper 10187
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10187


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2003




We have benefitted from discussions with Ariel Burstein, Ricardo Caballero, V.V. Chari, Larry Christiano,
Larry Jones, Boyan Jovanovic, Patrick Kehoe, Timothy Kehoe, Bob King, Pete Klenow, Oleksiy Kryvtsov,
Ellen McGrattan, Thomas Philippon, Thomas Sargent, Nancy Stokey, Julia Thomas, and Aleh Tsyvinski.
Participants in seminars at Chicago, Minnesota, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the CEPR
conference “The Phillips Curve Revisited” and the NBER Economic Fluctuations and Growth meeting
provided helpful criticism. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Mikhail Golosov and Robert E. Lucas, Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Menu Costs and Phillips Curves
Mikhail Golosov and Robert E. Lucas, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 10187
December 2003
JEL No. E0

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper develops a model of a monetary economy in which individual firms are subject to

idiosyncratic productivity shocks as well as general inflation. Sellers can change price only by

incurring a real “menu cost.” We calibrate this cost and the variance and autocorrelation of the

idiosyncratic shock using a new U.S. data set of individual prices due to Klenow and Kryvtsov. The

prediction of the calibrated model for the effects of high inflation on the frequency of price changes

accords well with the Israeli evidence obtained by Lach and Tsiddon. The model is also used to

conduct numerical experiments on the economy’s response to credible and incredible disinflations

and other shocks. In none of the simulations we conducted did monetary shocks induce large or

persistent real responses.

Mikhail Golosov
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
P.O. Box 291
Minneapolis, MN 55480-0291
golosov@econ.umn.edu

Robert E. Lucas, Jr.
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
relucas@uchicago.edu
  1. Introduction

       As an explanation for some of the apparent real eﬀects of inflations, menu costs–
real resources required to change nominal prices–have an evident appeal. Such costs
are by definition a source of nominal “rigidity” or “stickiness,” and lump-sum costs
have the added attraction that action will be taken infrequently and only in response
to changes that are viewed as permanent. Thus menu cost models are consistent with
the fact that even large disinflations have small real eﬀects if credibly carried out.1
Finally, and not least, menu costs are really there: The fact that many individual
goods prices remain fixed for weeks or months in the face of continuously changing
demand and supply conditions testifies conclusively to the existence of a fixed cost of
repricing.
       Granting these qualitative observations, it would be good to know how large
the real eﬀects of price stickiness induced by menu costs might be. Phillips curves
estimated from aggregate data provide one source of information, but such estimates
are notoriously unstable and can be given many diﬀerent interpretations. In this
paper, we calibrate a menu cost model using a new data set on prices, based on
Bureau of Labor Statistics surveys, assembled and described by Bils and Klenow
(2002) and Klenow and Kryvtsov (2003). This estimation makes use of both cross-
section and time series evidence on the prices of narrowly-defined individual goods,
  1
      Sargent (1986).


                                            2
and summary statistics on the frequency of individual price changes. The calibrated
model is then used to carry out several numerical experiments involving the economy’s
responses to specified changes in the overall inflation rate.
    A distinctive feature of the model we use is the assumption that each seller is
subject to two shocks that aﬀect its pricing decision: an aggregate shock, reflecting
economy-wide inflation, and an idiosyncratic shock, reflecting good-specific changes in
technology or preferences. In such a world, an observed price change may be triggered
by either kind of shock, or a mix of the two, and the pricing decisions of individual
sellers will not be synchronized. Observations on aggregates must be interpreted as
averages over a more complex microeconomic reality. In the next section we define an
equilibrium in a model with this feature, in which inflation is defined by changes in
an economy-wide nominal wage rate that follows an exogenously given random walk,
with constant drift and variance.
    The definition we propose in Section 2 is a little too general to permit us to
calculate or characterize equilibria, and the rest of the paper examines a series of
special cases and approximations. In Sections 3 and 4, we specialize to the case
where the inflation rate is constant and the idiosyncratic shock is mean-reverting.
In this version of the model, suitably normalized prices follow a continuous time
Markov process that has an invariant distribution. We derive the Bellman equation for
individual firms in this context. We describe a discrete-time model that can provide an
arbitrarily good approximation to the continuous-time model, and for which solutions
are inexpensive to compute. We use the approximate model to compute the optimal
pricing behavior of firms.
    This model predicts the fraction of prices that are changed per month, the key
parameter in the widely-applied model of Calvo (1983). We use the model to examine
the sensitivity of this fraction to changes in inflationary behavior. Then we compare
the predictions of the model, as estimated from data from the low-inflation U.S.


                                           3
economy of 1988-97, to Lach and Tsiddon’s (1992) evidence on the frequency of price
changes during the Israeli inflations of 1978-1979 and 1981-82. The predictions of the
model are surprisingly accurate.
     One of the most striking predictions of our model is that idiosyncratic shocks
account for most of the price adjustments in the U.S. In the U.S. data, more than
20 percent of all consumer prices are adjusted each month, and the average size
of the change in the individual prices that are adjusted is much larger than the
expected inflation between adjustments: The average price is changed once every five
months, and the average inflation in the U.S. over five months is roughly one percent,
while prices are changed on average by as much as 10 percent. These observations
suggest that idiosyncratic shocks–shocks to productivity or demand–are responsible
for most of the price changes. Our simulations confirm this intuition. When the
idiosyncratic shocks in the model are shut down, the frequency of price adjustments
is roughly unchanged in high inflationary environments but it is much reduced when
inflation is low.
     Even though idiosyncratic shocks cause most of the price adjustments, new prices
reflect both firm-level and aggregate shocks. Thus even a small inflationary shock, one
which is not suﬃcient to lead to a price change on its own, is quickly reflected in new
prices as firms react to other shocks. This makes it diﬃcult to obtain a large degree
of persistence for monetary shocks in our menu cost environment. Our simulations
also show this eﬀect very clearly.
     Although the simulated economy fits observed pricing behavior well, it exhibits
very small real eﬀects of monetary instability. Simulated time series with realistic
monetary variability have a variance of aggregate output that is ten times lower than
that observed in the recent U.S. data. The estimated Phillips curve is also very flat:
A one percentage point reduction in inflation rate depresses output by only 0.05 of
one percent. Thus money appears nearly neutral: The eﬀects of inflation shocks on


                                          4
aggregate production and employment, as we estimate them, are small and transient.
        Similar results hold for diﬀerent policy experiments. For a credible disinflation–
we use an immediate reduction in the rate of wage inflation from 15 to one percent
per quarter–there are essentially no real eﬀects, consistent with Sargent’s (1986)
findings. But even when the disinflation is carried out in a non-credible way, the
resulting decline in production never exceeds one percent of GDP. We summarize
these and other findings in more detail in a concluding section.
        The model we describe in the next section builds on the original formulation of
the pricing problem of a single firm by Sheshinski and Weiss (1977), and on the long
literature of other papers that apply (S; s)-type inventory theory to pricing problems.2
It has proved diﬃcult to situate these pricing models in equilibrium models, but
several precedents have been influential and valuable. Calvo (1983) leaves the fixed
cost in the background, assuming instead that a firm gets an option to re-price in any
period with a fixed probability that does not depend on its own state. By varying
this probability, any desired degree of price “stickiness” can be built into a model.
Caplin and Spulber (1987) considered equilibrium in an economy in which the money
supply always grows, the firm with the lowest price at any instant re-prices, and to
the top of the price distribution. They show that a rectangular distribution of firms
by their price levels is stationary, and that the distribution of prices relative to the
money supply is stationary and independent of the path of money. This was a striking
example of an economy with an extremely low re-pricing rate (in Calvo’s terms) that
would appear to an observer of aggregates to have no price stickiness at all. Further
developments can be found in Caplin and Leahy (1991) and elsewhere.
   2
       Sheshinski and Weiss (1977) analyzed the pricing decision of an individual seller facing a deter-
ministic trend in the desired price level. Versions of this problem, many of them stochastic, have
been studied by Sheshinski and Weiss (1983), Frenkel and Jovanovic (1980), Chang (1999), Mankiw
(1985), and Stokey (2002).



                                                    5
    Lach and Tsiddon (1992) look at individual price distributions in Israel, finding
them not to be rectangular and the changes not to be synchronized, even for firms
with the same initial price. They suggest that a successful model would need to have
idiosyncratic shocks as well as economy-wide shocks. Dotsey, King, and Wolman
(1999) propose a monetary equilibrium model in which the synchronization of price
changes is broken by a transient, random shock to the menu cost itself: Firms that
draw high cost have an incentive to postpone re-pricing. They explore a number
of issues numerically using a log-linear approximation. Further developments are
described in Willis (2000) and Burstein (2002).
    The model developed and applied below shares both its two-shock character
and its use of numerical methods with Dotsey, King, and Wolman (1999) and their
successors. In the Dotsey, King, and Wolman (1999) model, the idiosyncratic shock
aﬀects an individual firm’s menu cost and thus influences which firms will re-price at
a given time. All firms that do re-price move to the same new price. In our model,
in contrast, the idiosyncratic shock aﬀects productivity, and aﬀects both which firms
will re-price and the new prices of those who do. This feature allows us to capture
observable heterogeneity in individual pricing behavior: Prices for some goods are
increased for some and decreased for others, and the size of price adjustment is not
closely related to the expected inflation rate at the time price is adjusted.
    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we lay out the general model.
Section 3 containts the benchmark specification of the model with constant inflation
rate. Section 4 describes the data we used and the calibation procedure. Section 5
then describes the results of some simulations of disinflations, conducted using the
model of Section 3. We compare credible and non-credible disinflations. Section
6 calculates some impulse-response functions. Section 7 re-introduces a stochastic
shock to the inflation rate, and proposes an approximation to the firm’s pricing policy.
This approximation is then used to examine the behavior of Phillips curves, in the


                                           6
sense of correlations between inflation rates and levels of production and employment.
Estimates of the fraction of the variability in these variables that can be accounted
for by monetary shocks in the presence of menu costs are also provided.

2. A Model of Monetary Equilibrium

       The theory that we calibrate and simulate in this paper is a Bellman equation
for a single, price-setting firm that hires labor at a given nominal wage, produces a
consumption good with a stochastically varying technology, and sets product price
subject to a menu cost of re-pricing. We situate our model of a firm in a model of a
monetary economy so as to be able to relate its predictions to aggregative evidence.
In this economy, there is a continuum of infinitely lived households, each of which
consumes a continuum of goods. A Spence-Dixit-Stiglitz3 utility function is used to
aggregate across goods to form current period utility. Each household also supplies
labor on a competitive labor market. Firms hire labor, used to produce the consump-
tion good and to re-set nominal prices for the good, and sell goods to consumers.
Each firm produces only one of the continuum of consumption goods.
       The economy is subject to two kinds of shocks: a monetary shock, which we
summarize in the implied money wage rate Wt , and a firm-specific productivity shock
Vt . The log of the nominal wage, wt = log(Wt ), is assumed to follow a Brownian
motion with drift parameter a and variance ¾2w ,

                                        dw = adt + ¾w dZw ,                         (2.1)

where Zw denotes a standard Brownian motion with zero drift and unit variance.
We think of the behavior of the money wage as ultimately being determined by the
behavior of the money supply, but this connection will not be modeled and the only
explicit role of dollars in the theory is as a unit of account. In the absence of the real
  3
      Spence (1976) and Dixit-Stiglitz (1977).

                                                 7
menu costs associated with changing prices, the evolution of Wt would have no eﬀect
on resource allocation.
        There are also firm-specific productivity shocks Vt , which are assumed to be
independent across firms: We assume that vt = log(Vt ) follows a mean-reverting
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process:

                                     dv = −´vdt + ¾ v dZv ,               ´ > 0:                    (2.2)

where Zv is a standard Brownian motion with zero drift and unit variance, distributed
independently of Zw .
        Equilibrium prices and quantities will be modeled as stochastic processes, defined
in terms of an initial joint distribution Á0 (P; V ) of firms by their inherited price P
and productivity level V and by the evolution of the exogenous processes Vt and Wt :
Specifically, each firm chooses a pricing strategy {Pt }, a stochastic processes that
takes the form of a right-continuous step function whose date t value depends on the
histories of its own productivity shocks {Vs}t0 and of the nominal wage shocks {Ws }t0 :4
The strategy {Pt } that a firm chooses will also depend on its inherited initial price
P0 . When we want to emphasize this dependence we write {Pt (P0 )}:
        For given firm behavior {Pt (P0 )}, the initial joint distribution of (P0 ; V0 ), the
initial wage W0 ; and the probabilities implied by (2.1) and (2.2), induce a family of
probability measures Át for the prices facing consumers at all dates t. For any Borel
set A ⊂ R2 ,
                                 Z
                      Át (A) =       Pr{(Pt (P0 ); Vt )(!) ∈ A | V0 }Á0 (dP0 ; dV0 ):               (2.3)

        There is also a capital market, in which consumers trade contingent claims to
the monetary unit. We adopt the convention that
                                                  ·Z   ∞              ¸
                                              E            qt Yt dt
                                                   0
   4
       That is, the process {Pt } is adapted to the filtration generated by {Vt ; Wt }: (See, for example,
Stokey (2002), ch. 1.)

                                                       8
is the value at date 0 of a dollar earnings stream {Yt }∞
                                                        0 , also a stochastic process

defined in terms of Wt : Thus qt must be multiplied by the appropriate probabilities
to obtain the Arrow-Debreu prices.
    We next describe the decision problem of consumers in this environment. At
each date t, each household buys from every seller, and each seller is characterized by
a pair (P; V ); distributed according to the measure Át (P; V ). The household chooses
a buying strategy {Ct (·)}, where Ct (P ) is the number of units of the consumption
good that it buys from a seller who charges price P after the shock history {Ws}t0 has
occurred. It also chooses a labor supply strategy {`t }, where `t is the units of labor
supplied after the shock history {Ws }t0 has occurred. The values Ct (P ) and `t also
depend on the initial price distribution Á0 (P; V ):
    For any buying strategy Ct (P ); define ct as the Spence-Dixit-Stiglitz consumption
aggregate
                                       ·Z                                    ¸"=("−1)
                              ct =             Ct (P )   1−1="
                                                                 Át (dP; dV )           :       (2.4)

The corresponding current period utility is assumed to be
                                                          1 1−°
                                                            c :
                                                         1−° t
Preferences over time are
                                      "Z                 Ã                      !   #
                                           ∞                  1 1−°
                                  E            e   −½t
                                                                c   − ®`t dt :                  (2.5)
                                       0                     1−° t
The operator E(·) is defined by the shock processes (2.1) and (2.2).
    We write the consumer’s budget constraint as
                    ·Z   ∞        µZ                                                    ¶   ¸
                E            qt        P Ct (P )Át (dP; dV ) − Wt `t − Πt dt ≤ 0;               (2.6)
                     0

where Πt is profit income, obtained from the household’s holdings of a fully diversified
portfolio of claims on the individual firms. The household chooses buying and labor
supply strategies {Ct (·)} and {`t } so as to maximize (2.5), subject to (2.6), taking
{qt }; {Wt }, and {Át } as given.

                                                               9
     At each date, a firm faces consumer demand Ct (·), a nominal wage rate Wt , and
a stochastically determined productivity parameter (goods per hour worked) Vt : The
firm enters the period with a price level P carried over from the past. If it leaves
price unchanged, its current profit level is

                                             Ct (P )(P − Wt =Vt ):

If it chooses any price Q 6= P , its current profit level is

                                    Ct (Q)(Q − Wt =Vt ) − kWt ;

where the parameter k is the hours of labor needed to change price, the real menu
cost.
     A pricing strategy {Pt } for the firm takes the form of an increasing sequence

                       i=1 , dependent on the histories {Vt ; Wt } of shocks, and an
of stopping times {Ti }∞
associated sequence {P i }∞
                          i=1 of prices, such that


                                 Pt = P i           for Ti ≤ t < Ti+1 :

Any such strategy yields the expected return
                                     Z     T1
                                E[              qt Ct (P0 )[P0 − Wt =Vt ]dt
                                       0
                       ∞ Z
                       X     Ti+1                                        ∞
                                                                         X
                   +                qt Ct (P i )[P i − Wt =Vt ]dt − k          qTi WTi ]:   (2.7)
                       i=1 Ti                                            i=1

Firms choose the pricing strategy {Pt } to maximize (2.7). For a given initial price
distribution Á0 , the pricing strategy {Pt }, adopted by all sellers, defines the distrib-
utions {Át }: A process {Υt } with the interpretation that Υt dt is the number of firms
that re-price during the time interval (t; t + dt), is also defined.
     The market clearing condition for this economy is

                                         Z
                                                Ct (P )
                                `t =                    Át (dP; dV ) + kΥt :                (2.8)
                                                  V
                                                        10
The equality of goods consumed and goods produced is incorporated in (2.7). There
is no money market to clear because money does not appear as a good in the model:
It is just a unit of account.
    The consumer side of the model is familiar. We will use the first-order conditions
for consumers to reformulate the firms’ problems, and then turn to the study of the
latter. The first-order conditions for the consumer include
                         ·Z                                         ¸1=("−1)
              e−½t c−°
                    t         Ct (P )   1−1="
                                                Át (dP; dV )                    Ct (P )−1=" = ¸qt P;    (2.9)

where the multiplier ¸ does not depend on time, and

                                               e−½t ® = ¸qt Wt :                                       (2.10)

Eliminating the multiplier between (2.9) and (2.10) and simplifying using (2.4) yields

                                        −°+1="                             P
                                       ct          Ct (P )−1=" = ®            :
                                                                           Wt
Solving for Ct (P ), we obtain the demand function facing each firm:
                                                                µ        ¶−"
                                                                    ®P
                                       Ct (P ) =      c1−"°
                                                       t                        :                      (2.11)
                                                                    Wt
Applying the natural normalization q0 = 1 to (2.10), we obtain
                                                                W0
                                                qt = e−½t          :                                   (2.12)
                                                                Wt
    Inserting the solutions (2.11) and (2.12) from the consumer’s problem into the
firm’s objective function (2.7) then yields

                                  Z                       µ          ¶−"
                                       T1                     ®P0              P0  1
                         W0 E[              e−½t c1−"°
                                                  t                        [      − ]dt
                                   0                          Wt               Wt Vt
                   ∞ Z
                                               Ã          !−"
                   X     Ti+1                      ®P i             Pi  1        X∞
               +                e−½t c1−"°
                                      t                         [      − ]dt − k     e−½Ti ]:          (2.13)
                   i=1 Ti                          Wt               W t Vt       i=1
We sum up in the following



                                                          11
  Definition. Given an initial wage W0 and a joint price-shock distribution Á0 ,
an equilibrium is a pricing strategy {Pt } for firms, processes {ct } and {Át } for the
consumption aggregate and the price-shock distributions, and processes {Υt } and
{`t } for the re-pricing frequencing and labor supply, such that (i) given {ct }; {Pt }
maximizes (2.13), (ii) given {Pt }; {Át } satisfies (2.3), (iii) {ct } and {Át } satisfy (2.4),
and such that {Υt } and {`t } satisfy (2.8), given {Át } and with Ct (P ) given by (2.11).




     In our view it is a limitation of this definition of equilibrium that inflation is
defined by the assumed exogenous behavior of nominal wages, and not indirectly by
the behavior of the money supply. We will not remedy this deficiency here, but a brief
digression on the issues involved in doing so may help in interpreting our results. Sup-
pose we were to introduce money Mt into the theory, treating it as a given stochastic
process, and motivate its use by adding real balances Mt =Pt as a second argument in
consumers’ utility function. Retaining additivity, the instantaneous utility flow could
then be written
                                  1 1−°     Mt
                                     ct + u( ) − ®`t ;                                  (2.14)
                                 1−°        Pt
say. An additional equilibrium condition would then be the equality of the marginal
rate of substitution between real balances and leisure to their relative price, or

                                            Mt 1     Rt
                                     u0 (     )    =    ;                               (2.15)
                                            Pt ®Pt   Wt

where Rt is the instantaneous nominal interest rate. The other equilibrium conditions
are not aﬀected. The nominal interest rate in turn is essentially minus the rate of
change of the log of the price qt , given in (2.12), and is itself a stochastic process.
This familiar Fisherian connection between the level of real balances demanded and
the rate of change of the nominal wage means that, in general, nominal wages and
prices will not be proportional to the money supply along an equilibrium path.

                                                12
    But proportionality is a possibility. Suppose, for example, that u is the log
function, so (2.15) becomes
                                        Wt
                                           = Rt :
                                       ®Mt
Suppose further that the growth rate of money is constant at a rate a. If the nominal
wage grows at the same rate, the instantaneous interest rate will be constant at ½ + a
and the wage path
                                    Wt = ®(½ + a)Mt                                 (2.16)

will be an equilibrium.
    These are assumptions on preferences and the money supply that exactly ra-
tionalize the calculations we report for constant wage growth in Sections 3 and 4.
Under many other assumptions on preferences and the role of money it would not be
diﬃcult to “back out” the time series behavior of the money supply that would be
consistent with constant nominal wage growth, or with nominal wages following the
more general process (2.1). In our opinion, a money supply process constructed in
this way would be consistent with quantity-theoretic behavior similar, in a general
way, to (2.16). It would be informative, but also more diﬃcult, to construct an equi-
librium wage process taking a money growth process as given. Both of these lines are
worth pursuing, but we will not do so in this paper.
    Most previous work has been simplified by eliminating or avoiding the idiosyn-
cratic shocks, {Vt } in our set-up, and focusing on aggregate inflation shocks only.
We will initially go in the opposite direction, treating the special case in which the
variance ¾2w of the wage process is zero, so that the drift parameter a is simply the
constant rate of wage inflation. In this situation, we will seek an invariant joint distri-
bution Á for prices and idiosyncratic shocks. In the next two sections, we formulate,
calibrate, and study a Bellman equation for this case of a stationary equilibrium with
constant inflation.


                                            13
3. Stationary Equilibrium with Constant Inflation

    Let the inflation rate be constant at a, so that

                                                 Wt = W0 eat :                                            (3.1)

Denote the value of the objective (2.13) of a firm in a stationary equilibrium that has
an inherited nominal price P and exogenous shocks with current values (V; W ) by
W Φ(P; V; W ): In a stationary equilibrium, the consumption aggregate ct will be con-
stant at a value c (say) and Φ will satisfy the Bellman equation
                                                Z                      µ         ¶−"
                                                      T                    ®P0             P0  1
               Φ(P; V; W ) = max E[                       e−½t c1−"°                   [      − ]dt
                                       T          0                        Wt              Wt Vt
                              +e−½T · max [Φ(Q; VT ; WT ) − k]]:                                          (3.2)
                                                Q

    It is convenient to restate (3.2) in terms of the logs: (P; V; W ) = (ep ; ev ; ew ) and
to define a new state variable xt by

                                                 xt = pt − wt :                                           (3.3)

Then between price changes the motion of xt is described by

                                                    dx = −adt                                             (3.4)

and the motion of v follows (2.2). Then we seek a solution to (3.2) of the form
Φ(P; V; W ) = Φ(ep ; ev ; ew ) = '(p − w; v) = '(x; v); where the function ' satisfies
                         "Z                                                                           #
                               T
       '(x; v) = max E             e   −½t
                                             Π(xt ; vt )dt + e    −½T
                                                                           max['(x ; v(T )) − k] ;
                                                                                           0
                                                                                                          (3.5)
                   T       0                                                x
                                                                            0



and where
                              Π(x; v) = c1−"° (®ex )−" [ex − e−v ]:                                       (3.6)

Note that the pricing policy x that would maximize the profit function Π if there
were no menu cost would be
                                                             "
                                           x∗ = log(            ) − v:                                    (3.7)
                                                            "−1

                                                            14
     We will study the problem (3.5) using a discrete-time and state approximation
to (2.2)–a Markov chain– following Kushner and Dupuis’s (2001) description of
finite-element methods. The approximate process v(t) is assumed to take values on
the finite grid V = {−v; :::; −2h; −h; 0; h; 2h; :::; v}, so V is the state space of the
Markov chain. For a given grid size h; we specify a time interval ∆t and a transition
function ¼ on V;
                           ¼(v 0 ; v) = Pr{v(t + ∆t) = v 0 | v(t) = v};

in terms of the defining parameters (´; ¾v ) of the original continuous-time process in
such a way that in the limit as h → 0 the conditional, local means and variances of
the original and approximate processes match. See the Appendix for details.
     In the calculations reported below, we fix the grid size h and the set V on which
the shocks values v lie. Analogous to the definition of the set V , we define a set

                            X = {−x; :::; −2h; −h; 0; h; 2h; :::; x}

of possible x values, so that states (x; v) will be elements of S = X × V . Then we
approximate the continuous problem (3.5) with the discrete problem
                                                          X
                   Ã(x; v) = max{Π(x; v)∆t + e−r∆t                 ¼(v 0 | v)Ã(xea∆t ; v 0 );
                                                              v0
                                               X
                    max [Π(x0 ; v)∆t + e−r∆t        ¼(v 0 | v)Ã(x0 ea∆t ; v 0 )] − k}:          (3.8)
                     x
                     0
                                               v0
Under the assumptions we have imposed there is a unique function Ã on S that
satisfies (3.8).
   To see the dynamic behavior implied by (3.8), it is useful to define some auxiliary
functions. Let
                                                        X
                   Ω(v) = max [Π(x0 ; v)∆t + e−r∆t             ¼(v 0 | v)Ã(x0 ea∆t ; v 0 )];
                           0x
                                                         v0

so Ω(v) is the value of discounted profit if a one-time, costless repricing can occur in
state v: Let g(v) be the price that attains the maximum. Then define the “inaction

                                                15
region” D(v) as
                         D(v) = {x ∈ X : Ã(x; v) > Ω(v) − k}

(so that D(v) is the set of x = p − w values at which it does not pay to re-price when
the productivity shock is v). In our application, this region will be an open interval:

                                  D(v) = (L(v); U(v)):

The policy function for (3.8) is thus the function f : S → X defined by

                              f (x; v) = x if x ∈ D(v)

                              f (x; v) = g(v) if x ∈
                                                   = D(v)

The (log) price in state (x; v) is p = w + f (x; v).
    Figures 1 and 2 plot the three functions g; U and L; for quarterly inflation rates of
one and 15 percent. (These and other figures in this section are based on the baseline
parameter values given in Table 1 in Section 4.) These functions are decreasing: high
productivity shocks imply price decreases. Note that the inaction intervals D(v) are
wider for low v values: Getting prices “right” is more important when productivity
shocks–and hence quantities sold–are high. Note also the widening of the inaction
intervals as inflation increases. With high inflation, prices are changed often just to
keep up with general inflation, and pricing rules do not need to be as sensitive to
idiosyncratic productivity shocks. Higher inflation also induces a shift in the target
prices toward the upper boundary of the inaction region.

                             INSERT FIGURES 1 AND 2

    Figures 3 and 4 illustrate simulated sample paths for the ideal price given in
(3.7), reflecting changes in relative productivity only. Figure 3 also plots the optimal
price path for the cost parameter k = 0:004 and the constant inflation rate a = :01.
Figure 4 is the same in all respects, except that the cost parameter is decreased to

                                            16
k = 0:0004. One can see the way the step function for price tracks the ideal price,
and the fact that as the fixed cost decreases prices are changed more often and the
tracking gets better.
                         INSERT FIGURES 3, 4, AND 3a

    Figure 3a, taken from Chevalier et al. (2000), shows the time series of actual
prices for Triscuits, based on scanner data from a Chicago supermarket chain. It is
instructive to compare this time series to those in our Figures 3 and 4. On Figure
3a, temporary sales are evident in the many times the Triscuit price is reduced for a
short time and returned to exactly the former price soon thereafter. Such patterns
are of course common to many price series. To obtain a good match between theory
and data, then, sales must either be removed from the data or added to the model.
As discussed below, we took the first course, made easier by the fact that the BLS
flags observations that they regard as sale prices. For us, then, the data have sale
observations removed. Do this with your eye on Figure 3a, and then compare it to
Figures 3 and 4.
    The joint process (x; v), where x is controlled in the way we have just described,
has a unique ergodic set E, given by

                            E = {(x; v) ∈ S : x ∈ D̄(v)};

(where the overbar means closure) and there is a unique invariant distribution ¹(x; v)
on E. It is impossible to pass the boundaries of the inaction region because whenever
the uncontrolled process would do so, price is revised to prevent this from occurring.
Figure 5 plots the implied density of the pricing error xt − x∗ for the two quarterly
inflation rates one percent and 15 percent that were used in Figures 1 and 2.

                                INSERT FIGURE 5




                                         17
4. Data, Calibration, and a Test

        Our basic model lacks many features that a business cycle model needs–it has
no capital and no aggregate shocks–but we drew on that literature for the values of
the preference parameters ½; °, ®, and ". We used the annual discount rate ½ = :04,
the risk aversion parameter ° = 2; the elasticity of substitution parameter " = 7; and
the disutility of labor ® = 0:9: These ½ and ° values are conventional. The value of
" is related to the degree of monopoly power firms have: With " = 7, firm profits
are about 15 percent of GDP. The elasticity of substitution implies that a firm’s
mark-up–defined as the percent by which price exceeds marginal cost–is about 16
percent. Estimates of mark-ups typically fall in the 10-20 percent range, implying
values of " in the 6-10 percent range.5 Our results are not sensitive to changes in "
within that range. We interpreted our linear labor disutility as indivisible labor with
lotteries, following Hansen (1985). The value ® = 0:9 implies an average labor level
of 0.85.
        For the menu cost parameter k, the drift parameter a; and the two parameters ¾ 2v
and ´ that characterize the idiosyncratic productivity shocks, we used a new data set
on individual prices due to Klenow and Kryvtsov (2003). This price data set is based
on the BLS survey, and contains about 80,000 time series of individual price quotes
in 88 geographical locations. The series are either monthly or bimonthly, depending
on the location, for the years 1988-1997. The individual price quotes comprise 123
narrowly defined goods categories. The data set also provides the positive weights
       P
!i ,     i   ! i = 1; that are used to form the consumer price index from the individual
prices (called the CPI weights). We used the prices and weights for the New York
metropolitan area only to calibrate the parameters (a; ¾ 2m ; ´; ¾ 2v ) and the fixed cost k
   5
       See, for example, Rotemberg and Woodford (1995) and Basu and Fernald (1997). It is not clear
to us, we should add, that the estimates reported in these studies are best interpreted as mark-ups
in the sense used in the text.


                                                 18
of the model described in the last two sections.
        For calibrating the model under the assumption of a deterministic trend, we
imagine that the Klenow-Kryvtsov prices are generated by our model in the following
way. Prices for goods i = 1; :::; N are collected at the time intervals ∆t. Denote these
prices by {pi (t)}; i = 1; :::; N: For each good i, let

                                        pi (t) = xi (t) + w(t);

where for each t; w(t) grows at the constant rate a; vi (t) is generated by (2.2), and
equilibrium prices are determined as described in the last two sections.6
   We identify sample averages from the Klenow-Kryvtsov data with means taken
with respect to the invariant distribution ¹(x; v). If a seller begins a period in state
(x; v), he immediately moves (re-prices) to (f (x; v); v); so if F is any function on S
its observed average value will be
                                      X
                                             F (f (x; v); v)¹(x; v):                            (4.1)
                                       x;v

We first estimate the parameters (a; ¾ 2w ) of the stochastic inflation process defined in
(2.1), and then turn to the calibration of (´; ¾ 2v ,k):
        The weighted average price of goods (CPI) at time t is
                                                X
                                  p(t) =           i
                                                       ! i pi (t):
                                                X
                                         =         i
                                                       ! i [xi (t) + w(t)]
                                                X
                                         ∼
                                         =               x¹(x; v) + w(t)
                                                   x;v

where the second equality is a prediction of the theory, and the third replaces a sample
average with the population mean. Then since the first term on the right is constant
with respect to time, the model implies that

                              p(t + ∆t) − p(t) = w(t + ∆t) − w(t):                              (4.2)
   6
       The BLS identifies some recorded prices as sale prices. We have replaced such observations with
the recorded price for the same good in the period before the sale. See Figure 3a.

                                                       19
Equation (4.2) suggests using the average and the variance of the diﬀerences of the
observed CPI series {p(t)} as estimates of a∆t and ¾2w ∆t respectively (though for
now we set ¾2w = 0):
    The numbers in the first column of the first two rows of the table below report
these estimates. For the deterministic inflation version of the model, we set the
mean inflation rate equal to one percent and the standard deviation equal to zero,
as indicated in column 2. (Both means and standard deviations are expressed as
percentages.) The last three columns of the table indicate variations in the model’s
predictions under diﬀerent choices for the parameters (´; ¾ 2v ,k): The first two rows are
not aﬀected by these variations.



            TABLE 1 : CALIBRATED PARAMETER VALUESa
                       Baseline values: (´; ¾2v ,k) = (:25; :005; :004):

            Moment                Data    Model      ´ = 0:15 ¾2v = :0075 k = :003
    Quarterly inflation rate      .009      .01         :01          :01      :01
        S.d. of inflation         .0374      0           0            0        0
      Frequency of change         .219     .231        .227         .267     .261
      Mean price increase         .095     .075        .078         .084     .071
       S.d. of new prices         .094       .1        .133         .124     .101

         a= Column (2) (“Model”) is based on the baseline values: Columns
      (3)-(5) are based on the same values, except for the changes indicated at
      the head of each column.



    To calibrate the three parameters (´; ¾2v ,k); we calculate three additional sample
moments that intuition suggests will convey information. The results are given in the

                                              20
last three rows of the table. The first is the frequency of price change: the average
over all months in the data of the fraction of prices that were changed in that month.
As shown on the table, this fraction is .219. Second, we calculated the average log
price increase over all prices that increased from any date to the next date: .095 in the
data7 . Finally, from among all prices that were increased, we calculated the standard
deviation of the new prices. To do that we calculated log deviations from the average,
zi (t) = pi (t) − p(t), for each good i and then computed the standard deviation of zi (t)
over time for each good i. Then we averaged over goods i. This yielded the number
.094.
        For any values of (a; 0; ´; ¾ 2v ; k) we can calculate the corresponding moments
predicted by the theory, under the assumption that the probability distribution of
(x; v) is the invariant distribution ¹(x; v) and that prices are given by h(x; v): The
fraction of firms that do not change price in the time interval ∆t is just the probability
that the invariant distribution assigns to the set D(v) :
                                          X
                                               v;x∈D(v)
                                                          ¹(x; v):

The fraction of firms that change per month is then
                                       µX                       ¶1=(3∆t)
                                  1−          v;x∈D(v)
                                                       ¹(x; v)             :

        This value, .231, shown in the appropriate row of column 2 of the table, is
calculated with (a; ¾ 2w ; ´; ¾ 2v ; k) set equal to (.01, 0, .25, .005, .004). Columns 3-5 of
   7
       Thomas Philippon pointed out to us that with an assumed elasticity of " = 7, a 10 percent price
change for a single seller will induce a quantity response of nearly 70 percent. We agree that this
is highly unrealistic. The problem of unrealistic quantity responses to small price changes, which
reaches an extreme degree in Bertrand competition, is endemic in imperfect competition models.
Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) show that adding capacity constraints can provide a remedy, but
following this lead would drastically complicate our model. We do not think this issue is central to
our analysis of firms’ repricing decisions.


                                                    21
the table indicate how the calculated moments change as (´; ¾2v ; k) are changed one at
a time from these benchmark values. That is, column 3 shows the computed statistics
when the parameter vector (a; ¾ 2w ; ´; ¾2v ; k) = (:01; 0; :25; :005; :004) is replaced by
(:01; 0; :15; :005; :004): Thus the table shows that the frequency of price changes is
insensitive to changes in the rate of mean reversion in the idiosyncratic shock, that
it increases with the variance of these shocks, and that it decreases with increases in
the menu cost.
    There are many studies that try to estimate or calibrate menu costs for particular
products. For example, Levy et al. (1997) estimate that the cost of changing prices
in supermarkets is about 0.7 percent of firms’ revenue. In our baseline model with
k = 0:004; menu costs are about 0.25 percent of revenues and 1.9 percent of profits.
The labor required to adjust prices is equal to 0.5 percent of overall employment.
    We solved the model, calibrated as just described, for quarterly inflation rates a
ranging from 0 to 20 percent, calculated the invariant distribution ¹ in each case, and
calculated the fraction of firms that change price each month in this stationary equi-
librium. For comparison, we carried out the same calculations for the deterministic
Sheshinski-Weiss case where the variance of the idiosyncratic shocks is set equal to
zero. The results are shown in Figure 6. Also shown are three empirical observations:
the inflation-repricing pair (0.9,21.9) from the Klenow-Kryvtsov data, and the two
pairs (15,41) and (21,46) taken from the Lach-Tsiddon study of the Israeli inflations
in 1978-79 and 1981-82. The first pair lies exactly on the upper curve, reflecting the
fact that we used the Klenow-Kryvtsov data to calibrate our model. The model so
calibrated fits exactly the Israeli inflations, too. This is a genuine test of the theory,
carried out with evidence that is far out of sample.
    Figure 6 also confirms the necessity of including idiosyncratic shocks if the model
is to fit the evidence from low inflation economies. As inflation rates are reduced, a
lot of “price stickiness” remains in the data. Of course, this evidence does not bear on


                                            22
our interpretation of the idiosyncratic shocks as productivity diﬀerences, as opposed
to shifts in preferences, responses to inventory build-ups, or other factors.

                                 INSERT FIGURE 6

    The monthly re-pricing rates ranging from 22 to 46 percent shown on the figure
may be compared to Calvo’s (1983) assumption that the re-pricing probability is
constant, independent of the firm’s situation. When this fraction is endogenously
determined, as in our theory, it varies with the inflation rate, but we were surprised
at how small a change in the re-pricing probability is needed to fit the large diﬀerences
in inflation rates shown on the figure. The most important diﬀerences are in the two
theories’ implications for a cross-section of firms, as shown in our Figures 1 and 2. In
our theory, re-pricing is more likely when sales are large and price is more important.
In the Calvo theory, the firm’s situation does not eﬀect the re-pricing probability.

5. Disinflations: Credible and Non-credible

    We used the model with deterministic wage growth to study the eﬀects of two
kinds of disinflations: reductions in the given rate of wage growth. Each experiment
considers an economy that is initially in the stationary equilibrium described in Sec-
tion 3, with a constant rate of inflation. In both experiments, there is a one-time,
unanticipated, and permanent reduction in the growth rate of nominal wages from a
(say) to a0 < a. The first experiment involves a fully credible, rational expectations
equilibrium disinflation. The second describes a non-credible disinflation, in which
firms continue to expect the old inflation rate to be resumed.
    A disinflation of either kind will take the economy out of its stationary equilib-
rium, a fact that raises new computational problems which we deal with as follows.
Let c(a) denote the constant value of the consumption aggregate defined in (2.4) un-
der the original policy. We first construct an equilibrium response in which a new

                                           23
stationary distribution is attained, with the constant value c(a0 ) corresponding to the
new inflation rate, and in which the time path {ct }, c0 = c(a) and ct → c(a0 ), induced
by the shock is perfectly foreseen by firms.
     It is easiest to describe this construction in terms of the discrete approximation
(3.8). Initially, we set a limit n on the number of transition periods, and begin with
an assumed finite sequence cn = (c1 ; c2 ; :::; cn ) of values of the consumption aggregate.
Then we define the sequence {Ãi (x; v; cn )}ni=1 of value functions recursively by

                                        Ã n (x; v; cn ) = Ã(x; v);                                           (5.1)

where Ã(x; v) is the solution to (3.8) at the new stationary equilibrium with ct constant
at c(a0 ), and
                                                                X
        Ãi (x; v; cn ) = max{Π(x; v; ci )∆t + e−r∆t                    ¼(v 0 | v)Ãi+1 (xea∆t ; v 0 ; cn );
                                                                 v0
                                                X
             max [Π(x0 ; v; ci )∆t + e−r∆t            ¼(v 0 | v)Ã i+1 (x0 ea∆t ; v 0 ; cn )] − k}            (5.2)
              0  x
                                                 v0

for i = 1; 2; :::; n − 1: Let {fi (x; v; cn )}ni=1 be the sequence of policy functions corre-
sponding to the value functions {Ãi (x; v; cn )}ni=1 so defined. For given behavior cn of
the consumption aggregate, these functions can be calculated by the usual backward
induction.
     The pricing behavior {fi (x; v; cn )}ni=1 in turn implies a sequence {Ái (P; V; cn )}ni=1
of joint distributions of prices and productivity shocks, taking the original invariant
distribution Á as the initial condition. Individual firm sales are given by (2.11), and
then new values of the consumption aggregate by (2.4):
                               "Z                    µ        ¶1−"                 #"=("−1)
                                                         ®P
                     (Γc)i =        c(1−"°)(1−1=")
                                     i                                Ái (dP; dV )            :              (5.3)
                                                         Wi

The construction described in equations (5.1)-(5.3) thus defines a function Γ taking
an n-vector c into Γc.


                                                      24
    In our calculations we used the policy functions from the stationary equilibrium
with wage growth equal to a0 to generate c(a0 ), and then iterated using Γ until a fixed
point was found. This procedure requires a choice of the length n of the transition
period. We chose n large enough that the last few terms of the fixed point cn were
close to the value c(a0 ) associated with the new stationary equilibrium. The resulting
description of the transition is thus a rational expectations equilibrium in which agents
have perfect foresight about the evolution of aggregate variables.
    Figure 7a plots the response of two variables–real GDP and employment–
following a one-time permanent and fully credible decrease in the quarterly growth
rate of nominal wages from 15 to 1 percent. Real GDP yt is defined simply as the
sum of production of the diﬀerent goods,
                                        Z
                                yt =        Ct (P )Át (dP; dV ):

Employment is the equilibrium path of the variable `t , the labor used to produce
goods and the labor used in re-pricing. Both variables are normalized so that the
initial levels are one. One can see that neither variable declines by as much as one
half of one percent, and this very modest response is completed within a quarter of
the initial shock.
    Figure 7b plots the response of the inflation rate and the re-pricing rate to this
same credible disinflation. In constructing the figure, the price level is the fixed-weight
index Pt defined by
                                        Z
                              Pt yt =       P Ct (P )Át (dP; dV );

and the inflation rate is its quarterly rate of growth. The initial re-pricing rate is
about twice the long-run, post-disinflation level (see Figure 7b) and except for an
initial uptick, the figure shows a small adjustment that is over in less than a month.
The inflation rate follows an erratic path from 15 to 1. The pricing bounds are
narrower with the new, lower rate of wage growth (see Figures 1, 2 and 5) so as soon

                                                25
as the new rate is announced, many firms find themselves with a price level that
is outside the bounds. These firms immediately re-price, some with increases and
others with decreases. These changes almost cancel, and produce the very low initial
inflation rate in the first instant. After that, inflation rises to above 3 percent, and
gradually declines to its new equilibrium level of one. This adjustment, too, is over
in a quarter.
                           INSERT FIGURES 7a AND 7b

    Sargent’s (1986) analysis contrasts the eﬀects of a disinflation that is credible with
the eﬀects of one that is not. There is only one way for a disinflation to be credible,
but there are many non-credible ways for it to occur. Figures 8a and 8b represent
one possibility. They describe the results of the following experiment. Consider the
economy in the stationary equilibrium with a constant 15 percent quarterly inflation
rate. Exactly as in the previous example, there is a permanent decrease in the growth
rate of nominal wages from 15 percent to one percent. This decrease is completely
non-credible, in the sense that all the agents in the economy believe that wages will
continue to grow at 15 percent and treat one percent growth as a zero probability
event. Over time they repeatedly observe the one percent growth in W but continue
to believe that the next instant the growth rate will revert to its old 15 percent level.
It might be more realistic to assume that agents would use Bayes rule to decide on
the probability of W reverting to the high inflationary level, but we will show that
even with our extreme assumption real responses are very small.
    The computational strategy for this non-credible case is more complicated than
the one we used to calculate the equilibrium under a credible disinflation, because
beliefs about the consumption aggregator do not coincide with the time path that
actually occurs. Let the original value of the consumption aggregate be c(a), as in
the credible case, and let the distribution of the firms be the stationary distribution
Á1 (x; v) corresponding to a: Let the inflation rate be a0 for one period. At this point,

                                           26
everyone believes that inflation will revert to a immediately and remain there, so that
the original distribution Á(x; v) and the original value of the consumption aggregate
be c(a) will eventually be restored. We assume that this is expected to occur in
n periods, and define an operator Γ with fixed point cn exactly as in the perfect
foresight equilibrium described above. This procedure gives everyone’s action in the
first period, corresponding to the actual value a0 and their belief that wage growth
will immediately revert to its original value a.
    But this belief is not accurate. In the second period, wage growth is a0 again
and everyone believes it will revert to a in period 3. But the situation diﬀers from
period 1 because a new distribution Á2 (x; v) 6= Á1 (x; v) has been established. We need
to recalculate a new time path cn for the consumption aggregate, which will give us
everyone’s behavior in period 2. So we proceed period by period, calculating a perfect
foresight path from each date on, using only the first action to describe what firms
actually do, and discarding the rest of the sequence.

                           INSERT FIGURES 8a AND 8b

    Comparing Figures 8 to the credible disinflation shown in Figures 7, we can see
that as expected, the real eﬀects are larger in the non-credible case: The ultimate
decline in GDP is 0.9 percent rather than 0.3 percent. Even so, the eﬀect is hardly
supportive of the view that the welfare costs of non-credible disinflations are high:
The GDP response remains less than one percent, and the employment response is
only slightly larger. The eﬀects shown on Figures 8 are very persistent, but of course
this is only because we have modeled firms’ beliefs as being unrealistically persistent.
    We think the reason for the surprisingly unimportant role played by credibility
in this model is something like the following. Since firms can choose the frequency
of their price changes, they increase it when inflation is high. Each time they adjust
their prices, they expect to adjust them again on average within two months. When

                                          27
disinflation is not credible, the new prices are higher than the ones firms choose
with a credible disinflation, and this reduces output. On the other hand, firms wait
longer than in a credible disinflation to adjust their prices. That means that in the
non-credible disinflation, more firms have prices that are suboptimally low, and they
produce higher outputs. By comparing Figures 7b and 8b, one can see that the re-
pricing rate is lower under non-credible than credible disinflation. These eﬀects work
in opposite directions: The first eﬀect leads to a decline in output while the second
causes it to increase. The resulting overall eﬀect on output is negative but small.8

6. An Impulse-Response Function

        In the next section we will describe approximate behavior of the economy in a
two-shock equilibrium, in which firms are subject both to idiosyncratic and aggregate
shocks. It is instructive first, however, to study the dynamics of the model with de-
terministic wage behavior that is subjected to a single, one-time shock to the nominal
wage level. The thought experiment we conduct in this section subjects an economy
in the stationary equilibrium nominal wage rate growth is constant at a to an unan-
ticipated jump in the nominal wages from W to (1 + h)W , after that the wage growth
resumes its original level a:
        We calculate the response to this shock using the iterative method for calculating
rational expectations equilibrium that we applied to the credible disinflation case in
Section 5. Figures 9a and 9b plot the impulse-response functions calculated in this
way when a equals one percent per quarter and h = 0.0125.

                                 INSERT FIGURE 9a AND 9b

First, note that the initial response in output is less than the size of the monetary
   8
       See also Almeida and Bonomo (2002) who use a reduced form menu cost model to analyze eﬀects
of non-credible disinflation.


                                                 28
shock. Since aggregate output is
               Z
       yt =        Ct (P )Át (dP; dV )
                          ÃZ µ       ¶1−"               !(1−°")=(°"−°)       Z µ       ¶−"
                                 P                                                 P
           = ®     −1=°
                                            Át (dP; dV )                 ×                   Át (dP; dV )
                                 W                                                 W

the increase of W to (1 + h)W can increase total output by at most (1 + h)(1−°")=° ×
(1 + h)" = (1 + h)1=° :9
       The increase in W leads to a temporary increase in the number of the firms
changing their prices. This eﬀect is over very quickly, occuring right after the jump
in wages, after which the frequency of price changes reverts to its steady state level.
The eﬀect on real output lasts longer, but it also declines to zero by the middle of
the first quarter. The reason for such a fast decline is the fact that even if firms do
not react to the aggregate shock alone, many of them re-price due to idiosyncratic
shocks. Once a firm decides to re-price for any reason, it will take the higher level of
nominal wages into account when choosing the new price.
       In Figure 10a, we compare the output response to the wage shock described in
Figure 9a to the output response that would occur in a Calvo (1983)-type model,
otherwise identical to ours, in which a firm is permitted to reprice in any period with
a fixed probability that is independent of its own state and the state of the economy.
In the simulation, we set this fixed repricing probability equal to .23 per month, the
frequency predicted by our model. The two curves are strikingly diﬀerent. The initial
response is much larger with “time-dependent” repricing, as compared to our “state-
dependent” pricing. Time-dependent pricing also implies a much more persistent
eﬀect. These findings underscore the fact that what matters for price rigidity is not
                                                           µ     ¶1=°
                                                             Wt
   9
    Also, note that (2.11) and (2.4) imply that ct =                  ; where pt is the price aggregate
                                                             ®pt
                £R 1−"              ¤1=(1−")
defined as pt =   P    Át (dP; dV )          : This relationship shows that the maximum impact of a
h% shock on the consumption aggregate ct is (1 + h)1=° :


                                                      29
so much how many prices are changed as it is which prices are changed. The diﬀerence
between the two models becomes even larger for bigger shocks. Compare Figure 10b
that shows impulse response to a larger shock to Figure 10a.

                          INSERT FIGURE 10a AND 10b

   These results can be compared with the previous menu cost literature. In the
absence of idiosyncratic shocks, the log-linear approximation of our firms’ problem
would be equivalent to the set-up of Caplin and Spulber (1987). Their result that
aggregate shocks are completely neutral would then hold in ours: In a stationary
equilibrium the distribution of the relative prices of the firms would be uniform, and
a ·% increase in W would cause ·% of the firms to adjust their prices. The resulting
distribution of the relative prices would then be the same as the stationary distrib-
ution, and so total output would remain unchanged. The presence of idiosyncratic
shocks introduces more complicated distributions of the relative prices, so in our case
the shock to nominal wages leads to a real responses.
    Caplin and Leahy (1991) study a diﬀerent economy where the level of nominal
wages follow Brownian motion. Their result suggests that response of the output to
the nominal shocks may be very persistent: It is not worth paying the menu cost to
adjust the nominal price if the aggregate shock is small. We show that with reasonably
calibrated idiosyncratic shocks, this eﬀect will be very transient. Even though the
firms do not react to the aggregate shocks per se, they respond to idiosyncratic shocks
and take the higher level of nominal wages into account when they choose a new price.

7. Approximations to a Two-Shock Equilibrium

    In Section 2 we defined an equilibrium for an economy subject to two independent
shock process: the nominal wage process (2.1) and the idiosyncratic productivity
process (2.2). All of the results reported in Sections 3-6, though, are based on special

                                          30
cases where the variance ¾ 2w of the wage shock is set equal to zero. The only inflation
shocks we have studied are one-time impulses or permanent changes in the drift
parameter.
      The only barrier to formulating and studying a Bellman equation for the firm’s
pricing problem in the case where both aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks operate is
the appearance in the firm’s objective function (2.13) of the consumption aggregate
ct . We have analyzed situations where this aggregate is constant or varies determin-
istically, but if ¾ 2w > 0, ct is a stochastic process that depends in a complicated way
on the evolution of the distributions {Át } of all firms’ prices. In the end of the section
we will argue that variations in ct have a small eﬀect on the aggregate variables for
the calibrated parameter values of the model. We will study an approximate Bellman
equation based on (2.13) but with ct replaced with an unconditional mean value of
the simulated series for ct :
      The Bellman equation suited for this purpose is the variant of (3.5) described in
the Appendix:
                          "Z                                                                        #
                                T
        '(x; v) = max E             e   −½t
                                              Π(xt ; vt )dt + e
                                                              −½T
                                                                       max['(x ; v(T )) − k] ;
                                                                                   0
                                                                                                         (7.1)
                    T       0                                           0x


where (see (3.6))
                            Π(x; v) = c1−"° ®−" e−"x[ex − e−v ]:                                         (7.2)

The processes (x; v) are assumed to follow

                                          dx = −adt + ¾w dZw ;                                           (7.3)

and
                                          dv = −´vdt + ¾v dZv:                                           (7.4)

The corresponding discrete approximation, analogous to (3.8), is
                                                              X
              Ã(x; v) = max{Π(x; v)∆t + e−r∆t                          ¼(x0 ; v 0 | x; v)Ã(x0 ; v 0 );
                                                              x0 ;v0


                                                        31
                                                     X
                max[Π(»; v)∆t + e−r∆t                          ¼(x0 ; v 0 | »; v)Ã(x0 ; v 0 )] − k}:   (7.5)
                  »
                                                     x0 ;v 0

The transition probabilities ¼(x0 ; v0 | x; v) for the finite-state Markov chain that we
use to approximate the x and v processes are described in the Appendix.
    As in Section 3, we let f (x; v) be the policy function for (7.5). Then the transition
function for the controlled (x; v) process will be ¼(x0 ; v 0 | f (x; v); v). We assume that
this process has a unique invariant distribution ¹(x; v). The value and policy functions
and the invariant distribution ¹ will all depend on the value chosen for c. We then
obtain the equilibrium (or pseudo-equilibrium) value of c as the solution to
                          ³                   ´ ·Z                                ¸"=("−1)
                      c= c    1−"°
                                     ®   −"
                                                      e   (1−")x
                                                                   ¹(dx; dv; c)              ;         (7.6)

using (2.4), (2.10), and (3.3). We calculated this solution iteratively. The policy
function computed in this way is the policy of a firm that correctly observes the mean
level of ct but ignores all the fluctuations about this level. We propose this function
as an approximation to the true behavior of the firms in a two-shock equilibrium.
    To get some idea about the likely accuracy of this approximation, we recalculated
the impulse-response functions displayed in Figures 9a and 9b in Section 6 (which
display a rational expectations equilibrium in which ct varies over time) using the
constant c approximation just described. We also increased the size of the initial
shock by a factor of four. Figure 11 shows the results for real GDP. Evidently, the
approximation works very well for the eﬀects of a one-time shock, even a large one.
We take this as an indication that it will also be accurate for stochastic shocks of the
same order of magnitude.
                                     INSERT FIGURE 11

    We conduct several thought-experiments using this approximation. First, we will
study the eﬀect of the volatility of inflation on the volatility of the real output. We
simulate 40 quarters of data. Since the model is in continuous time (actually, about
40 discrete periods per quarter) and the economic data come in discrete intervals, we

                                                           32
aggregate the output of the model into quarterly values by taking the means of the
relevant variables over the quarter. Thus, the level º Q
                                                       T at quarter T of any function

of time º(t) is defined as
                                                Z   T +1
                                        ºQ
                                         T =               º(t)dt:
                                                T

       For our simulations we chose ¾ 2w = 0:0014 which corresponds to the .037 standard
deviation of quarterly inflation in the Klenow and Kryvtsov data set. The standard
deviation of the log level of output is equal to .0017 in our simulation. The stan-
dard deviation of actual U.S. quarterly consumption for the same period (1989 to
1998) around linear trend is equal to .015. Thus monetary fluctuations in this model
can account for only about 10 percent of the observed fluctuations in output. This
estimate is consistent with estimates from other sources.10
       In the second experiment we regress the log level of real output on the log dif-
ference of the nominal wages, using the simulated series generated by the model:

                              ln(ytQ) = ® + ¯[ln(wtQ) − ln(wt−1
                                                            Q
                                                                )]:

In this regression, we obtain the estimate ¯ = 0:046 with the standard error 0.007.
Thus an increase in nominal wage rates leads to an increase in real output, as in
standard Phillips curve regressions, but the eﬀect is very small. This conclusion is
not sensitive to diﬀerent specifications of the parameters (a; ¾ w ):

8. Conclusions

       We have constructed a model of a monetary economy in which re-pricing of goods
is subject to a menu cost, and studied the behavior of this economy numerically. The
model is distinguished from its many predecessors by the presence of idiosyncratic
shocks in addition to general inflation. We used a data set on individual U.S. prices
 10
      For example, see Lucas’s (2003) survey.

                                                    33
recently compiled by Klenow and Kryvtsov to calibrate the menu cost and the variance
and autocorrelation of the idiosyncratic shocks. We conducted several experiments
with the model.
    A key prediction of any menu cost model is that the fraction of firms that re-price
in a given time interval will increase with increases in the inflation rate. We simulated
our model at inflation rates varying from zero to 20 percent per quarter. The results,
shown on Figure 6, trace out a curve that passes through the inflation rate-re-pricing
rate pair estimated using data from the low-inflation U.S. economy of the 1990s. The
curve also fits the inflation rate-re-pricing rate pairs observed by Lach and Tsiddon
from the high inflation Israeli economy of 1978-82. We note that a model without
idiosyncratic shocks could not fit both observations.
    The model also predicts that credible disinflations will have smaller real eﬀects
that incredible ones: Menu costs make firms reluctant to re-price in response to
transient shocks. We simulated a credible (perfect foresight) reduction in the rate of
wage inflation from 15 percent to one percent, and that re-ran the simulation of a
disinflation that was non-credible in a specified way. The real eﬀects were large in
the second case by a factor of three, but in both simulations this large and sudden
disinflation resulted in output and employment declines of one percent or less.
    These results all refer to a special case in which inflation is deterministic. We also
solved an approximation to a more realistic two-shock model. With a realistic inflation
variance, this model can account for perhaps one-tenth of observed variance of U.S.
real consumption about trend. A Phillips curve estimated from data generated by
the model implies that a one percentage point reduction in inflation slope will depress
production by 0.05 of one percent.
    In summary, the model we propose fits microeconomic evidence on U.S. pricing
behavior well, and does a remarkably good job of accounting for behavior diﬀer-
ences between countries with very diﬀerent inflation rates. It does not appear to be


                                           34
consistent with large real eﬀects of monetary instability. These results seem to us
another confirmation of the insight provided by the much simpler example of Caplin
and Spulber (1987) that even when most prices remain unchanged from one day to
the next, nominal shocks can be nearly neutral: The prices that stay fixed are those
where stickiness matters least, and the prices that are far out of line are the ones that
change. Figures 10a and 10b illustrate the quantitative importance of this eﬀect in a
more realistic, calibrated model.

Appendix

  The construction of approximating Markov chains for the one shock model of Sec-
tions 3-5 and the two-shock model of Section 6 is based on Kushner and Dupuit
(2001). This appendix provides the details, based on the two-shock model of Section
6. For the most part, the specialization to the one-shock case is obvious.
  In the calculations described below, we fix the grid size h and define the state space
S = X × V as we did in Section 3. Then we approximate the continuous problem
(7.1) with the discrete problem (7.5), repeated as
                                                        X
             Ã(x; v) = max{Π(x; v)∆t + e−r∆t                     ¼(x0 ; v 0 | x; v)Ã(x0 ; v 0 );
                                                        x0 ;v0
                                        X
               max[Π(»; v)∆t + e−r∆t              ¼(x0 ; v 0 | »; v)Ã(x0 ; v 0 )] − k};            (A.1)
                 »
                                        x0 ;v 0

where ¼ is a transition function defined on S × S that we define in a moment. The
time interval ∆t is related to the grid size and other parameters by

                                                    h2
                                       ∆t =            ;                                           (A.2)
                                                    Q

where
                               Q = ¾2w + ah + ¾2v + ´vh:                                           (A.3)

    We assume that in a given time interval ∆t at most one of the variables x and v

                                              35
changes.11 Provided that neither x nor v is at its upper or lower bound, we assume
that if x changes, it moves either to x + h or to x − h; if v changes, it moves either to
v + h or to v − h. The final possibility is that neither of the variables changes and the
state remains at (x; v): The probability of all other transitions is zero. Away from
the boundaries of S, the five non-zero transition probabilities will then be defined by
                                                            ¾ 2w =2
                                    ¼(x + h; v; x; v) =             ;                       (A.4)
                                                               Q
                                                       ¾ 2w =2 + ah
                                 ¼(x − h; v; x; v) =                ;                       (A.5)
                                                             Q
                                                   ¾2v =2
                             ¼(x; v + h; x; v) =              (if v ≥ 0);                   (A.6)
                                                     Q
                                                ¾2v =2 + ´vh
                          ¼(x; v − h; x; v) =                      (if v ≥ 0);              (A.7)
                                                      Q
and
                                           ¾ 2w + ¾ 2v + ´vh + ah
                     ¼(x; v; x; v) = 1 −                                (if v ≥ 0):         (A.8)
                                                       Q
(The v(t) process is symmetric about zero, so the adaptations of (A.6) and (A.7) for
the case v < 0 are obvious.) Transitions at the boundaries are handled by assuming
that if, for example, x hits its upper bound x then x goes one step down to x − h with
probability ¼(x−h; v; x; v) and stays at x with probability ¼(x+h; v; x; v)+¼(x; v; x; v)
as given by the formulas (A.4) and (A.8). It is evident that the five probabilities (A.4)-
(A.8) add to one, and that the probabilities (A.4)-(A.7) are positive. That (A.8) is
non-negative follows from the fact that |v| ≤ v.
       The first and second moments of the Markov chain we have just defined, condi-
tional on the current state (x; v) (assumed not be a boundary point of S) are readily
calculated from (A.4)-(A.8). They are
                         E{x(t + ∆t) | x(t) = x; v(t) = v} − x
                                                               = −a;
                                          ∆t
  11
       This means that the Markov chains approximating v(t) and x(t) will not be independent for
h > 0, even though the continuous processes are. But independence will hold in the limit, as h → 0.

                                                 36
                      E{v(t + ∆t) | x; v} − v
                                                = −´v (if v ≥ 0);
                                 ∆t
                       V ar{x(t + ∆t) | x; v}
                                               = ¾2m + ah − a∆t;
                                 ∆t
                    V ar{v(t + ∆t) | x; v}
                                           = ¾2v + h |´v| − (´v)2 ∆t;
                             ∆t
                 Cov{x(t + ∆t); v(t + ∆t) | x; v}
                                                  = −´va∆t (if v ≥ 0):
                              ∆t
   From (A.2) and (A.3)
                       ∆t          h
                          = 2                  → 0 as h → 0:
                       h   ¾m + ah + ¾2v + ´vh
   This is the sense in which the conditional, local moments of the approximating chain
   approximate the conditional, local moments of the continuous time (x(t); v(t)) process
   defined by (7.3) and (7.4). See Kushner and Dupuis (2001), Chapter 9, for a proof
   that this approximation converges in distribution to the continuous time diﬀusion
   process when h → 0.




                                     REFERENCES

[1] Almeida, Heitor, and Marco Bonomo. 2002. “Optimal State-dependent Rules, Cred-
        ibility, and Inflation Inertia.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 49: 1317-1336

[2] Basu, Susanto, and John G. Fernald. 1997. “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production:
        Estimates and Implications.” Journal of Political Economy, 105: 249-283.

[3] Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow. 2002. ”Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky
        Prices”. NBER Working Paper #9069.

[4] Burstein, Ariel. 2002. “Inflation and Output Dynamics with State Dependent Pricing
        Decisions.” Working paper.

                                            37
 [5] Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. “Staggered Prices in a Unitility Maximizing Framework.”
         Journal of Monetary Economics, 12: 383-398.

 [6] Caplin, Andrew S., and Daniel F. Spulber. 1987. “Menu Costs and the Neutrality of
         Money.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102: 703-726.

 [7] Caplin, Andrew S., and John Leahy. 1991. “State Dependent Pricing and the Dy-
         namics of Money and Output.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106: 683-708.

 [8] Chang, Fwu-Ranq. 1999. “Homogeneity and the Transactions Demand for Money.”
         Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 31: 720-30

 [9] Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2000. “Sticky Price Models
         of the Business Cycle.” Econometrica, 68: 1151-1180.

[10] Chevalier, Judith A., Anil K. Kashyap, and Peter E. Rossi. 2000. “Why don’t prices
         rise during periods of peak demand? Evidence from scanner data.” NBER Work-
         ing Paper #7981.

[11] Dixit, Avinash, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1977. “Monopolistic Competition and Opti-
         mum Product Diversity.” American Economic Review, 67: 297-308.

[12] Dotsey, Michael, Robert G. King, and Alexander L. Wolman. 1999. “State-Dependent
         Pricing and the General Equilibrium Dynamics of Money and Output.” Quarterly
         Journal of Economics, 114: 655-690.

[13] Frenkel, Jacob A., and Boyan Jovanovic. 1980. “On Transactions and Precautionary
         Demand for Money.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 95: 25-43.

[14] Klenow, Peter J. and Oleksiy Kryvtsov. 2003. “State-Dependent or Time-Dependent
         Pricing: Does It Matter for Recent U.S. Inflation? Federal Reserve Bank of
         Minneapolis working paper.

                                            38
[15] Kreps, David M., and Jose A. Scheinkman. 1983. “Quantity Precommitment and
         Bertrand Competition Yield Cournot Outcomes.” The Bell Journal of Eco-
         nomics, 14: 326-337.

[16] Kushner, Harold J., and Paul Dupuis. 2001. Numerical Methods for Stochastic Control
         Problems In Continuous Time. Second Edition. New York: Springer-Verlag.

[17] Lach, Saul, and Daniel Tsiddon. 1992. “The Behavior of Prices and Inflation: An
         Empirical Analysis of Disaggregated Price Data.” Journal of Political Economy,
         100: 349-389.

[18] Levy, Daniel, Mark Bergen, Shantanu Dutta, and Robert Venable. 1997. “The Mag-
         nitude of Menu Costs: Direct Evidence from Large U.S. Supermarket Chains.”
         Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113: 791-825.

[19] Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 2003. “Macroeconomic Priorities.” American Economic Review,
         93: 1-14.

[20] Mankiw, N. Gregory. 1985. “Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A Macro-
         economic Model of Monopoly.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100: 529-538.

[21] Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford. 1995. “Dynamic General Equilibrium
         Models with Imperfect Competition.” In Thomas Cooley, ed., Frontiers of Busi-
         ness Cycle Research. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

[22] Sargent, Thomas J. 1986. Rational Expectations and Inflation. New York: Harper &
         Row.

[23] Sheshinski, Eytan, and Yoram Weiss. 1977. “Inflation and Costs of Price Adjust-
         ment.” Review of Economic Studies, 54: 287-303.




                                             39
[24] Sheshinski, Eytan, and Yoram Weiss. 1983. “Optimum Pricing Policy under Stochas-
         tic Inflation.” Review of Economic Studies, 60: 513-529.

[25] Spence, Michael E. 1976. “Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and Monopolistic Compe-
         tition.” Review of Economic Studies, 43: 217-235.

[26] Stokey, Nancy L. 2002. Brownian Models in Economics. Manuscript.

[27] Willis, Jonathan L. 2000. “General Equilibrium of a Monetary Model with State-
         Dependent Pricing.” Working paper.




                                             40
                                        FIGURE 1: PRICING BOUNDS FOR 1% QUARTERLY INFLATION
                      0.5



                      0.4



                      0.3



                      0.2
Relative price p-w




                      0.1


                              Solid lines: upper and lower
                        0
                              bounds U(v) and L(v).

                     -0.1     Dotted line: g(v).



                     -0.2



                     -0.3



                     -0.4
                       -0.5   -0.4       -0.3      -0.2      -0.1          0         0.1    0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5

                                                              Log level of productivity v




                                                             41
                                       FIGURE 2: PRICING BOUNDS FOR 15% QUARTERLY INFLATION
                      0.5



                      0.4



                      0.3



                      0.2
Relative price p-w




                      0.1



                        0     Solid lines: upper and lower

                              bounds U(v) and L(v).
                     -0.1
                              Dotted line: g(v).


                     -0.2



                     -0.3



                     -0.4
                       -0.5   -0.4       -0.3      -0.2      -0.1          0         0.1    0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5

                                                              Log level of productivity v




                                                             42
                                 FIGURE 3: SAMPLE PATH OF ACTUAL AND IDEAL PRICE LEVEL k=0.004
                 1.3
                                                                                      Price without menu costs
                                                                                      Actual price level
                                                                                      Price index


                1.25




                 1.2
Price level P




                1.15




                 1.1




                1.05
                       0   0.5         1      1.5        2     2.5      3       3.5         4        4.5         5

                                                             Quarters




                                                    43
                    FIGURE 3A: PRICE OF TRISCUIT 9.5 oz IN
         DOMINICK’S FINER FOODS SUPERMARKET IN CHICAGO



Figure 1

               Triscuit 9.5 oz

        2.65
price




        1.14
                1                                            399
                                                 week




   Source: Chevalier, Kashyap and Rossi (2000)



                                       44
                             FIGURE 4: SAMPLE PATH OF ACTUAL AND IDEAL PRICE LEVEL k=0.0004
                 1.3
                                                                                  Price without menu costs
                                                                                  Actual price level
                                                                                  Price index


                1.25




                 1.2
Price level P




                1.15




                 1.1




                1.05
                       0   0.5     1       1.5        2     2.5      3      3.5         4        4.5         5

                                                          Quarters




                                                 45
                   FIGURE 5: DENSITIES OF DEVIATIONS FROM TARGET PRICE
0.16



0.14



0.12                                                        1% Quarterly Inflation Rate
                                                                 (Dashed Line)

 0.1



0.08        15% Quarterly Inflation Rate
                (Solid Line)

0.06



0.04



0.02



   0
 -0.25   -0.2     -0.15        -0.1    -0.05         0           0.05      0.1     0.15   0.2   0.25
                                                                 *
                                           Pricing Error x - x




                                               46
                         FIGURE 6: FRACTION OF PRICES CHANGED EACH MONTH
 0.5


0.45


 0.4       Deterministic inflation with firm shock


0.35


 0.3
                                                      Deterministic inflation without firm shock

0.25

                                                          o = (0.9,.22) : Bils-Klenow evidence
 0.2

                                                          x = (15,.41) : Lach-Tsiddon evidence
0.15
                                                                   for 1978-1979

 0.1
                                                          + = (21,.46) : Lach-Tsiddon evidence

0.05                                                               for 1981-1982


  0
       0      2         4         6        8         10        12        14          16          18   20   22
                                          Quarterly Inflation Rate, Percent




                                                     47
                         FIGURE 7a: RESPONSES TO A CREDIBLE DISINFLATION



     1

                                            Responses of employment and output to a
0.9995
                                            permanent, fully credible reduction in the

 0.999                                      quarterly rate of nominal wage growth from

                                            15% to 1%
0.9985

                                            Initial levels normalized to one
 0.998       Real GDP


0.9975


 0.997


0.9965
                     Employment

 0.996


0.9955


 0.995
         0     0.5          1         1.5            2             2.5           3       3.5   4
                                                  Quarters




                                            48
                   FIGURE 7b: RESPONSES TO A CREDIBLE DISINFLATION
 4



3.5


                                         Responses of quarterly inflation rate (percent)
 3
                                         and re-pricing rate (percent of firms per day)

2.5                                      to a permanent, fully credible reduction in the

                                         quarterly rate of nominal wage growth from
 2
                                         15% to 1%


1.5

           Inflation Rate

 1

                 Re-pricing Rate

0.5



 0
      0   0.5           1          1.5              2           2.5           3            3.5   4
                                                 Quarters




                                            49
                  FIGURE 8a: RESPONSES TO A NON-CREDIBLE DISINFLATION
1.002



    1



0.998                                                Responses of employment and output

                                                     to a non-credible reduction in

0.996                                                the quarterly rate of nominal wage

                                                     growth from 15% to 1%
             Real GDP
0.994

                                                     Initial levels normalized to one

0.992



 0.99              Employment



0.988



0.986
        0   0.2     0.4     0.6    0.8       1          1.2        1.4         1.6        1.8   2
                                          Quarters




                                     50
                       FIGURE 8b: RESPONSES TO A NON-CREDIBLE DISINFLATION
 15


13.5


 12

                                                              Responses of quarterly inflation rate
10.5
                                                              (percent) and re-pricing rate (percent

  9                                                           of firms per day) to a non-credible

                                                              reduction in the quarterly rate
 7.5
                                                              of nominal wage growth from 15% to 1%

  6             Inflation Rate


 4.5


  3


 1.5
           Re-pricing Rate

  0
       0      0.2        0.4     0.6    0.8           1          1.2        1.4         1.6         1.8   2

                                                   Quarters




                                              51
                         FIGURE 9a: RESPONSES TO A TRANSIENT WAGE INCREASE
1.009


1.008


1.007
            Employment
1.006
                                                    Responses of employment and output
1.005                                               to a one-time increase (impulse) in
                                                    the level of nominal wages of 1.25%
1.004
                                                    Initial levels normalized to one
1.003


1.002


1.001


    1         Real GDP


0.999
        0     0.2        0.4     0.6     0.8       1         1.2        1.4        1.6    1.8   2

                                                Quarters




                                           52
                     FIGURE 9b: RESPONSES TO A TRANSIENT WAGE INCREASE
16



14



12

                                                       Responses of quarterly inflation rate

10                                                     (percent) and re-pricing rate (percent

                                                       of firms per day) to a one-time

 8                                                     increase (impulse) in the level of

                                                       nominal wages of 1.25%

 6         Inflation Rate



 4



 2
         Re-pricing Rate

 0
     0      0.2        0.4   0.6     0.8       1          1.2        1.4        1.6         1.8   2
                                            Quarters




                                           53
            FIGURE 10a: OUTPUT RESPONSES TO 1.25 PERCENT INCREASE IN NOMINAL WAGES
1.007



1.006



1.005



1.004
                                                                  Calvo model


1.003



1.002



1.001
                         Menu cost model


    1



0.999
        0      0.2     0.4     0.6         0.8      1       1.2      1.4        1.6   1.8   2
                                                 Quarters




                                            54
            FIGURE 10b: OUTPUT RESPONSES TO 5 PERCENT INCREASE IN NOMINAL WAGES
1.035



 1.03



1.025



 1.02

                                                                 Calvo model
1.015



 1.01



1.005
                        Menu cost model


    1



0.995
        0     0.2     0.4     0.6         0.8      1       1.2      1.4        1.6   1.8   2
                                                Quarters




                                           55
                 FIGURE 11: APPROXIMATE AND EXACT IMPULSE RESPONSE FUNCTIONS
1.014



1.012



 1.01

                                                  Responses of output

1.008                                             to a one-time increase (impulse) in

                5% shock                          the level of nominal wages

1.006                                             Initial levels normalized to one



1.004

                                             Solid Lines: Exact

1.002                                        Dashed Lines: Approximate



    1       1.25% shock



0.998
        0      0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8      1          1.2        1.4        1.6    1.8   2
                                             Quarters




                                        56
