NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHOULD EXACT INDEX NUMBERS
HAVE STANDARD ERRORS?
THEORY AND APPLICATION TO ASIAN GROWTH
Robert C. Feenstra
Marshall B. Reinsdorf
Working Paper 10197
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10197
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

Presented at the CRIW conference “Hard-to-Measure Goods and Services: Essays in Memory of Zvi
Griliches,” September 19-20, 2003, Bethesda, MD. We are grateful to Angus Deaton, Jack Triplett and
Charles Hulten for helpful comments.The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Robert C. Feenstra and Marshall B. Reinsdorf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Should Exact Index Numbers Have Standard Errors? Theory and Application to Asian Growth
Robert C. Feenstra aqnd Marshall B. Reinsdorf
NBER Working Paper No. 10197
December 2003
JEL No. C43, O53
ABSTRACT
In this paper we derive the standard error of a price index when both prices and tastes or technology
are treated as stochastic. Changing tastes or technology are a reason for the weights in the price
index to be treated as stochastic, which can interact with the stochastic prices themselves. We derive
results for the constant elasticity of substitution expenditure function (with Sato-Vartia price index),
and also the translog function (with Töörnqvist price index), which proves to be more general and
easier to implement. In our application to Asian growth, we construct standard errors on the total
factor productivity (TFP) estimates of Hsieh (2002) for Singapore. We find that TFP growth is
insignificantly different from zero in any year, but cumulative TFP over fifteen years is indeed
positive.
Robert C. Feenstra
Department of Economics
University of California
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu
Marshall B. Reinsdorf
Bureau of Economic Analysis
1441 L Street, NW
Mail Stop BE-40
Washington, DC 20230
marshall.reinsdorf@bea.doc.gov

1. Introduction
In the stochastic approach to index numbers, prices are viewed as draws from some
distribution, and the price index is viewed as a measure of the trend change in prices, with an
estimable standard error. The most comprehensive treatment of this problem is by Selvanathan
and Rao (1994), but the idea dates back to Keynes (1909) and earlier writers, such as Jevons and
Edgeworth. Keynes points out that the price changes reflect both a common trend (generalized
inflation) and commodity-specific trends,1 which make the common trend difficult to identify.
Selvanathan and Rao (1994, pp. 61-67) attempt to solve this problem using purely statistical
techniques, as we describe in section 2, and the standard error of their price index reflects the
precision of the estimate of the trend. Keynes does not offer a solution, but elsewhere he
observes that changes in the purchasing power of money can occur for three distinct reasons:
“The first of these reasons we may classify as a change in tastes, the second as a change in
environment, and the third as a change in relative prices.”2
The first factor identified by Keynes — changing tastes — can be expected to affect the
weights in a price index and not just the prices. Accordingly, we will derive the standard error of
a price index when both prices and tastes (or technology) are treated as stochastic. The rationale
for our treatment of stochastic tastes (or technology) comes from the economic approach to index
numbers, (e.g. Diewert, 1976), which shows that certain price indexes, known as exact indexes,
equal the ratio of expenditures needed to obtain a fixed level of utility at two different prices.

1

In Keynes (1909) essay on “Index Numbers,” section VIII deals with the “Measurement of General Exchange
Value by Probabilities,” which is the stochastic approach. He writes: “We may regard price changes, therefore, as
partly due to causes arising from the commodities themselves raising some, lowering others, and all different in
degree, and, superimposed upon the changes due to these heterogeneous causes, a further change affecting all in the
same ratio arising out of change on the side of money. This uniform ratio is the object of our investigations.” (from
The Collected Writing of John Maynard Keynes, volume XI, p. 106).
2
Keynes (1930), cited from The Collected Writing of John Maynard Keynes, volume V, p. 85.

2
This ratio of expenditures depends on the tastes of the consumer, so if the taste parameters are
stochastic, then the exact index number is also. Section 3 describes how we allow for both
random prices and random tastes, thereby integrating the stochastic and economic approaches to
index numbers.
We use our integrated approach to stochastic index numbers to derive estimators for index
number standard errors for two well-known models of tastes or technology. The first of these is
the constant elasticity of substitution (CES) expenditure function (for a consumer) or cost
function (for a firm). In section 4 we suppose that the CES taste parameters are random, and
obtain a simple specification for demand that depends on the random parameters and on prices.
The estimated error from this demand equation can be used to infer the standard error of the
exact price index. Inverting the demand equation, we also obtain a simple specification in which
price changes depend on a trend (the price index) and a component (log changes in expenditure
shares) that has an average of zero, just as is supposed for the error term in an identical set of
equations derived under the stochastic approach. The CES case therefore provides a good
comparison to the specification used by Selvanathan and Rao (1994). In section 5 we extend our
treatment of the CES case to deal with both random prices and random tastes, allowing an
additional comparison to the Selvanathan and Rao results.
We next apply our integrated approach to stochastic index numbers to the translog case,
considering the effects of random tastes in section 6 and the effects of both random tastes and
random prices in section 7. The demand equations estimated are the familiar translog
expenditure share equations, and again, the error in this system of regressions is used to infer the
standard error of the exact price index. Although the CES system provides a particularly clear
comparison with the conventional stochastic approach, a linear relationship between the shares

3
and the taste parameters makes the translog system easier to implement than the non-linear CES
system, and we recommend the translog for future use.
In section 8 we provide an application of our results to Asian productivity growth, and in
particular, productivity growth in Singapore. The extent to which the East Asian countries are
“exceptional” or not in terms of their productivity growth has been a topic of debate between the
World Bank (1993) and Young (1992, 1995). Citing the estimates of zero or negative
productivity growth in Singapore found by Young and also Kim and Lau (1994), Krugman
(1994) popularized the idea the growth in some East Asian countries is mainly due to capital
accumulation, and in that respect, is not much different than the former Soviet Union: certainly
not a miracle. Recently, however, Hsieh (2002) has re-examined the productivity performance of
several East Asia countries using dual measures of total factor productivity (TFP), and for
Singapore finds positive productivity growth, contrary to Young. The difference lies in Hsieh’s
use of “external” rates of return for capital computed from three different sources, which are then
used in a dual calculation of productivity growth; this contrasts with Young’s calculation of
primal productivity growth, which implicitly uses an “internal” return on capital.3
We use Hsieh’s three different rates of return on capital to compute the standard error of
that series, and of estimates of TFP, where we also incorporate the error in fitting the translog
function. In the results, we find that TFP growth in Singapore is insignificantly different from
zero for any single year in the sample. The same holds true when estimating cumulative TFP
growth over any five-year or ten-year period of the sample. For the 15-year period, however, we
find that cumulative TFP growth in Singapore is significantly positive. Thus, the estimates of

3

That is, the difference between these authors is not in the primal versus dual methodology for computing TFP, but
in their use of differing rates of return for capital. We thank Charles Hulten for this observation.

4
Hsieh (2002) are indeed statistically different from those of Young (1992, 1995), provided that
cumulative TFP over a long enough time period is considered.

2. The Stochastic Approach to Index Numbers
An example of the stochastic approach to price indexes is a model where price changes
satisfy the equation:
ln(pit / pit-1) = πt + eit,

i =1,..., N,

(1)

where the errors are independent and heteroskedastic satisfying E(eit) = 0 and var(eit) = σ2/wi,
where wi are some exogenous values that sum to unity,

∑i =1 w i = 1 .
N

Under these conditions, an

unbiased and efficient estimate of trend change in prices πt is,
N

πˆ t = ∑ wi ln(pit/pit-1),

(2)

i =1

which can be obtained by running weighted least squares (WLS) on (1) with the weights

wi .

An unbiased estimate for the variance of π̂ t is
s 2π

=

s 2p
N −1

,

(3)

where s 2p = ∑ i =1 w i ( ∆ ln p it − πˆ t ) 2 .
N

Diewert (1995) criticizes the stochastic approach and argues that: (a) the common trend πt
in (1) is limiting; (b) the variance assumption var(eit) = σ 2/wi is unrealistic; (c) some choices of
wi (such as budget shares) will not be exogenous. In assessing these criticisms, we believe that a
distinction should be made between lower-level and higher-level aggregation. At higher levels,

5
these criticisms seem apt, and simple extensions to the model in (1) are unable resolve them in
completely satisfactory ways. In particular, to avoid the assumption of a single common trend
for all prices, Selvanathan and Rao (1994, pp. 61-67) add commodity-specific trends δi to
equation (1):
ln(pit / pit-1) = πt + δi + eit,

i =1, ..., N,

(1´)

where again the errors are independent and satisfy E(eit) = 0 and var(eit) = σ2/wi, with

∑ i =1 w i = 1 .
N

For the estimator of the common trend πt to be identified, some assumption is

needed on δi. Selvanathan and Rao show that the estimator for πt is still given by (2) under the
assumption that the commodity-specific trends have a weighted average of zero:4
N

∑

i =1

wi δi = 0.

(4)

The justification for (4) is purely statistical, i.e. it allows πt to be identified, though we will
suggest an economic interpretation in section 4.
In contrast, at the lowest level of aggregation, prices from different sellers of the same
commodity are typically combined into indexes for individual commodities, or for narrow classes
of closely related commodities. At this level, the assumption of a common trend, such as πt in
equation (1), will often be realistic. The stochastic approach in (1)-(3) can then be used to form
the elementary indexes that are combined at higher levels of aggregation into indexes for all
commodities, or for broad classes of commodities. If the expenditure shares needed to compute

4

The standard error of

π̂ t when the commodity effects are used is less than that in (3), since the residual error of

the pricing equation is reduced.

6
the weights wi are unavailable for lower-level aggregates, so that wit = 1/N is used, the stochastic
approach in (1)-(3) amounts to using a simple average of log-changes for prices, and its variance.

3. Integrating the Economic and Stochastic Approaches to Index Numbers

Despite Keynes’ early contribution to the literature on the stochastic approach to index
numbers, he ultimately rejected it. Keynes wrote,

I conclude, therefore, that the unweighted (or rather randomly weighted) Index-Number
of Prices — Edgeworth’s indefinite index number — which shall in some way measure
the value of money as such or the amount of influence on general prices exerted by
‘changes on the side of money’ or the ‘objective mean variation of general prices’ as
distinguished from the ‘change in the power of money to purchase advantages’, has no
place whatever in a rightly conceived discussion of the problems of Price-Levels.5

We also believe that index numbers with weights that reflect expenditure patterns are more
interesting and informative than index numbers that have a purely statistical motivation. To
motivate the incorporation of expenditure information in our index, we assume that the objective
is to estimate an economic index, which, for the consumer problem, is defined as the ratio of the
expenditure function evaluated at current period prices to the expenditure function evaluated at
reference period prices.
Adopting an economic index as the goal of estimation makes the link between the

5

Keynes (1930, pp. 87-8.) Keynes’ argument against stochastic price models with independent commodity-specific
shocks was that linkages between prices in an economy preclude shocks that affect a single price in isolation: “But
in the case of prices a movement in the price of one commodity necessarily influences the movement in the prices of
other commodities.” (p. 86.)

7
stochastic properties of the data and the stochastic properties of the estimator less straightforward
than when the goal is simply to estimate a mean price change. Nevertheless, any kind of index
number calculated from stochastic data is itself stochastic. Moreover, a model of the stochastic
processes reflected in the data used to calculate the economic index should allow the derivation
of an estimator for its standard error.
Our starting point is the stochastic process for the expenditure shares used to calculate the
weights in the index. To estimate an economic index requires an assumption about the form of
the expenditure function that describes tastes. (For simplicity, our discussion will be in terms of
the consumer problem, although the approach is equally applicable to the producer problem.)
This assumption implies a functional form for the equations relating expenditure shares to prices.
Since these equations generally do not fit the data on expenditure shares precisely, they imply the
existence of an error term. We interpret changes in expenditure shares not explainable by
changes in prices as arising from stochastic tastes. If we were able to take repeated draws from
the distribution of the taste parameters in the expenditure function while holding prices constant,
we would observe a range of outcomes for expenditure shares: this is one source of variance in
an economic index.
A second source of variance in the price index is sampling error in the price data.6 When
prices are treated as stochastic, we need to decide whether the expenditure shares are determined
by observed prices or by expected prices. Griliches and Grunfeld (1960, p. 7), for example,
recognize that models of consumer behavior may be specified using either expected prices (and
income) or observed prices (and income). We shall take the latter approach, and assume that

6

Sampling error in the expenditure shares changes the interpretation and derivation of the estimator of the index
standard error, but not the estimator itself.

8
observed prices determine expenditure shares.7 In that case, the error term for prices influences

the expenditure shares, so a component of the variance of expenditure shares comes from the
variance of prices. In our translog results below, we include components representing the
variance of expenditure shares that comes from the variance of prices (see proposition 7).
However, for the non-linear CES model with prices treated as stochastic, we are unable to
include these components in our variance estimator.
In addition to the indirect effects arising from the equations relating prices to expenditure
shares, which are small, price variances have an important direct effect on the index’s variance.
We therefore extend our results for both the CES model and for the translog model to take
account of the direct effect on the index of sampling error in the measures of prices used to
construct the index. We assume that the lower-level aggregates in the index are price indexes for
individual commodities, or for narrow categories of items that are homogeneous enough to be
treated as a single commodity. Each commodity has its own non-stochastic price trend, but
rather than summing to zero, as in equation (4), with properly chosen weights these commodity
price trends sum up to the true index expressed as a logarithm. As sample estimators of these
trends, the lower-level aggregates used to construct the index are subject to sampling error.
Equation (1) describes the process generating the changes in individual price quotes that are
combined in a lower-level aggregate. If all the quotes have identical weights and variances, the
variance of the lower-level aggregate can therefore be estimated by equation (3).

7

Under the alternative hypothesis that expected prices are the correct explanatory variable, regression equations for
expenditure shares using observed prices must be regarded as having mismeasured explanatory variables.
Measurement error in the prices used to explain expenditure patterns may imply a bias in the estimates of the
contribution of the taste variance to the index variance, but it does not necessarily do so. If sampling error in the
price variables reduces their ability to explain changes in expenditure shares, too much of the variation in
expenditure shares will be attributed to changes in tastes, and the estimate of the taste variance will be biased
upward. Nevertheless, even if such a bias exists, and it will usually be negligible.

9
Finally, in addition to sampling error in tastes and in estimates of commodity prices,
another source of inaccuracy in an estimate of a cost of living index is that the model used to
describe tastes might be misspecified. This was thought to be an important problem until
Diewert (1976) showed that by using a flexible functional form, an arbitrary expenditure function
could be approximated to the second order of precision. We do not explicitly estimate the effect
of possible misspecification of the model of tastes on the estimate of the cost of living index, but
our standard error estimator does give an indication of this effect. An incorrectly specified model
of tastes will likely fit the expenditure data poorly, resulting in a high estimate of the component
of the index’s variance that comes from the variance of tastes. On the other hand, our estimator
will tend to imply a small standard error for the index if the model fits the expenditure data well,
suggesting that the specification is correct, or if growth rates of prices are all within a narrow
range, in which case misspecification does not matter.
One source of misspecification that can be important is an incorrect assumption of
homotheticity. (Diewert’s approximation result for flexible function forms does not imply that
omitting an important variable, such as income in nonhomethetic cases, is harmless.) In the
economic models considered in this paper, homotheticity is assumed for the sake of simplicity.
In applications to producers, or in applications to consumers whose income changes by about the
same amount as the price index, this assumption is likely to be harmless, but when consumers
experience large changes in real income, the effects on their expenditure patterns are likely to be
significant. If a model that assumes homotheticity is used and changes in real income cause
substantial variation in expenditure shares, the estimate of the variance of the index’s weights is
likely to be elevated because of the lack of fit of the model. Knowing that the estimate of the
economic index has a wide range of uncertainty will help to prevent us from having too much

10
confidence in results based on an incorrect assumption, but relaxing the assumption would, of
course, be preferable.8

4. The Exact Index for the CES Model with Random Technology or Tastes
A. Exactness of the Sato-Vartia Index in the Non-Random Case

Missing from the stochastic approach is an economic justification for the pricing equation
in (1) or (1´), as well as the constraint in (4). It turns out that this can be obtained by using a CES
utility or production function, which is given by,
η

⎞ (η−1)
⎛N
f(xt,at) = ⎜⎜ ∑ a it x it( η−1) / η ⎟⎟
,
⎠
⎝ i =1

where xt = (x1t,…xNt) is the vector of quantities, and at = (a1t,…aNt) are technology or taste
parameters that we will allow to vary over time, as described below. The elasticity of
substitution η > 0 is assumed to be constant.
We will assume that the quantities xt are optimally chosen to minimize

∑i=1 p it x it ,
N

subject to achieving f(xt, at)=1. The solution to this optimization problem gives us the
corresponding unit-cost function ,

8

Caves, Christensen and Diewert (1982) find that the translog model that we discuss below can be extended to
allow the log of income to affect expenditure patterns and that the Törnqvist index still measures the cost of living
index at an intermediate utility level. However, to model non-homothetic tastes for index number purposes, we
recommend the use of Deaton and Muellbauer’s (1980) “Almost Ideal Demand System (AIDS).” Feenstra and
Reinsdorf (2000) show that for the AIDS model, the predicted value of expenditure shares at the average level of
logged income and logged prices must be averaged with the Törnqvist index weights (which are averages of
observed shares from the two periods being compared) to obtain an exact price index for an intermediate standard of
living. However, the variance formulas that we derive below for the translog model can still be used to approximate
the variance of the AIDS index as long as logged income is included among the explanatory variables in the
regression model for expenditure shares.

11
1

⎞ (1−η)
⎛N
c(pt, bt) = ⎜⎜ ∑ b it p1it−η ⎟⎟
,
⎠
⎝ i=1

(5)

where pt = (p1t,…pNt) is the vector of prices, and bit ≡ a itη > 0, with bt = (b1t,…bNt).
Differentiating (5) provides the expenditure shares sit implied by the taste parameters bt:
s it = ∂ ln c(p t , b t ) / ∂ ln p it = c(p t , b t ) η−1 b it p1it−η .

(6)

Diewert (1976) defines a price index formula whose weights are functions of the
expenditure shares sit-1 and sit as exact if it equals the ratio of unit-costs. For the CES unit-cost
function with constant bt, the price index due to Sato (1976) and Vartia (1976) has this property.
The Sato-Vartia price index equals the geometric mean of the price ratios with weights wi:

⎛ p ⎞
∏ ⎜⎜ it ⎟⎟
i =1⎝ p it −1 ⎠
N

wi

=

c(p t , b t )
,
c(p t −1 , b t )

(7)

where the weights wi are defined as:
wi =

∑

(s it − s it −1 ) /(ln s it − ln s it −1 )
N
(s
j =1 it

− s it −1 ) /(ln s it − ln s it −1 )

.

The weight for the ith commodity is proportional to (sit – sit-1) / (ln sit – ln sit-1), the logarithmic
mean of sit and sit-1, and the weights are normalized to sum to unity.9 Provided that the

9 The logarithmic mean of the expenditure shares in the two periods approximately equals an average of their
arithmetic and geometric means with a 2/3 weight on the geometric mean. If sit-1 equals sit, then the logarithmic
means is defined as sit.

(8)

12
expenditure shares are computed with constant taste parameters bt, the Sato-Vartia index on the
left side of (7) equals the ratio of unit-costs on the right, also computed with constant bt. In
addition to its ability to measure the change in unit-costs for the CES model, the Sato-Vartia
index is noteworthy for its outstanding axiomatic properties, which rival those of the Fisher
index (Balk, 1995, p. 87).

B. Effect of Random Technology or Tastes

As discussed above, we want to allow for random technology or taste parameters bit, and
derive the standard error of the exact price index due to this uncertainty. First, we must
generalize the concept of an exact price index to allow for the case where the parameters bt
change over time, as follows:10

Proposition 1
Given bt-1 ≠ bt, let siτ denote the optimally chosen shares as in (6) for these taste parameters, τ =
N

t-1, t, and define b iτ ≡ b iτ ∏ b iwτ i , using the weights wi computed as in (8). Then there exists
i =1

~
b i between bit −1 and b it such that,
N

∏

i =1

⎛ p it ⎞
⎜⎜
⎟⎟
⎝ p it −1 ⎠

wi

~
c(p t , b )
=
~ .
c(p t −1 , b )

(9)

This result shows that the Sato-Vartia index equals the ratio of unit-costs evaluated with

10

The proofs of all Propositions are in an Appendix, at: http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/fzfeens/papers.html .

13
~
parameters b i that lie between the normalized values of the bit in each period. Therefore, the

~
Sato-Vartia index is exact for this particular value b of the parameter vector, but the index will
change as the random parameters bt-1 and bt change. The standard error of the index should
reflect this variation. The following proposition shows how the variance of the log Sato-Vartia
index is related to the variance of the ln bit, denoted by σβ2 :

Proposition 2
Suppose that ln biτ are independently and identically distributed with variance σβ2 for i = 1,…,N
and τ = t–1 or t. Using the weights wi as in (8), denote the log Sato-Vartia index b y πsv ≡

∑ i=1 w i ∆ ln p it
N

. Then conditional on prices, its variance can be approximated as:
var πsv ≈

N

1
2

σ β2 ∑ w i2 (∆ ln p it − π sv ) 2 = 12 σ β2 s 2p w ,

(10)

i =1

where w ≡ ∑ i =1 w i2 ( ∆ ln p it − πsv ) 2 / ∑ i =1 w i ( ∆ ln p it − πsv ) 2 is a weighted average of the wi with
N

N

the weights proportional to wi (∆ ln pit – πsv) , and s 2p ≡ ∑ i =1 w i ( ∆ ln p it − π sv ) 2 is the weighted
2

N

variance of prices.

Equation (10), which is conditional on the observed prices, shows how the variance of the
Sato-Vartia index reflects the underlying randomness of the taste parameters bt and bt-1. In
effect, we are computing the variance in the price index from the randomness in the weights wi in
(8) rather than from the randomness in prices used in the conventional stochastic approach.

14
To compare (10) to (3), note that w equals 1/N when the weights wi also equal 1/N. In
that case, we see that the main difference between our formula (10) for the variance of the price
index and formula (3) used in the conventional stochastic approach is the presence of the term
1 2
σ .
2 β

This term reflects the extent to which we are uncertain about the parameters of the

underlying CES function that the exact price index is intended to measure. It is entirely absent
from the conventional stochastic approach. We next show how to obtain a value for this
variance.

C. Estimators for σβ2 and for the Index Variance

To use equation (10) to estimate the variance of a Sato-Vartia price index we need an
estimate of σβ2 . Changes in expenditure shares not accounted for by the CES model can be used
to estimate this variance. After taking logarithms, write equation (6) in first-difference form as:
∆ ln s it = (η − 1)∆ ln c t − (η − 1)∆ ln p it + ∆ ln b it ,

(11)

where ∆ln ct ≡ ln[c(pt,bt)/c(pt-1,bt-1)]. Next, eliminate the term involving ∆ln ct by subtracting
the weighted mean (over all the i) of each side of equation (11) from that side. Then using the
fact that ∑iN=1 w i ∆ ln s it = 0 , equation (11) becomes,
∆ ln s it = α t − (η − 1)∆ ln p it + ε it , i =1,…,N,

(12)

α t = (η − 1)∑iN=1 w i ∆ ln p it ,

(13)

ε it = ∆ ln b it − ∑iN=1 w i ∆ ln b it .

(14)

where,

and,

15

Equation (12) may be regarded as a regression of the change in shares on the change in
prices, with the intercept given by (13) and the errors in (14). These errors indicate the extent of
taste change, and are related to the underlying variance of the Sato-Vartia index.
Denote by α̂ t and η̂ the estimated coefficients from running weighted least-squares on
(12) over i =1,…,N, using the weights wi. Unless the supply curve is horizontal, the estimate of

η may well be biased because of a covariance between the error term (reflecting changes
preferences and shifts in the demand curve) and the log prices. We ignore this in the next result,
however, because we treat the prices as non-stochastic so there is no correlation between them
and the errors εit. We return to the issue of stochastic prices at the end of this section, and in the
next.
The weighted mean squared error of regression (12) is useful in computing the variance
of the Sato-Vartia index, as shown by the following result:

Proposition 3
Define w = ∑iN=1 w i2 as the weighted average of the wi , using wi from (8) as weights, with w as
in Proposition 2. Also, denote the mean squared error of regression (12) by s ε2 = ∑iN=1 w i εˆ it2 ,
with εˆ it = ∆ ln s it − αˆ t + (ηˆ − 1)∆ ln p it . Then an unbiased estimator for σβ2 is:
s β2 =

s 2ε
.
2(1 − w − w )

(15)

16
To motivate this result, notice that the regression errors εit in (14) depend on the changes
in the ln bit minus their weighted mean. We have assumed that the ln bit are independently and
identically distributed with variance σβ2 . This means that the variance of ∆ ln b it = ln b it − ln b it −1
equals 2σβ2 . By extension, the mean squared error of regression (12) is approximately twice the
variance of the taste parameters, so the variance of the taste parameters is about one-half of the
mean squared error, with the degrees of freedom adjustment in the denominator of (15) coming
from the weighting scheme.
Substituting (15) into equation (10) yields a convenient expression for the variance of the
Sato-Vartia index,
var πsv ≈

s 2ε s 2p w
4(1 − w − w )

.

(16)

If, for example, each wi equals 1/N, the expression for var πsv becomes s 2ε s 2p / 4( N − 2) . By
comparison, the conventional stochastic approach resulted in the index variance s 2p /( N − 1) in
(3), which can be greater or less than that in (16). In particular, when s ε2 < 4( N − 2) /( N − 1)
then conventional stochastic approach gives a standard error of the index that is too high, as will
occur if the fit of the share equation is good.
To further compare the conventional stochastic approach with our CES case, let us write
regression (12) in reverse form as,
∆ ln p it = π sv − (η − 1) −1 ∆ ln s it + (η − 1) −1 ε it ,

(12´)

π sv = ∑iN=1 w i ∆ ln p it ,

(13´)

where,

17

and the errors are defined as in (14). Thus, the change in prices equals a trend (the Sato-Vartia
index), plus a commodity-specific term reflecting the change in shares, plus a random error
reflecting changing tastes. Notice the similarity between (12´) and the specification of the
pricing equation in (1´), where the change in share is playing the role of the commodity-specific
terms δi. Indeed, the constraint in (4) that the weighted commodity-specific effect sum to zero is
automatically satisfied when we use (12´) and the Sato-Vartia weight wi in (8), because then

∑iN=1 w i ∆ ln s it = 0 . Thus, the CES specification provides an economic justification for the
pricing equation (1´) used in the stochastic approach.
If we run WLS on regression (12´) with the Sato-Vartia weights

w i , the estimate of the

trend term is exactly the log Sato-Vartia index, πˆ sv = ∑iN=1 w i ∆ ln p it . If this regression is run
without the share terms in (12´), then the standard error of the trend is given by equation (3) as
– . The standard error is
modified to allow for heteroskedasticity by replacing N with 1/w
somewhat lower if the shares are included. Either of these can be used as the standard error of
the Sato-Vartia index under the conventional stochastic approach.
By comparison, in formula (16) we are using both the mean squared error s ε2 of the
“direct” regression (12), and the mean squared error s 2p of the “reverse” regression (12´) (run
without the share terms). The product of these is used to obtain the standard error of the SatoVartia index, as in (16). Recall that we are assuming in this section that the taste parameters are
stochastic, but not prices. Then why does the variance of prices enter (16)? This occurs because
with the weights wi varying randomly, the Sato-Vartia index π sv = ∑iN=1 w i ln(p it / p it −1 ) will vary

18
if and only if the price ratios (pit/pit-1) differ from each other. Thus, the variance of the SatoVartia index must depend on the product of the taste variance, estimated from the “direct”
regression (12), and the price variance, estimated from the “reverse” regression (12´) without the
share terms.
We should emphasize that in our discussion so far, regressions (12) or (12´) are run
across commodities i =1,…,N, but for a given t. In the appendix, we show how to generalize
Proposition 3 to the case where the share regression (12) is estimated across goods i =1,…,N and
time periods t =1,…,T. In that case, the mean squared error that appears in the numerator of (15)
is formed by taking the weighted sum across goods and periods. But the degrees of freedom
adjustment in the denominator of (15) is modified to take into account the fact that the weights
wi in (8) are correlated over time (since they depend on the expenditure shares in period t-1 and
t). With this modification, the variance of the taste parameters is still relatively easy to compute
from the mean squared error of regression (12), and this information may be used in (10) to
obtain the variance of the Sato-Vartia index computed between any two periods.
Another extension of Proposition 3 would be to allow for stochastic prices as well as
stochastic taste parameters. This assumption is introduced in the next section under the condition
that the prices and taste parameters are independent. But what if they are not, as in a supplydemand framework where shocks to the demand curve influence equilibrium prices: then how is
Proposition 3 affected? Using the mean squared error s ε2 of regression (12) in equation (15) to
compute the variance of the taste disturbances, or in equation (16) to compute the variance of the
index, will give a lower-bound estimate. The reason is that running WLS on regression (12) will
result in a downward biased estimate of the variance of tastes: E(s ε2 / 2(1 − w − w )) ≤ s β2 if taste

19
shocks affect prices, because the presence of taste information in prices artificially inflates the
explanatory power of the regression.

5. Variance of the Exact Index for the CES Function with Stochastic Prices
Price indexes are often constructed using sample averages of individual price quotes to
represent the price of goods or services in the index basket.11 In these cases, different rates of
change of the price quotes for a good or service imply the existence of a sampling variance. That
is, for any commodity i, ∆ln pit will have a variance of σ i2 , which can be estimated by s i2 , the
sample variance of the rates of change of the various quotes for commodity i. The variances of
the lower-level price aggregates are another source of variance in the index besides the variances
of the weights considered in Proposition 3.12
In the special case where the commodities in the index are homogeneous enough to
justify the assumption of a common trend for their prices and the log changes in commodity
prices all have the same variance, an unbiased estimator for this variance is s 2p /(1 − w ), where s 2p
is defined in Proposition 2.13 This special case yields results that are easily compared with the
results from the conventional stochastic approach.
In the more general case, no restrictions are placed on the commodity-specific price

11

Even if every price quoted for a good is included in the sample, we can still adopt an infinite population
perspective and view these prices as realizations from a data-generating process that is the object of our
investigations.
12
Estimates of the variance of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics have long
included the effects of sampling error in the price measures used as lower-level aggregates in constructing the CPI.
Now they also include the effects of the variances of the weights used to combine these lower-level aggregates,
which reflect sampling error in expenditure estimates. See U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1997), p. 196.
13
The denominator is a degrees of freedom correction derived as follows. Assume for simplicity that E[∆ ln pit – E(∆
ln pit)]2 =1. Then E(∆ ln pit – π t )2 = E(∆ ln pit – ∑ wj∆ ln pjt )2 = E[(1–wi)∆ ln pit – ∑j≠i wj ∆ ln pjt ]2 = (1– wi)2 + ∑j≠i wj2
–.
= 1– 2wi + ∑j wj2. The weighted average of these terms, ∑i wi [1– 2wi + ∑j wj2], is 1– ∑i wi2 = 1– w

20
trends, but we do assume that the price disturbances are independent of the weight disturbances.
Although allowing ∆ln pit to have a non-zero covariance with the wi would be appealing if
positive shocks to bit are thought to raise equilibrium market prices, this would make the
expression for var πsv quite complicated. With the independence assumption, we obtain
Proposition 4:

Proposition 4
Let prices and weights wi in (8) have independent distributions, and let s i2 be an estimate of the
variance of ∆ ln pit, i =1,…,N. Then the variance of the Sato-Vartia price index can be
approximated by:
N

N

i =1

i =1

var πsv ≈ ∑ w i2s i2 + 12 sβ2s 2p w + 12 s β2 ∑ s i2 w i2 (1 − w i ) 2 ,

(17)

where s β2 is estimated from the mean squared error of the regression (12) as in (15). In the
special case when every price variance may be estimated by s 2p /(1 − w ) , (17) becomes,
N

var πsv ≈ s 2p w /(1 − w ) + 12 sβ2 s 2p w + 12 s β2 [s 2p /(1 − w )] ∑ w i2 (1 − w i ) 2 .

(17´)

i =1

This proposition shows that the approximation for the variance of the price index is the
sum of three components: one that reflects the variance of prices, another that reflects the
variance of preferences and holds prices constant, and a third that reflects the interaction of the
price variance and the taste variance. The first term in (17) or (17´) is similar to the variance
estimator in conventional stochastic approach. If each wi equals 1/N, the first term in (17´)

21
becomes s 2p w /(1 − w ) = s 2p /( N − 1) , just as in (3). The second term in (17) or (17´) is the same as
the term that we derived from stochastic tastes, in Proposition 2. The third term is analogous to
the interaction term that appears in the expected value of a product of random variables (Mood,
Graybill and Boes, 1974, p. 180, Corollary to Theorem 3). The presence of this term means that
the interaction of random prices and tastes tends to raise the standard error of the index. If each
wi equals 1/N, then the second term in (17´) becomes s ε2 s 2p / 4( N − 2) and the third term becomes

[s s

2 2
ε p

]

/ 4( N − 2) [1 − 1 / N ] .

6. Translog Function
We next consider a translog unit-cost or expenditure function, which is given by:

N

ln c(p t , α t ) = α 0 + ∑ α it ln p it +
i =1

1 N N
∑ ∑ γ ij ln p it ln p jt ,
2 i =1 j=1

(18)

where we assume without loss of generality that γij = γji. In order for this function to be linearly
homogeneous in prices we must have ∑iN=1 α it = 1 and ∑iN=1 γ ij = 0 . The corresponding share
equations are,
N

s it = α it + ∑ γ ij ln p jt , i=1,…,N.

(19)

j=1

We will treat the taste or technology parameters αit as random variables, but assume that
the γij are fixed. Suppose that αit = αi + εit, where the constant coefficients αi satisfy ∑iN=1 α i = 1,
while the random errors εit satisfy ∑iN=1 ε it = 0. Using this specification, the share equations are,

22
N

s it = α i + ∑ γ ij ln p jt + ε it , i=1,…,N.

(20)

j=1

We assume that εit is identically distributed with E(εit)=0 for each equation i, though it will be
correlated across equations (since the errors sum to zero), and may also be correlated over time.
Since the errors sum to zero the autocorrelation must be identical across equations. We will
denote the covariance matrix of the errors by E(εt εt′ ) = Ω, and their autocorrelation is then
E(εt εt -1′ ) = ρ Ω.
With this stochastic specification of preferences, the question again arises as to what a
price index should measure. In the economic approach, with αit constant over time, the ratio of
unit-costs is measured by a Törnqvist (1936) price index. The following result shows how this
generalizes to the case where αit changes:

Proposition 5
Defining αi = (αit −1 + αit ) / 2 , and w it = (s it −1 + s it ) / 2 , where the shares siτ are given by (19)
for the parameters αiτ, τ = t-1, t, then,

⎛ p ⎞
∏ ⎜⎜ p it ⎟⎟
i =1 ⎝ it −1 ⎠
N

w it

=

c(p t , α )
.
c(p t −1 , α )

(21)

The expression on the left of (21) is the Törnqvist price index, which measures the ratio
of unit-costs evaluated at an average value of the taste parameters αit. This result is suggested by
Caves, Christensen and Diewert (1982), and shows that the Törnqvist index is still meaningful
when the first-order parameters αi of the translog function are changing over time.

23
The variance of the Törnqvist index can be computed from the right side of equation (21)
expressed in logs. Substituting from equation (18), we find that the coefficients αi multiply the
log prices. Hence, conditional on prices, the variance of the log-change in unit-costs will depend
on the variance of αi = (αit −1 + αit ) / 2 = αi + (ε it −1 + ε it ) / 2 . The covariance matrix of these taste
parameters is E (α − α )(α − α )' = (1 + ρ)Ω / 2 . This leads to the next result:

Proposition 6
Let the parameters αit be distributed as αit = αi + εit, with E(εt εt′ ) = Ω and E(εt εt -1′ ) = ρ Ω,
and denote the log Törnqvist index by πt ≡ ∑ i =1 w it ∆ ln p it . Then, conditional on prices, the
N

variance of πt is:
1
2

var π t = (1 + ρ)∆ ln p t ' Ω ∆ ln p t .

(22)

Since the errors of the share equations in (20) sum to zero, the covariance matrix Ω is
singular, with Ωι = 0 where ι is a (Nx1) vector of one’s. Thus, the variance of πt is equal to,

1
2

var π t = (1 + ρ)[∆ ln p t − π t ] ' Ω [∆ ln p t − π t ] .

(23)

The variance of the Törnqvist index will approach zero as the prices approach a common
growth rate, and this property also holds for the variance of the Sato-Vartia index in Proposition
2 and the conventional stochastic approach in (3). But unlike the stochastic approach in (3), the
variance of the Törnqvist index will depend on the fit of the share equations. Our formula for the
variance of the Törnqvist index is more general than the one that we obtained for the Sato-Vartia

24
index, because Proposition 6 does not assume that the taste disturbances are all independent and
identically distributed.
The fit of the share equations will depend on how many time periods we pool over, and
this brings us to the heart of the distinction between the stochastic and economic approaches.
Suppose we estimated (20) over just two periods, t-1 and t. Then it is readily verified that there
are enough free parameters αi and γij to obtain a perfect fit to the share equations. In other words,
the translog system is flexible enough to give a perfect fit for the share equation (20) at two
points. As we noted in section 3, such flexibility is a virtue in implementing the economic
approach to index numbers: indeed, Diewert (1976) defines an index to be superlative if it is
exact for an aggregator function that is flexible.14 But from an econometric point of view, we
have zero degrees of freedom when estimating the share equations over two periods, so that the
covariance matrix Ω cannot be estimated. How are we to resolve this apparent conflict between
the economic and stochastic approaches?
We believe that a faithful application of the economic approach requires that we pool
observations over all available time periods when estimating (20). In the economic approach,
Christensen and Diewert (1982a,b) allow the first-order parameters αit of the translog unit-cost
function to vary over time (as we do above), but strictly maintain the assumption that the secondorder parameters γij are constant (as we also assume). Suppose the researcher has data over three
(or more) periods. If the share equations are estimated over periods one and two, and then again

14

Diewert (1976) defines an aggregator function to be flexible if it provides a second-order approximation to an
arbitrary function at one point, i.e. if the parameters can be chosen such that the value of the aggregator function, and
its first and second derivatives, equal those of an arbitrary function at one point. We are using a slightly different
definition of flexibility: if the ratio of the aggregator function, and the value of its first and second derivatives, equal
those of an arbitrary function at two points.

25
over periods two and three, this would clearly violate the assumption that γij are constant. Since
this is an essential assumption of the economic approach, there is every reason to use it in our
integrated approach. The way to maintain the constancy of γij is to pool over multiple periods,
which allows the covariance matrix Ω to be estimated. Pooling over multiple periods is also
recommended for the CES share equations in (12), to satisfy the maintained assumption that η is
constant, even though in the CES case we do not obtain a perfect fit if (12) is estimated over a
single cross-section (provided that N > 2).
Once we pool the share equations over multiple periods, it makes sense to consider more
general specifications of the random parameters αit. In particular, we can use αit = αi + tβi + εit,
where the coefficients βi on the time trend satisfy

∑i=1βi = 0. Then the share equations become,
N

N

s it = α i + β i t + ∑ γ ij ln p jt + ε it , i=1,…,N; t =1,…,T .

(24)

j=1

We make the same assumptions as before on the errors εit. Proposition 5 continues to hold as
stated, but now the αi are calculated as α i = (α it −1 + α it ) / 2 = α i + β i / 2 + (ε it −1 + ε it ) / 2 . The
variance of these is identical to that calculated above, so Proposition 6 continues to hold as well.
Thus, including time trends in the share equations does not affect the variance of the Törnqvist
index.

7. Translog Case with Stochastic Prices
As in the CES case, we would like to extend the formula for the standard error of the
price index to include randomness in prices as well as taste parameters. For each commodity i
we suppose that ∆ln pit is random with variance of σ i2 , which can be estimated by s i2 , the sample

26
variance of the rates of change of the various quotes for item i. These “lower level” sampling
errors are assumed to be independent across commodities, and are also independent of error εit in
the taste or technology parameters, αit = αi + εit. Then the standard error in Proposition 6 is
extended as:

Proposition 7
Let ∆ ln pit, i =1,…,N, be independently distributed with mean 0 and variances estimated by s i2 ,
and also independent of the parameters αit = αi + εit . Using the weights w it = (s it −1 + s it ) / 2 ,
the variance of the log Törnqvist index is approximated by:

var(π) ≈ ∑ wit si 2 +
2

+

1
4

1
$
2 (1 + ρ)( ∆ ln

∑i ∑j (∆ ln pit)(∆ ln pjt) [∑k γ$ ikγ$ jk sk 2]
pt)′ Ω$ ( ∆ ln pt) +

1
4

∑i (si 2)[∑j γ$ ij2sj 2] + 12 (1 + ρ$ )[∑ Ω$ ii si 2]. (25)

In the case where all prices have the same trend and variance, we can estimate σi 2 by

– ) for all i and (25) becomes:
sp2/(1 – w
– /(1 – w
–) +
var(π) ≈ sp2 w

1
2
4 [sp /(1

+

1
$
2 (1 + ρ)( ∆ ln

+

1
2
2 [sp /(1

– )]{∑i ∑j (∆ ln p )(∆ ln p ) [∑k γ$ γ$ ]}
–w
it
jt
ik jk

pt)′ Ω$ ( ∆ ln pt) +

1
4

– )]2 [∑i ∑j γ$ 2]
[sp2/(1 – w
ij

– )](1 + ρ$ )[∑i Ω
$ ii]
–w

(25´)

Thus, with stochastic prices the variance of the Törnqvist index includes five terms. The
first term in (25) contains the product of the squared weights times the price variances, the
second term reflects the effect of the price variance on the weights, the third term reflects the

27
variance of the weights that comes from the taste shocks, the fourth term reflects the interaction
of the price variance component and the component of the weight variance that comes from the
price shocks, and the fifth term reflects the interaction between the price variance and the
component of the weight variance that comes from the taste shocks. The expression for the
variance of the Sato-Vartia index in equation (17) also includes the analogous expressions for the
first, third and fifth terms in (25). The terms in (25) reflecting the effect of the price shocks on
the weight variance are new, however, and arise because the linearity of the Törnqvist index
allow use to include them; they were omitted for the sake of simplicity in the CES case. These
terms can be omitted from the estimator of the index variance if the model of consumer behavior
is specified with expected prices, rather than realized prices, as explanatory variables.

8. Application to Productivity Growth in Singapore
We now consider an application of our results to productivity growth in Singapore. As
discussed in the introduction, Hsieh (2002) has recently computed measures of total factor
productivity (TFP) for several East Asian countries, and obtains estimates higher than Young
(1992, 1995) for Singapore. The question we shall address is whether Hsieh’s estimates for
productivity growth in Singapore are statistically different from those obtained by Young.
Hsieh uses three different measures of the rental rate on capital for Singapore. They are
all motivated by the Hall-Jorgenson (1967) rental price formula, which Hsieh writes as:

rj
p

=

p kj
p

(i − p̂ k + δ j ) ,

where p kj is the nominal price of the jth type of capital, p is the GDP deflator, i is a nominal

(26)

28
interest rate, p̂ k is the overall inflation rate for capital, and δj is the depreciation rate for the jth
type of capital. For the real interest rate (i − p̂ k ) , Hsieh uses three different measures: (i) the
average nominal lending rate of the commercial banks, less the overall inflation rate for capital
p̂ k ; (ii) the earnings-price ratio of firms on the stock market of Singapore; (iii) the return on
equity from firm-level records in the Singapore Registry of Companies. These are all plotted in
Figure 1 (reproduced from Hsieh, 2002, Figure 2), where it can be seen that the three rates are
substantially different.
To compute the real rental price, capital depreciation is added to all three series in Figure
1, after which the calculation in (26) is made using the investment price deflators for five kinds
of capital for p kj . Hsieh weights these five types of capital by their share in payments to obtain
an overall rental rate corresponding to each interest rate. We will denote these by rtk , k=1,2,3,
depending on the three interest rates used. The plot of the real rental prices (not shown) looks
qualitatively similar to Figure 1. In Figure 2 we show the percent change in the rental prices
(computed as the change in the log of (26), times 100), where it is evident that the dip in the
commercial bank lending rate in 1974 has a dramatic effect on that rental price. Hsieh (2002, p.
509) regresses the average growth of rentals on a constant and time-trend, and the coefficient of
the time trend over each sample – representing the average growth of each rental – is reported in
Part A of Table 1.
On the wage side, Hsieh distinguishes eight types of workers, by gender and four
educational levels. He uses benchmark estimates for wages and employment in 1966, 1972,
1980 and 1990 and annual data on income and employment from labor market surveys beginning

29
in 1973 to calculate the annual growth rates of wages. The average growth of wages over various
times periods is shown in part A of Table 1.15
The labor share of 0.511 shown in part A is taken from Young (1995), and is held
constant. Then dual TFP growth is computed by the weighted average of the annual growth in
the wage and rental price of capital, using the constant labor share as the weight on labor. This
results in dual TFP growth ranging from 1.76 percent to 2.46 percent per year, as shown in the
second-last column of Table 1. These estimates are comparable to the estimates for other Asian
countries, but they contrast with the negative estimates of primal TFP for Singapore from Young
(1995), shown in the final column.
The question we wish to address is whether the Hsieh’s estimates in the second-last
column of part A are significantly different from Young’s estimates in the last column. Hsieh
(Table A2, p. 523) computes confidence intervals on the average growth of each of the real
rental prices in part A using the standard errors from the coefficient on each time trend. For two

of the three alternative measures, the 95 percent confidence interval includes a decline of nearly 1
percent per year. Hsieh uses the bounds of these confidence intervals for rental price growth to
calculate confidence intervals for TFP growth. The confidence intervals for TFP growth all lie
above 1 percent per year, so according to his calculations, TFP growth is significantly greater
than zero.
We would argue that this procedure fails to convey the true uncertainly associated with
the TFP estimates, for two reasons. First, and most important, we should treat each interest rate
– and associated rental prices on capital – as an independent observation on the “true” rate, and

15

These results are somewhat higher than reported in Hsieh (2002, p. 509), because we have corrected a slight
inconsistency in his calculation.

30
pool across these to compute the standard error of the rentals. Second, we should distinguish this
standard error in any one year from that over the entire sample period. Hsieh’s procedure is to
compute average TFP over the entire sample, along with its standard error, but this does not tell
us whether TFP growth in any one year (or shorter period) is significantly positive. We now
proceed to address both these points.

8.1 Error in Annual TFP

Before we can construct our estimate of the standard error of dual TFP, we first need to
re-measure productivity using annual data on labor shares, wages, and the rental price. These
results are shown in part B of Table 1. Annual data for wages and labor shares are available
beginning in 1973, and the annual data for all three rentals continues until 1992, so that becomes
our sample period. We first aggregate the eight types of labor using a Törnqvist price index, and
then compute dual TFP growth using a Törnqvist index over the real wage index and real rental
price of capital:
∆TFPtk ≡ 12 (s Lt + s Lt −1 )∆ ln(w t / p t ) + 12 (s Kt + s Kt −1 )∆ ln(rtk / p t ) ,

(27)

where sLt is the labor share in period t, sKt is the capital share with sLt + sKt =1, wt is the wage
index, and rt is the rental price on capital. The labor shares are computed from Economic and
Social Statistics, Singapore, 1960-1982, and from later issues of the Yearbook of Statistics,
Singapore. These shares range from 0.36 to 0.47 over 1973-1992, and average 0.418, which is

less than the labor share shown in part A of Table 1 and used by Young (1995) and Hsieh.
In addition to the average labor share, we report in part B the average growth rates of the
rentals prices and wage index, as well as the computed dual TFP. The average rental price

31
growth differs substantially between parts A and B. This reflects the use of different formulas: as
noted above, Hsieh uses a regression-based method to compute the growth rate, whereas we use
the average of the difference in logs of (26), times 100. Hsieh states that his method is less
sensitive to the initial and end points of the sample period, whereas the average of the difference
in log rentals certainly does depend on our sample period. It is evident from Figure 2 that the
rental price computed with the average bank-lending rate falls by about 200 percent from 197374, and then rises by about 300 percent from 1974-75, and these values are the largest in the
sample. If instead of using 1973-1992 as the sample period, we use 1975-1992, then the average
growth in the rental price computed with the commercial bank lending rate falls from 2.5 percent
per year to –1.4 percent per year!
The growth rates of wages reported in Parts A and B also differ slightly because of
differences in sample periods and in formulas used.16 Dual TFP based on the Törnqvist index,
reported in part B, shows higher growth for two of the rental price measures, and lower growth
for one measure, than dual TFP based on average growth rates, reported in part A. Using the
mean of the three alternative rental price estimates, the growth of dual TFP based on the

Törnqvist index is 2.48 percent per year over 1973-1992. Yet this falls dramatically to 1.37
percent per year if 1973-1974 (when one of the rental prices moved erratically) is omitted.
Our goal is to compute the standard error of the Törnqvist index in (27), where this error
arises from two sources: (i) error in measuring the rental prices of capital, based on the three
alternative real interest rates used; (ii) error because the annual data will not fit a translog cost
function perfectly. Under the hypothesis that the homothetic translog cost function model

16

As discussed above, we use a Törnqvist price index constructed over the eight types of labor, whereas Hsieh uses
an averaging procedure.

32
describes the process generating the data, the Törnqvist price index exactly summarizes the
change in the cost function. Thus, we assume that changes in expenditure shares represent
responses to changes in wages and rental prices in accordance with the translog model, plus
effects of random shocks to expenditures. Ceteris paribus, the greater the variance of the share
changes that is unexplainable by the translog model, the greater the variance of the random
shocks that affect the weights in the Törnqvist index.
Beginning with error (i), we first construct the mean rental price:
ln rt ≡

1 3
ln rtk ,
∑
3 k =1

and its change,
ln( rt / rt −1 ) =

1 3
ln( rtk / rtk−1 ) ,
∑
3 k =1

(28)

where k=1,2,3 denotes the three rental prices. Then the sample variance of the change in mean
rental price, denoted by s 2t , is,
s 2t ≡

1 3
∑ [ln(rtk / rtk−1 ) − ln( rt / rt −1 )]2 .
6 k =1

(29)

In Figure 3 we plot mean TFP growth in each year,
∆TFP t ≡ 12 (s Lt + s Lt −1 )∆ ln(w t / p t ) + 12 (s Kt + s Kt −1 )∆ ln(rt / p t ) ,

(30)

and the 95 percent confidence interval (with 2 degrees of freedom) constructed as ∆TFP t ±
2.9 (s
Kt
2

+ s Kt −1 ) s 2t . We can see that the confidence interval on mean TFP growth over 1973-

1995 is extremely wide, but this is not surprising given the erratic data on rentals shown in
Figure 2. In Table 1, we report in parentheses the average standard deviation of the change in

33
rental prices, and the average standard error of mean TFP growth, over the 1973-1992 period.
Consistent with Figures 2 and 3, both these are extremely large.
Furthermore, even when we restrict attention to the shorter period of 1975-1992 shown
in Figure 4, the confidence interval of mean TFP growth still includes zero in every year. This
can also be seen from Table 1, where we report the average standard deviations of the change in
rental prices, and mean TFP growth over 1975-1992. The average value of mean TFP growth is
1.4 percent, but it has an average standard error of 5 percent. Accordingly, in every year we
cannot reject the hypothesis that mean TFP growth is zero or negative. Thus, on an annual basis,
we would be hard pressed to conclude that the positive productivity estimates of Hsieh are
significantly different than the negative estimates of Young (1995).

8.2 Error in Cumulative TFP

Nevertheless, our interest is not in the hypothesis that TFP growth in each year is
positive, but rather, that cumulative TFP growth is positive. An erratic movement in a rental
price one year might very well be reversed the next year, resulting in a negative autocorrelation
that reduces the variance of long-run rental growth. To assess the implications of this, we instead
consider longer differences in TFP, such as 15-year growth,

∆TFP t ,15 ≡ 12 (s Lt + s Lt −15 )[ln( w t / p t ) − ln( w t −15 / p t −15 )]
+

1
(s
2 Kt

+ s Kt −15 )[ln( rt / p t ) − ln( rt −15 / p t −15 )] .

(31)

The standard error of this can be measured using the variance of measurement error in the longdifference of rental prices,
s 2t ,15 ≡

1 3
k
k
2
∑ [ln(rt / rt −15 ) − ln(rt / rt −15 )] .
6 k =1

(32)

34

In Figure 5 we plot the mean 15-year TFP growth ending in the years 1988-1992, along
with the 95 percent confidence interval ∆TFP t ,15 ±

2.9 (s
Kt
2

+ s Kt −15 ) s 2t ,15 . We have five

observations for the 15-year cumulative TFP growth, and in four out of five cases the cumulative
growth is significantly greater than zero. The only exception is 1989, where the erratic
movement in the mean rental from 1974, and its large standard error, makes that observation on
TFP growth insignificantly different from zero. In all other end years the confidence intervals on
cumulative TFP growth exclude zero. This can also be seen from part C of Table 1, where we
report the mean values of the growth in wages, mean rental, and mean TFP growth over the 15year period, along with their standard deviations. Cumulative TFP growth of 21.8 percent
(averaged over the end-years 1990-92) vastly exceeds its standard error of 3.8 percent. Notice
that this standard deviation is actually smaller than the standard deviation of the annual change
in TFP growth in part B, indicating some negative correlation in the measurement error of rental
price changes.17 Accordingly, we cannot reject that hypothesis that 15-year mean TFP growth is
positive, except in 1989.
8.3 Error from Fitting the Translog Function

We still need to check the second source of error in the index, which arises because a
translog cost function does not fit the data perfectly. We proceed by estimating the share
equations for the translog cost function, using the mean rental price rt and the Törnqvist wage

17

The standard deviation of the change in rental prices first increases with the lag length, and then falls. That is, let

2
s t ,T

denote the variance of the change in rental prices as in (7), but with a lag length of T. For T=1,2,3,5,10,15, the

standard deviation of

2

s t ,T (averaged over end-years 1990-1992) equals 5.0, 7.5, 8.7, 18.8, 8.8, 6.6%.

35
index wt.18 Dropping one share equation (since shares sum to unity), we are left with estimating
the capital share equation:
s Kt = α L + γ KK ln(rt / p t ) + γ KL ln( w t / p t ) + ε Kt ,

(33)

where sKt is the capital share. We allow for first-order autocorrelation ρ in the error εKt when
estimating this equation. So losing one observation to allow for estimation of ρ, the sample
period becomes t =1974,…,1992, or t =1976,…,1992 when we exclude the erratic change in
rentals. Results for both periods are shown in Table 2.
Over the 1974-1992 period, we obtain significant estimates for both γKK and γKL in the
first regression (row) in Table 2, but with these estimates we strongly reject the homogeneity
restriction that γKK + γKL = 0. If we go ahead and impose this constraint, then the results, shown
in the second regression of Table 2, are quite poor: γKK = –γKL is insignificant, and most of the
explanatory power comes from the autocorrelation ρ = 0.91. This is likely caused by the erratic
movement in the mean rental price over 1973-74, so instead we consider estimation over 19761992. In that case, unconstrained estimation in the third regression leads to estimates of γKK and
γKL that are opposite in sign, and the homogeneity restriction γKK = –γKL is borderline between
being accepted and rejected at the 95 percent level. Using this restriction, we obtain the
estimates in the final regression, with γKK = 0.10, ρ = 0.10, and a standard error of the regression
equal to 0.012. We shall use these estimates in the calculations that follow.

18

The second error can be assessed by either fitting a translog unit-cost function to the data on rental prices and the
Törnqvist wage index (2 factors), or to the data on the rental prices and wages for each type of labor (9 factors of
production). For convenience, we have uses just 2 factors.

36
To construct the standard deviation of 15-year TFP growth due to the translog error, we
re-write the term on the right of (22) as,

1
(1 + ρ15 )[ln(w t
2

/ w t −15 ) − ln(rt / rt −15 )]2 ω 2KK ,

(34)

where ωKK is the standard error of the capital-share regression. We obtain (34) from (22) by
⎡ ω2
using the simple structure of the covariance matrix Ω = ⎢ KK
2
⎢⎣− ω KK

− ω 2KK ⎤
⎥ , which follows since
ω 2KK ⎥⎦

the errors in the capital and labor share equations sum to zero.
15

With autocorrelation of ρ = 0.10, the term ρ

is negligible. So taking the square root of

(34), the standard error of 15-year TFP growth becomes

1
2

ln(w t / w t −15 ) − ln(rt / rt −15 ) ω KK .

The 15-year rise in the wage/rental ratio is quite large: 68% from the values in part C of Table 1.
part C of Table 1. But then multiplying by the standard error of the capital-share equation, which
is 0.012, and dividing by

2 , we obtain the small standard error of 0.6 percent shown in

parentheses in part C. This is about one-sixth the size of the standard error due to measurement
error in the rentals, so the imprecision in fitting the translog function does not add very much to
the standard error of the productivity index in this case.
Next, we need to check the various interaction terms between the measurement error in
the rentals and in error in fitting the translog function; these are the second, fourth and fifth terms
on the right of (25). Computing these for the 15-year changes in factor prices, and using the
estimated coefficient γKK = 0.10, we obtain an additional standard error of 0.1%, also shown in
parentheses in part C. Summing the squares of these various sources of error in the TFP index,

37
and taking the square root, we obtain the total standard deviation of the 15-year TFP growth of
3.9%. The 95% confidence interval for 15-year growth (averaged over 1990-1992) is then
(10.6%, 33.1%), which easily excludes zero. Therefore, we conclude the even taking into
account the errors in computing the dual Törnqvist index, cumulative productivity growth in
Singapore has indeed been significantly greater than zero.

9. Conclusions
The problem of finding a standard error for index numbers is an old one, and in this paper
we have proposed what we hope is a useful solution. We have extended the stochastic approach
to include both stochastic prices and stochastic tastes. The variance of the taste parameters,
which affect the weights in the price index formula, is obtained by estimating a demand system.
Our proposed method to obtain the standard error of prices indexes therefore involves two steps:
estimating the demand system, and using the standard error of that regression (or system),
combined with estimates of the sampling error in the prices measures themselves, to infer the
variance of the price index.
While our methods extend the stochastic approach, they also extend the economic
approach to index numbers by integrating the two approaches. It is worth asking why standard
errors have not been part of the economic approach to indexes. Consider, for example, the
problem of estimating a cost of living index. We could estimate the parameters of a model of
preferences from data on expenditure patterns and then use these estimates to calculate a cost of
living index. Yet, if the data fit the model perfectly, the cost of living index calculated from the
parameter estimates would have the same value as an exact index formula that uses the data on
expenditure patterns directly. Moreover, Diewert’s (1976) paper showed that the types of

38
preferences or technology that can be accommodated using the exact index approach are quite
general. As a result, econometric modeling was no longer thought to be necessary to estimate
economic index numbers.
A consequence of the lack of econometric modeling is that estimates of economic index
numbers are no longer accompanied by standard errors, such as those that appear, for example, in
Lawrence (1974). Nevertheless, if the model that underlies an exact index number formula has
positive degrees of freedom, an error term will usually need to be appended to the model to get it
to fit the data perfectly. This will certainly be the case if the consumption or production model is
estimated over a panel data set with multiple commodities and years, which is our presumption.
Indeed, we would argue that the assumption of the economic approach that taste parameters are
constant between two years, when applied consistently over a time series, means that the
parameters are constant over all years of the panel. This will certainly mean that the demand
system must have an error appended, and as a result, the taste parameters and exact price index
are also measured with error. We have derived the formula for this error in the CES and translog
cases, but our general approach can be applied to any functional form for demand or costs.
In our application to Asian growth, we have contrasted the TFP estimate of Hsieh (2002)
to those of Young (1992, 1995). Hsieh argues that the available evidence on returns to capital
from financial sources do not show the decline that is implicit in the work of Young. Hsieh
considers three different measures of the return to capital, and their associated rental prices.
While the rentals differ markedly from each other in some years, the error in measuring the true
rental is not enough to offset the underlying fact that their decline is much less than the
cumulative rise in real wages: a 6.8 percent cumulative decline in the average rental over 15
years, as compared to a 61 percent increase in the real wage. Even when including the additional

39
error from fitting a translog function to the data for Singapore, the error on 15-year cumulative
TFP growth remains low enough so that its confidence interval is entirely positive. Taken over
this sufficiently long time-period, there is compelling evidence that Singapore has enjoyed
positive productivity growth, in contrast to the conclusions of Young.

40

References
Balk, Bert M. “Axiomatic Price Theory: A Survey.” International Statistical Review 63, 69-93.
Caves, D. W., Christensen, L. R. and W. Erwin Diewert (1982) “The Economic Theory of
Index Numbers and the Measurement of Input, Output and Productivity,” Econometrica
50, 1393-1414.
Deaton, Angus and John Muellbauer (1980) “Almost Ideal Demand System (AIDS).” The
American Economic Review, Vol. 70, No. 3. (June), pp. 312-326.

Diewert, W. Erwin (1976) “Exact and Superlative Index Numbers,” Journal of Econometrics, 4,
115-145.
Diewert, W. Erwin (1995) “On the Stochastic Approach to Index Numbers,” University of
British Columbia, Discussion Paper No. DP95-31, September.
Grunfeld, Yehuda, and Zvi Griliches (1960) “Is Aggregation Necessarily Bad?” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 42(1), February, 1-13.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Marshall Reinsdorf (2000) “An Exact Index for the Almost Ideal
Demand System”, Economics Letters 66, 159-62.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai (2002) “What Explains the Industrial Revolution in East Asia? Evidence from
the Factor Markets,” American Economic Review, 92(3), 502-526.
Keynes, John Maynard (1909) “Index Numbers,” in The Collected Writing of John Maynard
Keynes, London: MacMillan and New York: Cambridge University Press, volume XI, pp.

49-156.
Keynes, John Maynard (1930) A Treatise on Money, Volume 1, The Pure Theory of Money, New
York: Harcourt, Brace and Co. (Reprinted in The Collected Writing of John Maynard
Keynes, London: MacMillan and New York: Cambridge University Press, volume V.)

Kim, Jong-Il and Lawrence Lau (1994) “The Sources of Economic Growth of the East Asian
Newly Industrialized countries,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies,
September, 8(3), 235-271.
Krugman, Paul R. (1994) “The Myth of Asia’s Miracle,” Foreign Affairs, November/December,
73(6), 62-78.
Lawrence, Anthony G. (1974) “The Bias and the Asymptotic Variance of a Computed True
Cost of Living Index: The Case of the Klein-Rubin Constant Utility Index,” BLS

41
Working Paper No. 20, January. Mimeo, U.S. Bureau Of Labor Statistics, Washington
DC.
Mood, Alexander M., Franklin A. Graybill and Duane C. Boes (1974) Introduction to The theory
of Statistics, New York: McGraw-Hill.

Sato, Kazuo (1976) “The Ideal Log-Change Index Number,” Review of Economics and
Statistics 58, May, 223-228.

Selvanathan, E.A. and D.S. Prasada Rao (1994) Index Numbers: A Stochastic Approach, Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Törnqvist, L. (1936) “The Bank of Finland’s Consumption Price Index,” Bank of Finland
Monthly Bulletin 10: 1-8.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1997) BLS Handbook of Methods, Chapter 17. U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington. Available at
http://www.bls.gov/opub/hom/pdf/homch17.pdf.
Vartia, Y. O. (1976) “Ideal Log-Change Index Numbers,” Scandinavian Journal of Statistics 3,
121-126.
World Bank (1993) The East Asia Miracle. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Young, Alwyn (1992) “A Tale of Two Cities: Factor Accumulation and Technical Change in
Hong Kong and Singapore,” in Olivier Jean Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds., NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1992, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 13-54.

Young, Alwyn (1995) “The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the East
Asian Growth Experience,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 110(3), 641-680.

42

Table 1: Dual Total Factor Productivity Growth in Singapore

Labor
share

Real
Rental

0.511
0.511
0.511

–0.20
1.64
–0.50

Growth Rate (Percent):
Real
Dual
Primal
a
Wages
TFP
TFP

Part A: Revised from Hsieh (2002)
Real interest rate used:
Return on equity (1971 – 1990)
Bank lending rate (1968 – 1990)
Earnings-price ratio (1973 – 1990)

3.64
2.86
4.44

1.76
2.26
2.02

–0.69
–0.22
–0.66

Part B: Computed with annual data, Törnqvist index
Real interest rate used:
Return on equity (1973 – 1992)
Bank lending rate (1973 – 1992)
Earnings-price ratio (1973 – 1992)

0.418
0.418
0.418

–0.85
2.50
1.62

4.33
4.33
4.33

1.24
3.35
2.85

Average rental price (1973 – 1992)
Ave. stand. dev. (1973 – 1992)

0.418

1.09
(17.4)

4.33

2.48
(10.5)

Average rental price (1975 – 1992)
Ave. stand. dev. (1975 – 1992)

0.424

–0.58
(8.7)

4.02

1.37
(5.0)

61.0

21.8
(3.8)

Part C: Computed with 15-year changes, Törnqvist index
Real interest rate used:
Average rental price (end-years 1990–92)
Ave. stand. dev. due to error in rentals

Ave. stand. dev. due to translog error
Stand. dev. due to interaction between errors
b
Total standard deviation

0.422

–6.82
(6.6)

(0.6)
(0.1)
(3.9)

Notes:
Calculated by Hsieh from primal estimates in Young (1995), which depend on the sample
period used.
b
Computed as the square root of the sum of squared standard deviations listed above.
a

43

Table 2: Translog Estimation,
Dependent Variable – Capital Share

Sample

2

ln(Real

Rental)

ln(Real
Wage)

ρ
regression

0.63
(0.02)

-0.020
(0.011)

-0.14
(0.022)

0.50
(0.23)

0.010

0.92, 19

0.50
(0.08)

-0.015
(0.014)

0.015
(0.014)

0.91
(0.10)

0.015

0.81, 19

0.65
(0.02)

0.005
(0.048)

-0.14
(0.027)

0.44
(0.23)

0.011

0.89, 17

0.72
(0.02)

0.10
(0.011)

-0.10
(0.011)

0.10
(0.27)

0.012

0.87, 17

Constant

S.E. of R , N

1974 – 1992:

constrained:*

1976 – 1992:

constrained:*

* The constraint used is that the coefficients of the log real rental and real wage should be equal
but opposite in sign. This constraint is rejected over the 1974-1992 period, but not rejected over
1976-1992.

44

Figure 1: Real Interest Rates in Singapore (Percent)
20
15
10
5
0
-5

Return to Equity

Ave Lending Rate

94
19

92
19

90
19

88
19

86
19

84
19

82
19

80
19

78
19

76
19

74
19

72
19

70
19

68
19

66
19

64
19

19

62

-10

Earnings-Price Ratio

Figure 2: Change in the Rental Prices (Percent)
300
200
100
0
-100
-200

19
62
19
64
19
66
19
68
19
70
19
72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94

-300

Return to Equity

Ave Lending Rate

Earnings-Price Ratio

45

Figure 3: Annual TFP Growth (Percent)

200
100
0
-100

Plus 2.9*SE

92
19

91

19

89

88

90
19

19

87

19

19

86

85

19

84

19

19

83

82

Mean TFP growth

19

80

81

19

19

19

79

78

19

77

19

19

76

75

19

19

19

74

-200

Minus 2.9*SE

Figure 4: Annual TFP Growth (Percent)
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20

19
76
19
77
19
78
19
79
19
80
19
81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92

-30

Mean TFP growth

Plus 2.9*SE

Minus 2.9*SE

46

Figure 5: 15-Year TFP Growth (Percent)
75

50

25

0
1988

1989
Mean TFP growth

1990
Plus 2.9*SE

1991
Minus 2.9*SE

1992

