                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL IN OUTSOURCING TO CHINA:
              ESTIMATING THE PROPERTY-RIGHTS THEORY OF THE FIRM

                                         Robert C. Feenstra
                                         Gordon H. Hanson

                                        Working Paper 10198
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10198


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2003




We thank Barry Naughton and seminar participants at Brown University, Claremont Graduate University,
Columbia University, Harvard University, the NBER, Northwestern University, Princeton University,
Stanford University, UC Irvine, UCLA, UCSD, the University of Michigan, and the University of Wisconsin
for helpful comments. Jeffrey Lin and Songhua Lin provided excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Robert C. Feenstra and Gordon H. Hanson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Ownership and Control in Outsourcing to China:
Estimating the Property-Rights Theory of the Firm
Robert C. Feenstra and Gordon H. Hanson
NBER Working Paper No. 10198
December 2003
JEL No. F14, L23

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper, we develop a simple model of international outsourcing and apply it to processing

trade in China. We observe China's processing exports broken down by who owns the plant and by

who controls the inputs the plant processes. Multinational firms engaged in export processing in

China tend to split factory ownership and input control with managers in China: the most common

outcome is to have foreign factory ownership but Chinese control over input purchases. To account

for this organizational arrangement, we appeal to a property-rights model of the firm. Multinational

firms and the Chinese factory managers with whom they contract divide the surplus associated with

export processing by Nash bargaining. Investments in input search, production, and marketing are

partially relationship specific. In our benchmarks estimates, this relationship specificity is lowest

in southern coastal provinces, where export markets are thickest, and highest in interior and northern

provinces. The probability contracts are enforced has a similar pattern and is the lowest along the

southern coast and the highest in the north.

Robert C. Feenstra
Department of Economics
University of California
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu

Gordon H. Hanson
IR/PS
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu
1. Introduction

           Global production is a common feature of the modern firm. Businesses as diverse as

Mattel, which makes plastic dolls, Dell, which sells personal computers, and Intel, which makes

semiconductors, operate supply chains that span multiple countries. Typically, multinational

firms produce components in one location, process components into final goods in another

location, and manage these operations from headquarters in yet another location. While trade

theory has used general-equilibrium models to examine location decisions by multinational

firms,1 the literature has tended to abstract away from how multinationals set firm boundaries

within global supply chains. Until recently, trade theory has not sought to explain why Intel

would use wholly-owned subsidiaries in China and Costa Rica to assemble its microchips, while

Dell and Mattel subcontract production to outside firms in many countries. Nor has it tried to

account for why Dell would control who buys what from whom along its PC supply chain, while

Mattel grants the suppliers that make its dolls latitude in finding sources for materials.

           In a new body of work, trade theorists have started to bring modern theories of the firm

into models of international trade.2 Grossman and Helpman (2002a,b) and Antras (2001) use the

property-rights theory of Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore (1990) to model global

outsourcing and intra-firm trade. Grossman and Helpman (2002c) apply the incentive-systems

framework of Holmstrom and Milgrom (1994) to model managerial compensation in global

production, and Marin and Verdier (2001, 2003) and Puga and Trefler (2002) extend the Aghion

and Tirole (1997) theory of delegating authority to general equilibrium.

           In this paper, we build a simple model of international outsourcing and apply this model

to China. We consider a multinational firm that has decided to setup an export processing plant


1
    See Markusen (2002) and Markusen and Maskus (2003) for surveys.
2
    For early work on firm boundaries in international trade, see Ethier and Markusen (1996) and McLaren (2000).
                                                 2


in a low-wage country. In this arrangement, the firm sends intermediate inputs to a processing

factory, which converts the inputs into finished goods and then exports the final output. The

decisions facing the multinational include who should own the processing factory and who

should control input-purchase decisions the factory makes. Following recent trade literature, we

use the Grossman-Hart-Moore property-rights (PR) theory as the basis for our model. In this

framework, parties use control rights over productive assets to ameliorate hold-up problems

created by incomplete contracts. We also build simple contracting costs into the model, in the

spirit of the Holmstrom-Milgrom incentive-systems (IS) framework.

       The application to China is motivated by the importance of export processing to global

trade and by the availability of detailed trade data on China. As described in section 2, we

observe China’s processing exports broken down by who owns the plant and by who controls the

inputs the plant processes. Since the early 1980s, China has permitted foreign ownership of

export processing plants. It stipulates that all processing plants (whether Chinese or foreign

owned) operate according to one of two regimes: a pure-assembly regime, in which a foreign

buyer supplies a plant in China with inputs and hires the plant to process them into finished

goods, all the while retaining ownership over the inputs; and an import-and-assembly regime, in

which a plant in China imports inputs of its own accord, processes them, and sells the processed

goods to a foreign buyer. This level of contractual detail is rarely observed in international trade.

       In our model of export processing, presented in section 3, parties have the option of

writing a legal contract to govern trade, where with some probability the contract will be not be

verifiable and parties will be forced to divide gains from trade by Nash bargaining. The threat-

point payoffs associated with bargaining do not fully compensate parties for their investments in

human capital and depend, in standard fashion, on who has the relevant control rights (i.e.,
                                                  3


ownership of the factory or control over input decisions). Whether factory ownership and input

control should be given to the same or to different parties depends on parameters of the model,

including the specificity of human-capital investments in the project, value-added in the

processing factory, and the Nash bargaining weights. When human-capital specificity is low,

value added is high, or the bargaining weight of the multinational is high, the multinational can

ameliorate the hold-up problem by transferring control of input purchases to the manager. This

will improve the manager’s incentive to make investments specific to the multinational even

when she does not own the factory, so that ownership and control are given to different parties.

However, when human-capital specificity is high, value added is low, or the multinational’s

bargaining weight is low, then ownership and control should be given to the same party.

       On the basis of the model, we develop a stochastic specification for organizational

decisions in export processing, which is presented in section 4. Previewing the empirical results

in section 5, we find that multinational firms engaged in export processing in China tend to split

factory ownership and input control with factory managers in China: the most common outcome

is to have foreign factory ownership but Chinese control over input purchases. This is consistent

with moderate or low human-capital specificity, which our estimates of these parameters

confirm. In our benchmarks estimates, the specificity of human-capital investments is estimated

at 28 – 51% in interior and northern provinces but only about 22% in southern coastal provinces,

where export production is concentrated. Thus, the specificity of investments appears to be

lowest where export markets are thickest. The probability of legal enforcement of contracts has

a similar pattern and is the lowest in the southern coastal provinces, and the highest in the north.

Our preferred estimate of the Nash bargaining weight for multinational firms is 0.7, but the

confidence interval includes the value of 0.5, which corresponds to simple Nash bargaining.
                                                           4


         Our findings are relevant to several bodies of literature. While incomplete contracts are a

staple feature of recent trade models, there is little empirical work on whether contracting costs

matter for international trade.3 We estimate sources of contractual incompleteness in global

production. A second body of literature to which our work relates is empirical work on modern

theories of the firm. Despite intense theoretical interest in the PR and other models, few papers

have tested them.4 A notable exception is Baker and Hubbard (2000a,b) who examine

contractual arrangements in U.S. trucking. They exploit the introduction of on-board computers

in trucks, which changed the costs of monitoring truck drivers. They find evidence consistent

with the PR and IS models. Our work, which exploits the interaction between choices over

ownership and input-purchase regimes, is similar in spirit to theirs. Our work extends the

literature by estimating contracting costs in a developing-country context, where contractual

incompleteness is often assumed to be severe but is rarely estimated empirically.


2. Export Processing in China

         Export processing plays a major role in China’s foreign trade. Table 1 shows that over

the years 1997-2002, which spans our sample period, processing exports accounted for 55.6% of

China’s total exports. Export processing in China is broadly similar to that in other countries. It

involves a firm in China importing intermediate inputs, processing the inputs, and then exporting

the finished goods. The inputs are imported duty-free (as are any investment goods used in

export processing) as long as these goods are only used to produce exports. China has two

regulatory regimes for export processing.




3
  See Rauch (1999) and Rauch and Casella (2000) on networks and information costs in international trade.
4
  For surveys of the theoretical literature, see Hart (1995) and Tirole (1999) and for surveys of the empirical
literature, see Baker and Hubbard (2001) and Whinston (2001).
                                                        5


        The Pure-Assembly Regime.5 In this arrangement, a foreign firm supplies a factory in

China with materials from abroad (Naughton, 1996). The factory in China, whose role is

relatively passive, receives orders from and delivers processed goods to the foreign client, who

then sells the goods outside China. While the factory takes possession of the imported materials

during processing, the foreign firm retains ownership over them. The foreign firm pays the

factory in China a fee for its processing services. To obtain clearance from Chinese customs to

import materials and to export processed goods, the terms of the transaction between the Chinese

factory and the foreign firm must be stipulated in a written contract and presented in advance to

Chinese customs officials for approval.6 Legally, the processing factory may use imported

materials for the sole purpose of meeting its obligations to the foreign client.

        The Import-and-Assembly Regime. In this arrangement, the processing factory in China

plays a more active role. Table 1 shows that this regime is the more common form of export

processing, accounting for 70.7% of processing exports over the 1997-2002 period. The factory

imports materials of its own accord and takes ownership of these materials during processing. It

may broker deals to process goods for multiple foreign firms (World Bank, 1994). Thus, the

factory in China controls both the import of inputs and the export of processed goods (though

usually not the marketing and sale of the good to end users). Legally, Chinese customs treats

processing plants under this regime as bonded warehouses – facilities that are permitted to

import inputs duty free under the proviso that they export all output. Bonded goods cannot be

transferred to another party without the approval of Chinese customs. To become a bonded



5
  In Chinese trade statistics, the pure-assembly arrangement is called “processing and assembling” or “processing
with supplied materials,” and the import-and-assembly arrangement is called “processing with imported materials.”
6
  The contract must specify the materials (and any equipment) to be imported, the processing activities to be
performed, the fees to be paid, and the ports of entry and exit, among other items. See “Regulations Concerning
Customs Supervision and Control over the Inward Processing and Assembling Operation (Amended),” Customs
General Administration, October 5, 1990, http://www.moftec.gov.cn.
                                                      6


warehouse, a plant must apply to the Chinese government and have warehouse facilities and

accounting personnel that meet government standards.7 Under either regime, exporters are

required to submit monthly reports on the status of their contracts and to verify that the contract

has been completed within a month of having exported the finished goods.

        There are several important distinctions between the two processing regimes. One relates

to the responsibilities of the factory manager in China. Under pure-assembly, the manager

appears to play a small role in searching for inputs or in other activities that precede input

processing. Under import-and assembly, the factory manager has greater responsibility. A

second distinction has to do with to controls rights over imported materials. Under pure-

assembly, the foreign buyer of the processed goods owns the materials used in processing.

Without this buyer’s consent, the factory in China cannot legally use the imported materials to

process goods for another client. Under import-and-assembly, in contrast, the processing factory

owns the imported materials. It may use them to produce for the foreign buyer of its choice, so

long as the goods are exported. A third distinction between the two regimes is that they are

subject to different approval processes and regulations. In particular, import-and-assembly

factories are required to make greater investments in inventory storage and management. This

suggests that a processing plant cannot costlessly or quickly change from one regime to another.

        Processing factories may be owned by either Chinese or foreign interests. Foreign-

invested enterprises (FIEs) play a major role in China’s trade. Table 1 shows that over the period

1997-2002 FIEs accounted for 62.8% of China’s processing exports. The Chinese government

recognizes two categories of FIEs, wholly foreign-owned enterprises and equity joint ventures in

which a foreign interest has at least a 25% ownership stake. One issue is whether a 25%


7
 See “Measures on the Administration of the Customs of the People’s Republic of China for Bonded Warehouse
Factory Engaged in Processing Trade,” Customs General Administration, April 6, 1988, http://www.moftec.gov.cn.
                                                        7


ownership share gives a foreign party effective control over a processing factory. Standard

definitions of whether an enterprise is foreign controlled set a lower ownership threshold, such as

10% in the case of the U.S. government. Following this precedent, we treat as foreign controlled

both wholly owned factories and equity joint ventures.8

        Export processing began to take off in China in the late 1980s. The pioneers in the sector

included Hong Kong trading companies that set up processing plants across the border in

Guangdong Province and used Hong Kong as a base from which to manage their operations

(Sung, 1991). Hong Kong continues to mediate a large fraction of China’s processing trade.

Table 1 shows that over the sample period, 45.9% of China’s processing exports were re-

exported through Hong Kong. Hong Kong traders provide a range of intermediation services,

including finding foreign buyers, sorting and grading goods according to quality, labeling and

packaging, and coordinating processing in China with processing in other countries (Naughton,

1997; Feenstra and Hanson, 2002). We shall examine whether processing exports re-exported

through Hong Kong differ systematically from those shipped directly to destination markets.


3. The Model

        We begin by describing the problem faced by a foreign firm wanting to locate export

processing operations in China. The parties choose who should own the factory used in

production and who should control the purchase of inputs processed by this factory. Our model

follows closely the PR approach of Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore (1990).

        Consider a foreign firm, denoted by f, transacting with a factory manager in China,

denoted by g. The project requires the parties to purchase one unit of an input, to use a factory to

8
  The government also recognizes cooperative joint ventures as a mode of inward foreign investment (Sung, 1998).
These are often non-equity arrangements between a foreign firm and a domestic partner that account for a small
fraction of exports. Since these arrangements may not involve foreign investment, we exclude them from our
definition of foreign-owned plants. Counting them as foreign-owned plants does not affect the results.
                                                  8


process the input into one unit of a final product, and to market and to sell the final product.

Timing is as follows: In period 0 the parties choose who should own the factory and who should

control input purchases; in period 1 the parties simultaneously make effort investments; and in

period 2 the parties undertake input purchases, input processing, and final sales. All actions are

observable to the two parties but not necessarily verifiable to a third party.

       The efforts undertaken in period 1 are as follows: e1 = effort devoted to searching for a

low-priced input, by either party f or g; e2 = effort devoted to preparing the factory to produce,

by the factor manager g; e3 = effort devoted to marketing the final good, by the foreign firm f.

The subscripts on these effort levels denote the stages of production rather than the timing, since

all efforts are undertaken in period 1, before production and sale. The price of the input in period

2 is given by the linear function P·(1-e1), P>0, 0 ≤ e1 ≤ 1 , so that more search effort lowers the


input price. The cost of input processing in period 2 is given by A·(1-e2), A>0, 0 ≤ e 2 ≤ 1 , so

that preparation effort lowers processing costs in period 2. Revenues from final sales in period 2

are given by B·(1+λe2+e3), where 0 < λ ≤ 1 , 0 ≤ e 3 ≤ 1 and B>(A+P)>0, so that more

preparation and marketing effort raises sales revenue. Combined period 2 profits are then,


                       π = B(1+λe2+e3) – A(1–e2) – P(1–e1) > 0.                               (1)


       Notice that we have introduced an element of joint production between input processing

and sales revenue, with effort e2 by the factory manager affecting both. It is perhaps obvious

that effort by the manager can reduce factory costs. An example, taken from Grossman and

Helpman (2002c), where such effort also affects final sales is when the project is “successful”

(leading to positive sales) with some probability that is increasing in e2. Joint production means
                                                            9

that it may be difficult to compensate the manager at the first-best level, reflecting the marginal

contributions of her effort to both processing costs and final sales.

         The period 1 effort investments, ei, i=1,2,3, impose a cost on the parties involved. The

variable δ1 ∈ {0,1} indicates whether the foreign firm f (δ1 = 0) or the manager g (δ1 = 1)

expends search effort e1. We refer to this indicator variable as control over input purchases.

                                                                             γf
The costs to the foreign firm are given by C f [(1 − δ 2 )e1 , e 3 ] =        2
                                                                                  [(1 − δ1 )e12 + e 32 ] , and the costs

                                                     γg
to the manager are given by Cg(δ1e1, e2) =           2
                                                          ( δ1e12 + e 22 ) , where γf and γg are the disutility of


effort for each party. The total surplus from the project is then,


                           W = π – Ch[(1–δ1)e1, e3] – Cf(δ1e1, e2),                                              (2)


where first-best effort levels are e1* = max{P / γ f , P / γ g } , e *2 = (λB + A ) / γ g , and e *3 = B / γ f .

         In addition to input control, δ1, we introduce the ownership variable δ2 ∈ {0,1} to

indicate whether the foreign firm f (δ2 = 0) or whether the Chinese manager g (δ2 = 1) owns the

processing factory. While this indicator variable does not appear in the profits (1) or surplus (2),

ownership of the factory certainly affects the effort levels of f and g, as will be made clear below.

With the effort levels depending on δ1 and δ2, the surplus in (2) also depends on these, which we

write as W(δ1, δ2). The goal of our analysis is to see how W varies with δ1 and δ2. If W(0,0) +

W(1,1) > W(0,1) + W(1,0) then W is strictly supermodular, so the highest values for W are

obtained when δ1 and δ2 take on the same values and it is optimal for the same party to control

the inputs and to own the factory. Conversely, when W(0,0) + W(1,1) < W(0,1) + W(1,0) then
                                                       10


W is strictly submodular, so it is optimal for δ1 and δ2 to take on different values, meaning that

one party controls input purchases and the other owns the factory. As we shall see, our

application of the PR model can lead to either outcome, depending on parameter values.


3.1 Incomplete Contracting

       Essential to modern theories of the firm is that idea that contracts are imperfect or

incomplete, so that the first-best effort levels cannot necessarily be obtained. In Grossman and

Hart (1986), contracts are unenforceable, so there is Nash bargaining over ex post profits. In

Holmstrom and Milgrom (1994), effort is observed with a random error, so wage compensation

imperfectly rewards effort. We will combine elements of both approaches by assuming that with

probability (1– φ) the parties’ efforts can be verified, so that a first-best contract can be enforced,

and with probability φ there is no verifiability and no contract, in which case the parties Nash

bargain over profits. Thus, the parameter φ serves as a measure of contractual incompleteness.

       We will allow for generalized Nash bargaining where the foreign firm has bargaining

weight θ and the Chinese manager has weight (1 – θ). The status quo or threat point payoffs for

the two parties will be denoted by π̂ f and π̂ g (as specified below). Total ex post profits are

given by (1), and the profits πf and πg earned by each party are then:


       Party f receives:     πf = πˆ f + θ( π − πˆ g − πˆ f ) = θ( π − πˆ g ) + (1 − θ)πˆ f          (3)


       Party g receives:    πg = πˆ g + (1 − θ)( π − πˆ f − πˆ g ) = (1 − θ)( π − πˆ f ) + θπˆ g .   (4)


       Given our assumption that Nash bargaining occurs with probability φ, whereas first-best

contracts occur with probability (1 – φ), the expected payoffs to each party are then:
                                                          11


       Party f payoff:     ~
                           π f ≡ φ[θ(π − πˆ g ) + (1 − θ)πˆ f ] + (1 − φ)[Be 3 + (1 − δ1 )Pe1 ]     (3’)

       Party g payoff:     ~
                           π g ≡ φ[(1 − θ)(π − πˆ f ) + θπˆ g ] + (1 − φ)[(A + λB)e 2 + δ1Pe1 ] .   (4’)


Thus, each party will choose their effort levels to maximize the difference between these payoffs

and the costs of supplying effort:

               Party f solves:
                                             max          ~
                                                          π f – Cf[(1–δ1)e1, e3] ,                  (5)
                                         (1−δ1 ) e1 ,e3


               Party g solves:
                                            max           ~
                                                          π g – Cg(δ1e1, e2) ,                      (6)
                                           δ1e1 ,e 2


where the foreign firm f chooses e1 when δ1=0, while the manager g chooses e1 when δ1=1.

       In order to solve these problems, we need to be more specific about the threat point

payoffs received by each party. Our general assumption is that when Nash bargaining breaks

down, the party not owning the factory can still make an arrangement with another factory. But

in that case, the marginal product of his or her effort investment is reduced by ψ, so the payoffs

are (1 – ψ) times their first-best level. Thus, ψ measures the specificity of human-capital

investments by either party in the project. For example, when the Chinese manager owns the

factory (δ2 = 1) and Nash bargaining breaks down, then the foreign firm will seek out another

factory to work with. In that case, the threat-point payoff to the foreign firm is:


       Party f threat-point when δ2 = 1:           πˆ f = (1 − ψ )[Be 3 + (1 − δ1 )Pe1 ] .          (7)


Meanwhile, the manager can still use the factory to process the input for another firm. We

suppose that the transfer price received depends imperfectly on the marketing effort of the

manager, T̂ = T + λ(1 – ψ)Be2, but otherwise the manager has property rights over the residual

profits of the firm. Her threat-point payoff is then:
                                                        12



        Party g threat-point when δ2 = 1:             πˆ g = T̂ − A(1 − e 2 ) − P(1 − δ1e1 ) .             (8)


        Next, suppose that the foreign firm owns the factory (δ2 = 0). In the case of

disagreement over the ex post division of profits, the foreign firm retains ownership of the

factory and hires another manager. There is no reason to expect that a new manager would have

made prior effort investments, so in that event the profits of the foreign firm should be computed

with e2=0. Thus, the threat-point payoff of the foreign firm is:


        Party f threat point when δ2 = 0:             πˆ f = B(1 + e 3 ) − A − P[1 − (1 − δ1 )e1 ] .       (9)


The ex-manager must now find another factory to work with, and the amount that she earns from

her effort investments is again reduced by ψ. We make the further assumption that when the

manager does not own the factory her effort investments are valued more highly by another

factory if she controls input purchases. In other words, a manager who is separated from a

foreign firm is more productive in another firm if she brings with her the knowledge of how to

purchase inputs; otherwise, she becomes part of the general labor pool, where her prior effort

investments have little value.9 Normalizing the wage in the general labor pool at zero, then the

threat point payoff to the manager when she does not own the factory is:


        Party g threat point when δ2 = 0:             πˆ g = δ1 (1 − ψ )[(A + λB)e 2 + Pe1 ] .             (10)


9
  The key feature of this assumption is that giving the factory manager control over input purchases does more to
improve her outside option (or, more precisely, to increase the sensitivity of her outside option to her effort
investments) when she does not own the factory (and is in a weaker bargaining position) than when she does own
the factory (and is in a stronger bargaining position). For simplicity, we normalize the return on the factory
manager’s investments in the threat point for case (δ1,δ2) = (0,0) to zero, but this is not essential. We assume a
similar asymmetry does not apply to the foreign firm (but all that is essential here is that any asymmetry between
ownership regimes in how gaining control over input purchases affects outside options is larger for the factory
manager than for the foreign firm). Since the foreign firm may transact with many managers, the impact of gaining
control over input purchases on the firm’s outside options is less likely to depend on whether it owns the factory.
                                                   13

Substituting (7)-(10) into the objective functions (5) and (6), we can determine the optimal effort

investments, as discussed in the next section.


3.3 Solutions for Effort Investments

        Let us first consider the case where the foreign firm owns the factory, and also controls

the input, so that (δ1,δ2) = (0,0) in the upper-left cell of Table 2. In the disagreement point the

foreign firm receives the full marginal value from it’s own effort investments, as shown in (9),

since it owns the factory. It follows that the foreign firm’s effort levels are at their first-best

levels of e1 = P/γf and e3 = B/γf. The manager, on the other hand, faces the threat-point payoffs

in (10). When δ1 = 0, the manager’s effort investments have no value in her outside option.

Since the threat-point payoff has weight θ in (7), then e 2 = (1 − φθ)( A + λB) / γ g , which is

below its first-best level by the factor φθ.

        The case (δ1,δ2) = (0,0) is particularly simple because the foreign firm retains ownership

of the factory, and since it also makes the input decision, the manager has no property rights. To

discuss other cases in Table 2, recall our assumption that a party loses 0 < ψ < 1 times her

marginal product if she works with another factory. In particular, consider the case (δ1,δ2) =

(1,0) in the lower-left cell of Table 2, so the foreign firm retains ownership of the factory but the

factory manager now controls the input decision. In that case, if the manager goes to another

factory then she loses ψ times the marginal product of her effort investments. So the optimal

investment towards processing the inputs is now e 2 = (1 − φψθ)( A + λB) / γ g , which exceeds

e 2 = (1 − φθ)( A + λB) / γ g , as applies when the foreign firm has both factory ownership and

input control. Thus, giving the manager control over input-search improves her incentive to
                                                               14

make investments in processing the input. This is because the threat-point earnings from outside

employment in (13) are conditional on having control over the input, δ1=1. However, her

optimal effort in input-search is e1 = (1 − φψθ )P / γ g , which is less than the first-best.

        In order to compute the levels of surplus W(δ1, δ2), we make use of the following result:


Lemma

Suppose the efforts levels are e1 = (1 − ∆1 )P / γ h , h = f, g, e 2 = [(1 − ∆ 2a ) A + (1 − ∆ 2 b )λB] / γ g ,

and e 3 = (1 − ∆ 3 )B / γ f . Then surplus is:


                  W = ( B − A − P ) + 2 γ1 (1 − ∆21 )P 2 + 2 1γ (1 − ∆23 )B2
                                               h                     f
                                                                                                           (11)
                           + 2 γ1     [(1 − ∆22a ) A 2   + (1 − ∆ 2a ∆ 2 b )2λAB + (1 − ∆22 b )λ2 B 2 ].
                                  g




This result follows by straightforward computation, and shows that the welfare loss is

proportional to the square of the deviation of each effort level from its first-best value. Making

use of (11) and the efforts shown in the first column of Table 2, it is readily shown that W(0,0)

cannot be ranked in general with W(1,0): effort e1 is higher when the foreign firm controls input

purchases, but effort e2 in processing the input is higher when the manager has input control.

        Now consider the situation where the manager owns the processing factory (δ2=1). The

solutions for the effort investment are shown in the second column of Table 2. When δ1 = 0, the

foreign firm controls input purchases. As summarized in the upper-right cell of Table 2, all

effort investments are below their first-best level. For the foreign firm, the marginal value of its

investments are reduced by ψ in its threat-point payoff, and since this occurs with probability φ

and has weight (1–θ) in (3), its optimal efforts levels are e1= [1 − φ(1 − θ)ψ ]P / γ f and
                                                     15


e3= [1 − φ(1 − θ)ψ]B / γ f . The manager chooses e2, which has marginal value A+(1– ψ)λB in her

threat-point payoff (8), compared with (A+λB) in profits π. Since the threat-point has weight φθ

in (4), it follows that e2= [A + (1 − φθψ )λB] / γ g , which is below the first-best level.

        Suppose now that the manager controls input purchases, δ1 = 1. In that case, she receives

full marginal value of P from search effort in both her threat-point payoff (8) and in total profits,

π. It follows that her optimal search investment is at her own first-best level, e1 = P/γg. The

other efforts levels are unchanged from when the foreign firm controls the input decision. So the

only difference between having one or the other party control the input decision is in their search

efforts. With differing disutility of efforts, we cannot rank W(0,1) and W(1,1). If γf = γg,

however, then it is clearly better to have the manager search for the input, since she undertakes

this activity at her first-best level. So W(1,1) > W(0,1) if γf = γg.

        Using the effort levels in Table 2, the value of surplus in each case is computed as in

(11). Then a convenient summary statistic is the modularity of the surplus function, computed

by taking the sum of its values using the diagonal elements of Table 2, minus the sum of its value

using the off-diagonal elements. We obtain:


        W(0,0) + W(1,1) – W(0,1) – W(1,0)

                     ⎡ φ 2 (1 − θ) 2 ψ 2 φ 2 θ 2 ψ 2 ⎤ (A + λB) 2 φ 2 (1 − ψ 2 )θ 2
                = P2 ⎢                  +            ⎥−                             .          (12)
                     ⎣⎢       2γ f          2γ g ⎦⎥              2γ g


It is apparent that (12) can be positive or negative. In the former case the surplus function is

strictly supermodular, meaning that the highest values tend to occur when δ1=δ2, so that factory

ownership and input control go to the same party; in the latter case, the surplus function is
                                                    16


strictly submodular so that the highest values tend to occur when δ1≠δ2, so that ownership and

control go to different parties. These results are summarized with:


Proposition 1

The surplus function is strictly supermodular, so (12) is positive, if and only if,


                         ⎛ A + λB ⎞
                                    2
                                        ⎛ ψ 2 ⎞ ⎡ ⎛ 1 − θ ⎞ 2 ⎛ γ g ⎞⎤
                                      < ⎜         ⎟              ⎜ ⎟
                         ⎜
                         ⎝ P ⎠
                                  ⎟     ⎜ 1 − ψ 2 ⎟ ⎢1 + ⎜⎝ θ ⎟⎠ ⎜ γ ⎟⎥ .                         (13)
                                        ⎝         ⎠⎣⎢            ⎝ f ⎠⎥⎦


        Notice that the parameter φ, indicating the degree of contractual incompleteness, does not

appear in condition (13), so the modularity of the surplus function is independent of this

parameter. This is because φ does not affect the relative bargaining power of the two parties. To

interpret condition (13), recall that (A+λB) is the marginal product of the manager’s effort e2,

while e*2 = ( A + λB) / γ g is the first-best effort level, so that ( A + λB) 2 / γ g would be the labor

income received by the manager or value-added in the first-best. Similarly, if the manager

controls the input decision, then P is the marginal product of her effort e1 and e1* = P / γ g is the

                              2
first-best effort level, so P /γg would be the labor income or value-added in the search activity. It

                          2
follows that [(A+λB)/P] is interpreted as the ratio of value-added in the factory relative to that

in input search, or simply the value-added ratio, in the first-best.

        Then (13) shows that if the value-added ratio is low, the parameter ψ measuring the

specificity of human-capital investments is high, or the foreign firm’s Nash bargaining weight θ

is low, then supermodularity of the surplus function is obtained. To explain this result, low

value-added means that incentive problems are more acute in input search than in processing.

Then from Table 2, the first-best levels of input search are obtained along the diagonal, when the
                                                         17


same party has ownership of the factory and control over input sourcing. Relatedly, when ψ is

high (say, ψ = 1) then the outside options are irrelevant and the disincentive for the manager to

engage in processing effort e2 is the same in all cells of Table 2: e2 =(A+λB)/2γg when ψ=1,

which is one-half of its first-best level. Then again, the relevant incentive problem occurs in

input search rather than processing, which obtains its first-best along the diagonal, when

ownership and control is given to the same party. In this case the surplus function is

supermodular, as is also obtained when θ is sufficiently low.10

         When value-added is high, however, or human-capital specificity is low, then surplus

depends more on ameliorating the incentive problem in processing. In these cases, the

manager’s effort is improved by giving her better outside options. In particular, when the

foreign firm owns the factory then the manager’s outside options are improved by giving her

control over the inputs. Because ownership and control are given to opposite parties, this means

that the surplus function is submodular.

         We can think of a low value of ψ, the measure of human-capital specificity, as indicating

“thick labor markets” for the manager, since her outside options are improved. We might expect

this to occur in coastal regions of China or in the country’s special economic zones where export

processing plants have agglomerated and where rules governing employment and firm creation

are less restrictive. A lower value of ψ, or higher productivity in processing as measured by

(A+λB), both give more submodular values of the surplus function. This result follows directly

from the measure of modularity in (12):


10
  When θ is low (say, θ=0) and the factory manager has all the bargaining power, then she maximizes π so all her
effort decisions are at their first-best level. Likewise for the foreign firm provided that it owns the factory. When
the manager owns the factory, however, then the foreign firm makes second-best effort choices on e3, and also on e1
when the foreign firm controls inputs. Thus, the worst outcome in this case is to have Chinese ownership and
foreign control of inputs, leading to supermodular welfare.
                                                            18


Proposition 2

Define V ≡ W(0,0) + W(1,1) – W(0,1) – W(1,0). Then:

                              ∂V      ∂V      ∂V           ∂V
                                 < 0,    < 0,    < 0 , and    > 0.                             (14)
                              ∂A      ∂B      ∂λ           ∂ψ


Below, we apply this result by examining how processing exports vary across the four factory-

ownership and input-control regimes. More generally, the goals of our empirical analysis will be

to assess the modularity of the surplus function and to estimate the model parameters.


4. Stochastic Specification and Data
4.1        Multinomial Logit

           The modularity of the surplus function cannot be tested directly, because we do not

observe the value of surplus from outsourcing activity; instead, we observe the processing

exports accounted for by each ownership and control regime. To move from the value of surplus

in (12) to the frequency of contractual regimes in our data, we adopt a simple stochastic

specification. In particular, we suppose that ownership and control in our data are chosen to

maximize W(δ1, δ2) plus an i.i.d. extreme value random error that varies across contractual

types.11 Then it is well known (see, e.g., Train, 1986) that the probabilities of observing each

contractual type take on the logit form:


                                               exp[W(i, j)]
                             Pr(i, j) =                           ,   i,j ∈ {0,1}.             (15)
                                          ∑i, j= 0,1 exp[W(i, j)]


           To measure the probabilities on the left of (15), we shall use the share of processing

trade accounted for by each contractual type. Denoting these export shares by S(i, j), our


11
     A stochastic specification of this type is suggested by Whinston (2001).
                                                 19

measure of the modularity of the welfare function is then:


               MOD ≡ [ln S(0,0) + ln S(1,1) – ln S(1,0) – ln S(0,1)]

                       = [W(0,0) + W(1,1) – W(1,0) – W(0,1)] ,                               (16)


where the second line follows from replacing Pr(i, j) by S(i, j) in (17). We assess the modularity

of the welfare function in Chinese export processing by calculating the expression for the sum of

log export shares in the first line of equation (16). We then see how this expression varies across

Chinese regions and trade policy regimes.

       Turning to parametric techniques, if we observed individual export processing plants,

then we could estimate (15) using standard multinomial logit techniques, in which the dependent

variable would indicate which of the four factory-ownership/input-control regimes is chosen.

Our data, while not at the factory level, are still highly disaggregated. For each of the four

ownership/control regimes, we observe exports by year, Chinese city, type of economic zone,

product, and destination market, yielding approximately 170,000 observations per year. For the

vast majority of these year-city-zone-product-destination country cells, exports are positive in

only one of the four input-country/ownership regimes. This makes it feasible to use multinomial

logit to estimate the underlying parameters of the welfare function. The dependent variable

indicates for a given cell which of the four ownership/control regimes has positive exports.

       To apply multinomial logit, we measure welfare for a given ownership/control regime

choice relative to welfare for some base choice, which we select to be W(0,0). For convenience,
                                                      2                  2
we shall weight welfare by the inverse of σ(A+λB) /γg, where (A+λB) /γg is the (first-best)
                                                         20


value-added in the processing factory, and σ is a parameter related to the variance of the extreme

value error.12 Using the effort levels shown in Table 2, the relative welfare levels are:


          ⎡ W (1,0) − W (0,0) ⎤ φ 2 θ 2 (1 − ψ 2 ) 1 ⎡          γ g ⎞ ⎤⎛ P ⎞ 2
                                                        2 2 2 ⎛
          ⎢                     ⎥=                − ⎢φ θ ψ + ⎜ ⎟⎟ − 1⎥⎜
                                                              ⎜                  ⎟ ,                         (17a)
          ⎢⎣ σ(A + γB) 2 / γ g ⎥⎦        σ         σ ⎣⎢       ⎝ γ f ⎠ ⎦⎥⎝ A + λB ⎠



          ⎡ W (0,1) − W (0,0) ⎤ φ 2 θ 2 ⎛ γ g ⎞ φ 2 (1 − θ) 2 ψ 2     ⎛ P ⎞
                                                                                    2
          ⎢                     ⎥=     − ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟                        ⎜        ⎟
          ⎢⎣ σ(A + γB) 2 / γ g ⎥⎦  σ      ⎝ γf ⎠        σ             ⎝ A + λB ⎠
                                                                                                             (17b)
                                       φ ⎡ 2 2 ⎛⎜ γ f
                                         2              ⎞                 ⎤⎡       B2 / γ g       ⎤
                                     −   ⎢θ λ           ⎟ + ψ 2 (1 − θ) 2 ⎥ ⎢                     ⎥,
                                       σ ⎢      ⎜ γg    ⎟
                                                                          ⎦⎥ ⎢⎣ (A + λB) / γ f    ⎥⎦
                                                                                         2
                                         ⎣      ⎝       ⎠

          ⎡ W (1,1) − W (0,0) ⎤ φ 2 θ 2 1 ⎛ γ g     ⎞⎛ P ⎞ 2
          ⎢                     ⎥=     − ⎜⎜     − 1⎟⎟⎜        ⎟
          ⎢⎣ σ(A + γB) 2 / γ g ⎥⎦  σ    σ ⎝ γf      ⎠⎝ A + λB ⎠
                                                                                                             (17c)
                                       φ ⎡ 2 2 ⎛⎜ γ f
                                         2              ⎞                 ⎤ ⎡ B2 / γ g           ⎤
                                     −   ⎢θ λ           ⎟ + ψ 2 (1 − θ) 2 ⎥ ⎢                    ⎥.
                                       σ ⎢      ⎜ γg    ⎟                 ⎥⎦ ⎢⎣ (A + λB) 2 γ f   ⎥⎦
                                         ⎣      ⎝       ⎠


The various terms appearing on the right of (17) reflect the reduction in welfare due to having

efforts chosen below their first-best levels. Notice that these terms depend on two value-added
                        2
ratios: [P/(A+λB)] , which is the ratio of first-best value-added in input search relative to that in

                                                                                           2             2
processing production (when they are both done by the manager); and (B /γf)/[(A+λB) /γg],

which is the ratio of first-best value-added in marketing the final good relative to that in

processing (where the former is done by the foreign firm and the latter by the manager). Our

empirical measures of these value-added ratios are discussed next.


                                                      2 2
12
     The variance of an extreme-value distribution is µ π /6 (Anderson, De Palma and Thisse, 1992, p. 40), whereas
                                                              2
the MNL specification in (15) assumes that the variance is π /6, so that µ = 1. Our assumption is that the variance
                             2
parameter µ equals σ(A+λB) /γg, so that by dividing each observation by this, we effectively obtain µ = 1. We do
not attempt to identify σ, but shall treat it as a fixed parameter.
                                                        21


4.2 Data

        Data are from the Customs General Administration of the People’s Republic of China

and show processing imports and exports by year (1997-2002), 8-digit harmonized system (HS)

product, origin or destination city-districts in China (including trade zone status), destination

country (including whether goods are exported directly or through Hong Kong), customs regime

(pure-assembly or import-and-assembly), and ownership type (foreign or Chinese-owned). In

addition, we make use of import and re-export data for Hong Kong by year (1997-2001), source

and destination country, and 8-digit HS product. The detail in these data approach that which

might be available from a firm level dataset, even though the fundamental observation available

to us is the 8-digit HS product, Chinese city-district, and destination market. For example, if

there is a single factory processing “women’s or girl’s suit-type jackets of wool” in Pudong,

Shanghai, operating in a SEZ, and exporting goods directly to the U.S., then the Chinese data

would show its ownership and control regime along with its export value. However, if there are

several such processing factories in Pudong (located in the same economic zone and exporting

the same product directly to the U.S.), then the exports of each ownership and control regime

represented there would be listed. Thus, a given city-economic zone-product-destination market

cell might show positive exports for more than one type of contractual arrangement.13

        To estimate the parameters of the welfare function, we need measures of the two value-

added ratios appearing on the right of (17). As discussed in the data appendix, we will measure

the value-added in processing trade within China using an estimated input-output table that

differs across provinces, and we shall measure the value-added in input search by the markups

charged on goods re-exported from Hong Kong to China. From these two data sources the ratio


13
  In our data 82.7% of observations have positive exports in one ownership/control regime, 13.4% have positive
exports in two regimes, 3.4% have positive exports in three regimes, and 0.5% have positive exports in four regimes.
                                                           22

              2
[P/(A+λB)] is constructed, which we refer to as the inbound value-added ratio, since it depends

on the effort devoted to bringing inputs into China. It is more difficult to measure the value-

added in marketing the final good since this depends on the destination market for the processed

good, but we attempt to do so using the markup on goods leaving China and re-exported through

Hong Kong. The ratio of this to the value-added on processing trade within China is used to
                               2               2
(imperfectly) measure (B /γf)/[(A+λB) /γg], which we refer to as the outbound value-added

ratio, since it depends on the effort in marketing the final good exported from China.

         Because of the errors involved in estimating the Hong-Kong markup and the input-output

table for processing trade within China, both the value-added ratios are measured at the 1-digit

SITC level rather than the 8-digit HS level; these ratios also vary across years, across provinces

(since the processing input-output table differs across provinces), and across destination markets

(for the outbound ratio). The coefficients of the two value-added ratios along with the intercept

terms in (17) are estimated by multinomial logit, from which the underlying parameters φ, θ, ψ

are obtained once we specify σ as a parameter.14 We correct the standard errors for the

correlation across errors because the value-added ratios are measured across 1-digit SITC rather

than 8-digit HS products. Our estimates will be sensitive to the Hong Kong markups that we

use, and as discussed by Feenstra et al (1999), there are several methods available to estimate

these. After reporting benchmark results, we investigate the sensitivity of the parameter

estimates to alternative measures of the markups.



14                                                     2             2
   Because we do not accurately measure the ratio (B /γf)/[(A+λB) /γg] appearing in (17b) and (17c), we do not
expect to identify the intercepts in those equations. So we rely on the single intercept term of (17a), together with
                                     2                                                                                  2
the three coefficients of [P/(A+λB)] , to measure the four parameters φ, θ, ψ, and (γg/γf). It is readily shown that φ
is proportional to the choice of σ, so we can only measure the relative magnitude of this parameter (across regions or
time). The ratio (γg/γf) is also quite sensitive to the choice of σ, so we do not report this parameter. The human-
capital specificity parameter ψ is independent of σ, while θ depends on σ only slightly.
                                                23


5. Empirical Results

5.1 Export Shares

       To evaluate the modularity of the welfare function nonparametrically, we report the

average values of export-shares across the four factory-ownership and input-control regimes. In

Table 3, the first two columns show export shares in the total sample, and the second two

columns show export shares for all provinces expect those on the southern coast (i.e., excluding

Shanghai, Zhejiang, Fujian, Guangdong, and Hainan). Reading down the diagonal of the first

matrix, foreign control of the inputs (the pure-assembly regime) combined with foreign

ownership of the factory accounts for an average of 8.3% of processing exports, while Chinese

ownership of the factory and control of the inputs accounts for 14.6% of processing exports.

Much more weight occurs on the off-diagonal, where Chinese control of the inputs (the import-

and-assembly regime) combined with foreign ownership of the factory accounts for 49.6% of

exports, and foreign control of the inputs combined with Chinese ownership of the factory

accounts for 27.1% of processing exports. Computing MOD as in (16), this is highly negative,

confirming that dispersed control/ownership is more likely than concentrated control/ownership.

Thus, in the full sample, the data support the submodularity of the surplus function. From

Proposition 1, this is consistent with some combination of high value-added in input processing,

low human-capital specificity, and a relatively high bargaining weight for foreign firms.

       From Proposition 2, we expect the welfare function to be less submodular where

productivity in export processing is lower or human-capital specificity is higher. In China,

export processing activities are highly concentrated in coastal provinces. Given the relative

absence of export processing in interior provinces, we might expect human-capital specificity to

be higher in these regions. Managers or foreign firms who separate from their trading partners
                                                       24

would presumably be less able to find an alternative partner in the interior than they would along

the coast. In the second two columns of Table 3, we separate out processing exports for interior

China. For the interior provinces we find that the MOD measure is positive rather than negative,

indicating supermodular welfare. This appears to be consistent with Proposition 2.

        One reason that coastal China has developed more export processing than the rest of the

country is that over the last two decades trade policies have varied substantially across regions of

the country. In the early stage of China’s economic opening, the government permitted foreign

trade and investment only in Special Economic Zones (SEZs) located in the southern coastal

provinces of Guangdong and Fujian. In the mid to late 1980s, the government expanded the

number of regions in which foreign trade and investment were permitted. By the 1990s, foreign

trade and investment were allowed (subject to government approval) throughout the country

(Demurger et al, 2001). Still, much export activity continued to be concentrated in SEZs.15

Advantages to being in a zone may include expedited treatment by customs of imported inputs

and exported outputs, more freedom to import or export goods directly rather than through state-

owned foreign trade corporations, greater opportunities to retain foreign exchange earnings, and

access to various types of tax incentives. There are is also a separate court system set up to

handle civil and commercial legal cases in trade zones (Wang, 2000).

        Being in a SEZ may affect the choice of input-control and factory-ownership regime in a

variety of ways. Since SEZs are the center of import and export activities in China, it might be

relatively easy for a foreign firm or Chinese factory with a presence in an SEZ to find a new

export supplier or foreign buyer. We hypothesize that this would lower the specificity of human-


15
  SEZs have been succeeded by second and third generation trade and development zones, including bonded areas,
Economic and Technological Development Areas, and Hi-Technology Development Areas. At risk of blurring
definitions, we refer to all of these zones as SEZs. These zones are managed by provincial governments and so may
exhibit regional variation in their organization and effectiveness.
                                                25

capital investments by factory managers and foreign buyers, and by Proposition 2, would make

concentrated input-control and factory-ownership less likely inside SEZs than outside SEZs. To

evaluate this, Table 4 replicates the results in Table 3 breaking out processing exports by whether

or not they are produced in one of China’s Special Economic Zones (SEZs). Being inside and

SEZ puts over 75% of the export mass in the lower-left cell, with foreign ownership but Chinese

control of the inputs. Outside the SEZs, there is 44% of the export share with foreign ownership

and Chinese control, but another 32% with the reverse case of Chinese ownership and foreign

control of the input, so again the preponderance of export mass is on the off-diagonal of Table 4.

So being outside the SEZ does affect the type of contract used in outsourcing, but the modularity

measures within or outside the SEZ are not that different.

       Another useful way to split the sample is according to whether the processing exports

from China are re-exported through Hong Kong or not. Re-exports are not simply goods

transshipped through Hong Kong; rather, they are goods that clear customs in Hong Kong and

that are taken into possession (and subject to intermediation services) by firms there. Hong

Kong traders typically grade them according to quality, package and label them, and arrange for

their shipment to final destination markets (Sung, 1991). As compared to direct exports from

China, we conjecture that Hong Kong firms have a higher relatively high marginal productivity

of investment (B) in export processing activities and relatively low specificity of human-capital

investments (ψ). By Proposition 2, we then expect export processing involving Hong Kong to

exhibit more dispersed ownership and control. Table 5 separates Chinese processing exports into

those shipped directly to destination markets and those re-exported through Hong Kong. For

Hong Kong re-exports, there is more mass along the off-diagonal in dispersed ownership and
                                                           26

control regimes. Thus, for re-exports through Hong Kong, MOD is more negative, as is again

consistent with Proposition 2.

         Lastly, we investigate how ownership and control differs across various industries. In

Tables 6 and 7 we contrast two low value-added industries (apparel and footwear) with two high

value-added industries (office machines and electrical machinery).16 In Table 6, apparel has

export shares that are rather evenly spread across the four ownership/control regimes (though

somewhat less in Chinese ownership and control), and its measure of modularity MOD is closer

to zero than the overall sample in Table 3. Footwear also has a less negative measure of

modularity, though it is closer to the overall sample. From Proposition 1, industries are less

likely to be submodular when the value-added in input processing is low, and this is true for both

these industries. In contrast, office machines in Table 6 has nearly 70% of its export share in the

Chinese control/foreign ownership regime, and the modularity measure MOD is much more

negative than for the entire sample. Electrical machinery is also more submodular than the

overall sample. These are both high value-added industries, so the lower value of MOD is

consistent with Propositions 1 and 2.

         The differing pattern of ownership/control across industries may account in part for the

differing magnitude of MOD across regions of China: the coastal provinces have roughly equal

processing exports within SITC 7 (which includes office machines and electrical machinery) and

outside of SITC 7, whereas the interior provinces have four times more exports outside of SITC

7, and especially within SITC 8 (which includes apparel, footwear, and toys). In our parametric

estimation we will control for differences in value-added across industries by using this as an


16
  Over the sample period, apparel accounts for 16.9% of China’s total processing exports, electrical machinery
accounts for 11.7%, office machines accounts for 11.4%, and footwear accounts for 6.5%, making these the first,
third, fourth, and sixth largest Chinese industries for processing exports (the second and fifth largest industries are
jewelry and telecommunications and sound recording equipment).
                                                           27

independent variable. In addition, we allow for other differences across coastal and inland

provinces by letting the model parameters ψ and φ differ across regions.


5.2 Parametric Estimation Results

         We turn now to the estimation of the model parameters: ψ, the specificity of human

capital in a factory manager-foreign firm relationship; θ, the bargaining weight for foreign firms;

and φ, the probability that contracts will be unenforceable. The latter parameter is very sensitive

to our choice of σ, which is related to the variance of the extreme-value distribution. We choose

σ = 0.1 to ensure that φ lies between zero and unity, and focus on the relative magnitude of this

parameter across various dimensions of the data rather than its absolute level.17

         In Table 8, we report the results from MNL estimation of the three equations in (17).

With six years of data (1999 – 2002) and thirty Chinese provinces, we can allow parameters to

change over time and across regions. We adopt a parsimonious specification whereby the

coefficients of the two valued-added ratios appearing on the right of (17) have constant

coefficients, whereas the intercept terms vary across inland and coastal regions and also years.

In addition, we allow for interaction terms between the four coastal regions (northern provinces;

those around Beijing; those around Shanghai; and southern provinces) and the two time periods

1997-99 and 2000-02. The usefulness of this fixed-effects specification will be apparent when

we discuss the parameter estimates.

         In Table 8, the sign pattern of the coefficients in the three MNL equations meets our

expectations from (17). For example, in the first regression, the inbound value-added ratio has a

negative coefficient in (17a) provided that (γg/γf) is not too small, and this negative sign is


17
   As discussed in note 14, the γg/γf is also quite sensitive to the choice of σ, so we do not report this parameter,
which is typically slightly greater than unity.
                                                  28

confirmed in the estimated equation (17a) in Table 8. The outbound value-added ratio does not

appear at all in (17a), and its estimated coefficient in Table 8 is very small. The intercept term is
                                    2 2       2
positive in (17a), where it equals φ θ (1 – ψ )/σ, and also in the estimate of Table 8. Our

inclusion of Hong-Kong and SEZ indicator variables, as well as the regional indicator variables

for the four coastal regions, clearly affects the estimate of the intercept term in Table 8 and

therefore affects the implied parameters. Using equations (17) and the estimates from Table 8,

we can solve for the implied parameters ψ, φ and θ, as reported in Table 9. We also compute

standard errors by bootstrapping equations (17) with 100 replications. For convenience, we do

not report the standard error for each estimate and region, but instead indicate the maximum

standard error across regions.

       From Table 9, we see that the estimates of ψ, the degree of human-capital specificity, are

highest in Beijing and lowest in the southern coast. Since this parameter reflect the loss in the

return to human-capital investments when bargaining breaks down, lower values of ψ may

indicate a “thicker” labor market and stronger outside options for the Chinese managers. We

find it highly plausible human-capital specificity is lowest in the southern coastal provinces of

Guangdong, Fujian and Hainan Island due to the concentration of export activity in these

regions. It is somewhat surprisingly that this parameter is highest in Beijing, though the

difference between Beijing and the northern or inland provinces is very small in the 2000-02

period, whereas the southern coastal provinces still have a markedly lower value of ψ, indicating

less human-capital specificity. Just below the estimates of ψ for each time period, we report the

range of these parameters across regions. Generally, these ranges are reduced in the 2000-02

period as compared to 1997-99. These results are suggestive of labor markets that are becoming

more integrated within and across regions over time.
                                                       29


        In addition, the estimates of ψ depend on whether the goods are processed in SEZ or not,

and whether they are re-exported through Hong Kong or not. Comparing the estimates in the

first two columns of Table 9 with those in the second two columns, we see that direct exports

have slightly higher estimates of ψ than do re-exports through Hong-Kong. That is, by not using

Hong-Kong traders to handle processed exports, Chinese entrepreneurs or foreign firms face

slightly higher project specificity of human-capital investments (presumably because the Hong

Kong traders can help arrange a new match). This human-capital specificity is increased further

when processing occurs outside of SEZ. An exception to this rule occurs for the southern coastal

provinces, where the loss in returns to human-capital investments remains close to 0.22 (or 22%)

regardless of whether processing occurs in SEZ or whether the goods are re-exported through

Hong Kong. That estimate for Fujian, Guangdong and Hainan compares with the range 0.28 –

0.51 (or 28 – 51%) for the other regions and years.

        Next in Table 9 we report the estimates of φ, which is the probability that a contract

cannot be enforced so that Nash bargaining is used. Recall that the absolute magnitude of this

parameter depends on σ, which is related to the variance of the extreme-value distributions in the

MNL specification. We have chosen σ = 0.1 so that φ lies between zero and unity, and focus on

the relative magnitude of this parameter rather than its absolute level. Our estimates of φ are

lowest in Beijing, suggesting the highest degree of legal enforcement there. While we have no

direct evidence on legal institutions across provinces, there is data on the level of “trust” that

businesses perceive within each province, from Ke and Zhang (undated).18 According to these

authors, Beijing and Shanghai rank as the most trustworthy locations. Our estimates accord with


18
    These authors received a response from over 5,000 businesses on the question: “From your experience, which
five regions do you consider most trustworthy? List from high to low.”
                                                         30


theirs for Beijing, but not for Shanghai, where our estimates of φ in Table 9 are higher than for

Beijing. More surprisingly, our estimates shown the highest value of φ in the southern coastal

provinces. We would not have expected to have the highest probability of Nash bargaining (and

lowest likelihood of legal enforcement) in these locations. Ke and Zhang rank Guangdong as 4th

in terms of “trust,” Fujian as 11th, but Hainan at 30th out of 31 provinces or autonomous regions

(including Chongqin, which is a newly added 31st region). While our finding that the southern

coastal provinces have a much higher value of φ is surprising, we note that the disparity between

these provinces and Beijing is somewhat lower in the 2000-02 period than in 1997-99. In other

words, there is evidence of regional convergence in legal institutions over time.

         Lastly in Table 9 we report the estimate of θ, the Nash bargaining weight for foreign

firms, which is 0.69 (standard error of 0.12) across all regions and time periods. It turns out that

θ depends only on the slope coefficients of the inbound and outbound value-added ratios, so in

our specification it does not vary with region or time period, as do ψ and φ. However, the

estimates of the bargaining weight would be sensitive to the measurement of the Hong Kong

markups, used to compute the inbound and outbound value-added ratios. Feenstra et al (1999)

describe three methods for computing markups, and method C is used in Tables 6 and 7.19 By

way of sensitivity analysis, we re-estimate (17) using the alternative methods A and B. In Table

10 we report parameter estimates using these methods, focusing on 2000-02 for convenience.

         Considering first the estimates of ψ, method B gives estimates that are larger than those

for methods A or C. Despite the differences in magnitude, the overall pattern of estimates across


19
    These methods are described in the data appendix. The difficulty in measuring the re-export markups is that
Hong Kong re-exports are distinguished by destination country whereas Hong Kong imports are not, so the bundle
of goods differs even at the 8-digit HS level. Method A compares the Hong Kong import unit-value for each HS
product to the unit-value for re-exports to a destination country, whereas method B compares the Hong Kong import
unit-value to the unit-value for all re-exports (regardless of destination country). Method C attempts to correct the
import unit-value to reflect the ultimate destination country for the re-exports.
                                                 31


regions is similar in Table 9 and 8. In all cases, Beijing has the highest estimate of ψ and the

southern coastal provinces have the lowest, though the range of estimates across regions in Table

10 is somewhat smaller than in Table 9. Again, the lower values of ψ for the southern coastal

provinces indicate less human-capital specificity and “thicker” labor market there.

       The estimates of φ in Table 10 are also larger than those reported in Table 9, and in some

cases φ exceeds unity. This could be readily corrected by choosing a lower value of σ, whereas

we have maintained σ = 0.1 in both Tables 7 and 8. The absolute magnitude of σ is not that

relevant, but its relative magnitude across regions is still of interest. Again, we obtain the same

pattern of estimates in Table 10 and in our benchmark results of Table 9: φ is lowest in Beijing,

indicated the greatest degree of legal enforcement of contracts there, and highest in the southern

coastal provinces. Evidently, this pattern is not sensitive to the precise measure of the Hong

Kong markups that we use in constructing the value-added ratios.

       Finally in Table 10 we report the estimate of θ, which is the Nash bargaining weight for

the foreign firm. It varies between 0.42 and 0.65 in Table 10, which is somewhat lower than the

estimates of 0.69 in our benchmark results. This range of estimates includes the value 0.5, which

corresponds to simple Nash bargaining as used by Grossman and Hart (1986). It appears that

this simple bargaining rule is adequate to account for the contractual choices observed in export

processing in China, provided that differences in human capital-specificity and contractual

enforcement across regions are also incorporated.


6. Conclusions

       This paper reports a new empirical finding: that the allocation of ownership and control

in processing exports of China tends to be shared between foreign and local parties, with foreign

firms likely to have (at least partial) ownership in the Chinese plant, but the Chinese parties
                                                32

having control over input-purchase decisions. Based on anecdotal evidence, we expect that this

pattern might apply in other developing countries as well, such as India. A goal of our paper has

been to reconcile this finding with available theories of the ownership/control structure within a

firm. We have drawn on the property-rights model due to Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart

and Moore (1990), while also including simple contracting costs into the model, in the spirit of

the Holmstrom-Milgrom incentive-systems (IS) framework. To conclude, it is useful to contrast

these two models to see to which framework our results are closest.

       Holmstrom and Milgrom show that under certain conditions the IS model leads to a

complementarity in the allocation of ownership/control instruments, so that these instruments

tend to be given to the same party. In our simple model of outsourcing, we find that the PR

model leads to that outcome when value-added in the factory is low or the specificity of human-

capital investments is high. But the PR model leads to the alternative arrangement with a

sharing of the ownership/control instruments between the parties when value-added is high, or

human-capital specificity is low. The evidence from China strongly supports the finding that

ownership and control is divided between the parties, and more so as we consider subsets of the

data that focus on exports through Hong Kong, or that exclude the interior provinces: in these

cases, an even greater magnitude of exports occur in the foreign-ownership/local-input-control

regime. The finding that ownership and control is divided between parties therefore supports a

PR framework with a low or moderate degree of human-capital specificity, meaning that the

effect of outside options on incentives becomes very important. There is some evidence of

regional convergence in the contractual environment, which would be consistent with a gradual

harmonization of legal institutions and equalization of access to world markets across regions.
                                                 33


Data Appendix

A. Estimating Value Added in Chinese Export Processing

        An initial measure of value-added in Chinese export processing is the difference between
the value of processing exports and processing imports (relative to processing exports). As
shown at the bottom of column (3) in Table A1, average value-added is 36% over all products
and years 1997-2002. It is not possible to measure this by individual harmonized system (HS)
products, however, since it is not known what other HS products they use as inputs. Even if we
aggregate the trade data to the 1-digit SITC level, as shown in Table A1, we see that for a
number of SITC categories the value of processing imports exceeds exports: obviously, these
imports are being used to produce exports in alternative SITC products. In order to measure the
value-added within HS or SITC products, we therefore cannot rely on the difference between
processing exports and imports. Instead, we make use of the provincial-level processing trade
data at the 1-digit SITC level to estimate an input-output table between SITC categories.

       There is considerable variation in the processing trade by 1-digit SITC industries across
provinces. In Table A2, we compare SITC 7 (machinery and transport equipment, which
includes office machines) with all other SITC categories, across provinces. For the coastal
provinces, there is roughly equal processing exports within SITC 7 and outside this category.
But the inland provinces have about four times as much processing exports outside of this
category. The most important sector for the inland provinces is SITC 8 (miscellaneous
manufactured articles, which includes apparel, footwear and toys).

        Making use of the variation in processing trade across provinces, we estimate an input-
output table for processing trade, as discussed in section B. This input-output table differs across
provinces and years, reflecting the productivity with which processing imports are used. By
construction, the demand for processing imports from the input-output table exactly equals actual
imports in each province, year, and 1-digit SITC product. The average value-added estimates by
1-digit SITC industries are shown in column (4) of Table A1.

        We do not obtain a value-added estimate in SITC 0 (food and live animals) that is
significantly different from zero, and we are also unable to estimate value-added in SITC 9
(special commodities and transactions). There is little trade in either of these industries. But for
the remaining 1-digit SITC industries, the value-added estimates in Table A1 appear plausible.
The industries with the greatest processing exports are SITC 6 (manufactured goods), 7
(machinery and transport equipment) and 8 (miscellaneous manufactured goods). We obtain
relatively low value-added of 16% in SITC 6 and 8, and higher value-added of 55% in SITC 7.
As described by Yeats (2001), SITC 7 includes a number of individual products and their parts,
such as: automobiles and their parts; computers and their parts; various types of machinery and
their parts; etc. So as a rough check on our value-added estimate of 55% from the input-output
table, we can compare this to value of processing exports and processing imports (relative to
processing exports), obtaining 50% as shown in column (3). This is quite close to our input-
output estimate of 55% for this industry in column (4), giving us added confidence in the
estimated input-output table.
                                                        34


B. Input-Output Table for Processing Trade

         Denote processing export industries at the 1-digit SITC level by i = 1,…,N, and
processing import industries at the 1-digit SITC level by j=1,..,N. Let the (NxN) matrix
 A kt = [a ijkt ]' denote the amounts of processing imports j needed per dollar of processing exports i
in province k and year t. The columns of this matrix denote processing exports and the rows are
                             kt
imported inputs. Let X denote the (Nx1) vector of processing exports in each industry for year
                                 kt
t and province k, and let M denote the (Nx1) vector of demands of processing imports. These
                      kt    k kt                              k
are related by M ≡ A X . We model the elements of A as:

                                         a ijk = exp( b ij−2 )δ kt
                                                                j ,                            (A1)

where 0 ≤ exp( b ij−2 ) ≤ 1 and δ kt
                                  j is a parameter indicating the productivity of imported input j in

province k and year t: δ kt
                         j >1 means that more of input j is needed, so it is less productive, and

conversely when δ kt
                  j <1.


       We estimate bij and δ kt                                                      kt
                             j in a two-step procedure. In the first step, we treat δ j as

unknown random variables that are distributed independently of the processing exports X ikt .
                     kt   k kt
Then using (A1) and X ≡ A Y , we estimate bij from the nonlinear regressions:

                         N                          N
                                  − 2 kt                  −2
                    j = ∑ [exp( b ij )δ j ]X i = ∑ exp( b ij )X i + ε j ,
                  M kt                       kt                 kt   kt
                                                                                j=1,…,N.       (A2)
                         i =1                      i =1

              N
        j ≡ ∑ [( δ j − 1) exp( b ij )]X i is a random error with mean zero, which is independent
where ε kt        kt             k      kt
             i =1
of the processing outputs X ikt by virtue of the assumption that δikt is also. These 10 regressions
in (A2) are run over six years and 30 Chinese provinces, for a total of 180 observations. The
estimates of exp( b ij−2 ) are shown in Table A3, where to assist in convergence we have restricted
the coefficients of SITC export industries 1 and 2, and 3 and 5, to be the same.

       Let B ≡ exp( b̂ ij−2 ) denote the matrix of estimates obtained. In the second step, we treat
                                                             kt       kt   kt
δ kt
  j as fixed effects estimated so that the relation M ≡ A X holds precisely in each province

and year. Letting D kt ≡ diag( δˆ kt
                                  j ) denote the diagonal matrix, this relation can be written as:


                                         M kt = D kt BX kt .                                   (A3)
                                                        35


Let M̂ kt ≡ BX kt denote the predicted imported inputs if province k had the input-output matrix
B. Then writing out (A3) in terms of the components of each vector, the elements of D are:

                                            δˆ kt    kt     kt
                                               j = M j / M̂ j .                                           (A4)

Thus, if province k has lower actual imports than predicted imports of input j, then δˆ ikt < 1
indicates above-average productivity of this input. Using the estimates in (A4), we obtain
a ijk = exp( b ij−2 )δ kt
                       j , which are the components of the input-output matrix. The values of this
matrix when averaged across provinces and years are shown in Table A4.

        Since a ijkt is the amount of processing imports j needed for one dollar of processing
export in industry i, then the value-added in industry i is (1 − ∑ Nj=1 a ijkt ) . This is shown in the
last row of Table A4. Note that value-added in SITC industry 0 (food and live animals) is
insignificantly different from zero, and we do not obtain a value-added estimate for SITC
industry 9 (commodities and transactions). These are industries in which there is relatively little
processing trade. Otherwise, the value-added estimates in Table A4 appear reasonable.

C. Measurement of Hong Kong Markups

        The measurement of these Hong Kong markups is discussed in Feenstra et al (1999), and
is based on a comparison of unit-values for Hong Kong imports and re-exports of disaggregate
commodities (as the 8-digit HS level). This comparison is complicated, however, because when
a good is imported into Hong Kong, it is not known whether it is intended for the domestic
market or for re-export to some destination market. So comparing the import unit-value to the
unit-value for re-exports to China involves some error, and sometimes the computed Hong Kong
markups can be negative rather than positive.20

       Feenstra et al (1999) discuss several alternative methods for the markups calculation, and
in Table A5 we summarize method A, B, and C for goods entering China, and method A for
goods leaving China, averaged over 1-digit SITC categories. Consider first goods entering
China from Hong Kong (the “inbound” markups). Method A compares the import unit-value of
all Hong Kong imports of each HS product to the unit-value for re-exports to China, whereas
method B compares the unit-value of all Hong Kong imports to the unit-value of all re-exports
(of which about 80% on average go to China).21 From columns (1) and (2) in Table A5, the
average markups is only 1.4% over all products and years using method A, and 4.1% using
method B. Method C attempts to improve on these estimates by using only 8-digit HS products
for which the quantity of imports into Hong Kong are at least 90% of the quantity of re-exports
to China, i.e., these HS products are nearly entirely destined for China. From column (3), the
average markup using method C is 4.2%, but there are some substantial differences in the 1-digit

20
    Feenstra and Hanson (2002) argue that negative markups might be a genuine feature of the market, rather than
just measurement error, due to “quality sorting” of goods in Hong Kong.
21
    We are excluding re-exports that originate in China from these calculations.
                                                    36

markups across the various methods. We choose method C for our benchmark estimates because
it appears to give the most accurate comparison of goods imported into Hong Kong and re-
exported to China. In cases where we obtain negative markups for the 1-digit SITC categories,
these products are omitted from the calculation of the value-added ratios, and from our
regression estimation.

        Turning to the markups on goods originating in China and re-exported from Hong Kong
(the “outbound” markups), these are calculated for each destination market. In column (4) of
Table A5 we report the average value of these markups across destination markets, and across
years. It can be seen that the outbound markups are much higher than the inbound markups, with
an average value of 16.7%. We did not use method B (which would average across destination
markets) or any method C for the outbound markups.

       To compute the ratio of Hong-Kong markups to the Chinese value-added, we first re-
express both relative to a common denominator, which is the value of goods flowing from Hong
Kong to China, i.e. Chinese imported inputs. Thus, the estimate of Chinese value-added are re-
expressed as (1 − ∑ j=1 a ijkt ) / ∑ j=1 a ijkt . Then taking the ratio of the “inbound” markups to
                      N           N

                                                                                  2
Chinese value-added we obtain the inbound value-added ratio [P/(A+λB)] that appears on the
right of (17). This explanatory variable varies across 1-digit SITC industries, provinces, and
years, and is alternatively calculated using methods A, B and C for the “inbound” markups.
Taking the ratio of the “outbound” markups to Chinese value-added we obtain the outbound
                       2             2
value-added ratio (B /γf)/[(A+λB) /γg], which varies across 1-digit SITC industries, provinces,
years, and destination markets.
                                                   37


                    Table A1: Chinese Processing Trade by SITC Industry
                          ($million and percent, average 1997-2002)


                             (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)
                         Processing     Processing       (1)-(2)      Value-
                           Exports        Imports          (1)         added
                         ($ million)    ($ million)     (percent)    (percent)

         SITC 0 – Food and live animals
                           2,467          1,249           49%            0
         SITC 1 - Beverages and tobacco
                             64              6            91%          63%
         SITC 2 - Crude materials, inedible, except fuels
                            295           4,568         -1,448%        63%
         SITC 3 - Mineral fuels, lubricants and related materials
                            602           1,006           -67%         67%
         SITC 4 - Animal and vegetable oils, fats and waxes
                            160            224            -40%         43%
         SITC 5 - Chemicals and related products
                           2,416         11,858          -391%         67%
         SITC 6 - Manufactured goods
                          16,081         25,750           -60%         16%
         SITC 7 – Machinery and Transport Equipment
                          60,443         30,486           50%          55%
         SITC 8 - Miscellaneous manufactured articles
                          45,949          6,626           86%          16%
         SITC 9 – Special commodities and transactions
                             77            829           -977%          n.a.

         Total            128,553         82,600          36%          36%


Notes:
Column (3) reports (processing exports – processing imports)/processing exports for each 1-digit
SITC industry. The negative values reported for many industries indicate that the processing
inputs are used elsewhere. The value-added estimates in column (4) are measured with the
input-output table reported in section B, and Tables A2 and A3. This table differs across 1-digit
SITC industries, provinces and years, so all values shown are averages.
                                                38


           Table A2: Chinese Processing Trade by Provinces and SITC Industry
                       ($million and percent, average 1997-2002)


                                    Within SITC 7                    Outside SITC 7
                              (1)         (2)        (3)        (1)         (2)        (3)
                   FDI Processing Processing (1)-(2) Processing Processing (1)-(2)
                  ($bill) Exports       Imports      (1)      Exports     Imports      (1)
                          ($ million) ($ million) (percent) ($ million) ($ million) (percent)
Coastal:
North
Heilongjiang       1.3       100         77          0.22        114           72        0.36
Jilin              1.1       86          34          0.61        218          135        0.38
Liaoning           5.4      2,551       1,374        0.46       2,645        2,249       0.15
Beijing area
Beijing/Tianjin    9.1      4,923       2,760        0.44       2,470        2,031       0.18
Hebei              2.0        98          31         0.69        577          320        0.44
Shandong           8.5      1,604        811         0.49       5,906        3,862       0.35
Shanghai area
Jiangsu           14.0      7,432       3,903        0.47       5,339        4,210       0.21
Shanghai          11.6      6,497       3,413        0.47       5,877        4,284       0.27
Zhejiang           4.0       891         417         0.53       2,826        1,622       0.43
South
Fujian            13.7     2,325        1,143        0.51      3,791        2,686        0.29
Guangdong         39.0     33,229       16,282       0.51      35,670       29,033       0.19
Hainan             4.0       7.9          2.3        0.71        81           57         0.30

Total coastal     113.7    59,744       30,247       0.49      65,514       50,560       0.23

Inland:
17 provinces      15.2       699         240         0.66       2,596        1,554       0.40



Notes:
Column (3) reports (processing exports – processing imports)/processing exports for each
province, for SITC 7 and all other SITC. We combine Beijing and the neighboring industrial
district of Tianjin, while Guangxi is treated as an inland province even though it has some
coastline in the south of China.
                                                                     39


                                    Table A3: First-step estimates of exp( b ij−2 ) for input-output table
                                                                   Processing Exports
             SITC:         0            1         2          3         4        5            6         7          8
               0         0.563
               1                     0.007      0.007
               2         0.277                                       0.180                0.176
               3         0.081                             0.277                0.277
Processing     4                     0.325      0.325                                                           0.002
 Imports       5                                                                                     0.010      0.278
               6                                           0.062                0.062     0.218                 0.487
               7                                                                          0.379      0.376      0.047
               8         0.095                                                            0.020      0.066      0.043
               9                                                     0.478                                      0.024


                                  Table A4: Second-step estimates of a ijk = exp( b ij−2 )δ kt
                                                                                            j for input-output table
                                                                   Processing Exports
              SITC:        0            1         2          3         4        5            6         7          8
                0        0.506
                1                    0.016      0.016
                2        0.357                                       0.232                0.227
                3        0.079                             0.269                0.269
Processing      4                    0.349      0.349                                                           0.003
 Imports        5                                                                                    0.009      0.247
                6                                          0.061                0.061     0.215      0.000      0.481
                7                                                                         0.373      0.370      0.046
                8        0.097                                                            0.020      0.067      0.043
                9                                                    0.336                                      0.017
               Sum       1.038       0.366      0.366      0.330     0.567      0.330     0.835      0.446      0.837
           Value-added   -0.038      0.634      0.634      0.670     0.433      0.670     0.165      0.554      0.163

             Note: These estimates are averaged across provinces and years.
         Table A5: Hong Kong Markups by SITC Industry (percent, average 1997-2001)


                                     Inbound to China                Outbound
                                                                    from China
                          Markup         Markup          Markup      Markup
                         Method A       Method B        Method C    Method A
                         (percent)      (percent)       (percent)   (percent)

         SITC 0 – Food and live animals
                          -7.1%           -4.3%           -4.0%      20.9%
         SITC 1 - Beverages and tobacco
                           5.1%           16.5%            8.4%      63.3%
         SITC 2 - Crude materials, inedible, except fuels
                           0.0%            0.7%            1.2%      18.5%
         SITC 3 - Mineral fuels, lubricants and related materials
                           3.4%            7.7%           -0.5%      4.7%
         SITC 4 - Animal and vegetable oils, fats and waxes
                           0.2%            0.8%           -0.5%      21.5%
         SITC 5 - Chemicals and related products
                           0.6%            1.8%            1.3%      12.9%
         SITC 6 - Manufactured goods
                          -0.8%           -0.5%           -0.2%      17.9%
         SITC 7 – Machinery and Transport Equipment
                           5.5%            9.5%           21.6%      28.5%
         SITC 8 - Miscellaneous manufactured articles
                           1.6%            8.2%           16.5%      29.6%
         SITC 9 – Special commodities and transactions
                          -2.1%            0.1%          -10.7%      14.1%

         Total             1.4%            4.1            4.2%       16.7%


Notes:
Hong Kong markups are computed as described in Feenstra et al (1999). For the markups on
goods inbound to China from Hong Kong, method A compares the Hong Kong import unit-value
for each HS product to the unit-value for re-exports to China, whereas method B compares the
import unit-value to the unit-value for all re-exports (of which about 80% on average go to
China). Method C compares the import and export unit-values for 8-digit HS products only
when the quantity of imports into Hong Kong are at least 90% of the quantity of re-exports to
China. For the markups on goods outbound from China and re-exported through Hong Kong,
method A compares the Hong Kong import unit-value to the unit-value of re-exports to each
destination market.
                                              41


References

Aghion, Phillipe and Jean Tirole, 1997, “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations,” Journal
       of Political Economy, 105(1), 1-29.
Anderson, Simon P., Andre de Palma, and Jacques-Francois Thisse. 1992. Discrete Choice
       Theory of Product Differentiation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Antras, Pol. 2002. “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure.” Mimeo, MIT.
Baker, George P. and Thomas N. Hubbard. 2000a. “Contractibility and Asset Ownership: On-
       Board Computers and Governance in U.S. Trucking.” NBER Working Paper No. 7634.
Baker, George P. and Thomas N. Hubbard. 2000b. “Make versus Buy in Trucking: Asset
       Ownership, Job Design, and Information.” Mimeo, Harvard University.
Baker, George P. and Thomas N. Hubbard. 2001. “Empirical Strategies in Contract Economics:
       Information and the Boundary of the Firm.” American Economic Review 91(2), May, 189-
       194.
Chen, Hongyi. 2000. The Institutional Transition of China’s Township and Village Enterprises.
       Brookfield, VT: Ashgate.
Chiu, Stephen W.K., K.C. Ho, and Tai-Lok Lui. 1997. City-States and the Global Economy:
       Industrial Restructuring in Hong Kong and Singapore. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Demurger, Sylvie, Jeffrey D. Sachs, Wing Thye Woo, Shuming Bao, Gene Chang, and Andrew
       Mellinger. 2001. “Geography, Economic Policy, and Regional Development in China.”
       Asian Economic Papers, forthcoming.
Ethier, Wilfred J. and James R. Markusen. 1996. “Multinational Firms, Technology Diffusion,
       and Trade.” Journal of International Economics, 41(1): 1-28.
Feenstra, Robert C., Wen Hai, Wing T. Woo, and Shunli Yao. 1999. “Discrepancies in
       International Data: An Application to China-Hong Kong Entrepôt Trade,” American
       Economic Review, May, 338-343.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson. 2002. “Intermediaries in Entrepôt Trade: Hong
       Kong Re-Exports of Chinese Goods.” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy,
       forthcoming.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart, 1986, “Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of
       Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy, 94(3), August, 691-719.
                                              42


Groves, Theodore, Yongmiao Hong, John McMillan, and Barry Naughton. 1994. "Autonomy
       and Incentives in Chinese State Enterprises," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(1):
       183-209.
Groves, Theodore, Yongmiao Hong, John McMillan, and Barry Naughton. 1995. "China's
       Evolving Managerial Labor Market," Journal of Political Economy, 103(3): 873-92.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman. 2002a. “Integration versus Outsourcing in Industry
       Equilibrium.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1), February, 85-120
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman. 2002b. “Outsourcing in a Global Economy.” NBER
       Working Paper No. 8728.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman. 2002c. “Managerial Incentives and the International
       Organization of Production.” Mimeo, Princeton University and Tel Aviv University.
Hanson, Gordon H.      1995.     “"Incomplete Contracts, Risk, and Ownership," International
       Economic Review, 36: 341-63.
Hart, Oliver D. and John Moore, 1990, “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm,” Journal of
       Political Economy, 98, 1119-1158.
Hart, Oliver D. 1995. Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. Oxford: Oxford University
       Press.
Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom, 1994, “The Firm as an Incentive System,” American
       Economic Review, 84(3), 972-991.
Ke, Rongzhu and Weiying Zhang. undated. “Trust in China: A Cross-regional Analysis,”
       Guanghua School of Management and Institute of Business Research, Peking University
Lin, Chu-Chia and Ivan Png. 2001. “Monitoring Costs and the Mode of International
       Investment.” Mimeo, National University of Singapore.
Marin, Dalia and Thierry Verdier. 2001. “Power Inside the Firm and the Market: A General
       Equilibrium Approach.” Mimeo, University of Munich and DELTA.
Marin, Dalia and Thierry Verdier. 2003. “Globalization and the Empowerment of Human
       Capital.” Mimeo, University of Munich and DELTA.
Markusen, James R. 2002. Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade.
       Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
                                              43


Markusen, James R. and Keith E. Maskus. 2003. Discriminating among Alternative Theories of
       the Multinational Enterprise. In James Harrigan and Kwan Choi, editors, Handbook of
       International Trade, Basel Blackwell, forthcoming.
McLaren, John. 2000. “Globalization and Vertical Structure.” American Economic Review,
       90(5): 1239-1254.
Naughton, Barry, 1996, “China’s Emergence and Prospects as a Trading Nation,” Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 1996, pp. 273-343.
Naughton, Barry. 1997. The China Circle. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Puga, Diego and Daniel Trefler. 2002. “Knowledge Creation and Control in Organizations.”
       Mimeo, University of Toronto.
Rauch, James E., “Networks versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of International
       Economics, 48(1), June 1999, 7-37.
Rauch, James E. and Alessandra Casella, 2003, “Overcoming Informational Barriers to
       International Resource Allocation: Prices and Group Ties,” Economic Journal,
       forthcoming.
Sung, Yun-Wing.       1991.   The China-Hong Kong Connection.        Cambridge:     Cambridge
       University Press.
Sung, Yun-Wing. 1998. Hong Kong and South China: The Economic Synergy. Hong Kong:
       City University of Hong Kong Press.
Tirole, Jean. 1999. “Incomplete Contracts: Where Do We Stand?” Econometrica 67(3), July,
       741-781.
Train, Kenneth, 1986, Qualitative Choice Analysis. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Wang, Kui Hua. 2000. Chinese Commercial Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Whinston, Michael 2001. “Assessing the Property-Rights and Transaction Cost Theories of Firm
       Scope.” American Economic Review 91(2), May, 184-188.
World Bank. 1994. “China: Foreign Trade Reform.” Washington, DC.
Yeats, Alexander J. 2001. “Just How Big is Global Production Sharing?” in Sven W. Arndt and
       Henryk Kierzkowski (eds.), Fragmentation: New Production Patterns in the World
       Economy, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                                               44




           Table 1: Foreign Ownership, Export Processing, and Trade in China


            Processing            FIE
             Exports/           Exports/             Share in Total Processing Exports of
              Total              Total         Import-and-       Hong Kong
 Year        Exports            Exports         Assembly         Re-Exports        FIE Exports

 1997          0.545             0.361              0.704            0.556              0.561

 1998          0.568             0.393              0.705            0.552              0.587

 1999          0.568             0.413              0.677            0.507              0.609

 2000          0.552             0.439              0.701            0.470              0.646

 2001          0.554             0.462              0.714            0.456              0.669

 2002          0.550             0.484              0.741            0.436              0.697


Notes: Columns (1) and (2) show processing exports and exports by foreign-invested
enterprises, respectively, as a share of total China exports; columns (3)-(6) show as a share of
total China processing exports, processing exports under the import-and-assembly regime,
processing exports re-exported through Hong Kong, and processing exports by foreign-invested
enterprises, respectively.
                                            45


                         Table 2: Optimal Effort Levels


                                           Ownership of the Factory
                    δ2 = 0, Foreign firm f owns          δ2 = 1, Chinese Manager g owns



                      e1 = P/γf     (first-best for f)    e1= [1 − φ(1 − θ)ψ ]P / γ f
δ1 = 0,
                      e2 = (1 − φθ)(A + λB) / γ g         e2 = [A + (1 − φθ)λB] / γ g
Foreign firm
f controls inputs                                         e3 = [1 − φ(1 − θ)ψ]B / γ f
                      e3 = B/γf     (first-best)

Control                     W(0,0) >< W(1,0)               W(0,1) < W(1,1) if γf = γg
of the
Inputs

                    e1= (1 − φψθ)P / γ g                  e1 = P/γg (first-best for g)
δ1 = 1,
                                                          e2 = [A + (1 − φθ)λB] / γ g
Chinese manager     e2= (1 − φψθ)(A + λB) / γ g

g controls inputs    e3 = B/γf     (first-best)           e3 = [1 − φ(1 − θ)ψ]B / γ f

                                  W(1,0)                             W(1,1)
                                                 46



      Table 3: Processing Exports by Input Control and Factory Ownership Regime


                                   All Provinces                Interior Provinces
                               Ownership of Factory:          Ownership of Factory:
  Control over Inputs:         Foreign      Chinese            Foreign      Chinese
                                 S(0,0)      S(0,1)             S(0,0)       S(0,1)
     Foreign Buyer               0.083       0.271              0.177        0.110
    (pure-assembly)             (0.001)     (0.003)            (0.007)      (0.004)

                                 S(1,0)        S(1,1)           S(1,0)        S(1,1)
    Chinese Factory              0.496         0.146            0.416         0.297
 (import-and-assembly)          (0.003)       (0.002)          (0.011)       (0.009)

 [lnS(0,0)+lnS(1,1)] –                 -2.417                          0.141
  [lnS(1,0)+lnS(0,1)]                  (0.026)                        (0.064)



Notes: This table shows means for shares of processing exports by factory ownership (foreign
versus Chinese) and input-control regime (pure-assembly versus import-and-assembly) for
observations by year, industry, destination country, origin province, and trade zone status. The
first two columns show results for all provinces; the second two columns show results for
interior provinces (all provinces excluding the southern coastal provinces of Shanghai, Zhejiang,
Fujian, Guangdong, Hainan). Standard errors for the modularity measure (in parentheses) are
obtained by bootstrapping with 100 replications.
                                                47


               Table 4: Processing Exports depending on Trade Zone Status
                                      Inside SEZs                     Outside SEZs
                                 Ownership of Factory:            Ownership of Factory:
  Control over Inputs:           Foreign       Chinese            Foreign       Chinese
                                  S(0,0)        S(0,1)             S(0,0)        S(0,1)
      Foreign Buyer               0.081         0.076              0.084         0.317
     (pure-assembly)             (0.004)       (0.002)            (0.001)       (0.003)

                                  S(1,0)           S(1,1)          S(1,0)              S(1,1)
    Chinese Factory               0.745            0.098           0.442               0.157
 (import-and-assembly)           (0.006)          (0.003)         (0.003)             (0.002)

  [lnS(0,0)+lnS(1,1)] –                    -1.967                            -2.367
   [lnS(1,0)+lnS(0,1)]                     (0.069)                          (0.025)


Notes: This table shows mean shares of processing exports by factory ownership and input-
control regime for goods produced inside (columns 1 and 2) and outside (columns 3 and 4) of
Special Economic Zones. See also notes to Table 3.

                Table 5: Processing Exports by depending on Export Route


                                 Hong Kong Re-Exports                Direct Exports
                                 Ownership of Factory:           Ownership of Factory:
  Control over Inputs:           Foreign      Chinese            Foreign       Chinese
                                  S(0,0)        S(0,1)            S(0,0)        S(0,1)
      Foreign Buyer               0.024         0.367             0.160         0.154
     (pure-assembly)             (0.001)       (0.004)           (0.003)       (0.003)

                                  S(1,0)              S(1,1)       S(1,0)              S(1,1)
    Chinese Factory               0.490               0.119        0.504               0.182
 (import-and-assembly)           (0.004)             (0.002)      (0.005)             (0.003)

  [lnS(0,0)+lnS(1,1)] –                  -4.142                             -0.984
                                        (0.040)                             (0.031)
   [lnS(1,0)+lnS(0,1)]

Notes: This table shows mean shares of processing exports by factory ownership and input-
control regime for goods shipped directly to destination markets (columns 1 and 2) and goods re-
exported through Hong Kong (columns 3 and 4). See also notes to Table 3.
                                               48


              Table 6: Processing Exports for Low Value-Added Industries
                                       Apparel                        Footwear
                               Ownership of Factory:           Ownership of Factory:
  Control over Inputs:         Foreign       Chinese           Foreign       Chinese
                                S(0,0)        S(0,1)            S(0,0)        S(0,1)
     Foreign Buyer              0.225          0.286            0.104         0.178
    (pure-assembly)            (0.003)       (0.003)           (0.007)       (0.007)

                                 S(1,0)          S(1,1)         S(1,0)              S(1,1)
    Chinese Factory              0.302           0.187          0.579               0.140
 (import-and-assembly)          (0.003)         (0.002)        (0.009)             (0.003)

  [lnS(0,0)+lnS(1,1)] –                   -0.716                          -1.950
   [lnS(1,0)+lnS(0,1)]                    (0.020)                        (0.081)


Notes: This table shows mean shares of processing exports by factory ownership and input-
control regime for Apparel (SITC 84, columns 1 and 2) and Footwear (SITC 85, columns 3 and
4). See also notes to Table 3.

              Table 7: Processing Exports for High Value-Added Industries


                                   Office Machines             Electrical Machinery
                               Ownership of Factory:           Ownership of Factory:
  Control over Inputs:         Foreign      Chinese            Foreign       Chinese
                                S(0,0)        S(0,1)            S(0,0)        S(0,1)
     Foreign Buyer              0.033         0.211             0.070         0.246
    (pure-assembly)            (0.006)       (0.013)           (0.006)       (0.005)

                                 S(1,0)              S(1,1)     S(1,0)              S(1,1)
    Chinese Factory              0.693               0.062      0.575               0.109
 (import-and-assembly)          (0.016)             (0.008)    (0.007)             (0.004)

  [lnS(0,0)+lnS(1,1)] –                   -4.265                         -2.925
   [lnS(1,0)+lnS(0,1)]                    (0.223)                        (0.106)


Notes: This table shows mean shares of processing exports by factory ownership and input-
control regime for Office Machines (SITC 75, columns 1 and 2) and Electrical Machinery (SITC
77, columns 3 and 4). See also notes to Table 3.
                                                  49


                     Table 8: MNL Estimates of the Property Rights Model

                             Equation (17a)            Equation (17b)            Equation (17b)

       Intercept                   0.74                       -0.47                   1.24
     (Year = 2002)                (0.15)                      (0.16)                 (0.14)

       Inbound                     -0.34                   -0.036                     -0.17
   value-added ratio              (0.054)                  (0.072)                   (0.050)

       Outbound                    -0.007                   0.013                     0.035
   value-added ratio              (0.014)                  (0.021)                   (0.017)

         Years:            1997-99     2000-02      1997-99       2000-02       1997-99   2000-02

      Hong-Kong             -0.061       0.24         0.16              0.59    0.001       0.26
                            (0.20)      (0.15)       (0.23)            (0.16)   (0.22)     (0.16)

          SEZ                -0.21       0.47         0.19             -0.90     0.12       -0.48
                            (0.15)      (0.11)       (0.31)            (0.20)   (0.24)     (0.16)

      North coast            0.32        -0.18       -0.25         -0.018        0.54       -1.53
                            (0.21)      (0.16)       (0.24)        (0.15)       (0.24)     (0.18)

      Beijing area           0.11       -0.21        -0.12         -0.040        0.32       -1.18
                            (0.20)      (0.15)       (0.20)        (0.12)       (0.22)     (0.16)

     Shanghai area           -0.14       0.57        -0.56              0.72    0.027       -0.48
                            (0.19)      (0.14)       (0.22)            (0.12)   (0.20)     (0.14)

      South coast            0.75        1.94         0.25              2.42     1.10       -0.14
                            (0.29)      (0.20)       (0.37)            (0.24)   (0.30)     (0.21)


Notes: N = 1,118,883, across 8-digit harmonized system (HS) products, provinces, years, and destination
markets. The inbound (outbound) value-added ratio equal the markup on Hong Kong re-exports entering
(leaving) China, divided by the value-added in processing trade within China. These ratios are measured
at the 1-digit SITC industry rather than 8-digit HS product, so the standard errors (in parentheses) are
corrected for correlation of errors across observations. The variable SEZ equals one if the HS products
are produced in a Special Economic Zone (including high-technology development zones), and Hong-
Kong equals one if the good is re-exported through Hong Kong. All regressions include indicator
variables for the year (with 2002 excluded). The northern coast consists of Heilongjiang, Jilin and
Lioning; the area around Beijing includes Beijing/Tianjin, Hebei and Shandong; the area around Shanghai
includes Shanghai, Jiangsu and Zhejing; and the southern coastal provinces consist of Fujian, Guangdong,
and Hainan Island.
                                                50



                                Table 9: Parameter Estimates

                                 SEZ,                      SEZ,              No SEZ,
                            HK Re-exports              Direct exports     Direct exports
                           1997-99 2000-02           1997-99 2000-02    1997-99 2000-02
         Region:
  ψ      Interior            0.38       0.33          0.41      0.35      0.48       0.43
                            (0.05)     (0.04)        (0.06)    (0.04)    (0.06)     (0.05)
         North coast         0.36       0.34          0.39      0.38      0.44       0.48
                            (0.05)     (0.04)        (0.05)    (0.04)    (0.05)     (0.06)
         Beijing area        0.40       0.35          0.43      0.38      0.51       0.50
                            (0.06)     (0.04)        (0.06)    (0.05)    (0.06)     (0.07)
         Shanghai area       0.33       0.28          0.34      0.30      0.38       0.34
                            (0.04)     (0.03)        (0.04)    (0.03)    (0.04)     (0.04)
         South coast         0.21       0.22          0.21      0.23      0.22       0.24
                            (0.03)     (0.03)        (0.03)    (0.03)    (0.03)     (0.03)
         Range               0.19       0.13          0.22      0.15      0.29       0.26

  φ      Interior            0.50       0.58          0.46      0.54      0.40       0.44
                            (0.11)     (0.12)        (0.10)    (0.12)    (0.09)     (0.10)
         North coast         0.53       0.55          0.49      0.50      0.43       0.39
                            (0.12)     (0.12)        (0.10)    (0.12)    (0.09)     (0.10)
         Beijing area        0.48       0.55          0.44      0.50      0.37       0.38
                            (0.11)     (0.12)        (0.09)    (0.11)    (0.08)     (0.09)
         Shanghai area       0.58       0.68          0.55      0.64      0.50       0.56
                            (0.12)     (0.14)        (0.11)    (0.14)    (0.10)     (0.12)
         South coast         0.91       0.87          0.89      0.84      0.85       0.78
                            (0.18)     (0.17)        (0.18)    (0.17)    (0.17)     (0.15)
         Range               0.43       0.32          0.45      0.34      0.48       0.39

  θ      Any region          0.69       0.69          0.69      0.69      0.69       0.69
                            (0.12)     (0.12)        (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)     (0.12)

Notes: Parameters estimates are calculated from the coefficients in Table 8 and equations (17).
The parameter ψ is the degree of human-capital specificity, φ is the probability that contracts
cannot be enforced so that Nash bargaining is used, and θ is bargaining weight of the foreign
firm. Standard errors are obtained by bootstrapping (17) using 100 replications. The range
indicates the difference between the maximum and minimum estimates across regions.
                                            51



                    Table 10: Alternative Parameter Estimates, 2000-02

                            SEZ,                    SEZ,                     No SEZ,
                       HK Re-exports            Direct exports            Direct exports
                     Method A Method B      Method A     Method B     Method A     Method B
    Region:
ψ   Interior           0.38        0.49          0.39       0.52         0.40        0.60
    North coast        0.38        0.52          0.39       0.55         0.40        0.66
    Beijing area       0.44        0.53          0.44       0.57         0.46        0.68
    Shanghai area      0.37        0.44          0.38       0.45         0.39        0.51
    South coast        0.31        0.35          0.31       0.36         0.31        0.39
    Range              0.13        0.18          0.14       0.21         0.15        0.29

φ   Interior           1.22        0.66          1.20       0.63         1.17        0.54
    North coast        1.21        0.63          1.19       0.59         1.17        0.50
    Beijing area       1.07        0.61          1.04       0.58         1.02        0.48
    Shanghai area      1.25        0.75          1.23       0.72         1.20        0.65
    South coast        1.52        0.93          1.50       0.91         1.49        0.85
    Range              0.45        0.32          0.46       0.33         0.47        0.37

θ   Any region         0.42        0.65          0.42       0.65         0.42        0.65


Notes: Alternative parameters estimates are calculated by changing the method of computing
the Hong Kong markups, used to construct the inbound and outbound value-added ratios. Tables
8 and 9 use method C to calculate the markups, whereas the above estimates use methods A and
B. See Feenstra et al (1999) and the data appendix for more information on these methods for
computing markups, and see the notes to Table 9 for parameter definitions.
