                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL LABOR MARKETS:
                          A PERSONNEL ECONOMICS APPROACH

                                            Edward P. Lazear
                                               Paul Oyer

                                          Working Paper 10192
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10192


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2003




This paper formed the basis of Edward P. Lazear’s Adam Smith Lecture to the European Association of Labor
Economists, Seville, Spain, September, 2003. It is a substantially revised version of a paper previously
circulated under the title “Ports of Entry.” The paper is part of the project “Pay and Promotion in Swedish
Private Industries 1970-1990,” which is under the leadership of Eva M. Meyersson Milgrom and is financially
supported by the Swedish Council for Research in the Humanities and Social Sciences. We thank the Swedish
Employers’ Federation for access to their data. We thank Eva M. Meyersson Milgrom for help accessing and
understanding the data. We thank Gerald Oettinger and seminar participants at NBER and the 2003 AEA
meetings for comments. Financial support to Lazear from the National Science Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Edward P. Lazear and Paul Oyer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Internal and External Labor Markets: A Personnel Economics Approach
Edward P. Lazaear and Paul Oyer
NBER Working Paper No. 10192
December 2003
JEL No. M5

                                           ABSTRACT

Internal labor markets are those where workers are hired into entry level jobs and higher levels are

filled from within. Wages are determined internally and may be quite free of market pressure.

External labor markets imply that workers move somewhat fluidly between firms and wages are

determined by some aggregate process where firms do not have significant discretion over wage

setting. There are a number of theories that lead to internal labor markets. Using data from Sweden

from the late 1980s, it is found that although there is significant evidence of internal promotion

being important, a significant external market exists that affects both wage setting and hiring

patterns. Even in Sweden, which most would not choose as the best example of a free labor market,

external factors seem to create strong discipline on the ability of firms to set wages.

Edward P. Lazear
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
lazar@stanford.edu

Paul Oyer
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
pauloyer@stanford.edu
       How fluid are labor markets? Most economists believe that fluidity of labor markets is a

necessary condition for competition to prevail. Without at least the potential for significant

mobility across firms, the concern arises that workers will be locked into their firms and as a

result, may be subject to exploitation.

       Indeed, Adam Smith worried about this exact issue. He argued that scarcity of labor

would break any hold that employers had over their workers and would thereby eliminate their

power to hold wages down. Smith wrote,1



       “The scarcity of hands occasions a competition among masters, who bid against one

       another in order to get workmen, and thus voluntarily break through the natural

       combination of masters not to raise wages.”



       There are two kinds of fluidity that are of issue in modern labor markets - ex ante and ex

post. “Ex post fluidity” (by which we mean fluidity of the labor market for workers with at least

a fair amount of tenure at a given firm) relates most closely to internal labor markets. Because

workers eventually tend to settle down and remain with a particular employer for a significant

fraction of their careers, the pattern of early mobility, coupled with later stability, may reflect the

importance of internal labor markets, where workers are hired into “ports-of-entry” and higher

level positions are filled from within.2 A variety of factors could account for such a lack of

mobility, including firm-specific human capital, incentive structures, or pure institutional factors.


       1
        Adam Smith (1776), Book I, Chapter VIII.
       2
        See Hall (1982) on the age/stability relationship.

                                                   1
One potential implication of ex post rigidity is that wages do not move with the market.

        “Ex ante fluidity” refers to the flexibility of labor markets for workers at the start of a

career. Even if strong internal labor markets exist, it may well be the case that labor markets are

competitive at the time of hire into the entry level position. For example, before a worker signs

on with a firm and has acquired firm-specific skills, he or she may have many choices across

firms, and the ability to join a number of different firms would have implications at least for the

expected present value of lifetime wages that a firm would have to offer at the entry point. But it

is also possible that there is a lack of fluidity even at the entry level. For example, in a heavily

unionized country or industry, hiring may be determined in large part by union rules that make it

difficult for certain individuals to obtain specific jobs. Often, the rules relate to seemingly

sensible job-related factors such as skills, but it is also possible that such constraints may simply

be instruments that unions use to create monopoly rents for the members. Government

restrictions, such as minimum wages, may also be important at the entry level.

        The personnel economics approach is most useful at shedding light on ex post fluidity.

Personnel economics is a sub-discipline that uses the tools of economic theory and econometrics

to examine issues that are of interest in the human resources arena. Much of the literature has

focused on internal labor markets and on the structure of compensation within firms. The

theories and approach of that literature will be of direct applicability in analyzing labor market

fluidity.

        Before proceeding, it is important to point out that an external labor market that results

from a fluid labor environment is not the same as an efficient market. For example, suppose that

the government were to set a minimum wage well above the level that would prevail in an


                                                   2
unfettered competitive market. There might be complete mobility between firms, and

competition among firms would prevent any single firm from setting wages that were out of line

with the market. But the resulting use of labor would not be efficient. Instead, it would suffer

from distortions caused by the minimum wage. Strong centralized union wage setting could

create similar inefficiencies, even if there were competition between firms for labor. As such, it

is better to talk about external and internal labor markets than about competition and efficiency.

       The question that is posed in this paper is narrower than whether wages and labor

markets are competitive. The analysis asks whether positions are frequently filled from outside

the firm or whether they must be filled by incumbents, except at the firm’s ports-of-entry.

Second, the analysis aims to determine how much discretion firms have in wage setting. If labor

markets were truly internal, there would be no automatic connection between the wages in one

firm and the wages in another, even for the same job.

       Using data from Sweden, it is found that labor markets are “fluid” in two senses. First, at

every level of the firm’s hierarchy, a significant fraction of positions are filled from the outside.

Despite institutional limitations on firing workers, there is enough turnover so that the typical

firm can and does go to the external labor market to fill positions. Second, wages are determined

primarily by factors that are exogenous to the firm. At least in the long run, the wages paid by

the typical firm are determined by prevailing wages in the market, not by conditions in the firm.

In the short run, firm effects are most important, but over the longer haul, market considerations

discipline the ability of firms to set wages. Once again, this does not imply efficiency, because

the “market” wage might well be determined in an institutional and non-competitive manner.

But it does imply that the firm does not have significant power to exploit workers relative to the


                                                  3
market.

       This result is somewhat surprising, particularly in a country like Sweden where wage

setting occurs in large part in a formal and institutional way. Of course, were wages completely

determined centrally, at least the wage results would be less of a surprise. Centralized wage

setting would guarantee that firms’ wages paralleled the market. But this is not the whole story.

Although 82% of individual worker wages can be explained by job, region, firm and year effects,

the other 18% is worker specific variation. The firm variable only accounts for about one

percent of the variation in wages among workers Thus, in the presence of significant

idiosyncratic wage setting, the market wage for the job is more important than the firm in

determining the long run wage level.

       The conclusion is that even in the European environment where wage and employment

determination are constrained by institutional factors, external labor markets are prevalent and

forceful. Although promotion from within is the rule at most higher level positions in most firms,

positions are often filled from outside the firm, and the wages paid are those determined by the

general market conditions, not by the firm.



                        I. Ports-of-Entry, Promotion and Wage Setting

       Three factors bear on the importance of internal labor markets and ex post fluidity. They

are the hiring process, the promotion process, and the pattern of wage setting. If an internal labor

market exists, then there must be some jobs, presumably at high levels, that are filled almost

exclusively through internal promotion and there must be other ports-of-entry jobs, presumably




                                                 4
at low levels, that are filled through external hiring.3 The existence of ports-of-entry is not a

sufficient condition for insulated labor markets, however. Even if workers were hired only into

the lowest level job in the firm and stayed in the same firm their entire lives, and even if all

higher positions in the firm were filled through promotion from below, it is still possible that an

external labor market for labor could prevail at all firms. Consider the most extreme case, where

all firms are identical and all human capital is completely general. Once hired into a firm, there

is no reason for a worker to move to any other firm. Promotions reflect changes in human

capital, but workers need not be locked into the firm. Any attempt to exploit a worker by forcing

him to accept a wage below the market wage would result in turnover. Such events might never

be observed in equilibrium, however, because firms understand that they have no market power

over the worker and always pay the competitive wage.

       It is therefore necessary to complement the information on promotion with an analysis of

wages. If all markets are external labor markets, then all wages should move together once job

and skill have been sufficiently well defined. A change in the market wage should be reflected

in a complete and parallel change in the wage of workers at any given firm. Thus, by examining

the sensitivity of wages to the “benchmark” spot wage, it is possible to assess whether firms’

behavior is consistent with spot or internal labor markets. Wage movements that are parallel for

parallel jobs are a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for spot labor markets. Wages may

move together even if firms set up internal labor markets. Consider another extreme example.

Suppose that all firms are identical, that all firms set up long term contracts with their workers


       3
         The notion that there may be ports-of-entry dates back at least to Reder’s (1955) analysis
of job ladders and received additional attention in Doeringer and Piore’s (1971) book on internal
labor markets.

                                                  5
reflecting some relationship-specific value (such as specific human capital, union contracts, or

implicit lifetime incentive contracts), and that some exogenous shock changes the optimal

structure of the lifetime wage profile. Because all firms are identical, all firms will change their

profiles in exactly the same way so that wages at any given job will move in parallel. Yet an

internal labor market exists in that if a worker were to leave his current firm, he would not be

able to receive the same wage at a new firm because it is only his initial firm that has an implicit

contract to repay him for the loan that he has already given to that firm.

       Figure 1 summarizes how the following analysis of hiring and wages identifies the level

of labor market fluidity. To the extent that evidence can be provided on both the common

movement of wages and the patterns of hiring and internal promotion, light can be shed on the

prevalence of spot or internal labor markets. If both wage movement is largely firm-specific and

if more senior workers are primarily promoted from within, or if neither of these conditions

holds, then firm conclusions can be drawn. The combination that results in the upper right

corner, where wages move together but slots at the top of the firm are filled from within, rules

out neither internal labor markets nor external labor markets. The lower left corner is

inconsistent with both because internal labor markets require that most high level positions are

filled from inside and external labor markets requires that wages move together.

       Prior economic studies of how firm hierarchies evolve and of the relationship between

firm and market wages have been limited by the lack of data with detailed information on the

entire structure of firms. While hierarchies of individual firms have been analyzed, it is unclear

how well the patterns observed in these studies generalize to the large set of firms in the




                                                  6
economy.4 The following empirical analysis addresses both dimensions of Figure 1, using data

that cover almost all white-collar workers at a group of firms that account for about 40% of the

Swedish labor market during the 1970s and 1980s.5 It appears that the labor market is in large

part competitive. Although most firms fill most high level positions from inside, almost all firms

engage in a significant amount of outside hiring, even at the highest levels of the firm.

Additionally, the analysis of wage movements is most consistent with a competitive labor

market, where wages for given jobs largely move together.



                                    II. Theoretical Background

       The simplest view of the labor market is one where all human capital is general. Then

mobility could occur at every level of the firm’s hierarchy and wages could reflect productivity. For

example, though some universities have a comparative advantage in training assistant professors,

those schools need not retain all their trainees. When assistant professors have acquired the requisite

knowledge, they move to other universities and enter as associate or full professors. Human capital

in academics, particularly at the research end, is general, so movement into jobs even at high levels

seems natural. Long-term contracts are unnecessary and in fact have no role in this purest form.

External labor markets allocate labor perfectly, and there is no reason, save mobility costs, for there



       4
         See Lazear (1992) and Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstrom (1994) for economic studies of
private sector firms. See Barnett, Baron, and Stuart (2000) for a study of a large government
bureaucracy.
       5
        Gibbs, Ierulli, and Milgrom (2002) use the same data to study factors that drive
employees to move between levels, change firms, or change occupations. While both papers
study across-firm and within-firm transitions, this paper considers the hierarchies and sources of
workers from the firm’s perspective rather than focusing on the workers’ careers.

                                                  7
to be any permanent attachment to a firm.

       Many labor markets are not so simple, however, and a number of theories give rise to ports-

of-entry and to firms not needing to be perfectly responsive to market-wide wage changes. Although

some of these theories involve market power by one party, most involve situations of competition

at the hiring stage followed by the development of relationship-specific value.6

        A classic reason for internal labor markets is firm-specific human capital, which dates back

to Becker (1962). Once a worker acquires firm-specific human capital, his value inside the firm

deviates from that at other firms, which creates a situation of ex post bilateral monopoly.7 The firm

must offer new workers a competitive long-term contract, with a present value equal to the present

value of the worker’s value to the firm. At any point in time after the start of the contract, the present

value of the remaining wages must equal or exceed the present value of the alternative wages

obtainable. But there is no need for the firm to fully adjust workers’ wages exactly to current market

rates once those workers have developed firm-specific human capital.

        The theory of firm-specific human capital also provides a coherent story that might allow

for ports-of-entry. If high level jobs in the firm require more firm-specific knowledge than low level

ones, there is no way to acquire firm-specific knowledge other than spending time in the firm.

Workers are hired in at low levels and move up the hierarchy as they acquire skills.8

        6
         One widely analyzed theory of labor market power is monopsony, which can arise from
search, geographical lock in, or other causes. Though this is probably important in certain market
segments, it seems unlikely to permeate the entire national labor market studied here. For a
detailed analysis and summary of monopsony, see Manning (2003).
        7
       Lazear (2003) offers another approach to firm-specific human capital that is based solely
on general skills that are transferable across firms.
        8
        Note that, while firm-specific human capital could lead to entry into certain jobs, the
theory actually does not require that employees change job titles or levels.

                                                    8
       Another reason for long-term labor contracts where wages at a point in time deviate from

outside opportunities is incentives. One version of this idea is the upward sloping experience-

earnings profile (Lazear 1979), where deferred earnings provide workers with incentives to put forth

effort over their careers. Firms receive their surplus early in the career by paying workers less than

they are worth and pay workers back later in the career by paying them more than they are worth.

Once again, there is a deviation between wage and alternatives even though, over the worklife, the

present value of earnings equals the present value of productivity.

       A related idea, and one that can lead to both ports-of-entry and deviations between internal

and market wages, is tournaments (see Lazear and Rosen, 1981.) In tournament theory, jobs are

defined as wage slots. An individual enters the firm at one job level and is promoted to another if

he wins the tournament. Losers remain in the same job. There is no necessity that tasks differ in

the two jobs. In fact, most of tournament theory makes little mention of tasks.9 Promotions to

higher levels serve to motivate workers, so it is necessary that some workers come in at lower levels.

The model taken literally implies that the top level of the firm can only have workers who are

promoted because it serves no role other than to motivate those one level below. Although the

market is competitive, there is no direct connection between wage and worker output.

       Worker-firm matching provides another framework in which worker wages can deviate ex

post from market wage offers. In Jovanovic (1979), the productivity of any worker/firm pair (or

“match”) is idiosyncratic. If a match is sufficiently good, the worker is worth more to the current

firm than to outsiders and bilateral monopoly exists as the result of rents. Again, worker wages can




       9
        One exception is Gibbs (1995), who looks at tournaments that perform a sorting role.

                                                  9
deviate from market alternatives.10

       Pure search offers yet another reason. If there is a distribution of wages that exists purely as

a result of search costs, then some workers who are fortunate to find a firm that pays high wages will

not automatically have attractive alternative wage offers.11 The search model and the matching

model neither require nor preclude ports-of-entry.

       Finally, purely institutional factors can create wedges. A union that negotiates high wages

might create an environment where workers cannot readily obtain alternative employment at the

same wage. Alternatively, suppose workers are perfect substitutes for one another and that they rise

within organizations based only on seniority, nepotism, influence, and discrimination. Thus, all

workers must come in at the bottom and acquire promotions by working the system for a long

enough period of time. In such a world, wages need not move very closely with market wages and

firms will have specific ports-of-entry. Note, however that this view allows little role for markets

and mobility. Firms that run their businesses in an arbitrary fashion can be supplanted by those that

behave more rationally. Only when firms (rather than just their workers) are very insulated from

market forces could such a system persist.



                                           III. The Data

       In much of the analysis that follows, the focus is on a “job” or occupation. In order to study



       10
        There are a number of variants on this model. Waldman (1984) is a well-known
example that focuses on the importance of private information.
       11
         Alternatively, employer search costs can create differences between wages paid by a
given firm and the external labor market wage needed to hire a worker. See Lindbeck and
Snower (1986).

                                                 10
transitions between similar jobs at multiple firms or to determine how market-wide wages for a job

affect the wage for that job at an individual firm, it is necessary to have very detailed and consistent

data on jobs across a large sample of firms. While data of this sort do not exist for the United States,

there are a number of matched employer-employee datasets from European countries.12 The data in

this study come from Sweden. The data were collected and provided by the Swedish Employers’

Confederation (SAF).13 The SAF assembles very detailed and uniform data from establishment-

level personnel records. The firms span virtually every private sector industry (with the exception

of financial services). This study uses the SAF data for white-collar employees. In any given firm,

the data includes all white-collar workers, with the exception of the CEO and other members of the

executive team who negotiate their own wages rather than letting a union negotiate on their behalf.

Years of coverage are 1970-1990, inclusive. During that time, the data were used in annual wage

negotiations and were monitored by SAF and the relevant labor unions. Therefore, data quality is

very high and is likely to be much more accurate than standard surveys that rely on self-reported

wages.

         The dataset’s firm and establishment characteristics include industry code, number of

employees, and region. Individual data include wage, age, gender, and a detailed occupation code.

The wage measure used in this study is base wage and refers to the normal pay for a 38-hour work



         12
         The Census Bureau has been engaged in an ambitious project to develop matched
employer-employee matched data. This data has been used in numerous studies (see, for
example, Abowd, Haltiwanger, Lane, and Sandusky, 2001) and has several features not generally
available in the European datasets. However, there is no detailed information on jobs so it is
impossible to examine the wage structure or promotion paths within firms.
         13
         This data description borrows liberally from Meyersson Milgrom, Petersen, and
Snartland (2001). See that paper for further details about the SAF data.

                                                  11
week.

        The occupation code, which is part of the Swedish occupational coding system and is known

as the “BNT” code, is a four-digit number that can be thought of as the person’s job title or “job.”

The first three digits of the occupation code, which is referred to as an “occupation family”

throughout this paper, determine the type of work the person does. There are 51 unique white-collar

occupation families.

        The fourth digit of the occupation code, which is referred to as “level” throughout this

analysis, is a single digit that indicates the individual’s degree of responsibility and skill. In the

analysis that follows, “level” can take a value between 1 (lowest level) and 7 (highest level). In some

of the analysis, some of the levels are combined, but levels are always normalized so that the lowest

level at any given firm is one. Not all occupation families have seven levels, so the 51 occupation

families have a total of 285 occupation/level combinations.

        Figure 2 shows the distribution of workers among these levels, as of 1988, at those firms that

have at least six of the possible seven levels. The bottom level is not the largest level. Rather, the

bottom few levels are quite small. As will be shown below, most employees skip the bottom levels.

Furthermore, there is no single level that serves as a port of entry. There are many different entry

and promotion paths that exist in Swedish firms. Figure 3 shows the distribution of wages in 1988

for the sample as a whole and Figure 4 shows the distribution at the largest firm (which is fairly

typical.) This distribution looks similar to the distribution of levels because, not surprisingly, wages

and levels are correlated. It is worth noting that wages and levels are far from perfectly correlated.

Levels are determined by tasks, not by pay. However, redefining job levels to be pay levels would

not materially affect the conclusions drawn below. Patterns in entry and movement among the wage


                                                  12
distribution are similar to those across levels.

       The exact tasks associated with each level for any given occupation are documented in

significant detail and, to the degree possible, are applied consistently across firms. Unions and the

SAF oversee this classification. Because the data are used in wage negotiations, both sides have an

incentive to insure the integrity and comparability of the classifications.

       These data have the advantage of covering many years and many different sizes of

companies. While that allows relatively general conclusions, it also presents numerous challenges.

First, not all firms have workers at each level and, even at those that do, some of the firm/level

observations are quite small. As a result, for some of the analysis, firms will be separated by the

number of levels represented at the firm. In other parts, analysis will focus only on firms with some

employees at one or both of the two highest levels and one or both of the two lowest levels. Finally,

when sizeable firm/job groups are necessary, only the 100 largest firms in the data are examined.

       A second challenge is that, as a result of changes of ownership, data entry problems, or other

causes, there appear to be some false transitions in the data. For example, there are cases where a

firm with many employees is in the data in year t but not year t + 1. In year t + 1, another firm with

largely the same individual workers appears in the data for the first time or a firm that has been in

operation for several years before year t adds most of the employees from the firm that disappeared.

In an attempt to maximize the length over which individual workers are followed and to minimize

miscoded turnover, a variable called “family” is generated. Any two firms where more than half the

workers from one firm appear at the other firm in the next year are treated as being part of the same

family. If firms x and y and firm y and z are in the same families, a family is created including all

three of these firms and any other firm that has a family relationship with any individual firm.


                                                   13
       Finally, though up to twenty-one years of data are available for each firm, a significant

portion of the job observations are censored on one side or the other. In some of the analysis, the

level at which a person entered the firm for which he works is important. This information is not

available with certainty for many of the jobs observed. When relevant, the implications of this

censoring are considered in the discussion of the results.



                            IV. Empirical Analysis of Ports-of-Entry



A. Entry Level and Promotion

       The first analysis considers the fraction of workers in a given level (as of 1988) at a given

firm who moved to that level from a different level in the same firm. This analysis includes all

workers and all firms. There are seven possible levels, but not all firms have employees at each

level. Each column in Panel A of Table 1 corresponds to firms that, as of 1988, had each number

of levels. In this table, levels are defined by the “BNT code” in the SFA data, as described above.

One problem presented by the BNT code levels, however, is that they are not necessarily comparable

across occupation families. That is, a level 2 job in one occupation could actually pay more and have

more responsibility than a level 3 job in another occupation. As a result, this table will make it

appear that demotions are more likely than they actually are. To insure that this comparability issue

does not affect our conclusions, an alternative definition of level is used in Panel B of the table, as

described below.

       Panel A is based on employees’ 1988 level. The table shows how frequently employees had

previously been at a different level with this same employer. Employees who were already working


                                                  14
in their current level when the firm first enters the dataset are dropped because how they transitioned

into their 1988 positions cannot be determined unambiguously.

        Panel A of Table 1 makes it clear that the rate of external hiring relative to internal hiring

decreases monotonically at higher levels. For example, in firms with six or seven levels, over 80%

of employees in the top three levels moved to their current level from another level in the same firm.

A third or fewer of employees moved into their position internally at low levels of the organization,

however.

        Panel B of Table 1 uses an alternative approach to perform the same analysis. Level is

defined using “Job/Wage Levels.” These were determined by calculating the average wage of the

285 BNT codes in 1988 and dividing the codes into five quintiles based on these averages. Job/Wage

Level 1 jobs are those in the lowest quintile of average wages, Job/Wage Level 2 jobs are in the

second lowest quintile, etc. As in Panel A, the levels displayed in the table are actually level relative

to the lowest level at the firm. 3,568 of the firms in the sample employ workers that all fit into one

of these Job/Wage Levels. However, nearly 40% of the workers at these firms previously held a

position in another Job/Wage Level at their 1988 employer.

        Though the definition of level in Panel B is very different from the definition in Panel A, the

conclusions are almost identical. At higher levels, the firm is more likely to fill positions internally.

However, at all Job/Wage Levels, a large set of employees are hired externally.

        Table 1 provides evidence that there are large differences in inside and outside hiring by

level. The lower levels in the typical firm are much more likely to hire from the outside; the upper

levels are more likely to hire from within. This is consistent with the notion that there are ports-of-

entry into the firm. Note, however, that even at the very high levels, a significant fraction of workers


                                                   15
are hired from the outside. In firms with the most levels (which hire the fewest from the outside at

top levels), approximately 12-15% of those in the highest level were hired directly from outside the

firm.

        As shown in Figure 2, the fourth level from the top - and not the bottom level - is the largest

in terms of number of employees in both 6 and 7 level firms. Still, a relatively large proportion of

the workers in this modal position come in through promotion. (Note that 65% are hired into the

modal position internally.) Thus, it appears that the middle levels are almost absorbing states; most

workers either get hired directly into these levels and stay there or get promoted from lower levels

to the middle levels and rarely move beyond.

        While Table 1 examines whether employees move into each level internally or externally,

Table 2 looks at where workers start in the firm relative to where they are at a given point in time.

To maximize the number of firms included in this analysis, the top two levels are combined and the

bottom two levels are combined. Firms that do not have workers in both the top and bottom

(combined) levels are dropped.

        The second and third columns of Table 2 report the median and mean ratio of the number

hired into a level to the number in that level, where the unit of observation is a level within a firm.

Thus, the median is the ratio of the 50th percentile firm ranked by (# hired into level) / (# in level in

1988). For example, at level 4, a median of .50 is reported. This implies that in the median firm,

half as many workers were hired into level 4 as are currently found in level 4. The numbers are

higher at lower levels where more are hired in, relative to those who are still at that level. The fourth

column reports the number of firms in the sample at each level. The fifth column is the number in

the level at each firm, averaged across all firms. “Cum. hired” is the number hired in that level or


                                                   16
below. “Cum. in level” is the total number in that level or below. The last two columns are the

same values expressed as percentages, i.e., the cumulative distributions.

       The last two columns highlight the difference between entry level and current level. Fifty-

nine percent of the workers are hired in at one of the bottom two levels but only 31% worked in

those levels in 1988. The modal hiring level is 2 while the modal employment level is 3. At the

lowest level, the median firm has twice as many hired into level 1 as actually are employed at that

level. The highest level is almost the mirror image of the bottom with the median firm employing

2 ½ times as many at that level as it hired in at that level. In summary, many more work in the top

level than are hired into it and many more are hired into the bottom level than work in it.

       Table 3 displays three transition matrixes from entry level to 1988 level, focusing on the

same five levels as in Table 2. Panel A displays the source of workers in 1988, regardless of

changes in “occupation families”, while Panel B looks only at transitions of workers who move up

and down within a single occupation. Panel C focuses on employees with at least ten years of service

at their 1988 employer. Panels A and B lead to similar conclusions, so we focus our discussion on

Panel A. The longer tenure employees in Panel C generate slightly different conclusions, as

discussed below.

       Even for the highest level workers, more workers who are currently at level 5 entered at level

5 than at any other single level. Of course, those who definitely entered at level 5 comprise less than

a quarter of those at that level, but it is clear that despite the existence of lower level entry and




                                                  17
upward mobility, entry from outside the firm is reasonably common, even at the top levels of the

typical organization.14

        The summaries under each panel provide a sense of the overall pattern of entry and mobility.

They compute the number and proportion of individuals along the diagonal, in the lower triangle and

in the upper triangle of each matrix. Employees with unknown entry levels are excluded from this

calculation. First, 52% of the Panel A observations lie along the diagonal, which means that 52%

of the individuals in the typical firm are currently at the same level as they entered. It is striking that

46% are in the lower triangle, which means that 46% have been promoted at least one level. Only

2% lie in the upper triangle, implying demotion (often due to changing occupation). Thus, entry at

levels lower than those currently held is a very common pattern.

        The picture that emerges from Tables 2 and 3 is that most individuals at any given firm were

hired into lower or middle levels of the firm and did some advancing to higher levels. Almost 90%

of the typical firm’s workers were hired into levels 1, 2, or 3. About 85% work in those three levels

at any point in time. It is the middle levels of the firm that comprise most of the workforce. The

lowest level is relatively small.

        Even though disproportionately many are hired into the lowest levels, a substantial fraction

of the workforce makes its entry by being hired into the middle levels of the firm. The modal

worker entry/current combination in Table 3 is the 3,3 cell. The second biggest cell is the 2,2 cell.

The number who enter at 2 and are promoted to higher levels exceeds the number who are hired into



        14
          Strictly speaking, the current level is the modal entry level among those observations
where the entry level is known. Left censored observations are less likely to have entered in the
current level. As a result, at the highest levels, the current level may not be the true modal entry
level.

                                                    18
and remain at level 2. Thus, the most important levels in the typical firm in terms of number of

employees also happen to be ports-of-entry, accounting for most of the hiring. These levels are both

jumping off points and destination jobs for a large part of the workforce.

        Firms do not appear to have ports-of-entry in the standard sense. Most workers do not enter

at the bottom. For example, those who are currently in level 5 come in roughly even numbers from

levels 3, 4, and 5, but rarely from the two lowest levels. Those who are currently at level 4 are most

likely to have entered at level 3, then level 4. The general picture is that workers enter at or near the

position that they currently hold. While some of these workers may still be promoted at some point

in the future, Table 3 provides a picture of internal and external transition from the firm’s point of

view. For example, the (3,2) entry in the table, equal to 11,333, is large relative to the total in that

row. About two-fifths of the workers who are employed at level 3 in 1988 and for whom the entry

level is known entered at level 2. But it is also true that a slightly larger number (12,469) who

entered at level 2 are still at level 2. Although some may eventually move up to level 3, it is clear

that at a point in time, many workers remain at the level at which they were hired into the firm.

        It may not be sufficient, when looking at transitions within firms, to use the entire sample

of workers at any given point. Many workers have recently entered their firm and will not have been

promoted at this point, while many others will only work for their current firm briefly. In order to

focus on workers more likely to have moved within their current employer Panel C of Table 3 shows

the same analysis as Panels A and B, but limits the sample to workers who have been with the firm

for ten years or more. The picture changes somewhat, but the conclusions are remarkably similar.

There is still a significant portion of the workers along the diagonal. About one-third of the workers

remain in the job levels into which they were hired. A small fraction are demoted and almost two-


                                                   19
thirds of the workers have obtained at least one promotion during their time at the firm. Thus, entry

with promotion is the most common pattern, but a sizeable fraction are hired into the job that they

will hold, perhaps for their entire lives.15

        More can be understood by learning about the kinds of jobs that are represented by lowest

and middle levels. The appendix provides descriptions of typical jobs in the data by major

occupation. The occupation families are chosen to be among the largest numerically in the data.

In one occupation family (manufacturing), there are no level 1 jobs. In construction and marketing,

the lowest level jobs are for workers who do the most mundane tasks. For example, in construction,

a job that requires simple calculations regarding dimensions and materials is classified as level 3

(out of 7). Most white-collar workers in construction are likely to be required to do some of these

simple calculations, which means that firms hire most of their basic white-collar workers into levels

3 or higher.       But the relationship is far from obvious because in both manufacturing and

construction, any worker at level 3 or above is required to have a number of subordinates, which

would suggest that there would be more below than at this level. Part of this may have to do with

the data being restricted to white-collar workers. In manufacturing in particular, the subordinates

might be blue-collar workers who do not show up in these data and therefore make the bottom of

the hierarchy appear narrower than it is.

        Table 4 reports time in job. This is defined as number of years an employee stays in a

particular job (that is, 4-digit BNT code.) Employees who get promoted up a level, change

occupation families, or change firms are defined to be taking a new job. Note that, because of the

nature of the data, this is reported separately for jobs that start and end within the time the firm is


        15
             One change is that in levels 4 and 5, the modal level of hiring is now level 3.

                                                    20
in the sample (“uncensored”), jobs that end during the sample but were already in progress when

the firm first enters the sample (“left censored”), jobs that begin during the sample but are still in

progress when the firm leaves the sample (“right censored”), and jobs that are censored on both

sides.

         Table 4 demonstrates that the lowest levels in the firm tend to have the shortest job tenures.16

Low level jobs are common entry points, but they are also common exit points. Note that the average

tenure (uncensored) in level 1 jobs is about half that in level 5 jobs. The same pattern holds, but to

a lesser extent in the censored data. So workers do not spend much time in low level jobs. At least

on average, they move to higher level jobs in the firm or they leave the firm.

         The more interesting and perhaps surprising finding in Table 4 is that job tenure becomes

fairly constant above the lowest two levels. Average job tenures do not differ much among the top

three levels. Job tenure increases slightly at each increasing level until the highest level, when it

drops slightly. This suggests that many employees have long spells in middle levels of the typical

firm. It does not appear that firms are enforcing “up or out” policies, nor that employees who do not

get promoted regularly leave to seek better opportunities. Rather, it seems many workers settle into

a long spell in middle and upper-middle levels. This is more evidence that middle levels of the firm

act as semi-absorbing states.

         While Table 4 provides a sense of how often transitions take place, Table 5 breaks those

transitions down into internal and external movement. The table reports average entry rates to and



         16
          Many previous papers equate the term “tenure” with time spent at a given company.
Here “job tenure” is defined as tenure in a job (that is, occupation family-level combination) at a
single firm. An employment spell at a single employer can be made up of several jobs, each with
its own job tenure.

                                                   21
exit rates from a given firm/job. As in Tables 3 and 4, the top two levels are combined and the

bottom two levels are combined. Also, the sample is restricted to firms that have employees in the

top and bottom of the five possible levels.

       Panel A of Table 5 analyzes the entire sample. Each person/year is an observation. For

example, of all the individuals in level 3 as of year t, 10.03% worked in a different firm in year t -

1 and 13.03% worked at another job in the same firm in year t - 1. Also, 8.79% of the workers in

level 3 as of year t worked at another firm in year t + 1 and 10.75% worked in a different job at the

same firm in year t + 1.

       At lower levels of the typical firm, external entry is common while internal entry is not. At

high levels, there is much less external entry. Similarly, it is very common for employees at the

lowest levels to move to another job within the firm. This internal exit becomes less common at each

increasing level within the firm.

       The pattern in external exit is interesting and somewhat surprising. Leaving the firm is less

common at the first few movements up in levels. However, only the levels 1 and 2 difference in

external entry is meaningful, as turnover is about one-fourth less common for level 2 workers than

for level 1 workers. Turnover is fairly stable for level 3 and 4 workers, relative to level 2. However,

workers at the top level are actually significantly more likely to leave their firm than workers at any

level other than the bottom. Combined with the results for level 5 in Table 4, it appears that the top

levels of the white-collar Swedish labor market are somewhat more fluid than middle levels.

       Panel B of Table 5 limits the analysis to employees between the ages of 40 and 45. For this

older set of workers, the patterns are quite similar to those for the larger group. External exit rates

are lower than for the bigger sample, but at least 6% leave the typical firm at every level. Even for


                                                  22
these workers who are more likely to have found stable matches, turnover is higher at the highest

level of the firm. Again, there appears to be a fairly robust market for senior managers.

        One possible contributor to the exit rate patterns in Table 5 is documented by Holmlund and

Storrie (2002). They show that there has been an upward trend in the use of temporary workers in

Sweden in recent years. This is unlikely to be driving the results in Table 5 because, as Holmlund

and Storrie (2002) show, the bulk of the increase in temporary workers came in the 1990s. Thus,

temporary workers were not as important in the period studied here. However, to insure temporary

workers are not dominating the exit rates in Table 5, the analysis was redone using only employees

who had been at their firms at least three years. The exit rates are about one percentage point lower

for both external and internal exits at each level and the conclusions are qualitatively similar. Were

entry and exit rate analyses, such as those in table 5 repeated for the 1990s, it is possible that

conclusions would be modified somewhat because of the growth of temporary employment. But

the existence of temporary worker does not seem to drive the results here.

        Summarizing, the middle levels of the typical firm account for most white-collar workers

and the most white-collar hiring. There is a tendency for workers to be hired in at lower levels than

they end up. There are ports of entry in that people tend to enter at different levels than they end up,

but the extreme version of internal labor markets story does not seem to hold. A substantial fraction

of workers are not hired in at the bottom, but rather at positions close to the ones they currently hold.



B. Disaggregation of Firms

        Up to this point, the data has been analyzed as if it all came from one large firm. The reality

is that these data represent as many as 7,267 firms. Now consider how the patterns documented so


                                                   23
far vary across firms in the sample. Differences in firm size naturally generate some heterogeneity,

but the rest of this section looks at heterogeneity in ports-of-entry across reasonably similar firms.

The 100 firms (as of 1988) with the most employees in the sample are considered, conditional on

the firm having employees at all five of the levels analyzed in Table 3.

        It is possible to get at the issue using analysis of variance. Let the dependent variable be the

internal hiring rate and let the unit of analysis be the job within the firm. In the sample of the 100

largest firms, each having five levels, up to 51 occupation families, and up to 252 jobs, there are

6,306 observations for this regression. How much of the variation in the internal hiring rate is due

to jobs, occupation, and level and how much is due to firm fixed effects?

        Panel A of Table 6 starts with a regression that includes firm and job indicator variables.

Both the collection of firm fixed effects and the group of job indicators are significant as a group.

That is, the hypothesis that these 100 firms have the same tendency to hire from within can be

rejected, as can the hypothesis that the internal hiring rates are the same at each job in the typical

firm. However, the job fixed effects are far more powerful than the firm fixed effects. The majority

of job fixed effects are statistically different from the median job fixed effect, while only fifteen of

the firm fixed effects are statistically significant.

        Panel B of the table shows that just these five levels are responsible for much of the

explanatory power of jobs. Firm, occupation family, and level fixed effects are each jointly

significant, but the five level indicators explain more of the across job variation in internal entry

rates than the combination of occupation and firm.

        There are examples of firms that have particularly strong promote-from-within tendencies.

For example, 21 of the 100 firms source at least 50% of workers in each of levels 2 through 5 from


                                                   24
another level in the firm. Eight of the 100 get at least 60% of their workers internally at each of these

levels, while only one firm gets at least 75% internally at each of these levels. In terms of firms

showing a strong tendency to hire externally, only one firm hired fewer than 50% of its workers at

every level from another level internally.

        In general, while there are differences across firms, the primary influence is the level. Low

levels have significant amounts of external hiring and high levels are dominated by promotion from

within. Tables 1, 2, and 3 suggest that the use of promote-from-within policies are the rule among

most firms and at some firms, these human resource policies dominate the hiring and promotion

process. However, all the tables discussed thus far make it clear that most firms also show at least

some willingness to fill positions at all levels externally.



C. Discussion

        The data are inconsistent with the caricature version of ports-of-entry. It is clear that in the

typical firm, workers are hired from outside at virtually every level. Even among the most extreme

firms in terms of internal hiring, it can be said that external hiring is significant. For example, even

at the highest levels, the typical large firm hires an average of 15% of its workers from the outside.

But it is also true that hiring from the outside is much rarer at the top of the firm than at the bottom.

The corresponding portion of those hired from the outside at level 2 is nearly seventy percent. In

firms of all types (in terms of total number of levels) shown in Table 1, the pattern is the same.

There is plenty of internal job filling, especially at the top of the firm, but even at the very top, every

type of firm category uses external hiring.

        The data also show that transition from lower to higher levels is common in most firms.


                                                    25
Table 3 shows that almost two-thirds of workers who have been with the firm at least ten years move

up at least one level from the level into which they were hired. Not surprisingly, entry at lower

levels with promotion to higher levels is a very common practice in the typical firm. But again, at

any point in time, a large number of workers are at the level into which they were hired. The

snapshot analysis in Table 3 shows that even at level 5, a larger number of employees were hired

into that level than into any other single level.

        In general, this labor market seems to provide enough mobility for a substantial amount of

competitive pressure, given that markets can be arbitraged with very little actual movement. The

findings are consistent with the tournament view of the labor market, especially as supplemented

by Chan (1996). Hiring into high levels of the firm is primarily from within. The higher level jobs

draw most of their talent from inside in order to provide appropriate incentives, but if there is a

sufficiently dominant outsider, firms hire into the position from the outside. Internal promotion is

preferred to external hiring because it provides better incentives for workers at lower levels in the

firm. If workers know that they must compete with a large pool of outsiders for a particular job,

their incentives are diluted because the chances that their increased effort can affect the probability

of winning against such a large pool of competitors are slight. If the pool is narrowed to insiders,

incentives are enriched. Occasionally, however, insiders are so dominated by an outsider that it pays

to hire the outsider over promoting the insiders even at the cost of diminished incentives. But such

cases should be relatively rare.      The pattern in the data seems consistent with this view.

Furthermore, if the value of effort is higher at the top of the hierarchy, providing incentives to high

level workers is especially important, which could explain why firms are reluctant to hire from the

outside at top levels.


                                                    26
       The data are also consistent with models of firms valuing a mix of firm-specific and general

human capital. Suppose that a significant fraction of human capital is firm-specific, which gives

insiders an edge over outsiders. Most promotion would be from within and this would be most true

at the top, where workers possess the greatest quantities of firm-specific human capital. But,

occasionally an outsider comes along who so dominates insiders that it is worth hiring him even

though he does not possess the firm-specific human capital of the incumbents. This interpretation,

however, may be inconsistent with the homogeneity in the promotion policies and the fact that

promotion-from-within policies are not highly correlated across levels within firms. That is, one

might expect that there are some firms where firm-specific human capital is very important and

others where it is not. In this case, the firm effects in Table 6 would be important, indicating that

firms that promote from within at one level also do so at other levels. The failure to find large firm

fixed effects in Table 6 somewhat undermines the human capital explanation for our findings.

       Given the amount of external hiring that occurs at every level, it would be somewhat

surprising to find that firms are insulated from market forces. If other firms are hiring even high-

level workers from outside, a firm would seem to be forced to meet market wages in order to retain

labor. The next section looks carefully at this issue of the relationship between individual wages

and market wages.



                 V. The Relationship Between “Internal” and Market Wages



A. Basic Structure of Wages and Wage Changes

       The simplest way to get a sense for the effect of internal labor markets on wages is to look


                                                 27
at how important firm effects are in a wage regression. Panel A of Table 7 presents results of an

analysis of variance of wages on firm, occupation, region and year indicator variables. The sample

is the white collar workers at the 100 largest firms in the SAF sample (as of 1988) and an

observation is a person/year between 1984 and 1990. The dependent variable is log wages and

explanatory variables include firm indicators, job indicators (where a job is defined to be a unique

BNT code), 25 region indicators, and year indicator variables. Including firm and job effects leads

to explaining a much higher proportion (r-square = 82%) of the variation than in a typical wage

regression, even though the explanatory variables do not include demographic characteristics.

       Year and occupation account for the bulk of explanatory power. Although there are almost

three times as many occupation categories as firms, occupation accounts for almost 100 times as

much of the variance as firm and an even higher proportion than region. Jobs matter, therefore, in

a consistent way across the market. Wage levels are in large part dictated by occupation, at least in

the cross section. This finding is consistent with a spot labor market where wages are determined

by the market at the level of the job.

       The result is also consistent with centralized wage setting, where firms have no discretion

over wages paid once they have been centrally set. As long as firms were free to hire from the

outside, this would not be inconsistent with the view that firms buy in an external labor market,

albeit a wage-administered rather than competitive one. However, even this view is not quite

accurate. The ANOVA on wage levels shown above reveals that even holding detailed job constant,

the r-square is 82%, implying that 18% is left unexplained. Also, as shown below, there is important




                                                 28
short-term variation in wages by firm that does not reflect centralized wage bargaining.17

       However, collective agreements are clearly important because, though firm effects matter,

the explanatory power of the regression barely changes when firm effects are removed. The r-square

falls to 81.24%. Given that the job is the unit of negotiation in centralized wage bargaining, it seems

that firms exert some, but not a great deal of, discretion in setting wages, at least over the long run

where wage levels are effective. Below, it will be shown that firms do have significant discretion

in setting wages in the short run.

       Figure 5 provides a graphical representation of wage variation within occupations. The figure

shows kernel density estimates of 1988 wages for all workers in one of the largest occupation

families – construction. As the figures shows, there is some heterogeneity across levels in wages and

there is considerable overlap in the ranges of wages for each of the neighboring levels.

       The results for wage changes are different. Panel B of Table 7 reports the corresponding

analysis of variance for wage changes. Once again, time effects are key. There are high raise years

and low raise years. But now, firm effects become more important than occupation effects.

Apparently, over the short run, firms can adjust wages in ways that take into account their own

idiosyncratic situation. But over the long run, as reflected in wage levels, they must bring them into

line with other wages in the occupation in order to meet competitive pressure.

       In some sense, the result is obvious. Engineers are likely to earn significantly more than

secretaries even if both happen to have been in the same firm during the same period. The firm

effects that exert an influence on raises in the short run cannot be expected to alter the entire



       17
         “Wage drift,” as it is termed in Sweden, refers to wages that drift upward above the
level determined by centralized wage bargaining.

                                                  29
structure of wages in any significant sense. The basic pattern of occupational wage differences

would be expected to prevail, despite the short-run importance of firm effects.



B. Discussion

        As demonstrated by Figure 1, neither the results on wage determination nor the results on

entry taken independently are sufficient to draw definitive conclusions about the prevalence of

internal or external labor markets. But the evidence on both wages and internal and external hiring

patterns rules out pure internal labor markets. There is significant outside hiring at higher levels in

the typical firm and there is clearly co-movement of wages, as reflected in the ANOVA results.

There is considerable promotion and filling of jobs at higher levels from within. Internal mobility

plays a significant role in filling higher level jobs in all firms. However, a non-trivial fraction of

workers are hired from the outside even at the highest levels in the typical firm. Furthermore, there

is no evidence of a unique pattern of entry and movement within firms. Most workers who end up

at relatively high levels in the firm were hired in at a high level. Those workers who are hired in at

very low levels of the firm do not account for the bulk of workers at the higher level of the typical

firm.

        Wages do exhibit significant co-movement within occupation. Although there are important

firm-specific variations in the size of raises from one year to the next, the wage level regressions

imply that adjustment over the longer term results in wages that are very much in line with an

external labor market. This evidence is also consistent with a market that is disciplined by external

forces (at least over the long run). In the shorter term, it appears that firms have some discretion

over wage setting.


                                                  30
C. Entry and Exit Rates

       Most of the discussion has been in terms of firms being able to hire from the outside. To the

extent that firms hire from the outside, then it would appear that workers can obtain jobs even at

high levels in other firms. Although this may not be as common as obtaining a high level job in

one’s own firm, the fact that hiring from the outside is common means that there is pressure on the

a worker’s current firm to keep pace with the market in order to retain workers.

       Another constraint may be the ability of firms to fire workers. This also creates a deviation

from what is normally thought of as a functioning external labor market. Were firms prevented from

firing workers, there would be less hiring from the outside and the workers would be somewhat

insulated from the market. This does not imply that their wages would be protected. It is the

coupling of job protection with wage protection that creates the problem for employers because

allowing employers sufficient discretion over wages would be tantamount to allowing them to

terminate their workers. By offering a low enough wage, the worker could be induced to quit.

       Given the centralized bargaining and importance of job effects discussed above, it is likely

that employers do not have such discretion over workers’ wages. It is therefore instructive to look

at generalized labor turnover.

       Table 5 provides results that speak to this issue. First note from panel A that almost 12% of

the jobs that exist in any given year in the typical firm are held by individuals who were not

employed by that firm last year. Thus, the typical firm is hiring in about 12% of its labor needs every

year. Furthermore, even at the highest levels of the firm, almost 7% are hired in from the outside.

These facts suggest that workers do indeed have somewhere to go; they are not locked into their


                                                  31
current firms. Second, the fact that 12% are hired from the outside implies that the firm must resort

to an external labor market for a significant fraction of its employees.

        Separation rates are also significant at the typical firm. Although these data do not allow us

to distinguish between quits and layoffs, Table 5 does reveal that over 9% of the typical firms’

workers leave each year. Although this number is lower than that of some other countries’ labor

markets, it does, coupled with hiring numbers, suggest that mobility into and out of firms is

substantial, even in a highly centralized labor market as Sweden’s.



                                           VI. Conclusion

        The results on both mobility and wage setting suggest that at least over the long run, external

labor market wage setting is an important force in Swedish labor markets. Although there is much

promotion and job filling especially at high levels from within, there is significant hiring from the

outside at all levels of the typical firm’s hierarchy.

        Furthermore, wage levels seemed to be accounted for primarily by occupation, especially

level of the job, and time. Idiosyncratic firm-based wage movements are important over the short-

run, but in the longer term, occupation is a more important determinant of wages, suggesting that

firms are disciplined to a large degree by the external labor market in their wage setting.

        The results in no way imply that labor markets in Sweden are efficient and undistorted. The

fact that firms must compete with each other for labor does not mean that centralized wage setting

and other institutional factors do not play an important role in labor markets, perhaps distorting

behavior significantly. The evidence that is presented in this paper sheds no light on this more

fundamental question.


                                                  32
                                          References

Abowd, John M., John Haltiwanger, Julia Lane, and Kristin Sandusky.“Within and Between Firm
     Changes in Human Capital, Technology, and Productivity.” Manuscript, 2001.
Baker, George, Michael Gibbs, and Bengt Holmstrom. 1994. “The Internal Economics of the Firm:
       Evidence From Personnel Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 881-919.
Barnett, William P., James N. Baron, and Toby E. Stuart. 2000. “Avenues of Attainment:
       Occupational Demography and Organizational Careers in the California Public Service.”
       American Journal of Sociology 106, 88-144.
Becker, Gary S. 1962. “Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis.” Journal of Political
       Economy 70, 9-49.
Chan, William. 1996. “External Recruitment versus Internal Promotion.” Journal of Labor
      Economics 14, 555-570.
Doeringer, Peter, and Michael Piore. 1971. Internal Labor Markets and Manpower Analysis.
      Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath and Company.
Gibbs, Michael. 1995. “Incentive Compensation in a Corporate Hierarchy.” Journal of Accounting
       and Economics 19, 247-277.
Gibbs, Michael, Kathryn Ierulli and Eva M. Meyersson Milgrom. “Occupational Labor Markets.”
       Manuscript, 2002.
Hall, Robert E. 1982. “The Importance of Lifetime Jobs in the U.S. Economy.'' American Economic
        Review 72, 716-24
Holmlund, Bertil and Donald Storrie. 2002. “Temporary Work in Turbulent Times: The Swedish
      Experience.” Economic Journal 112, F245-F269.
.Jovanovic, Boyan. 1979. “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover.” Journal of Political Economy
       87, 1246-60.
Lazear, Edward P. 1979. “Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy 87,
       1261-1284.
Lazear, Edward P. 1992. The Job as a Concept.” In William J. Bruns, ed. Performance
       Measurement, Evaluation, and Incentives. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Lazear, Edward P. 2003. “Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skills-Weight Approach.” Cambridge,
       MA: NBER Working Paper #9679.
Lazear, Edward P. and Sherwin Rosen. 1981. “Rank-order Tournaments as Optimum Labor
       Contracts.” Journal of Political Economy 89, 841-864.
Lindbeck, Assar, and Snower, Dennis J. 1986. “Wage Setting, Unemployment, and Insider-Outsider
      Relations.” American Economic Review 76, 235-39.
Manning, Alan. 2003. Monopsony in Motion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Meyersson Milgrom, Eva M., Trond Petersen, and Vemond Snartland. 2001. “Equal Pay for Equal

                                               33
       Work? Evidence from Sweden and a Comparison with Norway and the U.S.” Scandinavian
       Journal of Economics 103, 559-583.
Reder, Melvin. 1995. “Theory of Occupational Wage Differentials.” American Economic Review
       45, 833-852.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1974. “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure
       Competition.” Journal of Political Economy 82, 34-55.
Smith, Adam. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.
Waldman, Michael. 1984. “Job Assignments, Signalling, and Efficiency.” RAND Journal of
     Economics 15, 255-267.




                                             34
                                          Table 1

           Panel A: Proportion in a Level who Moved into that Level Internally


              Total # of Levels
Level                  1        2        3         4            5        6        7
             1 32.00% 29.83%        29.57%    27.01%       23.85%   25.54%   24.19%
             2            51.81%    54.14%    50.75%       41.81%   35.83%   32.08%
             3                      67.21%    68.55%       65.47%   64.72%   33.78%
             4                                76.10%       79.96%   80.38%   65.25%
             5                                             79.65%   86.33%   84.11%
             6                                                      86.90%   85.46%
             7                                                               85.19%

Sample Sizes
Level                 1         2         3            4        5        6        7
            1     3,019     2,665     3,534        2,888    2,210    1,163      215
            2               2,239     4,010        6,414    7,000    6,300    1,275
            3                         2,461        4,839    9,295   14,486    7,036
            4                                      2,247    4,397   12,445   16,315
            5                                               1,676    5,075   10,044
            6                                                        1,389    3,094
            7                                                                   648

# firms           2,086     1,461     1,464        1,124      699      331      102

Employee levels and the number of levels in firm based on 1988. Employees whose 1988 level is
the same as their level when the firm first enters the dataset are dropped.




                                              35
                                               Table 1

        Panel B: Proportion in a Job/Wage Level who Moved into that Level Internally




               Total # of Job/Wage Levels
Job/Wage                1       2         3                4         5

Level
              1   39.87%     40.41%     38.48%     35.80%       42.49%
              2              56.88%     57.01%     54.92%       51.21%
              3                         70.81%     73.63%       74.10%
              4                                    80.79%       88.02%
              5                                                 88.49%

Sample Sizes
Job/Wage                 1          2          3           4         5

Level
              1     3,737      3,180      3,966         3,008    5,396
              2                2,421      4,392         7,134   22,105
              3                           2,580         4,798   45,416
              4                                         2,186   28,213
              5                                                  9,705

# firms             3,568      1,708      1,444          957       722


“Job/Wage Level” is defined by taking the average wage of all employees in a given job as of 1988
and then dividing these jobs into five quintiles based on this average wage. “Job/Wage level” of 1
indicates the job is in the bottom quintile of average wages, 2 is the second quintile, etc. Proportion
in top part of table is the proportion of people in a Job/Wage Level as of 1988 whose first job at their
1988 employer was in a different Job/Wage Level. Employees for whom it is not clear if their 1988
job was their first at a given employer were dropped.




                                                   36
                                             Table 2

               Ratio of Number Hired Into Level to Number Currently In Level

                              Firm/level     Total      Total   Cum      Cum    Cum        Cum
Level        Median Mean      cells Avg/cell Hired         in   Hired    Empl Hire %      Employ
                                                        Level                                  %
         1     2.00    2.96    512      7.83 10,582     4,010   10,582    4,010   0.175     0.066
         2     1.29    1.60    492     30.54 25,096    15,028   35,678   19,038   0.589     0.314
         3     0.76    0.83    493     50.31 18,270    24,805   53,948   43,843   0.890     0.723
         4     0.50    0.56    451     27.22 5,014     12,277   58,962   56,120   0.973     0.926
         5     0.40    0.46    512      8.78 1,651      4,493   60,613   60,613   1.000     1.000

    Total      0.95    1.30   2460     24.64 60,613 60,613

Sample is limited to employees for whom their job when they first began working for their 1988
employer is available. Those 42% of the 1988 sample employees who were hired before their
firm enters the sample are dropped. The two highest levels are combined into level 5 and the two
lowest into level 1. Firms that did not have employees at both levels 1 and 5 in 1988 are
dropped. “Median” is the median across all firms at a given level of (# employees currently at
the firm who started at the firm in that level)/(# in the level at the firm in 1988). “Mean” is the
average across all firms of this same ratio.




                                                37
                                          Table 3

                                Entry Level by Current Level

Panel A: All employees, level changes only

                                Entry Level
1988 Level             1        2        3              4           5 Unknown     Total
             1     4,257      325       31              0           0    1,626    6,239
             2     4,006   12,469      519             35           2    7,868   24,899
             3     2,852   11,333 12,987              336          26   18,941   46,475
             4       703    3,183    5,358          3,832         167   14,503   27,746
             5       102      510    1,247          1,275       1,583    5,989   10,706

         Total    11,920   27,820     20,142        5,478       1,778   48,927 116,065

Summary: Lower triangle, 45.5%; Diagonal, 52.3%, Upper triangle, 2.1%


Panel B: All employees, level and occupation changes

                           Entry Level
1988 Level        1         2      3                4       5 Unknown Different       Total
                                                                       Occupat.
         1    3,548        99         2          0          0      698    1,892       6,239
         2    2,439    10,727       222         12          1    4,168    7,330      24,899
         3    1,384     7,788    10,827        152          6   10,217   16,101      46,475
         4      238     1,620     3,323      3,144         83    6,952   12,386      27,746
         5       20       189       569        748      1,271    2,495    5,414      10,706

     Total    7,629    20,423    14,943      4,056      1,361       24,530   43,123 116,065

Summary: Lower triangle, 37.8%; Diagonal, 61.0%, Upper triangle, 1.2%




                                               38
Table 3 (cont.)

Panel C: Employees with ten years or more service, level changes only

                             Entry Level
Current            1         2       3            4          5 Unknown         Total
Level
       1        835        161        16          0         0      1,150       2,162
       2      1,467      2,349       215         20         1      4,879       8,931
       3      1,562      3,916     2,160        138        17     12,286      20,079
       4        505      1,759     2,089        756        92     10,455      15,656
       5         83        348       789        602       465      4,625       6,912

    Total     4,452      8,533     5,269      1,516       575     33,395      53,740

Summary: Lower triangle, 64.5%; Diagonal, 32.3%, Upper triangle, 3.2%


Notes to all panels: The two highest levels are combined into level 5 and the two lowest into level
1. Firms that did not have employees at both levels 1 and 5 in 1988 are dropped.




                                                39
                                                Table 4

                                         Job Tenure by Level

                                                                                    Both Sides
            All Observ.    Uncensored    Left Censored Right Censored                Censored
Level       Mean    # obs Mean     # obs Mean     # obs Mean    # obs              Mean     # obs
        1    1.85 117,688 1.63 77,735 1.94 22,805 2.64 14,891                       3.02    2,257
        2    2.66 291,391 2.25 181,325 2.99 50,219 3.46 52,110                      4.79    7,737
        3    3.22 343,097 2.87 205,814 3.52 45,444 3.70 82,159                      5.40    9,680
        4    3.44 174,643 3.08 101,247 3.70 21,063 3.85 47,568                      5.90    4,765
        5    3.32 69,601 3.00 41,425 3.39         8,631 3.88 17,667                 4.85    1,878

  Total         2.94 996,420     2.56 607,546     3.12 148,162    3.61 214,395      5.07    26,317


Level             % right       % left
                     cens         cens
            1     14.57%       21.30%
            2     20.54%       19.89%
            3     26.77%       16.07%
            4     29.97%       14.79%
            5     28.08%       15.10%

    Total          24.16%      17.51%

Mean job tenure is average number of years in the specific job (that is, occupation/level
combination).

Censoring Methodology:
The two highest levels are combined into level 5 and the two lowest into level 1. Firms that did not
have employees at both levels 1 and 5 at some point while in the sample are dropped. An
observation is an individual spell of employment in one level at one firm. A job is “left censored”
if the employee was working in that job in the first year in which his firm was in the available
dataset. A job is “right censored” if the employee was working in that job in the last year in which
his firm was in the available dataset.




                                                  40
                                             Table 5

                            Job Entry and Job Exit Rates by Level

Panel A: Full Sample

              External Internal External Internal
Level         Entry    Entry    Exit     Exit     Observations
             1 22.45% 9.24% 12.29% 20.41%              276,102
             2 15.44% 9.95% 9.52% 14.83%               874,621
             3 10.03% 13.03% 8.79% 10.75%            1,179,978
             4 6.90% 15.47% 8.63% 9.37%                624,829
             5 6.72% 15.78% 10.49% 8.27%               245,274

        Total 11.72% 12.55%           9.39% 12.24%          3,200,804


Panel B: Employers between 40 and 45 Years Old

              External Internal External Internal
Level         Entry    Entry    Exit     Exit     Observations
             1 8.50% 9.82% 8.09% 12.96%                 86,785
             2 6.59% 7.73% 6.79% 9.89%                 333,454
             3 5.03% 9.23% 6.78% 8.07%                 525,140
             4 4.50% 10.73% 7.18% 7.93%                349,696
             5 5.10% 11.91% 9.53% 7.55%                172,344

        Total     5.47%     9.60%     7.28%      8.68%      1,467,419

An observation is a person/year. An observation is defined as an “external entry” if the person is
not working at the firm in year t and works at the firm in a given job in year t + 1. The other
entry and exit variables are defined similarly. The first and last year that any firm is in the
dataset is dropped from the sample.




                                                41
                                               Table 6

                         Analysis of Variance – Internal Entry Rate

Dependent Variable = Fraction of workers in a job at a firm that
moved to that job from another job at the same firm

Panel A: Firms and Jobs

 Type of Indicator           # of Indicators             Partial Sum of          P-value
                                                            Squares
 Firm                             100                        35.68                0.000
 Jobs                             252                       198.30                0.000
  Total                                                   753.31
Regression of internal movement rate for 6,306 firm/job combinations. R-square = 31.88%. Sample
includes white-collar workers at 100 largest firms in SAF dataset. An observation is a firm/job in
1988.


Panel B: Firms, Levels, and Occupation Groups

 Type of Indicator           # of Indicators             Partial Sum of          P-value

                                                            Squares
 Firm                             100                        36.51                0.000
 Occupation                        51                        40.55                0.000
 Level                              5                        85.26                0.000
  Total                                                   753.31
Regression of internal movement rate for 6,306 firm/job combinations. R-square = 23.86%. Sample
includes white-collar workers at 100 largest firms in SAF dataset. An observation is a firm/job in
1988.




                                                 42
                                            Table 7

                                     Analysis of Variance


Panel A: Wage Levels

Dependent Variable = Ln(wage)

 Type of Indicator                       # of Indicators                  # of Indicators
                                    (Partial Sum of Squares)         (Partial Sum of Squares)
 Firm                                          100                                --
                                             (453.01)
 Job                                            272                              272
                                            (31,709.69)                      (33,521.87)
 Region                                         25                               25
                                             (229.86)                         (396.28)
 Year                                             7                               7
                                             (8,540.77)                      (10,374.30)
 R-square                                     82.03%                          81.24%
  Total Sum of Squares                      57,342.81                        57,342.81
Regressions of wages for 584,635 worker/years. Sample includes white-collar workers at 100 largest
firms in SAF dataset. An observation is a worker/year between 1984 and 1990.




                                               43
Table 7 (cont.)



Panel B: Wage Changes

Dependent Variable = Change in Ln(wage) from previous year

 Type of Indicator                        # of Indicators                 # of Indicators

                                     (Partial Sum of Squares)        (Partial Sum of Squares)
 Firm                                           97                               --

                                              (24.36)
 Job                                            272                             268

                                              (20.97)                         (30.94)
 Region                                         25                              25

                                              (3.23)                           (8.46)
 Year                                            6                               6

                                              (76.98)                         (84.15)
 R-square                                     10.85%                          9.14%
 Total Sum of Squares                        1,429.49                         1,429.49
Regression of wages for 415,606 worker/years. Sample includes white-collar workers at the 97 of
the 100 largest firms in SAF dataset for which wage change data is available. An observation is a
worker/year between 1985 and 1990.




                                               44
                                      Figure 1

                       Identification of Labor Market Fluidity




                            Hiring at higher levels of firm
                            Substantial External Hiring       Primarily Internal Hiring
Wage        Move            External labor market             Consistent with both spot and
Movements   together                                          internal labor market
            Movement is     Inconsistent with both spot       Internal labor market
            idiosyncratic   and internal labor markets




                                          45
                                  Figure 2

                 Number of Workers by Level


18,000


16,000



14,000


12,000



10,000
                                                         6 levelfirm s
                                                         7 levelfirm s
 8,000



 6,000


 4,000



 2,000


    0
         1   2   3            4              5   6   7
                     Level (1 is lo w est)




                                      46
                                         Figure 3

                              Cumulative Wage Distribution




Sample includes all employees in 1988. Wage is Swedish Kroners per month.




                                            47
                                          Figure 4

                            Wage Distribution at Largest Firm




Sample includes 7417 employees of a single firm in 1988.




                                             48
                                          Figure 5
                        Wage Distribution of Construction Occupation




     .0003
     .0002
Dens ity
     .0001
     0




                    0           10000           20000           30000     40000
                                                wage

                                          All               Level 1
                                          Level 2           Level 3
                                          Level 4           Level 5




                                   Figure 5A: Wage Levels
                3
                2
    Dens it y
                1
                0




                    8.5           9                 9.5         10      10.5
                                                     wage

                                           All              Level 1
                                           Level 2          Level 3
                                           Level 4          Level 5




                                      Figure 5B: Log Wages



                                                49
                                               Appendix
                                  Description of Positions in SAF Data
Occupation Family 1: Occupation # 120 – Manufacturing, Repair, Maintenance, and Transportation
11% of 1988 sample
There is no level 1 in this occupation.
Level 2 (4% of occupation #120 employees) – Assistant for unit; insures instructions are followed; monitors
    processes
Level 3 (46%) – In charge of a unit of 15-35 people
Level 4 (45%) – In charge of 30-90 people; does investigations of disruptions and injuries
Level 5 (4%) – In charge of 90-180 people; manages more complicated tasks
Level 6 (0.3%) – Manages 180 or more people
There is no level 7 in this occupation.


Occupation Family 2: Occupation #310 – Construction
10% of the 1988 sample
Level 1 (0.1%) – Cleans sketches; writes descriptions
Level 2 (1%) – Does more advanced sketches
Level 3 (12%) – Simple calculations regarding dimensions, materials, etc.
Level 4 (45%) – Chooses components; does more detailed sketches and descriptions; estimates costs
Level 5 (32%) – Designs mechanical products and technical products; does investigations; has 3 or more
    subordinates at lower levels
Level 6 (8%) – Executes complex calculations; checks materials; leads construction work; has 3 or more
    subordinates at level 5
Level 7 (1%) – Same as level 6 plus has 2-5 level 6 subordinates

Occupation Family 3: Occupation #800 – Marketing and Sales
19% of 1988 sample
Level 1 (0.2%) – Telesales; expedites invoices; files
Level 2 (6%) – Puts together orders; distributes price and product information
Level 3 (29%) – Seeks new clients for 1-3 products; can sign orders; does market surveys
Level 4 (38%) – Sells more and more complex products; negotiates bigger orders; manages 3 or more subordinates
Level 5 (20%) – Manages budgets; develops products; manages 3 or more level 4 workers
Level 6 (7%) – Organizes, plans, and evaluates salesforce; does more advanced budgeting; manages 3 or more level
    5 workers
Level 7 (1%) – Same as level 6 plus 2-5 level 6 subordinates

Occupation Family 4: Occupation #900 – Finance
5% of 1988 sample
Level 1 (1%) – Office work; bookkeeping; invoices; bank verification
Level 2 (7%) – Manages petty cash; calculates salaries
Level 3 (18%) – More advanced accounting; 4-10 subordinates
Level 4 (31%) – Places liquid assets; manages lenders; evaluates credit of buyers; manages 3 or more level 3
    employees
Level 5 (28%) – Financial planning; analyzes markets; manages portfolios; currency transfers; manages 3 or more
    level 4 employees
Level 6 (12%) – Manages credits; plan routines within the organization; forward-looking budgeting; manages 3 or
    more level 5 employees
Level 7 (2%) – Same as level 6 plus 2-5 level 6 subordinates




                                                        50
