NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VARIETIES OF CURRENCY CRISES
Graciela L. Kaminsky
Working Paper 10193
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10193
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

The title is inspired by Calvo (1998). I thank Amine Mati and Nilanjana Sarkar for superb research assistance
and participants at the 8th Annual Meeting LACEA, October 9-11, 2003 (Puebla, Mexico) for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Graciela L. Kaminsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Varieties of Currency Crises
Graciela L. Kaminsky
NBER Working Paper No. 10193
December 2003
JEL No. F30, F31, F32, F34, F36, F41
ABSTRACT
The plethora of currency crises around the world has fueled many theories on the causes of
speculative attacks. The first-generation models focus on fiscal problems. The second-generation
models emphasize countercyclical policies and self-fulfilling crises. In the 1990s, models pinpoint
to financial excesses. With the crisis of Argentina in 2001, models of sovereign default have become
popular again. While the theoretical literature has emphasized variety, the empirical literature has
supported the "one size fits all" models. This paper contributes to the empirical literature by
assessing whether the crises of the last thirty years are of different varieties. Crises are found to be
of six varieties. Four of those varieties are associated with domestic economic fragility. But crises
can also be provoked by just adverse world market conditions, such as the reversal of international
capital flows. The so-called sudden-stop phenomenon identifies the fifth variety of crises. Finally,
a small number of crises occur in economies with immaculate fundamentals but this type of crises
is not an emerging-market phenomenon.
Graciela L. Kaminsky
Department of Economics
George Washington University
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
graciela@gwu.edu

I. Introduction
The plethora of financial crises that have ravaged emerging markets and mature
economies since the 1970s has triggered a variety of theories on the causes of speculative
attacks. Models are even catalogued into three generations. The first-generation models focus
on the fiscal and monetary causes of crises. These models were mostly developed to explain the
crises in Latin America in the 1960s and 1970s.
explaining the EMS crises of the early 1990s.

The second- generation models aim at

Here the focus is mostly on the effects of

countercyclical policies in mature economies and on self- fulfilling crises, with rumors unrelated
to market fundamentals at the core of the crises. The next wave of currency crises, the Tequila
crisis in 1994 and the so-called Asian Flu in 1997, fueled a new variety of models –also known
as third-generation models, which focus on moral hazard and imperfect information.

The

emphasis here has been on “excessive” booms and busts in international lending and asset price
bubbles.

With the crisis in Argentina in 2001, academics and economists at international

institutions are now dusting off the articles of the 1980s modeling crises of default.
The abundance of theoretical models has failed to generate the same variety of empirical
models. Most of the previous empirical research groups together indicators capturing fiscal and
monetary imbalances, economic slowdown, and the so-called over-borrowing syndrome to
predict crises. 1

While this research has certainly helped to capture the economic fragility at the

onset of crises and therefore to predict balance of payment problems, it has failed to identify the
changing nature of crises and to predict those crises that do not fit a particular mold. This paper
contributes to this literature by assessing whether the crises of the last thirty years are of different
varieties. As a by-product, this paper contributes to the early warning literature by providing
new forecasts of the onset of financial crises.
To identify the various classes of crises, I examine crisis episodes for twenty industrial
and developing countries. The former include: Denmark, Finland, Norway, Spain, and Sweden.
The latter focus on: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia,
Mexico, Peru, the Philippines, Thailand, Turkey, Uruguay, and Venezuela. The period covered
starts in January 1970 and includes crises up to February 2002, with a total of ninety-six
currency crises. To gauge whether crises are all of the same nature or whether groups of crises
1

See, for example, Berg and Patillo (1999), Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz (1995), Frankel and Rose (1999),
Kaminsky (1998), and Sachs, Tornell, and Velasco (1996).

1

show unique features, I use a variety of macroeconomic and financial indicators suggested by the
previous literature –totaling eighteen variables– and a multiple-regime variant of the signals
approach. 2 Once crises are classified, I examine whe ther the nature of crises varies across
emerging and mature economies and tally the degree of severity of each type of crisis.
The key finding is that, in fact, crises have not been created equal. Crises are found to be
of six varieties. Four of those varieties are associated with domestic economic fragility, with
vulnerabilities related to current account deterioration, fiscal imbalances, financial excesses, or
foreign debt unsustainability.

But crises can also be provoked by just adverse world market

conditions, such as the reversal of international capital flows.
phenomenon identifies the fifth variety of crises.

The so-called sudden-stop

Finally, as emphasized by the second-

generation models, crises also happen in economies with immaculate fundamentals. Thus, the
last variety of crises is labeled self- fulfilling crises.
The second finding is that crises in emerging markets are of a different nature than those
in mature markets.

Crises triggered exclusively by adverse shocks in international capital

markets and crises in economies with immaculate fundamentals are found to be a mature-market
phenomenon. In contrast, crises in emerging economies are triggered by multiple vulnerabilities.
The last finding concerns the degree of severity of crises. As it is conventional in the
literature, severity is measured by output losses following the crises, the magnitude of the reserve
losses of the central bank, and the depreciation of the domestic currency. I also estimate a
variety of measures capturing the extent of borrowing constraints/lack of access to international
capital markets following crises. Notably, the degree of severity of crises is closely linked to the
type of crises, with crises of financial excesses scoring worst in this respect.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the literature on crises
and examines the particular symptoms associated with each model. Section III examines the
multiple-regime signals approach. Section IV is the main part of the paper and examines the
characteristics of crises in the twenty countries in the sample. The section pays particular
attention to the types of crises that have afflicted mature and emerging markets. It also tallies the
severity of the various classes of crises. Section V examines the early warnings of crises implicit
in this approach. Section VI concludes.

2

See Kaminsky (1998) and Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) for an application of the one-regime signals approach to
forecasting crises.

2

II. Models of Currency Crises

The earlier models of balance of payments problems were inspired by the Latin American
style of currency crises of the late 1960s and early 1970s. In these models, unsustainable moneyfinanced fiscal deficits lead to a persistent loss of international reserves and ultimately ignite a
currency crash (See, for example, Krugman, 1979 and Lahiri and Végh, 2003). Stimulated by
the EMS collapses in 1992 and 1993, more recent models of currency crises have stressed that
the depletion of international reserves might not be at the root of currency crises. Instead, these
models focus on government officials’ concern on, for example, unemployment. Governments
are modeled facing two often conflicting targets: reducing inflation and keeping economic
activity close to a given target. Fixed exchange rates may help in achieving the first goal but at
the cost of a loss of competitiveness and a recession. With sticky prices, devaluations restore
competitiveness and help in the elimination of unemployment, thus prompting the authorities to
abandon the peg during recessions. 3
The crises in Latin America in the 1980s, the Nordic countries in 1992, Mexico in 1994,
and Asia in 1997 have prompted the economics profession to model the effects of banking
problems on balance-of-payments difficulties. For example, Diaz Alejandro (1985) and Velasco
(1987) model difficulties in the banking sector as giving rise to a balance-of-payments crisis,
arguing that if central banks finance the bail-out of troubled financial institutions by printing
money, we have the classical story of a currency crash prompted by excessive money creation.
Within the same theme, McKinnon and Pill (1994) examine the role of capital flows in an
economy with an unregulated banking sector with deposit insurance and moral hazard problems
of the banks. Capital inflows in such an environment can lead to over- lending cycles with
consumption booms and exaggerated current account deficits. Most of the times, the overlending cycles are also accompanied by booms in the stock and real estate markets. In turn, the
over-borrowing cycles lead to real exchange rate appreciations, losses of competitiveness, and
slowdowns in growth. As the economy enters a recession, the excess lending during the boom
makes banks more prone to a crisis when a recession unfolds. This state of business becomes
even more complicated by the pervasive over-exposure of financial institutions to the stock and
3

See, for example, Obstfeld (1986), (1994), and (1996).

3

real estate markets, which makes banks even more vulnerable when asset bubbles burst as the
recession approaches. The deterioration of the current account, in turn, makes investors worried
about the possibility of default on foreign loans. In turn, the fragile banking sector makes the
task of defending the peg more difficult and may lead to the eventual collapse of the domestic
currency. In a similar vein, Goldfajn and Valdés (1995) show how changes in international
interest rates and capital inflows are amplified by the intermediation role of banks and how such
swings may also produce an exaggerated business cycle that ends in bank runs and financial and
currency crashes.
More recently, the literature on capit al inflows and capital inflow problems has
suggested another potential source of instability (see, for example, Calvo, 1998, Calvo and
Reinhart, 2000, and Calvo, Izquierdo, and Talvi, 2002), that of liquidity crises due to sudden
reversals in capital flows. For example, the debt crisis in 1982, the Mexican crisis in 1994 and
the so-called Tequila effect, and the Asian crisis in 1997-1998 show that capital inflows can
come to a sudden stop and even can sharply reverse their course and become capital outflows.
As emphasized by those authors, the sudden reversal, prompted, in large part, by fluctuations in
interest rates in industrialized countries, is far more persistent and severe when the borrowing
country is an emerging economy, highly indebted, dollarized, and with debt concentrated at
short- maturities. In these cases, sudden stops trigger massive depreciations of the domestic
currency.
The now revitalized literature on sovereign default has been mostly concerned with the
ability or the willingness of a country to service the debt. This literature mostly developed in the
1980s following the debt crisis in 1982. In a seminal contribution, Eaton and Gersovitz (1981)
argue that sovereign lending can take place even if borrowers are immune to any direct actions
by creditors in the event of no repayment. In this approach, borrowers will not be tempted to
default if they are concerned that they will lose their reputation in international credit markets
and lose future access to borrowing. In contrast, Cohen and Sachs (1982) assume that if a
country fails to make repayments, it will suffer a loss that is proportional to the country’s output,
perhaps because creditors can enforce repayment through direct punishments such as disturbing
the international trade of any borrower that unilaterally defaults. The literature on sovereign
crises has continued to grow, with the empirical research emphasizing that defaults are more

4

likely if the level of debt and the interest rates at which the countries borrow are high or if there
are adverse output shocks, such as deterioration in the country’s terms of trade.

III. Capturing Varieties: Methodology

The empirical research on predicting currency crises has adopted a variety of econometric
techniques. Parametric technique s include probit and VAR models. Non-parametric techniques
are mostly confined to the leading- indicator methodology. While currency crises can take many
forms, all the estimations impose “the one size fits all” approach, with the indicators predicting
crises including indicators related to sovereign defaults, such as high foreign debt levels, or
indicators related to fiscal crises, such as government deficits, or even indicators related to crises
of excesses, such as stock and real estate market booms and busts. That is, in all cases,
researchers impose the same functional form to all observations. When some indicators are not
robustly linked to all crises, they tend to be discarded even when they may be of key importance
for a subgroup of observations. For example, as examined in Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999),
financial market booms and busts are an important trigger of crises after financial liberalization
but the deterioration of the current account is at the core of crises before financial liberalization.
Naturally, if these non- linearities are known, they can be controlled using interactive terms. Yet,
such knowledge is the exception rather than the rule.
Another source of non- linearities impossible to capture in a standard regression
framework or signals approach is that crises become more likely as the number of fragilities
increases. For example, a real exchange appreciation of a certain magnitude becomes more
worrisome if coupled with excessive monetary expansion. Similarly, high foreign debt leads to a
further deterioration of the economy if accompanied by high world real interest rates.
In this paper, I will use a different methodology to allow for ex-ante unknown nonlinearities.

This methodology is a modification of the conventional leading- indicator

methodology, which has a long history in the rich literature that evaluates the ability of
macroeconomic and financial time series to predict business cycle turning points (see, for
instance, Stock and Watson, 1989, and Diebold and Rudebusch, 1989). More recently, this
technique has also been applied to predict crises.

The basic idea in the leading- indicator

methodology is that the economy evolves through phases of booms and recessions or, in our

5

case, of tranquil times and crisis episodes and that some fundamentals start to behave differently
at the onset of a recession or a crisis and thus can be used to predict the change in regime. This
change in behavior of a particular series is captured empirically by finding a “threshold” that
turns a fluctuation of a given variable into a signal of an upcoming recession or crisis. In most of
the applications, this threshold is the one that minimizes the noise-to-signal ratio of the particular
indicator. In this methodology, the working assumption is that recessions or crises are just of
one type. 4 Moreover, thresholds are obtained indicator by indicator without consideration of
possible complementarities.

In contrast, the proposed new methodology allows the data to

determine the number and characteristics of classes of crises. 5 Also, the thresholds that turn a
fluctuation of a variable into a signal of an upcoming crisis will be identified jointly for all
indicators to allow for interdependence.
To identify the possible multiple varieties of cris es, I apply regression tree analysis.6
This technique 7 allows one to search for an unknown number of sample splits (in our case,
varieties of crises and of tranquil times) using multiple indicators. Breiman et al (1984) show
that the regression tree method is consistent in the sense that, under suitable regularity
conditions, the estimated piecewise linear regression function converges to the best nonlinear
predictor of the dependent variable of interest. The actual sorting algorithm is described in
Durlauf and Johnson (1995). Intuitively, this methodology behaves as a multiple-regime signalapproach. 8

To identify the types of crises, the observations are first divided into those

observations in periods of crises and observations of tranquil times. 9 Crisis times are identified
with a 1 while tranquil times are identified with a 0. As in the conventional signal approach, the
algorithm first chooses thresholds for each indicator to minimize its noise-to-signal ratio. 10
4

Also, booms or “tranquil times” are assumed to be of just one type.
This methodology can be thought of as the non-parametric alternative to the multiple -regime Markov-process
models pioneered by Hamilton (1989). However, in contrast to the multiple-regime Markov-process model, the
number of regimes does not need to be specified exogenously, it can be determined endogenously.
6
See Durlauf and Johnson (1995) and Ghosh and Wolf (1998) for applications of the regression tree analysis to
characterize multiple regimes in growth behavior.
7
See Breiman et al (1984) for a description of this technique.
8
See, Kaminsky (1998) for a discussion of the one-regime signal-approach.
9
Observations are catalogued into crisis times and tranquil times using an index of exchange market pressure. See
Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) for a detailed explanation on the identification of crises.
10
The selection of the appropriate threshold that turns the fluctuation in an economic time series into a signal of an
upcoming crisis tries to fulfill conflicting criteria. If the threshold is too “lax,” that is, “too close” to normal
behavior, it is likely to catch all the crises but it is also likely to catch a lot of crises that never happened, that is,
send a lot of false signals. Alternatively, if the threshold is too “tight” it is likely to miss all but the most severe of
crises –the price of reducing the number of false signals will be reflected in a lower proportion of crises accurately
5

6

Then, the indicator with the lowest noise-to-signal ratio is selected. All observations are then
separated into two groups: those for which the chosen indicator is signaling and those for which
the indicator is not signaling. For each group, the methodology is repeated. Again, for each of
the remaining indicators, new thresholds are selected to minimize the noise-to-signal ratio. Note
that this time the threshold that converts a fluctuation of an indicator into a signal of an
upcoming crisis is conditioned on the selection of the first indicator and its threshold. This
allows to find complementarities: even minor fiscal problems can add to fragility and trigger
crises if accompanied by vulnerability of the banking sector. In this second round, groups are
created based in the classification of the indicator with the lowest noise-to-signal ratio from all
remaining indicators. 11

This process continues, with each new round helping to classify

observations into more tightly defined groups. Obviously, this process can continue until each
observation is classified into a different type.

To avoid the perfect fit, the regression tree

analysis imposes a penalty on the number of varieties. As explained in Gosh and Wolf (1998),
the rule used resembles an adjusted

R2

criterion, with the improvement due to the identification

of a new variety being compared with a penalty on the number of varieties. If the penalty
exceeds the improvement, the algorithm chooses the previous number of varieties, otherwise the
algorithm cont inues to partition the sample.

Still, no asymptotic theory exists to test the

statistical significance of the number of regimes uncovered by the regression tree. Finally, it
should be noted that the algorithm classifies both crisis episodes and tranquil times.

IV. The Anatomy of Currency Crises
The regression-tree methodology was applied to the data and the results of this exercise
are described below. First, the data and the estimated classification are presented. Afterwards,
the discussion is organized so as to answer the following questions: What are the varieties of
financial crises that we observe in this sample of over 90 crises; and Do these fit a certain mold?

called. The first step of the multiple -regime signal approach, as the first step of the one-regime signal-approach,
selects the “optimal” threshold on an indicator-by-indicator basis by performing a search over all possible
thresholds and selecting the value that minimizes the noise-to-signal ratio of each indicator.
11
Each indicator can be used several times (with different thresholds) to partition the observations. For example, a
40-percent real appreciation by itself can signal a future crisis. Still, a 10-percent real appreciation can signal a
crisis if accompanied by excessive international borrowing.

7

Are crises in mature and emerging markets of the same variety? How severe are the
consequences of each type of crisis?

1. The Data

Following the literature on early warnings, this paper will classify currency crises using
information on a variety of indicators. These indicators are described in Table 1. Indicators are
grouped according to the symptoms on which the various generation models focus on. The firstgeneration

models

of

currency

crises

highlight

the

inconsistency

of

expansionary

macroeconomic policies with the stability of a fixed exchange rate regime. Fiscal deficits and
easy monetary policy are at the core of these models. I capture the spirit of these models with
two indicators: fiscal deficit/GDP and excess M1 real balances. 12 The second- generation models
focus on countercyclical government policies.

The essence of these models is centered on

problems in the current account, with real appreciations fueling losses in competitiveness and
recessions. I capture the focus of these models with five indicators: Exports, imports, real
exchange rate (deviations from equilibrium13 ), terms of trade, output, and real interest rates. The
third- generation models focus on financial excesses. To capture the spirit of these models, I use
six indicators: domestic credit/GDP ratio, M2/reserves, deposits, M2 multiplier, stock prices, and
an index of banking crises. The literature on sovereign crises has focused mainly on too much
debt and even debt concentrated at short maturities. To examine this variety of crises, I use two
indicators: Foreign debt/exports, and short-term debt/foreign exchange reserves. Finally, the
sudden-stop approach focuses on international capital flow reversals, which I will try to capture
with fluctuations in both the world real interest rate and foreign exchange reserves of central
banks. There are a total of eighteen indicators. The Appendix describes the data in detail.
To examine the characteristics of crises, the paper looks at a total of twenty countries:
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Denmark, Finland, Israel, Indonesia, Malaysia,
Mexico, Norway, Peru, Philippines, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Uruguay, and Venezuela.
12

Excess real money balances are the residuals from a money demand equation. Money demand is estimated as a
linear function of output and expected inflation.
13
Not all real appreciations are a signal of losses in competitiveness, with for example, improvements in
productivity in the traded-good sector triggering appreciations in the equilibrium real exchange rate. “Equilibrium”
movements of the real exchange rate are captured with a time trend. See, also Goldfajn and Valdez (1996) for a
comparison of the ability of various methodologies in capturing equilibrium fluctuations of the real exchange rate.

8

As it is conventional in the crisis literature, crisis months are those months with a large exchange
rate pressure index. 14 The dates of the crises for the twenty countries are reported in Table 2.
Ninety-six crises were identified. I should note that when classifying crises, I do not classify just
the month of the crisis. The build- up of fragilities preceding a crisis starts early on. Thus, as in
Kaminsky and Re inhart (1999), I define “crisis episodes” as the month of the crisis plus the
twenty-four months preceding the crisis. Thus, in the sample, there are 2400 observations of
crisis episodes and 5280 observations of tranquil times. 15

2. The Classification

To estimate the types of crisis episodes, the data on all indicators for each country are
first transformed into percentiles of the distribution. This transformation allows for idiosyncratic
factors since, for example, a monthly 20-percent fall in stock prices can be business as usual in
emerging markets but is a strong signal of crisis in a mature economy.
The results of the regression tree are shown in Figure 1. The hexagons show the various
criteria for dividing the sample while the squares are the final groups of observations. The tree
algorithm classifies all observations into eighteen final groups or nodes. Only nine indicators are
used to catalogue all observations: real exchange rates, exports, excess real M1 balances,
domestic credit/GDP, M2/Reserves, fiscal deficits/GDP, foreign debt/exports, short-term
debt/reserves, and world interest rates. 16 Interestingly, the first split of the data is based on the
14

In the spirit of Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz (1995) and following Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), the index
of currency market turbulence was constructed as a weighted average of exchange rate changes and reserve changes,
with weights such that the two components of the index have equal conditional volatilities. Since changes in the
exchange rate enter with a positive weight and changes in reserves have a negative weight attached, readings of this
index that were three standard deviations or more above the mean were cataloged as crises. With countries in the
sample that, at different times, experienced hyperinflation, the construction of the index had to be modified. While a
100-percent devaluation may be traumatic for a country with low-to-moderate inflation, a devaluation of that
magnitude is commonplace during hyperinflations. If a single index for the countries that had hyperinflation
episodes were constructed, sizable devaluations and reserve losses in the more moderate inflation periods would be
left out since the historic mean is distorted by the high-inflation episode. To avoid this problem, the sample was
divided according to whether inflation in the previous six months was higher than 150 percent and then constructed
an index for each subsample.
15

Since the definition of crisis episodes is ad hoc, Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) check for robustness of the results.
In particular, we also define crisis episodes as the 12-month and the 18-month window prior to crises. We find that
all qualitative results remain with the different definitions of crisis episodes.
16

By looking at all the indicators jointly, the regression tree analysis allows to minimize the number of indicators
needed to classify and predict crises. For example, in these estimations, the index of economic activity is not

9

real exchange rate, indicating that real exchange rate appreciations are the most important signal
of a forthcoming crisis, confirming the findings of previous studies (e.g. Goldfajn and Valdés,
1996, and Frankel and Rose, 1996).

Observations with the real exchange rate at the 17.8

percentile of the distribution or lower have a 74.3-percent probability of crises. In contrast, a
more depreciated real exchange rate signals crises with just a 25.7-percent probability.

For

those observations with an appreciated real exchange rate, the groups are further defined with
classifications based on domestic credit/GDP, fiscal deficit/GDP, world interest rates, foreign
debt/exports, short-term debt/reserves, and excess M1 real balances.

In particular, some

observations are identified by real appreciations, high domestic credit/GDP, high fiscal
deficit/GDP, and high excess M1 real balances. Those observations are associated with an 82percent probability of crises.

For those observations with no problems of real appreciation

(observations with real exchange rates higher than the 17.8 percentile), the groups are further
defined with classifications based on the level of world interest rates, fiscal deficits/GDP, and
M2/Reserves ratio. In particular, one variety of crises identified in this branch is the one studied
by the first-generation models.

The observations in this group are characterized by fiscal

deficits/GDP in the 3.7 percentile or lower and are associated with an 87-percent probability of
crises. 17
Table 3 describes in detail the characteristics of the final groups. The indicators signaling
vulnerability are shown in bold.

For example, the first node is characterized by a real

appreciation of the domestic currency (real exchange rate in the 17.8-percentile or lower), low
debt/exports ratio (debt/exports in the 71.5-percentile or lower), low short-term debt/reserves
(short-term debt/reserves in the 16.6-percentile or lower), and low world interest rates (world
interest rates in the 84.5-percentile or lower). Thus, the only observed vulnerability in this group
is the appreciation of the real exchange rate, which is shown in bold characters.
Some of these groups share similar traits. For example, the vulnerabilities in groups 1
and 2 are only related to the real appreciation of the domestic currency while the vulnerabilities
of groups 14 and 15 are both associated with hikes in world interest rates. To account for these
similarities, I combine the eighteen groups into six varieties of crises. Ten of those groups are

selected as a separate indicator. Economic activity seems to be well captured by some of the chosen indicators, such
as the real exchange rate, domestic credit, and fiscal policy.
17
Since fiscal deficits are represented with negative numbers, large fiscal deficits are located in the left tail of the
distribution.

10

characterized by episodes of real appreciation. For four of them, real appreciations reflect the
only shown vulnerability. I catalogue these groups as Crises with Current Account Problems.18
For the other six, the real appreciation is not necessarily the main determinant of crises, it just
contributes to the build up of economic fragilities.

When the fragilities are associated with

booms in financial markets, crises are catalogued as Crises of Financial Excesses.19

In

particular, they are identified as crises that are preceded by the acceleration in the growth rate of
domestic credit and other monetary aggregates. In turn, when the fragilities are associated with
“unsustainable” foreign debt, crises are classified as Crises of Sovereign Debt Problems. The
fourth variety of crisis is related to expansionary fiscal policy. These crises are labeled Crises
with Fiscal Deficits.20

Sudden-Stop Crises constitute the fifth variety of crisis. This type of

crisis is associated with reversals in capital flows triggered by hikes in world interest rates. 21
Finally, Self-fulfilling Crises are those associated with node 13, which does not exhibit any
evident vulnerability. The last column of Table 3 shows the associated probabilities of crises of
each node.

3. Varieties of Crises in Emerging and Mature Economies

Table 4 shows the classification of the ninety-six crises in the sample into the six
varieties on a crisis-by-crisis basis. 22 To classify crises, I look at the episodes of crises (the
month of the crisis and the twenty-four preceding months) and using Table 3, I tally the number
of months in that particular episode with vulnerabilities arising from the current account,
financial excesses, fiscal deficits, debt problems, or sudden stops. The last column shows the
classification for the each crisis episode. If all the twenty- five observations in a crisis episode
are classified in outcome 13, which shows an economy without vulnerabilities, that episode is
18

These crises can also be associated with the second-generation models of currency crises.
See also, Gourinchas, Landerretche, and Valdés (2002) and Schneider and Tornell (2003) for an analysis of the
relationship between booms and busts in credit markets and crises.
20
These crises can also be associated with the first-generation models of currency crises.
21
Guillermo Calvo (1998) introduced the concept of sudden stops in the crisis literature. Sudden stops in this
interpretation are associated with a reversal of international capital flows. But hikes in world interest rates or
changes in international investors’ sentiments are not the only defining characteristic of sudden stop crises. These
crises are also linked to vulnerabilities in borrower countries, which include high levels of debt, dollarization, and
debt concentrated at very short maturities. In our classification, sudden stop crises are just associated to one type of
vulnerability: severe hikes in world interest rates.
22
For three of these crises, there is no data available on the various indicators. So, only ninety-three crises are
classified.
19

11

classified as a self- fulfilling crisis. Otherwise, as a general rule, a crisis is classified as type j if
the majority of the months of the crisis episode are classified in variety j. So, for example, as
shown in Table 4, the collapse of the Turkish Lira in February 2001 is classified as a crisis of
financial excesses because there are twenty-two months classified in outcomes 8 and 10. 23
This classification indicates that 14 percent of the crises are related to current account
problems, 29 percent are crises of financial excesses, 5 percent are crises with fiscal problems,
42 percent are crises of sovereign debt problems, 5 percent of the crises are related to sudden
stops, and just 4 percent of the crises are self- fulfilling crises.
Table 5 shows the varieties of crises in emerging and mature economies. 24 As shown in
this table, crises in emerging markets tend to be of a different variety than those in mature
markets. For example, current account and competitiveness problems are more of a trait of
mature markets (17 percent of the crises) than of emerging economies (13 percent of the crises).
While it is true that losses of competitiveness also affect emerging economies, lack of
competitiveness is just one of the many vulnerabilities that these economies suffer. More often
than not, lack of competitiveness is accompanied by highly expansionary credit growth and loose
monetary policy or debt problems or even macro-policies inconsistent with the stability of the
peg. Overall, eighty-six percent of the crises in emerging economies are crises with multiple
domestic vulnerabilities while economic fragility only characterizes 50 percent of the crises in
mature markets. 25 Sudden-stop problems are also more common in mature markets (17 percent

23

There are three exceptions to the general rule. First, a number of crisis episodes includes some observations
classified as observations with current account problems and some other observations classified as observations with
financial excesses. Since crises of financial excesses are characterized by excessive expansion of credit/monetary
aggregates as well as by real appreciations as in the case of crises with current account problems, I classify those
crisis episodes as episodes with financial excesses to show the presence of multiple vulnerabilities. For example,
current account problems and financial excesses were widespread during the Mexican crisis of December 1994, with
14 months showing current account problems and nine months showing “financial excesses.” The 1994 Mexican
crisis is classified as a crisis of financial excesses even though the number of months with current-account problems
exceeds that with financial excesses. Second, some crisis episodes include observations with debt problems and
fiscal problems. Since fiscal problems are part and parcel of debt problems, those crisis -episodes are classified as
crises with debt problems. Third, some crisis episodes include observations with financial excesses and
observations with debt problems. Again, as debt problems are part and parcel of financial excesses, those episodes
are classified as crises of financial excesses. A final note, when observations are classified into various groups, the
only groups that are considered for the classification of the crisis episode are those that include at least six
observations. Since this is an ad-hoc criterion, robustness tests have been performed. Qualitative results are not
affected. The results are available upon request.
24
Denmark, Finland, Norway, Spain, and Sweden are the mature economies in the sample. The remaining countries
in the sample are considered emerging economies.
25
The crises associated with multiple vulnerabilities are Crises of Financial Excesses, Crises of Fiscal Deficits, and
Crises of Sovereign Debt problems.

12

of all crises) than in emerging markets (2 percent of all crises). Again, in our classification,
sudden-stop problems are just characterized by adverse shocks to international capital markets
and crises in emerging economies mostly occur in the midst of multiple vulnerabilities. Finally,
while most of the crises are preceded by real, financial, or external fragilities, a small number of
crises are unrelated to deteriorating fundamentals (Self- fulfilling crises). These crises are not a
feature of emerging markets but tend to occur in mature markets. 26
Table 6 evaluates the costs of the different varieties of crises. Costs are grouped into
three categories. The first one captures the magnitude of the speculative attack. Two indicators
are used: losses of reserves and real exchange rate depreciations. For reserves, I use the sixmonth percentage change prior to the month of the crisis, as losses of reserves tend to occur
before the devaluation occurs (if the speculative attack is successful). For the real exchange rate
depreciation, I use the six- month percentage real depreciation following the month of the crisis
since large devaluations tend to occur only after and if the central bank concedes by devaluing or
floating the currency. The second category focuses on output losses (relative to trend) in the
year of the crisis and one year after the crisis so as to examine not only the magnitude of the
collapse following the crisis but also the persistence of output losses. The third category looks at
access to international capital markets in the aftermath of the crisis. It focuses on the behavior of
the trade account in the year following the crisis. The table reports separately the 12- month
percentage change (relative to trend) in exports and imports following the month of the crisis.
The first six columns report the average for each variety of crises. The last column shows the
average across all crises.
As shown in Table 6, reserve losses oscillate around 14 percent for all crises with the
exception of those classified as self- fulfilling, for which reserves increase about 15 percent in the
months preceding the crises. The depreciation of the real exchange rate across type of crises is
more varied and oscillates between 1 and 31 percent. Depreciations are most extreme in the case
of crises of financial excesses. As is the case with real depreciations, output losses (relative to
trend) are also substantially larger in the aftermath of crises of financial excesses. In this case,
26

While in the theoretical literature self-fulfilling crises are associated with the EMS crises in 1992 and 1993, the
implied classification from the regression tree identifies those episodes as crises with domestic vulnerabilities. In
the case of Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden, vulnerabilities are associated with international borrowing and
debt problems, while in the case of Spain, fragilities are related to financial excesses. The regression tree only
classifies as self-fulfilling crises, or crises with immaculate fundamentals, the crises associated with the collapse of
the Bretton Woods System.

13

output losses increase to almost 4 percent. In contrast, output (relative to trend) is unchanged or
continues to grow in the aftermath of crises with no observed domestic fragility, both those of
the sudden-stop and the self- fulfilling varieties. Output losses are somewhat persistent. On
average, during the second year after the crisis, output continues to fall relative to trend. Again,
declines in economic activity are less pronounced in the aftermath of crises with no domestic
fragility.
Finally, Table 6 also shows that, as discussed in Calvo (1998) and Calvo and Reinhart
(2000), access to international capital markets can be severely impaired in the aftermath of
crises, with countries having to run sizable current account surpluses to repay their debt. The
size and type of the adjustment varies across types of crises. For example, in the case of crises
with financial excesses, most of the adjustment occurs on the import side, with imports falling –
relative to trend– approximately 25 percent. In contrast, exports fail to grow (deviations from
trend growth are almost zero) even though the depreciations during this type of crises are
massive. This evidence suggests that countries are even unable to attract trade credits to finance
exports when their economies are mired in financial problems. 27 In contrast, for crises with no
domestic fragilities, booming exports are at the heart of the recovery of the current account.
Summarizing, on average, the costs of crises with financial excesses are significantly higher than
those of other crises, with crises of debt problems being a close second. On the opposite end,
self- fulfilling crises or crises triggered by just reversal in capital flows have no noticeable
adverse effects on the economy.

V. The Early Warnings

Figure 2 reports the time-series probabilities of currency crises implicit in the estimation
for all countries in the sample for the period January 1970- December 2001. The shaded areas in
the figures are “crisis times.” Overall, there are 2400 observations of crises (31 percent) and
5280 observations of “tranquil times” (69 percent). Macroeconomic vulnerabilities are basically
not present during “tranquil times,” with 77 percent of the observations being classified under

27

See, Corsetti, Pesenti, and Roubini (1999) for a chronology of the Asian crisis in 1997-1998 with an emphasis on
financial overlending before the crisis and the liquidity crunch following the devaluations. See, also, Mishkin
(1996) for an analysis of overlending cycles in emerging markets.

14

outcome 13. For those observations, the probability of crises is just 13.5 percent. This is the
frequency of crises in times of immaculate fundamentals.
In most cases, vulnerabilities are highly persistent and they trigger repeated exchange rate
crises. For example, Colombia suffered a series of crises in the late 1990s. Similarly, the July1997 crisis in Thailand that set the onset of the Asian crisis was followed by a string of crises
that only ended in July 2000. Episodes of multiple crises can be of the same nature. This was
the case of Argentina in the late 1980s and beginning of the 1990s, with debt problems at the
heart of all speculative attacks. In contrast, the nature of the crises in Thailand evolved from
problems of excessive borrowing at the beginning of the episode to fiscal problems following the
bailout of the banking sector.
This section evaluates the forecasting accuracy of the multiple-regime signals approach
vis-à-vis the traditional signals approach (Kaminsky, 1998). I follow Diebold and Rudebusch
(1989) in evaluating both techniques.

Two tests are implemented to evaluate the average

closeness of the predicted probabilities and observed realizations, as measured by a zero-one
dummy variable. Suppose we have T probability forecasts:
{Ptk }T
t +1

(1)

where Ptk is the probability of crisis conditional on information provided by the indicator k in
period t. Similarly, let
{Rt }T
t +1

(2)

be the corresponding time series of realizations; Rt equals one during crisis episodes and zero
otherwise. The first scoring-rule is the quadratic probability score, (QPS), given by
T

∑

1
QPS =
2( Pt k − Rt )2
T t =1
k

(3)

The QPS ranges from 0 to 2, with a score of 0 corresponding to perfect accuracy.
The second scoring-rule is the log probability score (LPS), given by
T

∑

1
LPS = −
[(1− Rt )ln(1− Pt k ) + Rt ln( Pt k )]
T t =1
k

15

(4)

The LPS ranges from 0 to ∞ , with a score of 0 corresponding to perfect accuracy. The loss
function associated with LPS differs from that corresponding to QPS, as large mistakes are
penalized more heavily under LPS.
Table 7 shows both the Quadratic Probability Score (QPS) and the log Probability Score
(LPS) for the forecasting probabilities of the two indicators. The score statistics are reported
separately for the whole sample, “Crisis Times” and “Tranquil Times.” As shown in this table,
the multiple-regime signals approach makes a substantial improvement over the traditional
signals approach.

This holds regardless of the loss function used. For the whole sample, the

losses in forecasting accuracy from using the one-regime signals approach reach 26 percent.
Losses in predictive accuracy from using the one-regime signals approach even reach 47 percent
during tranquil times, indicating that the multiple-regime signals approach issues substantially
less false alarms.

VI. Conclusions

Currency crises are not a new phenomenon. Not only is the list of countries affected by
these crises long but it is also increasing. Many have emphasized the destructive forces of
currency crises, and the economics profession as a whole is crusading to find ways of avoiding
crises. But while some countries collapse following a crisis, many others that also fall prey to
speculative attacks do not suffer catastrophic consequences, suggesting that crises come in many
varieties. Yet, most previous empirical studies of crises have failed to allow for this diversity.
In this paper, I used regression tree methods to classify ninety-six crises in twenty
countries from 1970 to 2001. The results indicate that crises are not created equal, with the
empirical classification reflecting the varieties proposed by the various generations of models of
currency crises. Still, some models are better than others at capturing the stylized characteristics
of crises. For example, I find that most of the crises are characterized by multitude of weak
economic fundamentals, suggesting that it would be difficult to characterize them as “selffulfilling” crises.
Finally, since crises are of different varieties, early-warning systems should allow for
multiple regimes.

Thus, the second-generation early-warning systems should incorporate

16

methodologies such as regression tree analysis or parametric multiple-regime models à la
Hamilton (1989) to capture a broad spectrum of crises.

17

References

1. Berg, A. and C. Patillo, “Predicting Currency Crises: The Indicators Approach and an
Alternative” Journal of International Money and Finance, 561-586, 1999.
2. Breiman, L., J.L. Friedman, R. A. Olshen, and C.J. Stone, Classification and Regression
Trees, Wadsworth, Belmont, CA, 1984.
3. Calvo, G. “Varieties of Capital-Market Crises,” in G. Calvo and M. King, (eds) The Debt
Burden and its Consequences for Monetary Policy, McMillan, 1998.
4. Calvo, G., “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden
Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics, November 1998.
5. Calvo, G., A. Izquierdo, and E. Talvi, “Sudden Stops, the Real Exchange Rate, and Fiscal
Sustainability: Argentina's Lessons,” Inter-American Development Bank, mimeo, 2002.
6. Calvo, G. and C. Reinhart, “When Capital Inflows Come to a Sudden Stop: Consequences
and Policy Options,” in P. Kenen and A. Swoboda (eds), Key Issues in Reform of the
International Monetary and Financial System, (Washington, DC: International Monetary
Fund), 2000.
7. Cohen, D. and J. Sachs, “Growth and External Debt Under Risk of Debt Repudiation,”
European Economic Review, 30, pages 529-560, 1986.
8. Corsetti, G., P. Pesenti, and N. Roubini, “What Caused the Asian Currency and Financial
Crisis?” Japan and the World Economy, Vol. 11, 3, 1999, 305-373.
9. Diaz-Alejandro, C., “Good-Bye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash,” Journal of
Development Economics, 1985, 19.
10. Diebold, F and G. Rudebusch, “Scoring the Leading Indicators,” Journal of Business, 1989,
62, 369-91.
11. Durlauf, S. and P. Johnson, “Multiple Regimes and Cross-Country Growth Behavior,”
Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 10, (4), pages 365-384, 1995.
12. Eaton, J. and M. Gersowitz, “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and Empirical
Analysis,” Review of Economic Studies, 48, pages 289-309, 1981.
13. Eichengreen, B., A. Rose, and C. Wyplosz, “Speculative Attacks on Pegged Exchange Rates:
An Empirical Exploration with Special Reference to the European Monetary System,” in
Matthew Canzoneri, Wilfred Ethier and Vittorio Grilli (eds), The New Trans-Atlantic
Economy, 1996.
14. Eichengreen, B., A. Rose, and C. Wyplosz, “Exchange Rate Mayhem: The Antecedents and
Aftermath of Speculative Attacks,” Economic Policy, 1995.
15. Frankel, J. and A. Rose, “Currency Crises in Emerging Markets: An Empirical Treatment,”
Journal of International Economics, 41, no. 3/4, pages 351-366, 1996.
16. Goldfajn, I. and R. Valdés, “Balance-of-Payments Crises and Capital Flows: the Role of
Liquidity,” (MIT, Cambridge), mimeo 1995.

18

17. Goldfajn, I. and R. Valdés, “The Aftermath of Real Appreciations,” NBER Working Paper
No. 5650, July 1996.
18. Gourinchas, P., O. Landerretche, and R. Valdés “Lending Booms, Latin America, and the
World,” Economia, vol, 1, No. 2, 2002.
19. Gosh, A. and H. Wolf, “Thresholds and Context Dependence in Growth,” NBER Working
Paper No. 6480, March 1998.
20. Hamilton, J., “A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary Time Series and
the Business Cycle, Econometrica, vol 57, 2, pages 357-384, 1989
21. Kaminsky, G.L. and C.M. Reinhart, “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Balanceof-Payments Problems,” American Economic Review, June 1999.
22. Kaminsky, G.L., “Currency and Banking Crises: The Early Warnings of Distress,”
International Finance Discussion Papers No. 629, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, October 1998.
23. Krugman, P., “A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crises,” Journal of Money, Credit, and
Banking, 1979, 11, 311-325.
24. Lahiri, A. and C. Végh, “Delaying the Inevitable: Optimal Interest Rate Policy and BOP
Crises,” Journal of Political Economy, 2003.
25. McKinnon, R.I., H. Pill, “Credible Liberalizations and International Capital Flows: The
Overborrowing Syndrome,” (Stanford University, Stanford), 1994.
26. Mishkin, F., “Understanding Financial Crises: A Developing Country Perspective,” in
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics, Washington, DC: World Bank,
1996, 29-62
27. Obstfeld, M., “Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance-of-Payments Crises,” American
Economic Review, March 1986.
28. Obstfeld, “The Logic of Currency Crises,” Cahiers Economiques et Monétaries (Banque de
France), no. 43, 1994.
29. Obstfeld, M., “Models of Currency Crises with Self- fulfilling Features,” European Economic
Review, 1996.
30. Sachs, J., A. Tornell, and A. Velasco, “Financial Crises in Emerging Markets: The Lessons
from 1995,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1996.
31. Schneider, M. and A. Tornell, “Balance Sheet Effects, Bailout Guarantees and Financial
Crises,” Review of Economic Studies, 2003.
32. Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson, “New Indices of Coincident and Leading Economic
Indicators,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1989, 351-93.
33. Velasco, A., “Financial and Balance-of-Payments Crises,” Journal of Development
Economics, 1987, 27, 263-283

19

Data Appendix
The Indicators: Sources and Definitions
Sources: International Financial Statistics (IFS), International Monetary Fund (IMF); Emerging Market Indicators,
International Finance Corporation (IFC); World Development Indicators, The World Bank (WB); The Maturity,
Sectoral, and Nationality Distribution of International Bank Lending, Bank for International Settlements (BIS);
International Banking and Financial Market Developments, Bank for International Settlements. When data was
missing from these sources, central bank bulletins and other country-specific sources were used as supplements.
Unless otherwise noted, all variables are in 12-month percent changes.
1. M2 multiplier: The ratio of M2 (IFS lines 34 plus 35) to base money (IFS line 14).
2. Domestic Credit/GDP: IFS line 52 divided by IFS line 64 to obtain domestic credit in real terms, which was then
divided by IFS line 99b.p. (interpolated) to obtain the domestic credit/GDP ratio. Monthly real GDP was
interpolated from annual data.
3. Domestic Real Interest Rate: Deposit rate (IFS line 60) deflated using consumer prices (IFS line 64). Monthly
rates expressed in percentage points. In levels.
4. "Excess" Ml balances: Ml (IFS line 34) deflated by consumer prices (IFS line 64) less an estimated demand for
money. The demand for real balances is determined by real GDP (interpolated IFS line 99b.p), domestic consumer
price inflation, and a time trend. Domestic inflation was used in lieu of nominal interest rates, as market-determined
interest rates were not available during the entire sample for a number of countries; the time trend is motivated by its
role as a proxy for financial innovation and/or currency substitution. In levels.
5. M2/Reserves: IFS lines 34 plus 35 converted into dollars (using IFS line ae) divided by IFS line IL.d.
6. Bank Deposits: IFS line 24 plus 25 deflated by consumer prices (IFS line 64).
7. Exports: IFS line 70.
8. Imports: IFS line 71.
9. Terms of Trade: The unit value of exports (IFS line 74) over the unit value of imports (IFS line 75). For those
developing countries where import unit values (or import price indices) were not available, an index of prices of
manufactured exports from industrial countries to developing countries was used.
10. The Real Exchange Rate: The real exchange rate index is derived from a nominal exchange rate index,
adjusted for relative consumer prices (IFS line 64). The measure is defined as the relative price of foreign goods (in
domestic currency) to the price of domestic goods. The nominal exchange rate index is a weighted average of the
exchange rates of the nineteen OECD countries with weights equal to the country trade shares with the OECD
countries. Since not all real appreciations reflect disequilibirium phenomena, we focus on deviations of the real
exchange rate from trend. In levels.
11. Reserves: IFS line IL.d.
12. Output: For most countries, the measure of output used is industrial production (IFS line 66). However, for
some countries, (the commodity exporters) an index of output of primary commodities is used (IFS lines 66aa), if
industrial production is not available.
13. Stock returns: IFC global indices are used for all emerging markets: for industrial countries the quotes from the
main boards are used. All stock prices are in US dollars.
14. Short-term Foreign Debt: Liabilities of domestic residents to BIS reporting banks with maturities up to one
year divided by total liabilities of domestic residents to BIS reporting banks, interpolated from semi-annual data.
The Maturity, Sectoral, and Nationality Distribution of International Bank Lending, Bank for International
Settlements.
15. Foreign Debt: Liabilities of domestic residents to BIS reporting banks. International Banking and Financial
Market Developments (BIS).
16. World Real Interest Rate: US deposit rate (IFS line 60) deflated using consumer prices (IFS line 64). Monthly
rates expressed in percentage points. In levels.
17. Fiscal Deficit: The ratio of fiscal deficit (IFS line 80) deflated by consumer prices (IFS line 64) to GDP (IFS
line 99b.p) interpolated.
18. Banking Crises: Index of banking crises from Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) (updated to 2002).

20

Table 1
Indicators of Currency Crises

Models

Indicators

First Generation

Fiscal Deficit/GDP
Excess Real M1 Balances

Second Generation Exports
Imports
Real Exchange Rate
Terms of Trade
Output
Domestic Real Interest Rate

Third Generation

Domestic Credit/GDP
M2/Reserves
M2 Multiplier
Deposits
Stock Prices
Banking Crises

Sovereign Debt

Debt/Exports
Short-Term Debt/Reserves

Sudden Stops

World Real Interest Rate
Foreign Exchange Reserves

Table 2
Chronology of Currency Crises

Country

Argentina

Currency Crisis

June 1970

Country

Malaysia

Currency Crisis

July 1975

June 1975

August 1997

February 1981

June 1998

July 1982
Mexico

September 1976

September 1986
February 1982
April 1989
December 1982
February 1990
December 1994
February 2002
Norway
Bolivia

June 1973

November 1982
February 1978
November 1983
May 1986
September 1985
December 1992

Brazil

February 1983

July 1998

November 1986

July 1999

July 1989

November 2000

November 1990
Peru

June 1976

October 1991
October 1987
January 1999
September 1988
Chile

December 1971
Philippines

February 1970

August 1972
October 1983
October 1973
June 1984
December 1974
February 1986
January 1976
December 1997
August 1982
September 1984

Spain

February 1976
July 1977

Colombia

March 1983
December 1982
February 1985
September 1992
August 1995
May 1993
September 1997
September 1998

Sweden

August 1999

August 1977
September 1981
October 1982

Denmark

May 1971
November 1992
June 1973
November 1979

Thailand

August 1993

November 1978
July 1981
November 1984

Finland

June 1973
July 1997
October 1982
January 1998
November 1991
September 1999
September 1992
July 2000

Indonesia

November 1978
Turkey

August 1970

April 1983
January 1980
September 1986
March 1994
December 1997
February 2001
January 1998
Uruguay
Israel

December 1971

November 1974
October 1982
November 1977
October 1983
July 1984

Venezuela

February 1984
December 1986
March 1989
May 1994

Sources:
Kaminsky & Reinhart, 1999 and updates .

December 1995

Table 3
Varieties of Currency Crises

Outcomes

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Characteristics

Current
Account

real appreciation < 0.178
low Domestic Credit/GDP growth < 0.715
low Short Debt/Reserves < 0.166
low world interest rate i* < .329
real appreciation < 0.178
low Domestic Credit/GDP growth < 0.715
low Short Debt/Reserves < 0.166
0.329 < moderate world interest rate < 0.845
real appreciation < 0.178
low Domestic Credit/GDP growth < 0.715
low Short Debt/Reserves < 0.166
high world interest rate > 0.845
extreme real appreciation < 0.039
low Domestic Credit/GDP growth < 0.715
moderate Short Debt/Reserves > 0.166
low Debt/Exports < 0.689
0.039 < real appreciation < 0.178
low Domestic Credit/GDP growth < 0.715
moderate Short Debt/Reserves > 0.166
low Debt/Exports < 0.689
real appreciation < 0.178
low Domestic Credit/GDP growth < 0.715
moderate Short Debt/Reserves > 0.166
high Debt/Exports > 0.689
Deteriorating Exports < 0.457
real appreciation < 0.178
low Domestic Credit/GDP growth < 0.715
moderate Short Debt/Reserves > 0.166
high Debt/Exports > 0.689
Growing Exports > 0.457
real appreciation < 0.178
high Domestic Credit/GDP growth > 0.715
high fiscal deficit < 0.486
real appreciation < 0.178
high Domestic Credit/GDP growth > 0.715
low fiscal deficit > 0.486
contractionary monetary policy < 0.888
real appreciation < 0.178
high Domestic Credit/GDP growth > 0.715
low fiscal deficit > 0.486
expansionary monetary policy > 0.888
real depreciation > 0.178
low Debt/Exports < 0.755
low world interest rate i* < .535
extremely high fiscal deficit < 0.037
real depreciation > 0.178
low Debt/Exports < 0.755
0.535 < moderate world interest rate I* < 0.934
extremely high fiscal deficit < 0.037
real depreciation > 0.178
low Debt/Exports < 0.755
low world interest rate i* < 0.934
no extremely high fiscal deficit > 0.037
0.178 < moderate real appreciation < 0.672
low Debt/Exports < 0.755
extremely high world interest rate i* > 0.934
real depreciation > 0.672
low Debt/Exports < 0.755
extremely high world interest rate i* > 0.934
real depreciation > 0.178
high Debt/Exports > 0.755
moderate fiscal deficit < 0.572
low M2/Reserves < 0.778
real depreciation > 0.178
high Debt/Exports > 0.755
moderate fiscal deficit < 0.572
high M2/Reserves > 0.778
real depreciation > 0.178
high Debt/Exports > 0.755
moderate fiscal deficit < 0.572

Notes: The * indicates to which variety of crises each group belongs.

Financial
Excesses

Fiscal
Deficit

Sovereign
Debt

Sudden
Stops

SelfProbability
Fulfilling

*

66.3

*

6.3

*

93.2

*

62.8

*

30.1

*

72.8

*

35.9

*

87.4

*

13

*

82.9

87
*

*

14.3

*

13.5

*

56

*

9.2

*

34.9

*

68.7

*

19.6

Table 4
Classification of Crises
Months of Crises with Problems of
Country

Argentina

Bolivia

Brazil

Chile

Colombia

Denmark

Finland

Indonesia

Israel

Malaysia

Mexico

Norway

Peru

Philippines

Spain

Sweden

Thailand

Turkey

Uruguay

Venezuela

Crisis
Jun-70
Jun-75
Feb-81
Jul-82
Sep-86
Apr-89
Feb-90
Jan-02
Nov-82
Nov-83
Sep-85
Feb-83
Nov-86
Jul-89
Nov-90
Oct-91
Jan-99
Dec-71
Aug-72
Oct-73
Dec-74
Jan-76
Aug-82
Sep-84
Mar-83
Feb-85
Aug-95
Sep-97
Sep-98
Aug-99
May-71
Jun-73
Nov-79
Aug-93
Jun-73
Oct-82
Nov-91
Sep-92
Nov-78
Apr-83
Sep-86
Dec-97
Jan-98
Nov-74
Nov-77
Oct-83
Jul-84
Jul-75
Aug-97
Jun-98
Sep-76
Feb-82
Dec-82
Dec-94
Jun-73
Feb-78
May-86
Dec-92
Jan-98
Jul-99
Nov-00
Jun-76
Oct-87
Sep-88
Feb-70
Oct-83
Jun-84
Feb-86
Dec-97
Feb-76
Jul-77
Dec-82
Sep-92
May-93
Aug-77
Sep-81
Oct-82
Nov-92
Nov-78
Jul-81
Nov-84
Jul-97
Jan-98
Sep-99
Jul-00
Aug-70
Jan-80
Mar-94
Feb-01
Dec-71
Oct-82
Feb-84
Dec-86
Mar-89
May-94
Dec-95

Current
Account
6
1
4
0
0
0
7
5
4
2
0
0
0
0
0
11
0
0
8
8
0
0
0
1
0
0
11
9
3
0
0
19
0
0
0
1
0
8
0
2
0
0
7
4
0
0
12
0
0
0
4
4
15
0
6
0
0
0
0
0
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
4
10
0
12
9
24
0
0
8
4
3
1
1
0
0
0
6
2
0
0
5
2
0
0
0
3

Financial
Excesses
15
11
7
0
0
0
3
8
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
6
1
2
12
16
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
3
0
15
0
0
0
5
13
0
0
5
12
10
1
5
5
9
0
17
0
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
13
8
2
20
1
0
0
12
7
0
0
0
0
0
1
23
2
2
0
0
0
0
22
0
16
6
0
0
0
0

Fiscal
Deficits
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
1
0
0
6
10
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
11
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
11

Sovereign
Debt
2
0
2
21
23
19
0
3
4
4
11
24
8
7
3
2
5
7
3
0
7
7
24
10
16
0
2
3
5
0
0
0
11
0
0
21
20
2
0
4
14
18
1
0
23
25
1
1
3
2
3
7
0
0
2
2
5
2
18
12
3
23
19
7
15
22
0
0
0
7
0
1
0
0
0
16
0
0
1
20
21
14
4
9
14
2
4
8
4
20
25
1
0

Sudden
Stops
0
0
11
0
0
0
0
8
4
18
11
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
22
0
0
0
9
3
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
3
5
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
16
0
0
0
10
22
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
1
0
0
0

Variety
n.a.
Financial Excesses
Financial Excesses
Financial Excesses
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Current Account
Financial Excesses
Financial Excesses
Sudden Stops
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Financial Excesses
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Fiscal Deficits
Current Account
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Financial Excesses
Financial Excesses
Financial Excesses
Current Account
Financial Excesses
Financial Excesses
Self-Fulfilling
Self-Fulfilling
Current Account
Sovereign Debt
Self-Fulfilling
Sudden Stops
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Current Account
Financial Excesses
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Current Account
Financial Excesses
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Current Account
Financial Excesses
Financial Excesses
Sovereign Debt
Financial Excesses
Sovereign Debt
Financial Excesses
Self-Fulfilling
Financial Excesses
Sudden Stops
Fiscal Deficits
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Current Account
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
n.a.
Financial Excesses
Financial Excesses
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Current Account
Current Account
Sovereign Debt
Financial Excesses
Financial Excesses
Current Account
Sudden Stops
Sudden Stops
Sovereign Debt
Current Account
Current Account
Financial Excesses
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Fiscal Deficits
n.a.
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Financial Excesses
Sovereign Debt
Financial Excesses
Financial Excesses
Sovereign Debt
Sovereign Debt
Fiscal Deficits
Fiscal Deficits

Table 5
Crises in Emerging and Mature Markets

Countries
Current
Account

Financial
Excesses

Emerging
Mature

13
17

35
13

Ratio

Current
Account

E/M

Number of Crises
(in percent)
Fiscal Sovereign
Deficits
Debt

6
4

45
33

Sudden
Stops

2
17

SelfFulfilling
0
17

Relative Importance of Crises in the Two Regions
Financial
Fiscal Sovereign Sudden
SelfExcesses Deficits
Debt
Stops
Fulfilling
0.8
2.7
1.5
1.4
0.1
0

Notes: The top panel shows the percent of crises in each variety. For example, 35
percent of all crises in emerging markets are classified as crises of Financial Excesses.

Table 6
Varieties and Costs of Crises

Indicator
Reserve Losses
Depreciation
Growth t
Growth t+1
Imports Growth
Exports Growth

Current
Account
-14.1
15.1
-1.9
-0.9
-3.9
4.3

Financial
Excesses
-13.0
30.8**
-3.8*
-0.7
-24.5**
-0.5

Costs of Crises
(in percent)
Fiscal
Sovereign Sudden
Deficits
Debt
Stops
-19.6
-12.7
-12.5
24.3
20.1
13.3
-1.9
-3.4
-0.2*
-2.8*
-0.3
-0.3
7.2
-4.8
-6.0
-7.6
0.4
5.3

SelfFulfilling
15.4
1.2*
0.6**
-0.4
22.4
19.5*

All Crises
(average)
-12.1
20.1
-2.9
-0.7
-8.2
1.3

Notes: Reserve Losses are computed as the change in foreign exchange reserves of the central bank in
the six months prior to the crisis. Depreciation is computed as the real exchange rate depreciation in the
six months after the crisis. Growth in the aftermath of crises is computed as the changes in output relative
to mean growth during the sample. t and t+1 refer to the year of the crisis and the year following the crisis,
respectively. Import (export) growth is computed as the change in imports (exports) -relative to trend- in the
12 months following the crisis.
*, **, *** refer to 10-, 5-, and 1-percent significance values. The null hypothesis is that the severity of the
particular variety of crisis is equal to that of the average crisis. The significance values refer to one-tail tests
and reflect the alternative hypothesis that the cost of a particular type of crisis is larger (smaller) than that of
of the average crisis.

Table 7
Forecasting Accuracy

Episodes

All Sample
Crisis Times
Tranquil Times

Forecasting Accuracy of Signals Approach
One Regime
Multiple Regime
QPS
LPS
QPS
LPS
0.369
0.937
0.161

0.561
1.249
0.308

0.293
0.779
0.109

0.464
1.069
0.235

Notes: QPS refers to the Quadratic Probability Score and LPS refers to
the Log Probability Score.

Figure 1
yes

yes

no

RER<.178

no
yes

C/Y<.715

SD/R<.166

FD/Y<.486

i*<.934

FD/Y<.572

no

yes

yes

D/X<.689

i*<.845

no

EM1<.696

Node 8

no yes

FD/Y<.037

no

yes

RER<.039

Node 3

no

Node 2

Node 4

Node 9

no

yes
yes

Node 1

X<.457

yes

no

yes

RER<.672

yes

Node 13

Node 18

no
yes

Node 14

no

M2/R<.776

no

i*<.535

Node 10

yes

no

yes

yes
yes

i*<.329

no

D/X<.755

Node 15

no

Node 16

Node 17

no

no

Node 5

Node 6

Node 7

Node 11

Node 12

Notation: RER= real exchange rate, C/Y= Domestic Credit/GDP, i*= World Interest Rate, EM1= Excess Real M1 Balances, FD/Y= Fiscal Deficit/GDP, M2/R=M2/Reserves, SD/R= Short-term Debt/Reserves, X=Exports, D/X= Debt/X

Figure 2

Probabilities of Currency Crises
Argentina

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

1975

1980

1985

1995

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

2000

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

1980

1985

1990

1995

1975

1980

1985

1995

2000

1970

1975

1980

1995

1995

0.0
1970

2000

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Indonesia

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

0.0
1970

1975

1980

Mexico

Malaysia

1.0

1985

1990

1995

2000

Norway

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

1970

2000

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Sweden

Spain

Philippines

0.0
1970

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

2000

2000

1990

Finland

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

1970

2000

1975

1980

Turkey

1990

1985

0.8

2000

Thailand

1970

1990

1.0

1.0

1975

1985

1.0

Peru

1970

1980

Denmark

1.0

1975

1.0

0.8

Israel

1970

Chile
1.0

0.8

1.0

1990

Brazil

1.0

0.8

Colombia

1970

Bolivia

1.0

1985

1990

1995

2000

Uruguay

0.0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Venezuela

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

1970

Note: Shaded Areas denote crisis windows

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1.0

1995

2000

1.0

0.0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

