                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 THE RISE OF THE SKILLED CITY

                                           Edward L. Glaeser
                                              Albert Saiz

                                          Working Paper 10191
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10191


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2003




Glaeser thanks the National Science Foundation and the Taubman Center for State and Local Government
for financial support. The paper was started when Saiz was an economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, but the views in this paper do not necessary reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia or Federal Reserve Bank System. Shannon Mail provided superb research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Edward L. Glaeser and Albert Saiz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Rise of the Skilled City
Edward L. Glaeser and Albert Saiz
NBER Working Paper No. 10191
December 2003
JEL No. J1

                                            ABSTRACT

For more than a century, educated cities have grown more quickly than comparable cities with less

human capital. This fact survives a battery of other control variables, metropolitan area fixed effects

and tests for reverse causality. We also find that skilled cities are growing because they are

becoming more economically productive (relative to less skilled cities), not because these cities are

becoming more attractive places to live. Most surprisingly, we find evidence suggesting that the

skills-city growth connection occurs mainly in declining areas and occurs in large part because

skilled cities are better at adapting to economic shocks. As in Schultz (1964), skills appear to permit

adaptation.

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Albert Saiz
Real Estate Department
The Wharton School
310 Lauder-Fischer Hall
256 South Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
saiz@wharton.upenn.edu
   I.      Introduction



Between 1980 and 2000, the population of metropolitan areas where less than 10 percent

of adults had college degrees in 1980, grew on average by 13 percent.               Among

metropolitan areas where more than 25 percent of adults had college degrees, the average

population growth rate was 45 percent. For more than a century, in both the United

States and Great Britain, cities with more educated residents have grown faster than

comparable cities with less human capital (Glaeser, 1994, Glaeser et al. 1995, Simon,

1998, Black and Henderson, 1999, Nardinelli and Simon, 1996, 2002).            There is no

consensus, however, on the causes or implications of this relationship.



Why have people increasingly crowded around the most skilled? Why does education

seem to be an increasingly important ingredient in agglomeration economies? Three

disparate, but not incompatible, visions of the modern city offer different answers to

these questions. The Consumer City view (e.g. Glaeser, Kolko, Saiz, 2002)— cities are

increasingly oriented around consumption amenities, not productivity—tells us that

skills predict growth because skilled neighbors are an attractive consumption amenity.

The Information City view (Jacobs, 1968)— cities exist to facilitate the flow of ideas—

tells us that we should expect cities to be increasingly oriented around the skilled because

the skilled specialize in ideas. The Reinvention City view (Glaeser, 2003)— cities

survive only by adapting their economies to new technologies— tells us that human

capital predicts city growth because human capital enables people to adapt well to change




                                                                                          2
(as in Shultz, 1964, Welch, 1970). Understanding why skills predict city growth will

help us determine if cities thrive because of consumption, information or reinvention.



In Section II of this paper, we use four approaches to address the possibility that the rise

of the skilled city is the result of a spurious correlation between local skills and other

urban characteristics.      First, we show that controlling for a wide range of other factors

makes little difference to the impact of local skills on subsequent city growth and that

local human capital is essentially orthogonal to many of the most important local

amenities. Second, we show that the metropolitan area human capital effect is robust to

including metropolitan area fixed effects. Third, we examine the connection between the

number of colleges per capita in 1940 and growth between 1970 and 2000. The pre-

World War II number of colleges seems considerably more exogenous than current skill

levels and it still correlates quite strongly with growth in the modern era.1



Fourth, we examine the timing of skills and growth and test whether skilled workers

flock to cities that are growing. Individuals with low education are particularly prone to

live in declining cities (as in Glaeser and Gyourko, 2001), but exogenous differences in

positive growth rates do not predict changes in the percentage of the population with a

college education. Reverse causation from growth to education seems to be present only

in a handful of declining metropolitan areas, and cannot account for much of the relevant

effect. Overall, the evidence supports the view that skills induce growth.




1
  In this we follow Moretti (2003). Card (1995) uses proximity to college as an instrumental variable for
the level of education of an individual.


                                                                                                            3
In Section III of the paper, we follow the methodology in Shapiro (2003) and present a

framework for understanding the connection between skills and growth. The framework

tells us that production-led growth should increase nominal wages and housing prices,

while consumption-led growth should cause real wages to fall. Rising nominal wages are

a sufficient condition for productivity growth, and declining real wages are necessary for

the amenity story to be of relevance.



Our empirical work in Section IV shows that productivity drives most of the connection

between skills and growth. At the metropolitan level, we find that education levels have

a positive impact on future wage and housing price growth. With almost any reasonable

set of parameter values, the connection between education and population growth is the

exclusive result of rising productivity and has less to do with rising amenity levels.

Indeed, real wages may actually be rising in high-education metropolitan areas, which

suggests that consumer amenities are actually declining in high skill areas.



At the city level, the results are less clear. In small municipalities within metropolitan

areas, low levels of human capital predict urban decline and falling housing prices. At

the city level (not at the metropolitan area level), it is the bottom end of the human capital

distribution that matters. High school dropouts predict urban decline. Moreover, this

decline appears to be driven, at least in part, through consumption-related effects.

Perhaps, unfortunately, poverty has become to be perceived as an increasingly negative

amenity because of social problems or a higher tax burden.




                                                                                            4
The fact that skills increase metropolitan area growth through productivity increases is

compatible with both the Information City and the Reinvention City hypotheses. In

Section V, we try to distinguish between these two interpretations of the growth-skills

connection.   To test the Information City hypothesis, we turn to patent data. Previous

research shows that areas with more human capital have higher rates of patenting per

capita (Carlino et al, 2001). We find that controlling for patenting rates does not explain

any portion of the effect of human capital on growth. This certainly does not disprove

the Information City hypothesis, but it doesn’t support it either.



One test of the reinvention hypothesis is to look at the cross-effect between skills and

factors that have an independent effect on city growth. The Information City view

implies that skills should predict growth among all types of cities. The Reinvention City

hypothesis predicts that skills should only matter among those cities that have received

negative shocks. We test this implication by looking at the cross effect between skills

and the weather, and skills and immigration. Warm weather and immigration have been

two of the most important drivers of contemporaneous metropolitan population growth in

the United States. As Figure 4 shows, the correlation between skills and growth is

essentially zero in warm cities. As Figure 5 shows, the correlation coefficient between

skills and growth is over 50 percent.      We also find that skills don’t matter much in

immigrant cities. There is a strong negative cross-effect between skills and either warmth

or immigration, which means that human capital really only matters in potentially

declining places, which in turn supports the reinvention hypothesis.




                                                                                         5
We also test the reinvention hypothesis by seeing whether skilled places shifted out of

manufacturing more quickly. In the first part of the 20th century, urban success generally

meant specialization in manufacturing.                   Declining transport costs and declining

importance of manufacturing has meant that at the beginning of the 21st century,

successful cities have moved from manufacturing into other industries. If the reinvention

hypothesis is right then it should predict the speed at which cities reinvent themselves.

Indeed, we find that metropolitan areas with high levels of education and significant

manufacturing as of 1940 switched from manufacturing to other industries faster than

high-manufacturing areas with less human capital. These results suggest that skills are

valuable because they help cities adapt and change their activities in response to negative

economic shocks.



II. Is the Skills-Growth Connection Spurious?



In this section, we confirm the empirical relationship between education and metropolitan

statistical area (MSA) growth. We test whether the connection between skills and city

growth is spurious, reflecting omitted variables. We use both cities and MSAs as our unit

of analysis, because there are advantages and disadvantages to both. MSAs are more

natural labor markets, but cities are smaller and a better unit of analysis for understanding

either amenities or real estate prices.               We use the 1999 county-based boundaries

(NECMA definitions in New England and PMSA definitions in the rest of the country).2

Using county level data, it is possible for us to obtain a complete and consistent panel for


2
    Using the most recent boundaries helps us avoid the endogeneity of current definitions to growth.



                                                                                                        6
1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000. We select those cities with population over 30,000 in 1970.

The Data Appendix details the sources of all variables



In Figure 1, we show the correlation between the growth of the logarithm of population

between 1980 and 2000 and the share of adults in 1980 with college degrees among

metropolitan statistical areas. In Table 1 (panel a) we show the correlation between

Metropolitan Area level growth and the primary independent variables over the entire

1970-2000 period. Table 1 (panel b) shows similar correlations at the city level. In both

cases, there is a significant association between initial education levels and later growth.

The correlation between the share of college graduates and population growth is 18

percent in the case of cities and 30 percent in the case of metropolitan areas.



While we focus primarily on the share of the adult population with college degrees, an

alternative measure of human capital, the share of adults who dropped out of high school,

is a stronger (i.e. more negative) correlate of city growth, but a weaker correlate of MSA

growth. This suggests that the impact of higher education may be more important at the

MSA level (maybe due to a productivity effect), whereas the impact of low education is

more important at the city level (maybe because of localized social interactions). While

these correlations are large, other variables such as heating degree days, annual

precipitation and the share of labor force in manufacturing have stronger correlations

with population growth than the human capital variables.




                                                                                          7
Our baseline regressions use a panel of metropolitan areas (in Table 2) and cities (in

Table 3) over three periods (the 70s, the 80s and the 90s).3 The dependent variable is the

difference in the log of population between census years. We focus on the coefficient on

the share of the population with a college education.4                        All regressions include decade-

specific fixed effects and allow each geographic unit’s standard errors to be correlated

over time. More precisely, we estimate the coefficients β and γ                             j   in regressions of the

form:

                         ⎛ Populationi,t ⎞⎟           Collegei,t −10
(1)                Log ⎜⎜⎜                  ⎟⎟ = β ⋅                   + ∑ γ j Zi, j ,t −10 + Yt + εi,t
                                            ⎟
                       ⎜⎝ Populationi,t −10 ⎠        Populationi,t −10   j




           Collegei ,t −10
where                          is the share of the population with a college degree in the initial
         Population i ,t −10

year, Z i , j ,t −10 is the value of independent variable j in the initial year, Yt is a decade-

specific fixed effect and ε i,t is the city-year error term, which we allow to be correlated

across decades.



Regression (1) in Tables 2 and 3 shows the raw impact of percent college educated on

later growth for MSAs and cities respectively. In the case of the MSA-level regressions,

a one-percentage-point increase in the share of the adult population with college degrees

increases the decadal growth rate by, approximately, almost one-half of one percent.

The standard deviation of metropolitan area growth is approximately .1 and the standard

deviation of the college graduation variable is approximately .05:                                   a one standard



3
  We have data for four years: 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000. Since we are using population growth (the first
difference in the log of population) we end up with 3 time periods.
4
  This corresponds to individuals with a bachelor’s degree.


                                                                                                                   8
deviation increase in percent college graduates increases the expected growth rate by one-

quarter of a standard deviation.



In the city-level regressions reported in Table 3, the basic effect of college education is

weaker. A one percent increase in college graduates increases the expected growth rate

by one fifth of one percent. At the city-level the standard deviation of the percent college

educated variable is approximately .1, and the standard deviation of decadal growth rates

is about .15. This means that a one standard deviation increase in the percent college

educated at the city level is associated with approximately a one seventh of a standard

deviation increase in the expected growth rate. As suggested by the raw correlations,

college education is a more powerful predictor of growth at the MSA level than growth at

the city level.



In regression (2) of both tables, we include initial population, the log of heating degree

days, the log of average precipitation, the share of labor force in manufacturing, trade and

professional services,5 and controls for the four Census regions. Warm and dry weather

have been shown to be amongst the important predictors of population growth in the

United States at the end of the 20th century (Glaeser, Kolko, and Saiz, 2001, Glaeser and

Shapiro, 2003). Heating degree days is a measure of cold weather severity (roughly, how

many days would a household need to use heating to keep warm). Initial population is

usually unrelated to later city growth (as in Glaeser, Scheinkman and Shleifer, 1995,

Eaton and Eckstein, 1997) but it remains a natural control. The employment share


5
 These are the three major occupations in our sample, representing 63% of total MSA employment in
1990.


                                                                                                    9
variables capture aspects of industrial orientation and we know from Table 1 that

specializing in manufacturing is a strong correlate of later decline.



For both cities and metropolitan areas we find that warm, dry places grow much more

quickly than cold, wet places. There is a modest amount of mean reversion: bigger cities

and metropolitan areas grow somewhat more slowly. Metropolitan areas with substantial

manufacturing grow more slowly. While these correlations are interesting, we will not

discuss them further because they have been considered at length elsewhere (Glaeser,

Scheinkman and Shleifer, 1995, Glaeser and Shapiro, 2003). Our focus is the extent that

controlling for these variables changes the impact of college education on later city

growth.



Including these controls has little impact on the coefficient on the college educated.

Education does not predict growth because educated metropolitan areas have more

employment in the service sector or better weather. In the case of metropolitan areas,

including these factors actually causes the coefficient on percent college educated to rise.

The fact that controlling for these major potential omitted variables causes the impact of

college to rise shouldn’t surprise us, because skilled workers are actually less likely to

live in warm, dry places. Since more educated people have tended to live in the areas of

the country with less desirable climates, controlling for the weather variables makes the

impact of education stronger, not weaker.




                                                                                         10
In specification three, we include state-specific fixed effects. In principle, these fixed

effects should capture all time-invariant weather or geographic variables, as well as those

state-level policies that change only slowly over time. In Tables 2 and 3, controlling for

state-specific effects has only a modest impact. In the case of metropolitan areas, the

state fixed effects regressions have almost exactly the same coefficient as the regression

with no controls. In the case of cities, the state fixed effects cause the coefficient on

education to drop 18 percent relative to the no control specification. We generally prefer

not to work with state specific fixed effects, especially in the case of metropolitan area

regressions, since many states have only a small number of metropolitan areas.



In the fourth regression, we include a city or metropolitan area fixed effect. This control

is meant to address the possibility that skilled workers are just proxying for omitted

variables that are pushing the area ahead. In this case, all of our identification comes

from changes in the share of college educated over time within the city. In other words,

during decades where the city began with more college graduates (relative to its historical

mean) did that city have a higher subsequent growth rate? In the case of metropolitan

areas, these fixed effects have little impact on the coefficient, although the standard errors

rise significantly.6 In the case of the cities, the coefficient drops by 40 percent (relative to

the no control benchmark) and becomes statistically insignificant, but the difference

between the coefficient in regression (4) and the coefficient in regression (1) is not

statistically significant.


6
  We understand that we cannot estimate the coefficient on the lagged dependent variable consistently in
the fixed effects specification. However the results on the other coefficients would not change very much if
we omitted the lag of population in the fixed effects specification.



                                                                                                         11
Including city specific fixed effects is asking a great deal of the data, given the extremely

high degree of persistence in human capital over time. The correlation coefficient in the

share of the college educated in 1980 and 1990 is 97.3 percent across cities and 97.5

percent across metropolitan areas. As the fixed effects eliminate most of the variation in

skills across space, we are amazed that we continue to find a positive effect, and we are

not troubled that the effect gets somewhat weaker in the city specification.



In the fifth regressions of the two tables, we add two further controls to the specification

in regression (2): the share of the adult population without high school degree and the

unemployment rate. We see both of these variables as added measures of human capital,

but these measures capture the lower end of the human capital distribution. While high-

frequency changes in the unemployment rate over time generally reflect time-varying

labor market conditions, differences in the unemployment rate across cities (less so across

metropolitan areas) are generally time invariant and reflect characteristics of the labor

force and the industry structure in the city.7 The correlation coefficient between city-

level unemployment rates in 1980 and 1990 is .75; the correlation coefficient between

MSA-level unemployment rates in 1980 and 1990 is .5.



In the case of metropolitan areas, the effect of the dropout rate is insignificant and the

unemployment rate is marginally significant.                 Together these variables reduce the

coefficient on percent college educated by 15 percent relative to regression (1). In Table


7
 Thus most of the time-series variation in unemployment rates is common to all cities, whereas the relative
differentials between cities are quite stable.


                                                                                                         12
3, controlling for these other variables severely reduces the impact of higher education on

city growth. The natural interpretation of Table 2 and Table 3 is that an abundance of

college graduates drives the success of a regional labor market, but a local neighborhood

succeeds by minimizing the number of low educated people.



Finally, in regression (6), we drop our measure of college graduation entirely and follow

Moretti (2003) using instead the presence of colleges in the area prior to 1940. As seen

in Figure 2, there is a remarkably strong relationship between the number of colleges per

capita before World War II and the level of people with higher education in 2000. This

variable has the advantage of being predetermined and not a function of recent events

which might attract the well educated to a metropolitan area.



While we believe that this variable is less likely to reflect reverse causality or omitted

factors than our share of college educated variable, we are not confident that it is

orthogonal to the error term. As such, using the variable as an instrument (as in Moretti,

2003) may give us quite misleading results because in instrumental variables regression,

the correlation with the error term is essentially multiplied by the inverse of the first stage

R-squared.8 Instead, we present results using this variable directly instead of using it to

instrument for the share of college graduates. In fact, both as an instrument and as a

right-hand-side variable, the variable has a strong, significant impact on population

growth. The coefficient in Table 2 implies that as the number of colleges per capita




8
 Technically, this statement is only true in a univariate regression. Still, the basic point that correlation
with the error term explodes in magnitude in instrumental variables regressions holds in all cases.


                                                                                                                13
doubles, the expected growth rate over the decade rises by roughly four percent for both

MSAs and cities.9



In Appendix Table 2 we run similar regressions at the MSA level with a set of controls

for other variables that may be correlated with initial high levels of education, and find

that the impact of education on growth is not driven by these omitted variables either.10



In Table 4, we look at reverse causality.              In regression (1), we look at the relationship

between population growth and the change in the share of the population with bachelor’s

degrees at the city level. Glaeser and Gyourko (2001) argue that durable housing causes

uneducated people to move into declining cities for the cheap housing. As such, the

relationship between population change and human capital change should be much

weaker among growing cities than among declining cities. This asymmetry occurs

9
  We have also experimented with college enrollment over population in 1970 as an exogenous proxy for
human capital with qualitatively similar results (see Appendix Table 2, column 1).
10
   In Appendix Table 2 we control for the possibility that the share of the highly educated be simply
capturing attributes of the age distribution in a city (for example, younger cities will tend to be more
educated because of a cohort effect: younger cohorts are attaining higher education levels, or cities with
lower education maybe simply cities with elderly retired people). To address that issue we have augmented
the MSA regression to control for the initial age distribution of the metropolitan area (variables for the
shares of population in the following categories: age 0-21,22-34,35-44,45-54, and 54-65). We include in
Appendix Table 2 other variables that are generally considered city amenities or disamenities. We also
control for the murder rate. Higher education levels have been shown to reduce crime (Lochner, 1999,
Lochner and Moretti, 2001). Crime is a very salient disamenity. For instance, Berry-Cullen and Levitt,
(1999) show a causal link between crime and city depopulation. Murder rates are a good indicator of crime,
because other crimes are not always reported, and reporting rates for other crimes may vary according to
education levels. The number of museums, eating and drinking establishments per capita, health
establishments per capita, the number of amusement and recreational service establishments, and the
teacher/pupil ratio (a proxy for the quality of primary and secondary education in the metropolitan area) are
included as local public goods or amenities that are likely to be provided in high human capital areas. We
also include the number of membership organizations as a proxy for social capital. An alternative
hypothesis to explain why the presence of highly educated people fosters growth hinges on the propensity
of the highly educated to contribute to local social capital by participating in political and civic institutions
(à la Putnam, 2000). Including these amenities, public goods and controls for social capital does not seem
to explain away the role of education on city growth. In fact, the amenity variables are mostly insignificant
in this specification, although in line with previous research there is a very strong negative impact of crime
on growth.


                                                                                                              14
because durable housing means that housing prices fall sharply in declining cities and this

attracts the unskilled. We estimate our regression with a spline at zero population

growth.



Regression (1) does indeed find a strong relationship between growth and human capital

among declining cities and little relationship among growing cities. In regression (4) we

repeat this exercise with metropolitan areas and find similar results. Regressions (2) and

(5) repeat regressions (1) and (4) with initial population and industry share controls and

finds little change in the coefficients on growth.



While these regressions point to a connection between decline and human capital change,

the fact that we are regressing change in human capital on contemporaneous population

growth is problematic.     Obviously, the causal link is hard to determine from this

regression. To address this issue, we instrument for growth using the omitted climate

variables (heating degree days and annual precipitation).        As shown above, these

variables powerfully predict growth and we use them as instruments in regressions (3)

and (6). Clearly, interpreting the coefficients from the IV specification would become

problematic if we believed that climate has a direct impact on the skill composition of an

area. In regressions (3) and (6), the results are inconclusive, because the standard errors

become quite large (especially for the coefficients on decline), but we see little evidence

for population growth accompanying skill upgrading among growing cities.




                                                                                        15
Our interpretation of Table 4 is that there is significant potential for reverse causality

among those cities that are actually in decline, but little potential for reverse causality

among growing cities.        We see this as being more problematic for the city level

regressions because decline is more common at the city level. To ensure that a tendency

for declining metropolitan areas to shed skilled workers is not driving our results in

Tables 2 and 3, we have run regressions where we treat all declining cities as having zero

population growth.       This change has little impact on our estimated coefficient on

schooling. We also omitted those areas which are predicted (on the basis of weather) to

have population declines. This causes our coefficients to fall, but generally remain

statistically significant.



III.    Productivity and Amenities: A Theoretical Framework



Tables 2, 3, and 4 suggest that the correlation between human capital and subsequent

urban growth is a real phenomenon, and not a spurious correlation driven by some

obvious omitted variable or reverse causality. We now try to understand this correlation.

In this section, we follow the approach in Shapiro (2003) and present a simple model that

will help us to distinguish between consumption and production led urban growth. The

structure of this framework closely follows the insights of Roback (1982). The main

novelty of the model is our use of Shapiro’s (2003) methodology to extend the

framework of Glaeser et al. (1995) to multiple skill groups.




                                                                                        16
The spatial equilibrium concept is the appropriate starting point for empirical work on

urban growth. This concept posits that identical people must be indifferent between

alternative locations. We assume that there are a large number of cities, and we consider

the equilibrium of a single city, denoted “j”. There are two types of workers, high skill

and low skill, who receive different wages in the city denoted W jH and W jL .



Utility is Cobb-Douglas over a traded good, a non-traded good, and over a place specific

commodity, and as such consumers choose the consumption of the non-traded good

(denoted Q) to maximize C j (W ji − PjQ Q)1−γ Q γ , where PjQ is the price of that good in

city j, and C j is a city-specific consumer amenity level. Optimization yields

PjQ Q = γW j . We assume a fixed supply of the non-traded good in city “j” which is

denoted Q j . If we let N j denote total city population and Ŵ j denote the average wage,

                                                                         γ
                                                                ⎛ Qj     ⎞
then total utility for each person equals (1 − γ )   1−γ
                                                           C jW ⎜
                                                                i        ⎟ which must in turn be
                                                               j
                                                                ⎜ N Wˆ   ⎟
                                                                ⎝ j j    ⎠

equal to U i , the reservation utility for each group H and L. This implies that the ratio of

                                                                     W jH         UH
wages in every city equals the ratio of reservation utilities, or         L
                                                                              =      .
                                                                     W   j        UL




We assume a Cobb-Douglas production function that uses capital (denoted K), effective

labor units (denoted L and defined later) and a city-specific production input (which is

meant to represent commercial land or access to waterways and is denoted F). Total

output is therefore A j K α Lβ F 1−α − β , where A j is a city specific productivity factor.


                                                                                              17
Capital is available at a national price of r, but there is only a fixed amount, F j , of the

city-specific input.



Our primary focus will be on changes in the productivity level, A j , and the consumer

amenity level, C j , and these are the only city-specific attributes that we will allow to

                                                        ⎛ A j ,t +1 ⎞
change over time. Specifically, we will assume that Log ⎜           ⎟ = δ Ak X kj ,t +ε Aj ,t and
                                                        ⎜ A j ,t ⎟ ∑
                                                        ⎝           ⎠ k

    ⎛ C j ,t +1 ⎞
Log ⎜           ⎟ = δ Ck X kj ,t +ε Cj ,t , where X kj ,t are city-specific characteristics as of time t
    ⎜ C j ,t ⎟ ∑
    ⎝           ⎠ k

which include the skill composition of the city. There are two interpretations of these

equations.        First, different variables may actually increase productive innovation or

investment in consumer amenities. In this case, we should think of estimated coefficients

as suggesting that certain characteristics have growth effects.



Alternatively, we can think of characteristics as having level effects which change over

time.        If          ( )
                    Log A j ,t = ∑ψ Ak ,t X kj ,t +ξ jA,t   and        ( )
                                                                  Log C j ,t = ∑ψ Ck ,t X kj ,t +ξ Cj ,t ,   and
                                    k                                              k


X kj ,t ≈ X kj ,t +1 (recall that the correlation of schooling levels over time is over 97 percent,

                                                  ⎛ A j ,t +1 ⎞
and the climate is even more permanent), then Log ⎜           ⎟ ≈ (ψ Ak ,t +1 − ψ Ak ,t ) X kj ,t +ε Aj ,t
                                                  ⎜ A j ,t ⎟ ∑
                                                  ⎝           ⎠ k

        ⎛ C j ,t +1 ⎞
and Log ⎜           ⎟ ≈ (ψ Ck ,t +1 − ψ Ck ,t ) X kj ,t +ε Cj ,t . As these equations are identical to the
        ⎜ C j ,t ⎟ ∑
        ⎝           ⎠ k

growth equations above, they are empirically indistinguishable, and we cannot tell if a



                                                                                                              18
characteristic causes productivity growth because it has a growth effect or because it has

a level effect that is increasing over time.                                        This model will enable us to separate

characteristics that impact consumption amenities and characteristics that impact

production amenities, but not to separate growth effects from “increasing level” effects.



To allow for multiple skill categories, we assume that a unit of effective labor is produced

via a constant elasticity of substitution technology that uses both high and low skilled

                           (
workers, i.e. L = θ 1j −σ LσH + LσL                 )   1/ σ
                                                               where θ j is a city-specific parameter increasing the

relative returns to skilled workers, and LH , LL reflect the number of high and low skill

                                                                                                          1
                                                                                              ⎛ W jL   ⎞ σ
                                                                                                        1−              −1
                                                L
workers respectively. Cost minimization implies H = θ                                         ⎜        ⎟      =θ j   φ 1−σ   , where
                                                                                             j⎜   H    ⎟
                                                LL
                                                                                              ⎝W j     ⎠

      UH
φ=       so the skill composition of the city is determined by the parameter θ j .
      UL

Manipulation of the first order conditions and using the notation η = 1 − α − β + γβ

implies:

                    1−γ         (η −γβ )(1−γ )           1−α        γ (1−α )
                       η                 η                 η           η
(2)         N j = Aj           Fj                   Cj         Qj              Θ Nj Ω N ,

                γ     (η −γβ )γ          α + β −1        −γ (1−α − β )
                η          η                η                   η
(3) Wˆ j = A j F j                   Cj             Qj                   ΘWj ΩW , and

                1   1−α − β          β       − (1−α − β )
               η           η         η              η
(4)   PjQ   = Aj Fj                 Cj Qj                      Θ Qj Ω Q




                                                                                                                                  19
where Θ ij for i=N, W, Q refers to city-specific terms that are only a function of θ j and

φ , and where Ω i i=N, W, Q refers to terms that are common across cities including the

reservation utilities, rent level and the parameters, α , β , γ and σ . Both Θ iN and Ω N

are defined in Appendix B.



Equations (2), (3) and (4) yield standard results in the regional literature: (1) increases in

urban productivity will cause increases in the population, average wages and the price of

non-traded goods (i.e. housing), (2) increases in the fixed factor of production will

likewise increase population, wages and the price of non-traded goods, (3) increases in

the consumption amenity will raise population, lower wages and raise housing prices and

(4) increases in the endowment of non-traded goods will increase the population,

decrease wages and decrease the price of the non-traded good.



To manipulate these equations, we will assume that, within a city, the production and

consumption amenities are changing over time, that all other city specific factors are

                                                                                  UH
fixed, and that while reservation utilities are changing, the ratio                  is fixed. These
                                                                                  UL

assumptions tell us that:



         ⎛ N j ,t +1 ⎞
(2’) Log ⎜           ⎟ = I N + ∑ ⎛⎜ δ Ak 1 − γ + δ Ck 1 − α ⎞⎟ X kj ,t +µ Nj ,t
         ⎜ N j ,t ⎟               ⎜        η            η ⎟⎠
         ⎝           ⎠         k ⎝


         ⎛ Wˆ j ,t +1 ⎞
(3’) Log ⎜            ⎟ = I W + ∑ ⎛⎜ δ k γ − δ k 1 − α − β ⎞⎟ X k +µ W
         ⎜ Wˆ j ,t ⎟               ⎜ Aη       C
                                                     η      ⎟ j ,t   j ,t
                                k ⎝                         ⎠
         ⎝            ⎠


                                                                                                  20
          ⎛ PQ ⎞            ⎛            β⎞
(4’) Log ⎜⎜ Q ⎟⎟ = I Q + ∑ ⎜⎜ δ Ak + δ Ck ⎟⎟ X kj ,t +µ Qj ,t
             j ,t +1              1
          ⎜ Pj ,t ⎟      k ⎝      η      η⎠
          ⎝          ⎠




where I i for i=N, W, Q is an intercept term that is constant across cities, and µ ij,t again

for i=N, W, Q is an error term, which has a zero mean and is orthogonal to the X terms as

long as the underlying error terms, µ ij,t are mean zero and orthogonal to the X terms.



Equation (2’), (3’) and (4’) show us how to use the differences in the coefficients from

population, wage and price growth regressions to determine the values of δ Ak and δ Ck

for any X variable. The intuition behind this claim is that if a variable is increasing

population and prices, but not wages, this implies that the variable is increasing

consumption amenities. If a variable is correlated with increasing population and wages,

more than with prices, then this implies that the variable is increasing productivity.



We focus on a specific X variable— the share of skilled workers, which is itself a

function of the ratio of reservation utility levels and the technology parameter θ j . We


will let δ AS and δ CS refer to the impact of this variable on the growth of productivity and

consumption amenities respectively. These equations will enable us to interpret the city

growth regressions (shown above) and regressions looking at changes in urban wages and

changes in housing values.




                                                                                          21
Under the assumptions of the model, different values of θ j will have no direct impact on

                           UH                                       U
growth if the ratio           is fixed. As shown in the appendix, if H rises, then we should
                           UL                                       UL

expect skilled cities to grow less. The intuition behind this result is a pure price effect.

For cities that specialize in the skilled, their primary form of labor has become more

expensive and as a result they grow less.                         To understand these issues fully, a general

equilibrium model would be necessary. For our purposes, though, it is enough to note

                           UH
that increases in                     (reflecting, perhaps, the rising skill premium) would cause
                           UL

relatively less population growth in more skilled cities.



Using calculations in the appendix and the notation B̂ Pop , Bˆ Pr ice and B̂Wage to denote

the coefficients on schooling in population growth, housing price growth and wage

growth regressions respectively, then it follows that:




                        1− γ                Bˆ Pr ice   β             BˆWage      β
                δ AS                                  −                      +1−
                          η                  Bˆ Pop 1 − α              Bˆ
                                                                       Pop       1−α
(5)                                     =                         =
               1− γ              1−α              γ          β               γ           β
        δ AS            + δ CS              1+          −             1+            −
                η                 η              1− γ       1−α            1− γ         1−α



Equation (5) tells us that if we want to determine the reason why skills increase

                                                                        Bˆ Pr ice            BˆWage
productivity growth, we need to know either                                             or            and two other
                                                                         Bˆ Pop               Bˆ
                                                                                               Pop


                    γ
parameters:                (the share of spending on non-traded goods divided by spending on
                1− γ


                                                                                                                 22
                      β
traded goods) and         the ratio of producer spending on labor divided by producing
                    1−α

spending on labor and non-traded capital goods.



IV.    Distinguishing Between Productivity and Amenity Effects



We now use the equations in the previous section to measure the extent to which the

connection between skill and growth stems from productivity or amenity effects. Since

Rauch (1993) we have known that, holding one’s own skill level constant, wages in a city

rise with the skill level of that community. We also know that prices are higher in both

cities and metropolitan areas with more skilled workers. Moretti (2003) extends Rauch

(1993) and identifies human capital externalities by using instrumental variables related

to human capital but plausibly exogenous to wages.11 He finds that, after controlling for

the private returns to education, a 1 percentage point increase in the share of the college

educated in a metropolitan area raises average wages by 0.6%-1.2%. The same author,

(Moretti, 2002) finds more direct evidence of human capital externalities by using plant

level production functions. Of course, it is arguable if the previous literature succeeds to

address the problem that selection of more unobservable skilled workers into these cities

might be driving the correlations.



In Figure 3, we show the relationship between wages, adjusted for both individual

characteristics and local prices, and local human capital across metropolitan areas in

1990. The individual characteristics include age, schooling and gender and we have used




                                                                                         23
the American Chamber of Commerce Research Analysis data to correct for local price

levels. The overall correlation is strong and positive. If we believe these price levels, it

seems appropriate to think that in the cross-section the primary impact of human capital

is to increase productivity, at least at the metropolitan area level.



Our focus is, of course, on changes over time, not on the level effects. So to address

these changes we turn first to results looking at housing price growth at the city and

metropolitan area levels. We are implicitly assuming the relative home quality changes

across metropolitan areas are small. The available evidence supports that this assumption

is not particularly problematic. Table 5 (panels A and B) reproduce Tables 2 and 3 with

the change in the logarithm of median housing values as the dependent variable. These

are self-reported housing values taken from the census. In these regressions, we add the

initial housing values as an added control to correct for mean reversion.



Regressions (1)-(6) of Panel A in Table 5 show the impact that initial human capital has

on later housing price appreciation at the metropolitan area level. The magnitude of the

effect expands dramatically between regression (1) and regression (2) as the coefficient

on percent college educated rises from .18 to 1.17.                If we believe the coefficient in

regression (1) then a 10 percent increase in the percent college educated at the

metropolitan area level is associated with a 1.8 percent increase in housing prices over

the next decade. If we believe the coefficient in regression (2) then a 10 percent increase




11
 He uses the demographic structure of the city and the presence of “land-grant” colleges from the Morrill
Act (1862).


                                                                                                       24
in the percent college educated increases the expected growth rate of housing prices by

almost 12 percent over the next decade.



The difference between the two coefficients is entirely the result of controlling for the

initial housing price in each community. There is an extraordinarily large amount of

mean reversion in housing prices across metropolitan areas. In general, the high price

areas have also had higher levels of human capital, so controlling for the natural tendency

of high price places to mean revert causes the coefficient on initial share with college

degrees to increase.



Regression (3)-(6) show that at the metropolitan area level the coefficient on schooling in

housing price growth regressions is extraordinarily robust statistically when we control

for initial housing price. Even with state or metropolitan area fixed effects, the t-statistic

never drops below four. Regression (6) shows that the presence of colleges prior to 1940

also predicts housing price growth during the past 30 years. Panel A in Table 5 certainly

seems to make it clear that higher levels of education increase both the population of

metropolitan areas and the price that this population is paying for the privilege of living

in the area.



In Panel B (Table 5), we examine housing price growth at the city level, and the results

essentially reproduce the findings of Panel A. Housing price growth is weakly positively

associated with human capital when we fail to control for initial housing prices. When

we control for mean reversion, the effect becomes extremely large and extremely robust.




                                                                                           25
The only substantive difference between Panel A and B is that in Panel B, the presence of

colleges prior to 1940 is not a good predictor of housing price growth over the last 30

years. We are certainly struck by the extraordinary power of human capital in predicting

housing price growth.



In Panels C and D (Table 5), we look at the connection between income growth and

human capital. Panels C and D essentially reproduce tables 2 and 3 with the log of

family income as the dependent variable. These regressions are useful in that they are

directly comparable to the previous regressions, but they are flawed by the fact that these

results will be biased because of the rise in returns to skill over this time period. Because

the compensation for skilled workers has generally risen over the period, we should

expect to see incomes rising more quickly in more skilled cities. Average family income,

or other aggregate income measures, cannot control for the general change in skill

premia. Nevertheless, for completeness we present these results.



Panels C and D show a systematic positive relationship between initial human capital

levels and later growth in family income at both the metropolitan area and city levels. As

in Panels A and B, there is a big difference in the coefficients between regressions (1)

and (2) (in both Panels C and D) where the coefficient on schooling is much bigger in

regression (2). Just as in the case of housing prices, there is substantial mean reversion in

family incomes, and just as in the case of housing prices, skilled cities look much better

once we account for this natural tendency of high income places to become relatively

poorer over time.




                                                                                          26
In both Panels C and D, the baseline impact of having an extra 10 percent of an area’s

adult population with college degrees is an increase in expected income growth of two

percent. When we control for mean reversion, that impact increases to more than 10

percent. Given that wages for workers with college degrees expanded (relative to non-

college degree workers) by less than 50 percent over the entire 30 year period (see Katz

and Murphy, 1992), the pure compositional effect of a 10 percentage point increase in the

share of adults with a college degree should be less than two percent per decade. Using a

back of the envelope estimate, if workers of category “X” have had their wages increase

by “Y” percent over a time period, then an upper bound for the purely compositional

effect of having an extra 10 percent of a place’s labor force in category “X” is .1*Y.12

Thus, the large magnitudes of the effects seem incompatible with the view that the only

effect is that skilled workers are getting higher wages: workers in skilled cities are getting

paid more relative to skilled workers elsewhere.13



To show this, in Table 6 column 1, we use the Census Individual Public Use

Microsamples (IPUMS) from 1970 to 2000 to control for individual characteristics in a

wage regression that includes MSA education levels. We look at the wages of males over

21, and we control for schooling, age, and race, and metropolitan area fixed effects. In

these regressions, the coefficients on schooling and age were allowed to differ by time

period. We also include a control for the schooling in the area. We decided to use the

12
  Although the initial share of the highly educated may also be positively correlated with changes in that
share. The micro-data regressions will dispel any concerns in that direction.




                                                                                                             27
lagged share of the percent of the area with college degrees as our measure of education.

The decision to use lagged value is both an attempt to make these results more

comparable with the growth regressions and also an attempt to reduce the causality

problems inherent with regressing wages on the population composition of an area.

While this would certainly not eliminate causal issues, our results are essentially

unchanged if we use schooling in 1970 as our measure of MSA schooling throughout the

time period.



Since we are controlling for metropolitan area fixed effects, we can only estimate the

coefficient on area-level schooling in three decades, and we chose 1970 as the excluded

decade. As such, differences in our estimated coefficients on the interaction of schooling

and decade should be interpreted as the extent to which the coefficient on average

schooling in the area has increased over time. Our results suggest that the coefficient on

schooling increased by .58 between 1970 and 1980, and then by .21 between 1980 and

1990. Between 1990 and 2000 the coefficient increased by .047.



On average over the three decades, the coefficient on the share with college degrees

increased by .25 per decade, which is comparable to a coefficient in a growth regression

of .25. This is comparable to the coefficient in the first regressions of Table 5 (Panels C

and D), not the subsequent regressions, because Table 6 doesn’t allow high wage cities to

mean revert and become lower wage over time.




13
  The results cannot be accounted for by the fact that higher educated people have a higher propensity to
be married and thus (median) higher family incomes: using income per capita at the MSA level we found



                                                                                                            28
In the second column of Table 6, we include housing value regressions that are similar in

character to the wage regressions. In this case, we are able to control for housing

characteristics and thus to control for any changes in the hedonic value of housing

characteristics over time. Just as in the wage regression, we are able to control for

metropolitan area fixed effects and we identify a tendency of the houses in high schooling

metropolitan areas to increase over time. On average, the coefficient on schooling rises

by over .5 each decade over the thirty years, but all of this increase occurs between 1970

and 1990. Between 1990 and 2000, the coefficient on schooling actually falls.



Interpreting the Coefficients with the Model



We first focus on metropolitan areas and then turn to cities and begin with our estimates

of B̂ Pop , Bˆ Pr ice and B̂Wage . At the metropolitan area level, the coefficient of schooling

in the Table 2 population growth regressions ranges from .42 to .58.          This is a fairly

narrow band and not much is gained by focusing on the extremes, as such we will use .5

as value of B̂ Pop .




The estimates of Bˆ Pr ice in Table 5 range from .2 to 2.4, but the bulk of them are clustered

around 1. In Table 9 our estimate of Bˆ Pr ice is .55. We will use .5 and .75 as two

estimates of Bˆ Pr ice . Table 5 gives a range of estimates for B̂Wage between .2 and 1.8. In




very similar results.


                                                                                            29
the case of B̂Wage , we are inclined to put more weight on Table 6’s estimate of .25, since

this is the only estimate that controls properly for individual characteristics.



To produce a reasonable set of estimates, we rely on the fact that the model implies that

B̂ Pop + B̂Wage = Bˆ Pr ice , the sum of the coefficients on wages and population should equal

the coefficient on prices. It is not true that this holds perfectly empirically— for Table

6’s estimates, and for the estimates in regression (2), (4) and (5) of Table 5, the value of

Bˆ Pr ice - B̂Wage ranges from .3-.5. The two cases where the difference is outside of this

range are the case where there are no controls and the case where we have state fixed

effects.   So we will calibrate the model with a range of .1 to .5 for B̂Wage and an

                                                                    Bˆ Pr ice
associated range of .6 to 1 for Bˆ Pr ice which implies that                  ranges from 1.2 to 2 or
                                                                     Bˆ
                                                                      Pop


BˆWage
       ranges from .2 to 1.
 BˆPop




Equation (5) tells us that if we want to determine the reason why skills increase

                                                        Bˆ Pr ice           BˆWage
productivity growth, we need to know either                          or              and two other
                                                         BˆPop               Bˆ
                                                                              Pop


               γ
parameters:          (the share of spending on non-traded goods divided by spending on
              1− γ

                      β
traded goods) and
                     1−α




                                                                                                  30
                                             γ
We must also have an estimate of                   -- the share of spending on non-traded goods
                                            1− γ

divided by one minus the same share. We can estimate this parameter by using the 2001

Consumer Expenditure Survey to calibrate the share of shelter in overall expenditure,

which is .19. Shelter is pretty clearly a non-traded good, but as there are other elements

of consumption which are non-traded, this estimate qualifies as something of a lower

bound.



                                      γ
The second way of estimating                is to use a city-level price index (from the American
                                     1− γ

Chamber of Commerce) and regress the log of this price index on the log of housing

prices.    If the Cobb-Douglas assumption is correct, and if we assume that the


consumption          amenity    is     constant      then:           E ( Pj , U ) =
                                                                                           ( )γ
                                                                                        U PjQ
                                                                                                        and
                                                                                      γ γ (1 − γ )1−γ

∂Log ( E ( P, U ))
                     = γ . Since price indices are supposed to measure the amount of money
  ∂Log ( PjQ )

needed to provide a fixed level of utility, they are ideally the expenditure function, so

                                                    ∂Log ( E ( P, U ))
another way of estimating γ is to estimate                               (i.e. the extent that local price
                                                      ∂Log ( PjQ )

levels rise with increases in housing prices). Using the 2000 cross-section, we estimate:



(6) Log(Price Level)= -2.2 + .29*Log(Median Housing Price)
                      (18)   (.015)

The R-squared is .63, and there are 220 observations.                     We can also estimate this

relationship from a panel with MSA and year dummies:


                                                                                                         31
(6’) Log(Price Level)=MSA and Year Dummies + .21*Log(Median Housing Value)
                                        (.028)


In this case, the R-squared is .986, and there are 505 observations. Together, these two

methods confirm that a reasonable estimate of the share of spending on non-traded goods

                                              ⎛ 0.25 ⎞                         γ
lies between .21 and .29, and we will use .33 ⎜          ⎟ as our estimate of      .
                                              ⎝ 1 − 0.25 ⎠                    1− γ



                β
The value of         equals the ratio of producer spending on labor divided by producer
               1−α

spending on labor plus producer spending on non-traded capital goods. While we lack

any compelling figures for this ratio, we don’t believe that spending on non-traded capital

goods can be more than one-third of the wage bill. Thus, this parameter is bounded

between .75 and 1.

                                                                                         1− γ
                                                                                  δ AS
                                   γ                                                       η
Using the parameter estimates           equals one-third, we know that
                                1− γ                                            1− γ              1−α
                                                                         δ AS            + δ CS
                                                                                 η                 η

                                   BˆWage                                   β
cannot fall below 1 as long as a          ≥ .33 regardless of the value of     . This result
                                     ˆ
                                    BPop                                   1−α


                               BˆWage   γ
comes from the fact that if           ≥     then real wages are increasing with initial
                                B Pop 1 − γ
                                 ˆ


                                                                                BˆWage
schooling which can only mean that amenity levels are falling. Even if                 = .2 , then
                                                                                 Bˆ
                                                                                  Pop




                                                                                                       32
                                                 1− γ
                                          δ AS
                                                   η
the lowest possible estimate of                                 is .6. To believe that the majority of
                                         1− γ             1−α
                                  δ AS           + δ CS
                                          η                η

                                                                                       BˆWage
the skills effect on growth comes from an amenity effect it must be that                      < .1 or
                                                                                        BˆPop


               Bˆ Pr ice
equivalently             < 1.1 . We don’t believe that either of those conditions hold and as
                Bˆ
                 Pop


such, we are led to the view that the bulk of the skills-growth connection at the

metropolitan area level comes from the fact that skills predict productivity growth.



As final check on this, in Table 7, we look at the growth of real wages and the

relationship to initial human capital.           As argued before, if human capital increases

amenities at the metropolitan area level, then real wages should be falling. We again use

the American chamber of Commerce data for local prices levels. We use three different

measures of MSA-level wages. First, we use the Census’ average wage in the area.

Second, we use the average manufacturing wage in the area from the Bureau of Labor

Statistics. Third, we use a wage variable that we construct using data from the Individual

Public Use Micro-Sample, which corresponds to the MSA fixed effect of a regression of

wages on individual characteristics. This can be interpreted as the average wage in the

metropolitan area net of the impact of individual characteristics. We present results both

with and without other controls.          In all cases, we find either a positive or a zero

coefficient on human capital. There is no regression where human capital is associated

with declining real wages at the city level.               This evidence again pushes us to the




                                                                                                   33
conclusion that rising wages at the city level have everything to do with rising

productivity and nothing to do with rising amenities.



Results at the City Level



We can distinguish between the impact of human capital on the growth of metropolitan

areas and the impact of human capital on the growth of cities (holding metropolitan area

growth constant). The overall growth of cities is driven by similar factors than the

metropolitan areas that surround them. The growth of cities holding metropolitan area

growth constant enables us to really focus on city-specific factors. There has been little

work on this issue, but in many respects it is a natural area for research on amenities.

Cities within a metropolitan area have radically different levels of amenities, but

supposedly are part of the same labor market. After all, metropolitan areas are defined to

capture a local labor market. Moreover, many people work outside of their city (within

their metropolitan area), but their city still determines their quality of life, their housing

prices and their public goods.



Within the context of the previous model, if we assume that wages are the same across

                                             ( )γ
cities (within a metropolitan area), then C j PjQ
                                                    −
                                                        must be constant across areas, i.e. the

price of the non-traded good (housing) must offset the value of a higher level of

consumption. This implies the following relationship:




                                                                                            34
           ⎛ PQ ⎞
(4’’) Log ⎜⎜ Q ⎟⎟ = I MSA
              j ,t +1
           ⎜ Pj ,t ⎟
                        Q      ~
                                       ( )
                          + ∑ γδ Ck X kj ,t +µ Qj ,t ,
                            k
           ⎝          ⎠



                                              ~
        Q
where I MSA is an MSA specific intercept, and δ Ck represents the impact of characteristic

k on consumption amenity growth at the local level, which may be slightly different than

the impact of the growth of this variable at the MSA level.



                                                                                               γWˆ j       Qj
We also know that the market for the non-traded good must clear, so that                               =        . If
                                                                                                PjQ        Nj

we use the notation that S j denotes the share of population in the city that is highly

                                                                   −γ
                                             ⎛Nj               ⎞
skilled, then this equation implies that C j ⎜
                                             ⎜Q
                                                               ⎟
                                                               ⎟
                                                                        (1 + φS )
                                                                               j
                                                                                   −γ
                                                                                         is constant within a
                                             ⎝ j               ⎠

metropolitan area. In this case, the model does not pin down the skill composition of the

city or the population of the city, only the city’s aggregate income. In principle the city

can include only skilled workers or only unskilled workers or any combination of the

two. To implement this empirically, we assume that (1 + φS j )
                                                                                    −γ
                                                                                         is constant over time,

and that implies that:



          ⎛ N j ,t +1 ⎞
(2’’) Log ⎜
          ⎜ N ⎟
                      ⎟ = I MSA
                            N        ~
                                       ( )
                                + ∑ γδ Ck X kj ,t +µ Nj ,t ,
          ⎝ j ,t ⎠                k




                                                                                                                 35
        N
where I MSA is an MSA specific intercept. Somewhat surprisingly, the Cobb-Douglas

utility function implies that the effect of consumption amenity growth on prices and

people should be the same.



Equations (2’’) and (4’’) inspire us to run regressions within metropolitan areas

controlling for MSA/decade fixed effects.       These are shown in Table 8 and the

regressions should be interpreted as capturing the impact of city-specific human capital

controlling for the average growth rate of the metropolitan area over the decade. The first

thing that the regressions show is that the impact on human capital on prices and

population is not the same, despite the implications of the model. Human capital has a

much stronger effect (at least when we control for initial price levels) on price growth

than on population growth.



The second implication of the regressions is that human capital powerfully predicts both

housing price and population growth. Interestingly, the impact of the highly educated

residents (college graduates shown in regressions (1) and (3)) is stronger in the housing

price growth regressions. High human capital workers appear to be highly correlated

with rising prices. The impact of less educated residents (high school dropouts shown in

regressions (2) and (4)) is stronger in the population growth regressions.        All four

regressions can be interpreted to mean that human capital is associated with rising

consumer amenity levels at the local level, but the regressions do not tell us a simple

story.




                                                                                        36
One possible way to reconcile these regressions is to drop our simple assumptions about

housing supply being essentially perfectly elastic (subject to the constraint of the fixed

amount of non-traded commodity). Indeed, the impact of housing supply is the most

important missing element in understanding city growth. If we assume that there are

limits to new construction, such as zoning or land use regulation, and we assumed that

these were more binding in high skill, rather than low skill cities, then we might expect

this pattern. In high skill cities, supply is relatively inelastic so increasing demand

operates mainly by increasing prices. In low skill cities, supply is more elastic so

increasing demand operates mainly by increasing quantities.           This is a possible

reconciliation of the four regressions in Table 8, but it properly belongs as a subject for

future research.



If we accept the assumption that a metropolitan area is a common labor market, with

common wages, then Table 8 seems to imply that there is a significant impact of skills on

consumption amenity growth at the local level. Of course, that assumption may not hold

perfectly. Some sub areas of a metropolitan region may be much more productive than

others, and productivity heterogeneity could explain the results. As such, these findings

are best thought of as suggestive evidence supporting the link between skills and amenity

growth at the local level.



V.     Understanding the Productivity Effect

The evidence suggests that the skills—growth connection at the metropolitan area is

fueled primarily by productivity effects. As suggested earlier, the basic data on wage,




                                                                                        37
price and population growth cannot distinguish between different stories concerning the

connection between human capital and productivity.           However, we will use other

available evidence to check the validity of two of these stories.

First, we address the hypothesis that an environment dense with highly educated people

leads to faster technological innovation and that this explains the connection between

metropolitan area growth and human capital. To test this idea, we turn to the patents

data. We are able to measure patents by MSA for the period 1990-1999, so we will focus

on growth during the 90s. We first regress patents per capita on the human capital level,

and then see how much of the skills—growth connection is explained by greater

patenting activity.



In Table 9, regression 1, we find (like Carlino, Chatterjee and Hunt, 2001) that the share

with bachelor’s degree is an important predictor of technological growth. We find that a

10 percent increase in the share of college graduates increases the number of patents by

.09 log points (approximately nine percent). This certainly supports the idea that the

better educated are more technologically innovative.



Moreover, in regression (2), we show that there is a connection between patents and

growth in regressions where we don’t control for human capital. Of course, no causality

is posited by these regressions.      Patents are as much a sign of a healthy urban

environment as a cause. However, the important fact is shown in regression (3). Once

we control for human capital there is no meaningful relationship between patents and

urban growth.     As such, human capital may matter because it makes people more




                                                                                       38
creative, but the important elements of this creativity must be in areas beyond the formal

patenting sector.



The Reinvention Hypothesis



We finally turn to the puzzle created by Figures 4 and 5: human capital predicts growth

much more sharply in cold places than in warm areas. Figure 4 shows the relatively mild

(0.13) correlation between skills and growth among those metropolitan areas with

January temperatures above 40 degrees on average. Figure 5 shows the 47 percent

correlation between the initial share of the population with college degrees and the

growth of the logarithm of population between 1980 and 2000 for those metropolitan

areas with average January temperatures below 40 degrees. The regression (reported in

the figure) suggests that as the share of college educated increases by one percent, the

growth rate of the period increases by 1.3 percent. Previous literature (Glaeser, Kolko,

and Saiz, 2001, Glaeser and Shapiro, 2003) has pointed to the role of warm weather as an

exogenous amenity that has fostered growth in the late 20th century U.S. Sun, coupled

with the availability of AC systems,14 may have given some areas in the South and West

a competitive advantage but skill appears to be a good substitute.



This fact may be explained by Jane Jacobs’ (1969) view that cities need to constantly

reinvent themselves. Specialization in one area may yield brief success but eventually the


14
   Alternatively, the weather variable maybe capturing the impact of other variables, thought the effect of
weather on population growth holds after controlling for state fixed effects. What matters for our argument
is not so much the causal impact of weather but the strong predictive power of the part of the signal in this
variable that is orthogonal to education.


                                                                                                           39
area fades, or the city’s comparative advantage in the area decays, and reinvention is

necessary. Glaeser (2003) details at least four periods in Boston’s history where the city

reinvented itself. Conversely, in areas with positive exogenous growth shocks human

capital may have less of a role, since reinvention is not necessary.



In Table 10, we look at this hypothesis more thoroughly. In regressions (1)-(3), we

repeat our benchmark specifications for population, housing price and wage growth, and

focus on the interaction between initial human capital and warmth. In all three cases,

there is a statistically significant negative interaction between warmth and initial skills.

The cross effect is strongest in the population regressions, where the regressions imply

that a doubling of the number of heating degree days causes the impact of skills to fall by

about one-half.    The effect on wages is also statistically significant, but smaller in

magnitude, at least relative to the benchmark coefficient. The effect on housing prices is

the weakest. Although, the cross-effect is still negative, it is not statistically significant.



One important omitted factor here is land use regulations which appear to be tighter

almost everywhere that there is a high degree of human capital. This would explain why

in warm places, skills still matter for housing price growth (because skills are correlated

with less elastic housing supply), but not much for population growth. Indeed, if there is

a correlation between skills and inelastic housing supply, this would tend to create a

perverse negative effect where more skilled places actually grow less, despite increasing

demand for these areas.




                                                                                              40
In regression (4)-(6), we look at the share of the population (in the initial time period)

that is composed of immigrants. Over this time period, immigration was a large source of

urban growth, and immigrants tend to settle where other immigrants live (Altonji and

Card, 1991, Saiz, 2003). If the reinvention hypothesis is correct, then we should expect to

see that human capital doesn’t matter in places with large supplies of immigrants, but it

should be important in areas where immigrants are not coming. Indeed, this is exactly

what we find in regression (4).       Human capital matters much more in predicting

population growth in areas without immigrants than in areas with immigrants.

One possible explanation for the strikingly different correlation between skills and

growth in growing and declining places is that skills allow reinvention. The view that

human capital is most valuable because it enables flexibility and the ability to respond to

new circumstances was emphasized by Welch (1968). If this view is correct, then we

should not be surprised if a high skill New England city manages to reinvent itself while

a low skill rustbelt town does not.



One implication of this hypothesis is that places with high human capital should be better

at switching out of declining industries. To test this hypothesis, we gathered data on

education and industrial composition in 1940 by metropolitan area (contemporaneously

defined). We then tested whether the impact of skills on contributing to the shift away of

manufacturing over the next 30 years has been more important in industrial, colder areas

of the country (Table 10, Panel B). The regressions support the view that the skilled

rustbelt towns were better at reorienting themselves: the importance of education to

explain the shift away of manufacturing (the change in the manufacturing share in the




                                                                                        41
left-hand-side) in the second half of the 20th Century was stronger in colder areas

(interaction between human capital and temperature) and in areas with an initial bigger

share of manufacturing (interaction between education and share manufacturing).



VI.    Conclusion



Human capital predicts population and productivity growth at the city and metropolitan

area level as surely as it predicts income growth at the country level. High skill areas

have been getting more populous, better paid and more expensive. Indeed, aside from

climate, skill composition may be the most powerful predictor of urban growth. This is

both a boon to the skilled cities that have done spectacularly over the past two decades

and a curse to the cities with less skilled workers that have suffered an almost

unstoppable urban decline.



Why do skilled cities grow more quickly? At the metropolitan area level, the available

evidence appears to show quite clearly that skills predict productivity growth and not an

increase in amenity levels. The high skilled metropolitan areas are not seeing falling real

wages. To the contrary, prices seem not to be rising quickly enough to offset the

increases in wages. Standard economic reasoning tells us that this means that high skill

levels are associated with decreasing relative levels of quality of life, perhaps because of

increasing population levels.



Within metropolitan areas, at the very local level, there is some evidence that the prices

of skilled places have risen sharply. If the standard assumption that a metropolitan area is


                                                                                         42
a single labor market holds, then the skills-housing price growth connection is best

understood as suggesting that skills increase amenities at the very local level, if not at the

metropolitan area level. Thus, our results suggest that skills are important because they

increase productivity at the metropolitan level and amenities at the local. On net, the

productivity effects appear to be much stronger.



Why are skills so strongly associated with productivity growth at the metropolitan level?

Certainly skilled cities are more innovative, but controlling for the rate of innovation

doesn't impact the effect of skills. One clue may be the fact that skills are much more

important in otherwise disadvantaged regions than in exogenously growing regions. This

fact might reflect the idea that cities are constantly reinventing themselves - moving from

one field of specialization to another. Skills may well be a crucial part of this reinvention

process as skilled workers react more speedily to painful economic shocks and educated

workers find it easier to switch techniques (as in Welch, 1970). While at this point the

reinvention hypothesis is only a guess, the fact that skills are so important in the northeast

and so almost irrelevant in the west suggests that there is something very significant

about the connection between skills and the process of urban decline.



The results in the paper suggest that city growth can be promoted with strategies that

increase the level of local human capital. At the regional or metropolitan level, attracting

high human capital workers may require provision of basic services, amenities and

quality public schools that will lure the most skilled. Conversely, redistributive policies

at the local level have to be carefully designed as they may have the undesired side effect




                                                                                           43
of repelling the skilled and deter growth. Generating new technologies locally does not

seem as important as having the capacity to adapt them.           Providing basic quality

education (maximizing success rates in high school graduation) may both produce and

attract the educated. Since local tax bases are heterogeneous, state and federal funds can

play a role in avoiding “low education traps” in ailing cities.




                                                                                       44
References

Altonji, J.G. and D.Card (1991). "The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market
Outcomes of Less-Skilled Natives," in Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market, ed.
John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991),
pp. 201-34.

Black, D. and V. Henderson (1999). “A theory of urban growth.” Journal of Political
Economy,” 107(2):252—284.

Berrie Cullen, J. and S.Levitt (1999). “Crime, Urban Flight, and the Consequences for
Cities,” The Review of Economics & Statistics, 1999, vol. 81, issue 2, 159-169

Card, D. (1995). “Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the
Return to Schooling,” in “Aspects of Labour Economics”: Essays in Honour of John
Vanderkamp, L. Christofides, E.K. Grant and R. Swindinsky, Eds. University of Toronto
Press.

Jacobs, J. (1969). The Economy of Cities, New York: Random House, 1969.

Carlino, J., S. Chatterjee, and R. Hunt (2001). “Knowledge Spillovers and the New
Economy of Cities,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 01-14.

Eaton, J. and Z. Eckstein (1997). “Cities and growth: Theory and evidence from
France and Japan.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 27(4-5): 443-474.

Glaeser, E.L. (1994). “Why Does Schooling Generate Economic Growth?" Economics
Letters 44 (1994): 333-337.

Glaeser, E.L. (2003). “Reinventing Boston: 1640-2003,” Harvard Institute for Economic
Research: Discussion Paper 2017.

Glaeser, E.L. and J. Gyourko (2001). “Urban Decline and Durable Housing,” NBER
Working Paper 8598.

Glaeser, E.L., Kolko, J. and A. Saiz (2001). “Consumer City.” Journal of Economic
Geography 1(1): 27-50.

Glaeser, E.L., J. Scheinkman, and A. Shleifer (1995). "Economic Growth in a Cross-
Section of Cities," Journal of Monetary Economics 36 (1995): 117-143.

Glaeser E.L. and J.M. Shapiro (2003). Urban Growth in the 1990s: Is City Living
Back? Journal of Regional Science, 43(1):139—165.

Lochner, L. (1999). “Education, Work, and Crime: Theory and Evidence,” Rochester
Center for Economic Research Working Paper No.465.



                                                                                   45
Lochner L. and Moretti, E. (2001). “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from
Prison Inmates, Arrests and Self-Reports,” NBER Working Paper8605.

Moretti, E. (2003). "Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence from
Longitudinal and Repeated Cross-Sectional Data," forthcoming in Journal of
Econometrics.

Moretti, E. (2002). “Workers' Education, Spillovers and Productivity: Evidence from
Plant-Level Production Functions." Mimeo , UCLA.

Nardinelli, C. and C. J. Simon, (1996). “The talk of the Town: Human capital,
Information, and the Growth of English Cities, 1861 to 1961.” Explorations in Economic
History 33(3): 384-413.

Putnam, R.D. (2000). “Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American
Community” New York: Simon & Schuster.

Roback, J., (1982). "Wages, Rents and the Quality of Life," Journal of Political
Economy 90:6: pp.1257-1278.

Saiz, A. (2003). “Immigration and Housing Rents in American Cities.” Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 03-12.

Schultz, T. W. (1964).     Transforming Traditional Agriculture.    New Haven: Yale
University Press.

Shapiro, J. (2003). “Smart Cities: Explaining the Relationship between City Growth and
Human Capital.” Mimeo: Harvard University.

Simon, C.J. (1998). “Human Capital and Metropolitan Employment Growth,” Journal of
Urban Economics, 43:223—24.

Simon C.J. and C. Nardinelli (2002). “Human Capital and the Rise of American Cities,
1900-1990.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 32:59—96.

Rauch J.E (1993). “Productivity Gains from Geographic Concentration of Human
Capital: Evidence from the Cities.” Journal of Urban Economics, 34:380—400.

Welch, F. (1970). “Education in Production,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 78, no.
1, Jan.-Feb. 1970, pp. 35-59




                                                                                    46
                            Appendix A: Data Appendix

General Notes: MSA data is for metropolitan areas as defined by the Office of
Management Budget in 1999. We use the county MSA/NECMA definition. In most cases
we need to aggregate data by county to obtain the appropriate MSA data. City data is
from the HUD State of the Cities Data System. We select those cities with population
over 30,000 in 1970, the initial year for which the data is available.


        Variable                   Source                               Details

Share of persons 25 or      HUD State of the Cities
older with a bachelor’s     Data System (Census)
degree
Population                  HUD State of the Cities
                            Data System (Census)
Average heating degree      County and City Data      We match MSA’s to the corresponding
days (1961-1990)            Books, 1994               major city
Average precipitation       County and City Data      We match MSA’s to the corresponding
(1961-1990)                 Books, 1994               major city
Share workers in            HUD State of the Cities   Employment in manufacturing over total
manufacturing               Data System (Census)      employment
Share workers in            HUD State of the Cities   Employment in professional services over
professional services       Data System (Census)      total employment
Share workers in trade      HUD State of the Cities   Employment in trade over total employment
                            Data System (Census)
Unemployment rate           HUD State of the Cities   Unemployment over labor force
                            Data System (Census)
Share of persons 25 or      HUD State of the Cities
older with less than high   Data System (Census)
school degree
Colleges per capita in      Peterson’s College        Peterson’s provides foundation dates for all
1940                        Guide (and Census)        colleges in the US. We use the foundation
                                                      date to ascertain if a college was founded
                                                      before 1940. We match the college zip code
                                                      with the pertinent county, and then assign
                                                      counties to MSA using 1999 MSA/NECMA
                                                      definitions. We have used the Department of
                                                      Education IPEDS dataset for 1969-1999 and
                                                      confirmed that attrition bias is not an issue:
                                                      colleges do not seem to disappear from the
                                                      IPEDS sample at a faster rate in stagnating
                                                      metro areas.
Family income               HUD State of the Cities
                            Data System (Census)
Median house value          HUD State of the Cities
                            Data System (Census)
Wages                       Bureau of Economic        Average wage and salary disbursements per
                            Analysis                  worker
Manufacturing wages         Bureau of Labor           Average Hourly Earnings in the
                            Statistics                manufacturing industry
IPUMS wages                 IPUMS (Census)
IPUMS House values          IPUMS (census)
Adjusted IPUMS wages        IPUMS (Census)          Obtained as the MSA fixed effects of
                                                    independent cross-sectional regressions
                                                    where we control for age, age squared,
                                                    education dummies, sex, race, Hispanic
                                                    ethnicity, marital status, and veteran status
ACCRA Price index           American Chamber of     A cross section of relative prices for 1970,
                            Commerce Research       1980 (about 36 observations) and 1990 and
                            Analysis Data           2000 (about 210 observations)
CPI-U                       Bureau of Labor         Consumer Price Index - Urban
                            Statistics
College enrollment in       IPED/HEGIS Database     HEGIS/IPEDS offers enrollment for each
1970                        (NCES)                  institution of higher education. We match zip
                                                    code to counties and add up enrollments for
                                                    all institutions in a metro area
Murders per 1,000           National Archive of     Originally from FBI. By county, we generate
population                  Criminal Justice Data   data by MSA.
Teacher/pupil ratio         NCES Common Core        The data is for 1990. We locate the county of
                            of Data                 each school and aggregate the number of
                                                    pupils and teachers by county. Then we
                                                    aggregate the county data to MSA.
Museums                     County Business
                            Patterns (1980, 1990)
Eating and drinking         County Business
establishments per capita   Patterns (1980, 1990)
Motion picture              County Business
establishments per capita   Patterns (1980, 1990)
Health establishments per   County Business
capita                      Patterns (1980, 1990)
Amusement and               County Business
recreational service        Patterns (1980, 1990)
establishments
Membership organizations    County Business
                            Patterns (1980, 1990)
Patents per worker          US Patent and           Data on patents by county were generously
                            Trademark Office        provided by Robert Hunt. We aggregated at
                                                    MSA level.
                                      Appendix B: Additional Calculations



                                                                                                     − σ (1 − α ) + β (1 − γ )
                                                                 ⎛ 1            ⎞⎛ σ             ⎞             ση
The terms in equation (2) are                          Θ Nj   = ⎜⎜ φ 1−σ + θ j ⎟⎟⎜⎜ φ 1−σ + θ j ⎟⎟
                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                 ⎜              ⎟⎜               ⎟
                                                                 ⎝              ⎠⎝               ⎠

                                                                                        1
          ⎛                                                                α (1−γ ) ⎞ η
                                            ⎛α ⎞
and Ω N = ⎜U αH−1 ((1 − γ ) β )(1−γ )(1−α ) ⎜ ⎟                                       ⎟ .
          ⎜                                 ⎝r⎠                                       ⎟
          ⎝                                                                           ⎠


                                              UH
The only places where                            or φ enters directly into the logarithm of population are in
                                              UL

the terms Θ Nj and Ω N , so we can write Log ( N j ) = Ψ + Log (Θ Nj ) + Log (Ω N ) , and

∂Log ( N j )             ∂Log (Θ Nj )               ∂Log (Ω N )
                     =                          +               . Differences in the skill levels of cities is
        ∂φ                      ∂φ                     ∂φ
proportional determined entirely by θ j , so for more skilled cities to grow more rapidly

                                                                                     ∂Log ( N j )              ∂ 2 Log (Θ Nj )
with an increase in φ , it must be the case that                                                           =                         > 0.
                                                                                         ∂φ∂θ j                     ∂φ∂θ j

Differentiating once yields:
                                              − σ (1 − α ) + β (1 − γ )
          ⎛ 1            ⎞⎛ σ             ⎞             ση
Θ Nj   = ⎜⎜ φ 1−σ + θ j ⎟⎟⎜⎜ φ 1−σ + θ j ⎟⎟
          ⎜              ⎟⎜               ⎟
          ⎝              ⎠⎝               ⎠




           ∂Log (Θ Nj )                       1               (1 − α )σ + β (1 − γ )                      1
(A1)                           =                        −                                         σ
                 ∂θ j                 1                                    ση
                                   φ 1−σ        +θ j                                           φ 1−σ       +θ j



Differentiating again yields:
                                                              2σ −1                     σ
                                                     σ                           1
       ∂ 2 Log (Θ Nj )                                      φ 1−σ                    φ 1−σ
                             (1 − α )σ + β (1 − γ ) 1 − σ                      1 − σ
(A2)                     =                                                −
           ∂θ j ∂φ                   ση           ⎛ σ         ⎞
                                                                      2
                                                                            ⎛ 1            ⎞
                                                                                             2
                                                  ⎜ φ 1−σ + θ ⎟             ⎜ φ 1−σ + θ ⎟
                                                  ⎜          j⎟             ⎜            j⎟
                                                  ⎝           ⎠             ⎝              ⎠


                                                    σ                     2                      2
                           1 − α + β (1 − γ ) ⎛⎜ 1−σ      ⎞ 1 ⎛⎜ 1−σ      ⎞
                                                                  1
This term is negative if                          φ       ⎟
                                                      +θ j > φ       +θ j ⎟
                         (1 − α )σ + β (1 − γ ) ⎜         ⎟ φ  ⎜          ⎟
                                                ⎝         ⎠    ⎝          ⎠



       1 − α + β (1 − γ )
As                          > 1 and
     (1 − α )σ + β (1 − γ )
               2                                                                                     2
⎛ σ         ⎞       2σ               σ      2σ −σ              σ       ⎛ 1         ⎞
                                                            2

⎜ φ 1−σ + θ ⎟ = φ 1−σ + θ 2 + 2θ φ 1−σ > φ 1−σ + θ j + 2θ φ 1−σ = 1 ⎜ φ 1−σ + θ ⎟ ,
                                                     2

⎜          j⎟               j    j                  φ       j       φ⎜           j⎟
⎝           ⎠                                                          ⎝           ⎠
the expression is negative and the impact of φ on population growth is lower for cities
with higher levels of θ j .
                                 Figure 1
               MSA growth (1980-2000) and human capital (1980)


                           Growth 1980-2000                      Fitted values


          1




          .5




          0




         -.5
                      .1                      .2                      .3         .4
                                              Share bachelors' 1980



Fitted line from the regression:


Log(pop2000/pop1980) = 0.0611 + 1.001 × Share with bachelor’s degree in 1980
                       (0.036) (0.209)


R-squared=0.067, N=318
                                            Figure 2
   Colleges in the pre-WWII era and the share of college educated in
                                              2000



                       Univariate regression line                 Share Bachelor's degree (2000)


         .5




         .4




         .3




         .2




         .1
              0                  .025                 .05               .075                .1
                                        Colleges/1000 population (1940)



Share with Bachelor’s in 2000 = 0.207 + 1.816 × Colleges per 1,000 population in 1940
                                (0.006) (0.337)

R-squared=0.085, N=313
                            Figure 3
       MSA IPUMS adjusted real wages and human capital (1990)

                      Real adjusted IPUMS wages                Fitted values

       4.5




         4




       3.5




         3

              .1                  .2                .3                   .4    .5
                                       Share with Bachelors degree




Real wage 1990 = 3.436+ 0.447× Share with bachelor’s degree in 1990
                 (0.031) (0.175)

R-squared=0.015 N=191
                           Figure 4
  MSA growth (1980-2000) and human capital (1980). Warm MSAs
                 (January temperature over 40)


                      Growth 1980-2000                          Fitted values


         1




         .5




         0




        -.5
                    .1                              .2                             .3
                                           Share bachelors' 1980



Log(pop2000)-log(pop1980) = 0.615 + 0.242 × Share with bachelor’s degree in 1980
                           (0.429) (0.072)

R-squared=0.0171, N=120
                            Figure 5
   MSA growth (1980-2000) and human capital (1980). Cold MSAs
                 (January temperature under 40)


                        Growth 1980-2000                        Fitted values

         .6




         .4




         .2




         0




        -.2
                   .1                       .2                       .3             .4
                                            Share bachelors' 1980




Log(pop2000)-log(pop1980) = -0.064 + 1.317 × Share with bachelor’s degree in 1980
                            (0.031) (0.175)

R-squared=0.222, N=198
                            TABLE 1
    1970-200 population growth and 1970 variables: correlations


                                                   Log(population 2000)-log(population 1970)

                               Panel a: Metropolitan Areas

Share with Bachelor's degree (age 25+) in 1970                         0.30
Log population in 1970                                                -0.13
Log average heating degree days (1961-1990)                           -0.56
Log average annual precipitation (1961-1990)                          -0.31
Share workers in manufacturing in 1970                                -0.56
Share workers in professional services in 1970                         0.22
Share workers in trade in 1970                                         0.29
Unemployment rate in 1970                                              0.15
Share of high school drop outs (age 25+) in 1970                      -0.18
Log colleges per capita in 1940                                        0.25
Log family income in 1970                                             -0.28
Log home value in 1970                                                 0.02

                                       Panel b: Cities

Share with Bachelor's degree (age 25+) in 1970                         0.18
Log population in 1970                                                -0.08
Log average heating degree days (1961-1990)                           -0.44
Log average annual precipitation (1961-1990)                          -0.45
Share workers in manufacturing in 1970                                -0.33
Share workers in professional services in 1970                         0.13
Share workers in trade in 1970                                         0.21
Unemployment rate in 1970                                              0.11
Share of high school drop outs (age 25+) in 1970                      -0.28
Log colleges per capita in 1940                                        0.25
Log family income in 1970                                             -0.08
Log home value in 1970                                                 0.07
                                                 TABLE 2
                                          MSA growth and education

                                                                                 ∆log(population)
                                                           (1)       (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

Share with Bachelor's degree (age 25+) at t-10            0.47        0.582       0.456      0.508      0.414
                                                       (0.096)*** (0.113)***   (0.117)*** (0.215)** (0.153)***
Log of population at t-10                                            -0.015      -0.011     -0.316     -0.014      0.003
                                                                  (0.004)***    (0.005)** (0.030)*** (0.004)*** (0.005)
Log average heating degree days (1961-1990)                          -0.082      -0.075                -0.084      -0.07
                                                                  (0.011)***   (0.020)***            (0.011)*** (0.011)***
Log average annual precipitation (1961-1990)                         -0.026      -0.001                -0.026     -0.024
                                                                    (0.015)*     (0.014)              (0.015)*   (0.015)
Share workers in manufacturing at t-10                               -0.173      -0.167     0.255      -0.162     -0.174
                                                                    (0.088)*    (0.073)** (0.125)** (0.085)* (0.084)**
Share workers in professional services at t-10                       -0.328      -0.166     0.148      -0.238      0.082
                                                                   (0.145)**     (0.132)   (0.203)    (0.142)*   (0.117)
Share workers in trade at t-10                                        0.034       0.113      0.229      0.007     -0.129
                                                                     (0.260)     (0.215)   (0.281)     (0.279)   (0.219)
Unemployment rate at t-10                                                                               -0.427
                                                                                                      (0.235)*
Share of high school drop outs (age 25+) at t-10                                                         -0.06
                                                                                                       (0.089)
Log colleges per capita in 1940                                                                                    0.035
                                                                                                                (0.008)***

Year fixed effects                                         yes       yes          yes        yes        yes        yes
Region fixed effects                                       no        yes          no         no         yes        yes
State fixed effects                                        no        no           yes        no         no         no
MSA Fixed effects                                          no        no           no         yes        no         no

Observations                                                918     918          918        954        918         816
R-squared                                                   0.56    0.51         0.6        0.89       0.51        0.5
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                      TABLE 3
                                              City growth and education

                                                                                      ∆log(population)
                                                                 (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

Share with Bachelor's degree (age 25+) at t-10                  0.202        0.217     0.166      0.121      0.061
                                                              (0.044)*** (0.053)*** (0.050)*** (0.086)     (0.078)
Log of population at t-10                                                   -0.009    -0.017     -0.512     -0.007     -0.010
                                                                          (0.004)** (0.005)*** (0.017)*** (0.004)     (0.004)**
Log average heating degree days (1961-1990)                                 -0.021     0.000                -0.023     -0.028
                                                                          (0.009)**  (0.015)              (0.009)*** (0.009)***
Log average annual precipitation (1961-1990)                                -0.097    -0.071                -0.097     -0.087
                                                                         (0.018)*** (0.025)***            (0.019)*** (0.021)***
Share workers in manufacturing at t-10                                      -0.032    -0.023      0.327      0.014     -0.042
                                                                            (0.060)  (0.059) (0.091)*** (0.063)        (0.055)
Share workers in professional services at t-10                              -0.113    -0.095     -0.851     -0.048      0.029
                                                                            (0.090)  (0.087) (0.144)*** (0.102)        (0.077)
Share workers in trade at t-10                                               0.276     0.122     -0.393      0.181      0.200
                                                                           (0.151)*  (0.154)    (0.164)**  (0.154)     (0.149)
Unemployment rate at t-10                                                                                   -0.043
                                                                                                           (0.200)
Share of high school drop outs (age 25+) at t-10                                                            -0.163
                                                                                                          (0.060)***
Log colleges per capita in 1940                                                                                         0.033
                                                                                                                     (0.007)***

Year fixed effects                                               yes        yes        yes        yes        yes        yes
Region fixed effects                                             no         yes        no         no         yes        yes
State fixed effects                                              no         no         yes        no         no         no
City Fixed effects                                               no         no         no         yes        no         no

Observations                                                      2160     2160       2160       2169       2160       2070
R-squared                                                         0.11     0.26       0.36        0.8       0.27       0.26
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                  TABLE 4
                                 Reverse causation: human capital and growth


                                                                    Cities                             MSA

                                                                                ∆share bachelors

                                                          (1)        (2)       (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)

Spline growth for declining areas                        0.058      0.055     -0.311        0.121       0.087     1.249
                                                      (0.014)*** (0.016)*** (0.203)       (0.024)*** (0.020)*** (1.996)
Spline growth for growing areas                          0.011     -0.005     0.057         0.010       0.022     -0.155
                                                       (0.005)**   (0.006)   (0.065)       (0.007) (0.007)*** (0.103)
Log of population at t-10                                           0.000     -0.001                    0.007     0.006
                                                                   (0.001)   (0.001)                 (0.001)*** (0.001)***
Share workers in manufacturing at t-10                             -0.048     -0.063                    0.023     -0.079
                                                                 (0.013)*** (0.017)***                (0.011)** (0.031)**
Share workers in professional services at t-10                      0.074     0.069                     0.138     0.060
                                                                 (0.021)*** (0.023)***               (0.016)*** (0.051)
Share workers in trade at t-10                                     -0.081     -0.086                    0.033     -0.038
                                                                  (0.037)** (0.045)*                   (0.034)   (0.054)

Year fixed effects                                        yes        yes       yes           yes        yes        yes

IV for growth (wheather instruments)                      no         no        yes            no        no         yes

Observations                                              2709      2169      2160           954       954         918
R-squared                                                  0.11     0.15                     0.22      0.42
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                            TABLE 5
                             Education, home value and income growth

                                                         (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

                                                                 PANEL A: ∆log(MSA median house value)
Share with Bachelor's degree (age 25+) at t-10          0.185      1.166     2.324       2.258      0.902
                                                      (0.083)** (0.186)*** (0.237)*** (0.518)*** (0.220)***
Log median house value at t-10                                    -0.417      -0.71     -1.183     -0.422     -0.333
                                                                (0.036)*** (0.041)*** (0.060)*** (0.035)*** (0.036)***
Unemployment rate at t-10                                                                          -0.881
                                                                                                  (0.344)**
Share of high school drop outs (age 25+) at t-10                                                   -0.053
                                                                                                   (0.109)
Log colleges per capita in 1940                                                                                0.032
                                                                                                            (0.012)***

                                                              PANEL B: ∆log(city median house value)
Share with Bachelor's degree (age 25+) at t-10     0.226       1.619      2.25       1.869      1.097
                                                 (0.045)*** (0.116)*** (0.118)*** (0.222)*** (0.151)***
Log median house value at t-10                                -0.376     -0.602     -1.096      -0.41     -0.169
                                                            (0.024)*** (0.029)*** (0.026)*** (0.025)*** (0.017)***
Unemployment rate at t-10                                                                      -1.483
                                                                                             (0.279)***
Share of high school drop outs (age 25+) at t-10                                               -0.377
                                                                                             (0.083)***
Log colleges per capita in 1940                                                                           -0.002
                                                                                                         (0.008)

                                                            PANEL C: ∆log(average MSA family income)
Share with Bachelor's degree (age 25+) at t-10     0.191       0.761      0.849      1.769      0.59
                                                 (0.029)*** (0.082)*** (0.090)*** (0.171)*** (0.090)***
Log average family income at t-10                             -0.291     -0.359     -1.155     -0.336     -0.143
                                                            (0.029)*** (0.036)*** (0.043)*** (0.030)*** (0.025)***
Unemployment rate at t-10                                                                      -0.307
                                                                                              (0.161)*
Share of high school drop outs (age 25+) at t-10                                               -0.186
                                                                                             (0.054)***
Log colleges per capita in 1940                                                                            0.019
                                                                                                        (0.004)***

                                                            PANEL D: ∆log(average city family income)
Share with Bachelor's degree (age 25+) at t-10     0.275       0.632      0.671      1.624      0.434
                                                 (0.020)*** (0.052)*** (0.056)*** (0.094)*** (0.057)***
Log average family income at t-10                             -0.135     -0.167     -1.091     -0.231     0.042
                                                            (0.016)*** (0.020)*** (0.031)*** (0.020)*** (0.009)***
Unemployment rate at t-10                                                                      -0.709
                                                                                             (0.118)***
Share of high school drop outs (age 25+) at t-10                                               -0.313
                                                                                             (0.041)***
Log colleges per capita in 1940                                                                           0.015
                                                                                                        (0.003)***

Year fixed effects                                        yes       yes       yes        yes        yes        yes
Region fixed effects                                       no       yes       no         no         yes        yes
State fixed effects                                        no       no        yes        no         no         no
MSA Fixed effects                                          no       no        no         yes        no         no
Other variables in Table 2                                yes       yes       yes        yes        yes        yes
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                           TABLE 6
          Human capital and wage/value growth: IPUMS


                                                       Log IPUMS            Log IPUMS
                                                         wage               house value

                                                            (1)                 (2)

Share bachelor's at t-10*1980 Dummy                       0.527                0.389
                                                         (0.459)              (1.550)

Share bachelor's at t-10*1990 Dummy                        0.738               2.205
                                                         (0.347)**           (1.087)**

Share bachelor's at t-10*2000 Dummy                       0.785                1.698
                                                        (0.271)***           (0.855)**

MSA fixed effects                                          yes                  yes
Year fixed effects                                         yes                  yes

Observations                                             1026867             1222890
R-squared                                                  0.33                0.64

Average growth in education effect per decade              0.26                 0.57

Robust standard errors clustered by MSA-year in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Wage regressions include year and MSA fixed effects, controls for age, age squared,
education dummies interacted with year, race, Hispanic ethnicity, marital status, and
veteran status. Observations include males of age over 21 with complete observations.
Value regressions include year and MSA fixed effects, controls for number of rooms and
bedrooms, quality of plumbing and kitchen facilties, and age of the building. The results
use a 50% random sample of the IPUMS data for all single units with the relevant
information.
                                                   TABLE 7
                                  Human capital and real wages: direct approach

                                                                                        ∆log(average
                                                                 ∆log(average           manufacturing          ∆log(IPUMS adjusted
                                                               wage/Accra prices)     wage/Accra prices)        wage/Accra prices)

                                                                  (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)             (5)        (6)

Share with Bachelor's degree (age 25+) at t-10                   0.78        1.78     -0.003      0.213          0.045       0.057
                                                              (0.217)*** (0.239)***   (0.178)    (0.297)        (0.088)     (0.144)
Log of population at t-10                                                   -0.03                -0.018                     -0.018
                                                                         (0.011)***             (0.010)*                  (0.005)***
Log average heating degree days (1961-1990)                                -0.033                 0.028                      0.011
                                                                          (0.024)                (0.024)                    (0.007)
Log average annual precipitation (1961-1990)                                -0.03                 0.024                      0.031
                                                                          (0.029)                (0.040)                   (0.014)**
Share workers in manufacturing at t-10                                     -0.029                 0.188                     -0.069
                                                                          (0.212)                (0.182)                    (0.080)
Share workers in professional services at t-10                             -1.362                 0.203                      -0.08
                                                                         (0.318)***              (0.389)                    (0.177)
Share workers in trade at t-10                                              2.063                 0.505                      0.262
                                                                         (0.505)***              (0.476)                    (0.371)

Decade fixed effects                                             yes        yes         yes        yes            yes        yes
Region fixed effects                                             no         no          no         no             no         no

Observations                                                      238      234         135        135             130        129
R-squared                                                         0.11     0.37        0.06       0.22            0.58       0.64
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Notes: We use Boston in 1990 as baseline, the evolution of Urban CPI and of relative prices from Accra to calculate prices by MSA and
year.
                                  TABLE 8
            Within MSA regressions: minor civil divisions within MSA


                                                                ∆log(population)       ∆log(median value)

                                                                 (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)

Share with Bachelor's degree (age 25+) at t-10                 0.179                      0.49
                                                             (0.031)***                (0.035)***
Share of high school drop outs (age 25+) at t-10                            -0.274                    -0.079
                                                                          (0.028)***                (0.025)***
Log of population at t-10                                       -0.03       -0.029       -0.019       -0.019
                                                             (0.002)***   (0.002)***   (0.001)***   (0.001)***
Share workers in manufacturing at t-10                          -0.12       -0.068       -0.099       -0.105
                                                             (0.045)***     -0.045     (0.026)***   (0.027)***
Share workers in professional services at t-10                 -0.512       -0.518       -0.264        0.033
                                                             (0.059)***   (0.053)***   (0.041)***     -0.034
Share workers in trade at t-10                                 -0.245       -0.363       -0.143       -0.249
                                                             (0.080)***   (0.082)***   (0.049)***   (0.051)***
Log median value at t-10                                                                 -0.111       -0.019
                                                                                       (0.012)***    (0.011)*

Decade fixed effects                                            yes          yes          yes          yes
MSA-Year fixed effects                                          yes          yes          yes          yes

Observations                                                     13752     13752        13645        13645
Minor civil divisions                                            4584      4584         4584         4584
R-squared                                                         0.24      0.25         0.59         0.59
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                     TABLE 9
                       Human capital and technological growth


                                                              Log patents per      ∆log(population)
                                                                  worker
                                                                    (1)             (2)          (3)

Share with Bachelor's degree (age 25+) at t-10                        9.135                       0.781
                                                                    (0.903)***                (0.119)***
Log patents per worker at t-10                                                        0.02        0.003
                                                                                 (0.006)***     (0.006)
Log of population at t-10                                              0.156         0.001       -0.011
                                                                    (0.040)***     (0.005)     (0.005)**
Log average heating degree days (1961-1990)                           -0.208       -0.026       -0.037
                                                                    (0.080)***    (0.010)**   (0.010)***
Log average annual precipitation (1961-1990)                          -0.014       -0.038         -0.05
                                                                     (0.107)      (0.017)**   (0.018)***
Share workers in manufacturing at t-10                                 5.894        -0.226       -0.047
                                                                    (0.740)***    (0.109)**     (0.122)
Share workers in professional services at t-10                        -0.485        -0.213       -0.756
                                                                     (1.341)       (0.157)    (0.162)***
Share workers in trade at t-10                                         1.832        -0.229        0.232
                                                                     (2.367)       (0.287)      (0.297)

Region fixed effects                                                   yes          yes          yes

Observations                                                          304          304          304
R-squared                                                             0.56         0.38         0.46
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                                              TABLE 10
                                                                     The "reinvention" hypothesis

                                                                                  Panel A: All MSA
                                                                                                        ∆log(house                                           ∆log(house
                                                             ∆log(population)         ∆log(wage)          value)       ∆log(population)     ∆log(wage)         value)

Share with Bachelor's degree (age 25+) at t-10                          0.945            2.541             1.264             0.999             2.203           1.046
                                                                    (0.138)***        (0.230)***         (0.209)***        (0.135)***        (0.226)***      (0.204)***
Temperature * Share bachelors' at t-10                                  -0.396           -0.284            -0.121
                                                                    (0.112)***         (0.137)**          (0.133)
Log of population at t-10                                               -0.013           0.424               0.04             -0.013            0.442          0.038
                                                                    (0.004)***        (0.051)***         (0.007)***        (0.004)***        (0.052)***      (0.007)***
Log average heating degree days (1961-1990)                             -0.143           -0.075             -0.06             -0.093            -0.052         -0.021
                                                                    (0.022)***        (0.026)***         (0.023)***        (0.011)***        (0.014)***       (0.014)
Log average annual precipitation (1961-1990)                            -0.027           -0.015            0.063              -0.026            -0.031         0.078
                                                                      (0.015)*          (0.018)          (0.017)***         (0.016)*          (0.019)*       (0.020)***
Share workers in manufacturing at t-10                                  -0.128           -0.151            0.138              -0.145            -0.185         0.074
                                                                       (0.087)          (0.115)           (0.114)           (0.082)*          (0.109)*        (0.112)
Share workers in professional services at t-10                          -0.295           -1.266            -0.139             -0.456            -1.267         -0.198
                                                                     (0.145)**        (0.207)***          (0.178)          (0.143)***        (0.210)***       (0.180)
Share workers in trade at t-10                                          -0.004           0.088             0.119               -0.05            0.078          0.103
                                                                       (0.257)          (0.336)           (0.307)            (0.252)           (0.333)        (0.304)
Log Average Wage Receipts per Worker at t-10                                             -0.403                                                 -0.417
                                                                                      (0.047)***                                             (0.048)***
Log median house value at t-10                                                                             -0.414                                              -0.466
                                                                                                         (0.036)***                                          (0.042)***
Share immigrant at t-10 * Share bachelor's t-10                                                                              -5.751            2.376           3.433
                                                                                                                           (1.201)***         (1.897)         (2.142)
Share immigrant at t-10                                                                                                      0.704             -0.901          -0.031
                                                                                                                           (0.268)***        (0.352)**        (0.409)




Year fixed effects                                                     yes               yes                yes                 yes             yes             yes
Region fixed effects                                                   yes               yes                yes                 yes             yes             yes

Observations                                                          918                918                918                 918            918              918
R-squared                                                             0.52               0.72               0.75                0.54           0.72             0.76

                                                                                 Panel B: 1940-2000




                                                                  Share
                                                              manufacturing                                                               ∆Log(population)
                                                               (1940-2000)                                                                  (1940-2000)

Share bachelors in 1940                                                 -0.011                        Share bachelors in 1940                  0.094
                                                                      (0.006)*                                                               (0.017)***
Share in manufacturing in 1940                                          -0.547                        Log(population) in 1940                  -0.139
                                                                    (0.084)***                                                               (0.028)***
January mean temperature                                                -0.002                        January mean temperature                 0.032
                                                                    (0.0008)**                                                               (0.002)***
Share manufacturing 1940 * Share bachelors in 1940                      -0.048                        Log average annual precipitation         -0.309
                                                                     (0.018)**                                                               (0.058)***
January mean temperature * Share bachelors in 1940                     0.0003                         Share in manufacturing in 1940           0.046
                                                                     (0.0001)*                                                                 (0.29)
Log employment in 1940                                                  -0.004                        Constant                                 2.227
                                                                       (0.003)                                                               (0.371)***
Constant                                                                0.222
                                                                    (0.050)***

Observations                                                          293                             Observations                             293
R-squared                                                             0.78                            R-squared                                0.58
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




Panel A: Temperature =9.27-log(heating degree days); 9.27 corresponds to the city with max(log heating degree days)
                                                                  TABLE A.1
                                                  Descriptive Statistics for the Main variables

                                                                        MSA

                                                    1970                        1980                        1990                        2000

                                             Mean          Std. Dev.     Mean          Std. Dev.     Mean          Std. Dev.     Mean          Std. Dev.

Log population- Log population at t-10         n.a          n.a           0.17         0.15           0.10          0.13          0.12          0.10
Share with Bachelor's degree (age 25+)        0.11         0.04           0.16         0.05           0.20          0.06          0.24          0.07
Population                                 504,782.90   970,639.80     560,354.40   981,159.50     626,707.90   1,073,780.00   712,948.90   1,197,389.00
Average heating degree days (1961-1990)     4,453.08     2,192.30       4,453.08     2,192.30       4,453.08      2,192.30      4,453.08      2,192.30
Average annual precipitation (1961-1990)     36.67        13.89          36.67        13.89          36.67         13.89         36.67         13.89
Share workers in manufacturing                0.23         0.11           0.21         0.09           0.17          0.07          0.14          0.07
Share workers in professional services        0.19         0.06           0.21         0.05           0.24          0.05           n.a           n.a
Share workers in trade                        0.21         0.03           0.21         0.02           0.22          0.02          0.16          0.02
Unemployment rate                             0.04         0.01           0.06         0.02           0.06          0.02          0.06          0.02
Share of high school drop outs (age 25+)      0.46         0.09           0.32         0.08           0.24          0.07          0.18          0.06
Colleges per 1,000 people in 1940             0.02         0.01           0.02         0.01           0.02          0.01          0.02          0.01
Home value                                 16,022.64     4,189.95      47,255.97    15,616.03      79,504.72     45,484.25     115,785.20    53,119.58
Median family income                        9,170.65     1,480.34      19,585.52     2,807.46      34,153.75      6,101.29     48,929.87      8,360.88

                     N=318


                                                                       CITIES

                                                    1970                        1980                        1990                        2000

                                             Mean          Std. Dev.     Mean          Std. Dev.     Mean          Std. Dev.     Mean          Std. Dev.

Log population- Log population at t-10         n.a          n.a           0.03         0.19           0.05         0.14           0.06         0.13
Share with Bachelor's degree (age 25+)        0.13         0.08           0.18         0.10           0.22         0.12           0.26         0.14
Population                                 118,794.40   363,363.60     119,624.10   334,524.10     127,120.60   348,124.00     138,225.50   378,873.30
Average heating degree days (1961-1990)     4,460.59     2,123.92       4,460.59     2,123.92       4,460.59     2,123.92       4,460.59     2,123.92
Average annual precipitation (1961-1990)     35.00        12.80          35.00        12.80          35.00        12.80          35.00        12.80
Share workers in manufacturing                0.26         0.12           0.23         0.10           0.17         0.08           0.14         0.07
Share workers in professional services        0.19         0.07           0.22         0.07           0.25         0.07            n.a          n.a
Share workers in trade                        0.21         0.04           0.21         0.03           0.22         0.03           0.15         0.02
Unemployment rate                             0.04         0.02           0.06         0.03           0.07         0.03           0.07         0.03
Share of high school drop outs (age 25+)      0.43         0.13           0.31         0.12           0.24         0.10           0.20         0.10
Colleges per 1,000 people in 1940             0.01         0.01           0.01         0.01           0.01         0.01           0.01         0.01
Home value                                 19,569.85     7,008.13      54,847.72    26,139.47      113,982.90   81,750.05      146,108.90   103,341.80
Median family income                       10,529.60     2,299.21      20,964.24     4,954.75      37,382.61    11,299.83      50,909.85    16,288.94

                     N=723
                                        Appendix Table 2
                                      Further robustness tests

                                                                           ∆log(population)

                                                                  (1)            (2)             (3)

Share with Bachelor's degree (age 25+) at t-10                                   0.686            0.505
                                                                              (0.134)***      (0.166)***
Log of population at t-10                                       -0.003          -0.019           -0.014
                                                                -0.004        (0.004)***       (0.008)*
Log average heating degree days (1961-1990)                     -0.078           -0.09          -0.123
                                                              (0.011)***      (0.011)***      (0.013)***
Log average annual precipitation (1961-1990)                     -0.02          -0.033          -0.056
                                                                -0.015         (0.015)**      (0.016)***
Share workers in manufacturing at t-10                           -0.31           -0.11           -0.349
                                                              (0.086)***         -0.09        (0.103)***
Share workers in professional services at t-10                  -0.433          -0.442           -0.299
                                                               (0.196)**      (0.144)***        (0.185)
Share workers in trade at t-10                                  -0.187          -0.005           -0.428
                                                                -0.237          -0.257          (0.302)
College enrollment/Population in 1970                            0.477
                                                              (0.126)***
Museums                                                                                           0.000
                                                                                                (0.001)
Eating and drinking establishments per capita                                                   -1.316
                                                                                               (18.143)
Motion picture establishments per capita                                                        64.137
                                                                                              (187.538)
Health establishments per capita                                                                 -9.404
                                                                                               (16.920)
Membership organizations                                                                          0.000
                                                                                                (0.000)
Amusement and recreational service establishments                                                 0.000
                                                                                                (0.000)
Teacher/pupil ratio                                                                              -0.504
                                                                                               (0.298)*
Murders per 100 inhabitants                                                                      -3.822
                                                                                              (1.064)***

Year fixed effects                                               yes             yes             yes
Lagged Age Distribution                                          no              yes             no

Observations                                                      909            915            550
R-squared                                                         0.51           0.6            0.57
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
