                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        EXPORTING AND PERFORMANCE OF PLANTS:
                        EVIDENCE FROM KOREAN MANUFACTURING

                                             Chin Hee Hahn

                                         Working Paper 10208
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10208


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




The author would like to thank James Harrigan, Kyoji Fukao, and other seminar participants at the Fourteenth
NBER East Asian Seminar on Economics (Taipei, September 5-7, 2003) for helpful comments and
suggestions, and Yonghun Jung of KDI for excellent research assistance. This paper is forthcoming in the
book “International Trade,” NBER EASE Volume 14. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Chin Hee Hahn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Exporting and Performance of Plants: Evidence from Korean Manufacturing
Chin Hee Hahn
NBER Working Paper No. 10208
January 2004
JEL No. F1, O1, O4

                                           ABSTRACT

This study examines the relationship between exporting and various performance measures

including total factor productivity, using the annual plant-level panel data on Korean manufacturing

sector during the period of 1990 to 1998. The two key questions examined are whether exporting

improves productivity (learning) and/or whether more productive plants export (self-selection). This

study provides evidence supporting both self-selection and learning-by-exporting effects, with both

effects being more pronounced at around the time of entry into and exit from the export market.

Thus, positive and robust cross-sectional correlation between exporting and total factor productivity

is accounted for by both selection and learning effects. These results are in contrast with Aw, Chung,

and Roberts (2000) who do not find any strong evidence of self-selection or learning in Korea.

Similar effects are observed when shipments or employment is considered as a performance

measure. Overall, this study suggests that the benefits from exporting have been realized not only

through resource reallocation channel but also TFP channel in Korea.

Chin Hee Hahn
Research Fellow
Korea Development Institute
P.O. Box 113 Cheongryangri Dong
Seoul 130-012 Korea
chhahn@kdi.re.kr
1. Introduction

       It has been a widely accepted view that international trade and international

openness play a key role in enhancing the growth rates of output and income. As a prime

example, the past economic successes of Korea and several other East Asian countries

have often been attributed, to a large extent, to the export-oriented development strategy.

The World Bank (1993) points to the export-promotion development strategy as the

hallmark of the East Asian miracle countries. Also, Krueger (1995) argues that the most

salient distinguishing characteristic between the success of East Asian countries and the

stalled growth of Latin American countries is the openness of international trading regime;

i.e., outer-oriented trade strategy of the former versus import substitution development

strategy of the latter. Even in recent years, many developing countries, including Korea,

promote export based on the belief that exporting activity per se is valuable, bringing

additional economic benefits. There is little disagreement on the static gains from trade in

the form of improved resource allocation and economic well-being. However, the dynamic

relationship between increased trade and long-run output and productivity growth is less

well understood.


       This study examines the relationship between exporting and productivity using the

plant level panel data on the Korean manufacturing sector during the period of 1990 to

1998. The two key questions to be addressed are whether exporting improves productivity

and whether more productive plants export. To consider the possibility that the benefits of

exporting accrue through channels other than productivity, other measures of plant

performance, such as shipment and employment, are also considered in the analysis.


       There are numerous studies supporting that exporters are better than non-exporters



                                              2
in terms of various performance measures. That is, exporting plants are more productive,

larger, more capital intensive, more technologically sophisticated, and pay higher wages

compared with those plants producing for domestic market only.1 While these studies

provided an important stepping stone toward understanding the export-performance nexus,

they do not by themselves suggest that exporting activity brings medium- to long-run

technological and other benefits over and above the static gains from trade. That is,

exporters might be better than non-exporters before they started exporting due to factors

other than exporting activity itself. Thus, in order to understand the role of international

openness or, more narrowly, the role of exporting in growth of productivity and output, it

is necessary to understand the causal relationship between exporting and performance

measures including productivity.


          There are broadly two strands of theoretical explanations for the positive cross-

sectional correlation between exporting and productivity. One explanation is that more

productive plants self-select into the export market. In this case, causality runs from

productivity to exporting. The usual argument is based on the existence of sunk entry cost

associated with export market participation (Bernard and Jensen 1999a). In order to sell

goods abroad, producers might have to incur additional costs, such as transport costs,

modification costs to meet foreign tastes and regulations, and setup costs to establish

distribution network. With these costs present, only productive producers will be able to

expect to recoup the entry cost after entering the foreign market.2 Alternative explanation


1
  These studies include Aw and Hwang (1995), Aw and Batra (1998), Chen and Tang(1987),
Haddad (1993), Handoussa, Nishimizu and Page (1986), Tybout and Westbrook (1995), Aw, Chen
and Roberts (2001), Aw, Chung, and Roberts (2000), Bernard and Jensen (1995), and Bernard and
Wagner (1997).
2
  The existence of sunk cost is not essential feature to explain self-selection. See Clerides, Lach,
and Tybout (1998).



                                                   3
of the positive cross-sectional correlation between exporting and productivity is that

exporting activity serves as a vehicle for diffusion of disembodied technology or

knowledge across countries and, hence, improves productivity. By exporting, exporters

learn from knowledgeable buyers who provide them with blueprints and give them

technical assistance. 3 This explanation is often called as learning effect. If these

mechanisms are at work then the positive correlation between exporting and productivity

might reflect causation running from exporting to productivity.4


          Several empirical studies provide evidence on the causal relationship between

exporting and productivity. Most studies report that exporters are more productive than

non-exporters before they start exporting, suggesting that cross-sectional correlation

between exporting and productivity partly reflects a self-selection effect. For example,

Clerides, Lach and Tybout (1998) find very little evidence that past exporting improves

performance, using the plant-level panel data from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco.

Similar results are reported by Aw, Chung, and Roberts (2000) and Aw, Chen, and Roberts

(2001) for Taiwan, Bernard and Jensen (1999b) for U.S. To the contrary, evidence in favor

of learning effect is scarce. The above studies find little evidence that continuous exporters

increase their productivity advantage over non-exporters over time on a sustained basis.

Although Bernard and Jensen (1999b) report that new entrants into the export market

experience some productivity improvement at around the time of entry, these productivity



3
  Although this explanation has long been provided by many trade economists, see Grossman and
Helpman (1991), Ben-David and Loewy (1998), and Feeny (1999) for recent exposition.
4
  Of course, as Tybout (2001) summarizes, there are other mechanisms whereby exporting may
improve productivity. One is exploitation of economies of scale by exporting. However, after
surveying empirical evidence, Tybout (2001) concludes that productivity growth due to scale
efficiency effects is likely to be very small. Another mechanism is enhanced incentive to innovate
and eliminate waste by exporting. However, Tybout (2001) points out that theoretically implied
direction of change in efficiency critically depend upon model specifics.



                                                  4
gains are very short-lived.


          Similar study exists for Korea. Aw, Chung, and Roberts (2000) report that they

could not find strong evidence which supports the learning-by-doing hypothesis or the

self-selection hypothesis using plant-level data on the Korean manufacturing sector for the

three years: 1983, 1988, and 1993. Their evidence on Korea differs markedly from other

countries in that even the self-selection hypothesis is not supported, although the lack of

strong evidence of learning-by-doing may be consistent with findings in other countries.

Aw, Chung, and Roberts provide two explanations for the absence of productivity-based

self-selection in Korea. The first one is that while long-run expected profitability is an

indicator by which the decision of export market participation is eventually guided, plant

productivity may not be a good indicator of plant profitability in Korea due to

heterogeneity across producers on the demand side of the market. The second explanation

is that the Korean government’s investment subsidies tied to exporting activity rendered

plant productivity a less useful guide on the decision to export.


          These explanations might or might not be close to reality in Korea. However,

their rejection of self-selection hypothesis as well as learning-by-doing in Korea seems

somewhat problematic. As Aw, Chung, and Roberts (2000) show, there exists a strong and

robust cross-sectional correlation between exporting and productivity even in Korea’s case.

That is, they show that exporters have higher productivity than non-exporters and that

those differences are large and statistically significant. Then, the superior productivity of

exporters to those of non-exporters must have developed before or after export market

participation. In other words, the strong and robust cross-sectional correlation between

exporting and productivity is at odds with the rejection of both self-selection and learning.




                                               5
Thus, there is a need to reexamine the relationship between exporting and productivity. In

this study, we use annual plant-level panel data from 1990 to 1998, while Aw, Chung, and

Roberts (2000) used five-year interval panel data for three years—1983, 1988, and 1993.

Using the annual data has advantage in that dynamic aspects of the exporting-productivity

relationship can be more closely examined. In addition, the availability of export variable

at annual frequency allows us to pay more careful attention to the exporting history of a

plant in the analysis.


          This study can also shed light on policy issues. There are many studies

documenting that international trade openness is one of the key factors explaining cross-

country variations in long-run economic growth. For example, Sachs and Warner (1995)

provide empirical evidence that openness and growth are positively related. Hall and Jones

(1999) show that openness and institutional quality are the most important factors

determining the long-run total factor productivity level, which accounts for most of the

cross-country variations in long-run output level. If we take these empirical findings

seriously, then we need to understand exactly how openness improves a country’s long-run

output level and growth rate. In order to utilize fully the opportunity that openness

provides, then the channels through which openness enhances aggregate productivity and

output should be more clearly understood. For example, if the openness enhances

aggregate productivity not only through intra-firm technological learning but also through

cross-firm and cross-industry resource reallocation, then openness per se might not be

cure-all. That is, greater openness accompanied by policies improving resource

reallocation will be more effective than policies enhancing openness alone in order to

exploit the potential benefits that openness provides.




                                               6
         Also, this study provides empirical evidence which is necessary to evaluate and

guide various measures to promote export. For example, if export market entry mostly

reflects self-selection process—i.e., good firms become exporters—then policies that

intervene this process are likely to bring about outcome less desirable than that without

such intervention. With regard to the learning effect, if there are no post-entry rewards

from exporting, then policies designed to increase the numbers of exporters become foot-

loose and waste resources, as those firms and their workers will not receive any extra

benefits. On the other hand, if exporting activity per se involves technological learning

then appropriate policy intervention might be to reduce barriers to export market

participation, such as export assistance, information programs, joint marketing efforts, and

trade credits (Bernard and Jensen 1999a).


       This paper is organized as follows. In the following section, some basic statistics

on exporting plants are provided. Also, we examine cross-sectional correlation between

exporting and various performance measures, including productivity. In section 3, we

compare performance measures of exporters with those of non-exporters before export

market participation. Utilizing the advantages provided by annual data, we pay particular

attention to the exporting history of plants in the analysis. In section 4, we examine

whether exporting improves performance over various time horizons. Section 5

summarizes the results and concludes.


2. Basic Statistics and Exporter Performance

       Data

       We briefly describe the data and provide some basic statistics on exporting plants.

The data used in this study is the unpublished plant-level data underlying the Annual



                                              7
Report on Mining and Manufacturing Survey. The data covers all plants with five or more

employees in 580 manufacturing industries at KSIC (Korean Standard Industrial

Classification) five-digit level. It is an unbalanced panel data with about 69,000 to 97,000

plants for each year during the 1990-1998 period.5 For each year, the exports amount of a

plant as well as other general plant characteristics are available as a continuous variable.

The exports in this data set include direct exports and shipments to other exporters and

wholesalers, but do not include shipments for further manufacture. Following the

convention in the literature, we define exporters in a given year as plants which reported

positive amount of exports. Accordingly, non-exporters in a given year are those plants

with zero exports.6


        Exporters and Export Intensity

          <Table 1> shows the number of exporting plants and average exports as

percentage of shipments (export intensity) during the 1990-1998 period. During the

sample period, the exporting plants accounted for between 11.0 and 15.3 percent of all

manufacturing plants. The share of exporting plants rose slightly between 1990 and 1992,

but since then it steadily declined until 1996. However, with the outbreak of the financial

crisis in 1997, the share of exporting plants rose somewhat noticeably to reach 14.8

percent in 1998. The rise in the share of exporting plants since 1997 can be attributed

mostly to the closing of non-exporting plants, rather than increase in the number of

exporting plants. The increase in the number of exporters since 1997 was only modest.

5
   Unfortunately, the plant-level data is not publicly available. Korea Development Institute has
been allowed access to the data set under the condition that no information on individual plants or
firms are revealed in the analysis. We appreciate Korea Statistical Office for allowing to use the
data set. Although the Surveys exist after 1998, these could not be used due to incomplete
information on plant identity variable.
6
   All the values of export variable are either zero or positive. There are no missing or negative



                                                  8
These changes are broadly consistent with the severe contraction of domestic demand and

the huge depreciation of Korean won associated with the crisis.


          // Table 1 here//


            Consistent with the high export dependency of the economy, the share of exports

in shipments at plant level is quite high in Korea. During the sample period, the

unweighted mean export share is between 43.6 and 54.8. The mean export share steadily

declines from 1990 to 1996, but rises with the onset of the crisis. The mean export share

weighted by shipment is generally lower than unweighted mean export share, suggesting

that smaller exporting plants have higher export share.


          One interesting point to note is that the rise in weighted export share is much more

dramatic than in unweighted export share during the 1997-1998 period when there was

large depreciation of won. Recalling that the new entry into the export market since 1997

was only modest, this suggests that the export boom during that period, as shown in the

final column of Table 1, was mainly driven by the increase in export shipments of large

firms who had been previously exporting. The fact that huge favorable exchange rate

shock triggered large increase in exports of previous exporters and only mild increase of

new entry into export market is consistent with the presence of sunk entry cost in export

market (Figure 1).


          // Figure 1 here//


          Performance of Exporters versus Non-Exporters

          It is a well-established fact that exporters are better than non-exporters by various



values.



                                                9
performance standards. As a point of departure, we examine whether the same pattern

holds in our data set for the period covered in this study. <Table 2> compares various plant

attributes between exporters and non-exporters for three selected years. In terms of

number of workers and shipments, exporters are on average much larger in size than non-

exporters. The differential in shipment is more substantial than the differential in number

of workers. So, the average labor productivity of exporters, measured by production and

value added per worker, are higher than that of non-exporters. Compared with the value

added per worker differential, the differential in production per worker between exporters

and non-exporters are more pronounced. This might reflect more intermediate-intensive

production structure of exporters relative to non-exporters.7 Although exporters have

higher capital-labor ratio and higher share of non-production workers in employment than

non-exporters, these differences in inputs do not fully account for the differences in labor

productivity. As a consequence, total factor productivity levels of exporting plants are, on

average, higher than those plants producing for domestic market only.8 Some of the

differences in the total factor productivity levels may be attributed to the differences in

R&D intensity. Controlling for the size of shipments, exporters spent about twice as much

on R&D as non-exporters. From the worker’s point of view, exporters had more desirable

attributes than non-exporters. Average wage of exporters is higher than that of non-

exporters. Although both production worker’s wage and non-production worker’s wage

are higher in exporters than in non-exporters, the differential in non-production worker’s

wage is more pronounced.




7
  I am indebted to James Harrigan for pointing out this feature of the data.
8
  The total factor productivity index is based on multilateral chained index number approach. For
details, see Appendix.



                                                 10
        // Table 2 here//


        <Table 3> shows the average percentage difference in various performance

measures between exporters and non-exporters for three years, which is estimated from

the following regressions.


        lnYi = α + βEXPORTi + γ INDUSTRYi +δ REGIONi + λ lnSIZEi +εi

        where EXPORTi is a dummy variable for exporters, INDUSTRYi and REGIONi

are dummy variables for five digit KSIC industry and plant location, and SIZEi denotes

plant size measured by employment. The three columns in Table 3 shows the estimated

coefficients of exporter dummy variable without any control variables, with controls of

industry and region, and with additional control of plant size.


        // Table 3 here//


        The regression confirms that exporters are better than non-exporters in terms of

various performance characteristics for all years, even after controlling for industry, region,

and size of the plants. Also, all coefficients on export dummy variable are highly

significant. Controlling industry and region has little effect on the magnitude of the export

premium. However, controlling plant size greatly reduced the coefficients of the export

dummy variable, which suggests that to a large extent the desirable characteristics of the

exporters are attributable to their larger size. Nevertheless, the estimated export premium

remained highly significant.


        Controlling for industry and region, exporters employed more workers by about

100 percent. Controlling for industry, region, and size, the shipments of exporters were

larger by about 50 percent, production per worker by about 50 percent, and value added




                                              11
per worker by about 20 to 30 percent. Although exporters have higher capital-labor ratio

and higher share of non-production workers, they also have higher total factor productivity

level. The total factor productivity levels of exporters are, on average, 2.5 to 7.5 percent

more productive than non-exporters, with industry, region, and size controlled. Average

wage is between 8 and 13 percent higher in exporting plants than in plants producing for

domestic market only.


       The findings in the above cross-sectional analysis suggest that there does exist

significant total factor productivity and other performance gaps between exporters and

non-exporters. As discussed earlier, however, these findings should not be interpreted as

suggesting that exporting per se makes plants or firms better. We now turn to the issue of

whether these performance gaps developed before or after exporting.


3. Do Good Plants Export?: Self-selection

       In this section, we examine whether good plants export. We compare various plant

characteristics between exporters and non-exporters before exporting. We follow Bernard

and Jensen (1999a) and divide our sample into two distinct sub-periods—1990-1994 and

1995-1998. We select all plants that did not export in any of the first years and compare

initial levels and growth rates of performance measures for exporters and non-exporters in

the final year. For example, we compare various performance measures in 1990 of

exporters and non-exporters in 1994.


       In 1997 and 1998, export growth increased significantly with the huge

depreciation of won. If the huge depreciation of Korean currency induced previously

unproductive plants to enter the export market, then it will work against finding self-

selection effect even if it really existed. Also, if the non-exporting plants that stopped



                                             12
operation in 1998 with the severe contraction of domestic demand were located at the

lower end of productivity distribution, this factor will also work against finding self-

selection effect. Thus, the self-selection effect is more likely to be observable in the first

sub-period if it exists.


        The ex-ante levels of performance measures of exporters compared with non-

exporters are obtained as the coefficient on export dummy variable from the following

regressions.


        lnYi0 = α + βEXPORTiT + γ INDUSTRYi +δ REGIONi + λ lnSIZEi0 +εi                   (1)

        where lnYi0 is logarithm of plant performance measures at the initial year of the

period and EXPORTiT is an export dummy variable at the final year of the period. <Table

4> shows estimated export premia expressed in percentage terms for 1990 and 1995.


        Table 4 shows that exporters have, on average, more workers and larger shipments

than non-exporters before exporting, regardless of the period examined. This result holds

whether or not we control for industry, region, and plant size. Although inclusion of plant

size variable reduces the size of the estimated exported premia, they are still statistically

significant. Similar conclusion holds for labor productivity measures, such as production

per worker and value added per worker, as well as for capital-labor ratio and share of non-

production workers. However, average wages of exporters are not significantly higher than

those of non-exporters. Although wage level measures of exporters are estimated to be

higher than those of non-exporters without the control of plant size, the coefficient on

export dummy variable loses significance or becomes substantially smaller when plant

size variable is included.




                                              13
       In Table 4, ex-ante total factor productivity level of exporters is estimated to be no

higher than non-exporters, on average. The coefficient on the export dummy variable is

not significantly different from zero at conventional significance level in any of the

regressions. In the regression with all control variables included for 1995-1998 period, the

exporters’ total factor productivity premium is even insignificantly negative. One

interesting point to note here is that the total factor productivity premia of exporters are

generally lower in the 1995-1998 period compared with those in the 1990-1994 period,

although they are all insignificant. As discussed earlier, this may be due to the

disappearance of low-productivity non-exporters from the sample and entries of

previously unproductive producers into the export market during the crisis period.


       // Table 4 here//


       Overall, exporters are already larger, more capital intensive and hire

proportionately more non-production workers. In terms of labor productivity, exporters

were already more productive than non-exporters before they started to export, but we

caution against interpreting this result as a strong evidence of self-selection. The

differences in labor productivity between future exporters and non-exporters may just

reflect differences in production technology, i.e., capital intensity, not the differences in

expected profitability, which may be better captured by total factor productivity. However,

the above analysis, which is based on a methodology by Bernard and Jensen (1999a), does

not reveal any significant ex-ante differences in total factor productivity between future

exporters and non-exporters.


       The ex-ante growth rate premia of exporters are estimated as the coefficient on the

export dummy variable from the following regressions.



                                              14
    ∆lnYiT-1 = α + βEXPORTiT + γ INDUSTRYi +δ REGIONi + λ lnSIZEi0 +εi                  (2)


        where ∆lnYiT-1 is the annual average growth rate of performance measures between

year 0 and T-1. The estimated growth rate premia of exporters are reported in <Table 5>.


        For both sub-periods, measures of plant size such as employment and shipments

grow significantly faster in future exporters. With industry, region, and initial plant size

controlled, the growth rate premia of exporters are 5.1 to 6.2 percent per year for

employment and 6.0 to 8.3 percent per year for shipments, depending on the period. The

regressions of labor productivity growth show somewhat mixed results. Growth rates of

production per worker in future exporters are generally higher but significant only in the

later period. With all control variables included, growth rates of value-added per worker

are lower in the earlier period but higher in the later period, although they are not

significant. We could not find any strong evidence suggesting that total factor productivity

growth rates are higher in plants that will export in the future. Although total factor

productivity growth rate premia were positive in the later period, it became insignificant

with the control of plant size. In terms of capital-labor ratio, the share of non-production

workers, and average wage levels, we could not find strong evidence of growth rate

premia of future exporters, either.9


        // Table 5 here//


        To summarize the above results, exporters already have many of the desirable

characteristics before they start exporting. Compared with non-exporters, exporters are

larger, more capital-intensive, have higher labor productivity, and hire proportionately

more non-production workers several years before they start exporting. To the contrary,




                                             15
we could not find significant ex-ante difference in levels and growth rates of total factor

productivity between future exporters and non-exporters.


        Then, is it justifiable to conclude that the decision of export market entry is not

based on total factor productivity in Korea? The answer seems to be negative. If we follow

more closely the exporting history of plants and repeat similar analysis, we can observe

differences in the ex-ante levels of total factor productivity between future exporters and

non-exporters. In <Table 4>, we selected plants who did not export during the 1990-1993

period and compared the total factor productivity levels between exporters and non-

exporters in 1994. However, the exporting history of those selected plants might be varied

after 1994. For example, among the plants classified as non-exporters in 1994, there are

plants that have entered the export market after 1994. If these plants had high total factor

productivity in the past, then it will be hard to find TFP-based self-selection even if it

exists in reality.10


        Thus, we compared the total factor productivity levels in 1990 between two groups

of plants, using regressions as in (1). The first group consists of plants that first began

exporting in 1994 and continuously exported thereafter. The second group consists of

plants that never exported throughout the 1990-1998 period. <Table 6> shows that future

exporters had a TFP advantage over those plants that never exported, regardless to the

inclusion of industry, region, and size control variables. However, the ex-ante TFP

advantage of future exporters was not a very robust result. The statistical significance and,

in some cases, even the sign of TFP premium were sensitive to the year of export market



9
 The exception is growth rate of non-production worker wage in the earlier period.
10
  At the same time, there are plants that switch exporting status more than twice since 1994.
Without further analysis, it is hard to predict the effect of the presence of these plants in the sample.



                                                    16
entry and to the length of time before entry into export market. Nevertheless, there was a

tendency for the estimated ex-ante exporter TFP premium to become significantly positive

as the length of pre-export time period becomes shorter.11 This suggests that ex-ante

exporter TFP premium develops close to the time of export market entry.12


        // Table 6 here//


4. Does Exporting improve performance?: Learning

        The empirical evidence presented in the previous section suggests that strong

cross-sectional correlations between exporting and various performance measures are at

least partly results of better performance of exporters even before they start to export. In

this section, we examine whether exporting improves performance over various time

horizons. The performance measure we are most interested in is the total factor

productivity, since, if there exist knowledge or technology spillovers associated with

exporting activity, they will show up primarily in total factor productivity. Also, whether

there are extra TFP gains from exporting has been at the center of the debate on the

benefits of exporting. As additional performance measures, we consider shipments and

employment. The reason is that if there are benefits of exporting in the form of improved

resource allocation, then they are likely to be captured, to a large extent, by analyzing

these two variables.


        As a preliminary check, we examine the relationship between exporting status of

plants at a point in time and subsequent performance, which is a frequently employed


11
   However, non of the estimated ex-ante exporter premium was significant when industry, region,
and plant size are all controlled. The detailed results of the robustness test are available from the
author upon request.
12
   In the pooled regression to be discussed in the next section, we show additional evidence
supporting this claim.



                                                  17
methodology in the literature. Next, we will perform an additional analysis which takes

advantage of annual data set to follow the exporting history of the plants more closely.13

Then, with the results from both methodologies at hand, we will attempt to answer

whether there are “learning” effects associated with exporting.


        To see whether current exporters perform better subsequently than non-exporters,

we ran following regressions.


     ∆lnYiT = α + βEXPORTi0 + γ INDUSTRYi +δ REGIONi + λ lnSIZEi0 +εiT                       (3)

        where ∆lnYiT is the average annual growth rate of various performance measures of

plants for a time interval of length T. We vary the length of time interval to examine short-

run, medium-run, and long-run performance of current exporters relative to non-exporters.

The short-run performance is estimated from the pooled time-series and cross-sectional

data with T equal to one. Medium- or long-run performance of exporters are estimated

from the cross-sectional data.


        <Table 7> reports total factor productivity growth rates of exporters relative to

non-exporters, which are the coefficients on export dummy variable in regression (3), over

various time horizons. In the short-run, without any control variables, the total factor

productivity growth rates of exporters are significantly higher than non-exporters during

the 1990-1998 period. However, when industry, region, and size of plants are controlled

for, the coefficient on export dummy variable becomes negative although insignificant. In

the medium-run, the results are mixed. In the earlier period, the coefficient on export

dummy turned from positive to negative, although insignificant, with inclusion of control


13
   The methodologies employed in the subsequent analysis follow closely Bernard and Jensen
(1999a, 1999b).



                                               18
variables. Meanwhile, in the later period, it was significantly positive regardless to the

inclusion of control variables. However, the bottom panel of Table 7 suggests that the

significantly positive export dummy variable in the later period might have been heavily

influenced by the export boom during the 1997-1998 period. In the long-run, the export

dummy variable lost significance with inclusion of control variables.


       // Table 7 here//


       In <Table 8>, we report growth rates of shipments of exporters relative to non-

exporters. When controlling variables are not included in the regressions, the shipment

growth rates of exporters are estimated to be significantly lower than non-exporters over

various time horizons. When industry, region, and size of plants are controlled, however,

the coefficients were reduced substantially in absolute magnitude or became insignificant.

In the case of employment growth rates of exporters relative to non-exporters, which is

reported in <Table 9>, the coefficients on past export dummy variables are negative over

various time horizons. However, when industry, region, and size of plants are

controlled,they all became significantly positive.


       // Table 8 here//


       // Table 9 here//


       Overall, we could not find any clear evidence of TFP improvement from exporting.

Benefits of exporting are confined to the faster employment growth. Subsequent growth

rates of shipments of current exporters are no faster than non-exporters. These results are

very similar to what Bernard and Jensen (1999a) found for the U.S. As mentioned before,

however, we postpone drawing out any strong conclusion on the benefits of exporting




                                              19
from the above results until further analysis are carried out below with more careful

attention to the exporting history of plants.


        Now, with exporting history of plants available at annual frequency during our

sample period, we can perform more focused analysis. In the analysis above, we classified

plants in a certain year into exporters and non-exporters. However, the exporting history

of plants may be diverse. For example, the plants that are classified as exporters in a given

year may or may not have been exporters before or after that year. The same is true for

those plants classified as non-exporters in a given year. Also, there might be plants which

switch exporting status more than twice during our sample period.


        Thus, we classify plants into the following five categories taking entire exporting

history during our sample period into account, as in Bernard and Jensen (1999b). There

are plants that exported during the entire sample period, which is grouped as “always”.

Similarly, the “never” group consists of plants that never exported. The “starter” is a group

of plants that become exporters during the sample period and stay in the export market.

Those that drop out of the export market and do not re-enter are grouped as “stopper”. The

“other” plants are those that switched exporting status more than twice during the sample

period.14


        Then, we examined five-year window centered around the switching years for

starter and stopper, in comparison with always, never, and other. The regressions are of the

following form.



14
   Before grouping plants, we selected only those plants, which operated either in export market or
in domestic market during the sample period. Thus, plants that ceased operation entirely or began
operation during our sample period, for example, are excluded from the analysis below. This
procedure, however, enables us to focus on the transition between domestic and export market.



                                                 20
     lnYit = Σg∈G Σk∈K βgk Dgi Dki + γ INDUSTRYi +δ REGIONi + θ YEARt +εit                         (4)

        where lnYit logs of various performance measures, G is the set of five plant groups

defined as above, and K is the set of locations in the five-year window so that K = {-2, -1,

0, 1, 2}. Dg and Dk are dummy variables denoting plant group and location in the five-year

window, respectively. Thus, the coefficient βgk denotes the mean values of each plant

group g at each location k, controlling for industry, region, and year effects. <Figure 2>

shows movements of the total factor productivity level of five plant groups, expressed as

the difference from the never(-2) and <Table 10> shows corresponding coefficients and

standard errors.


        // Figure 2 here//


        // Table 10 here//


        Figure 2 shows that there exists some learning effect associated with exporting.

Plants that start exporting widen TFP gap with those that never exported and close the gap

with those that always exported, after entering exporting market. However, the learning

effect is very short-lived and pronounced immediately after entry into the export market. If

the learning effect from exporting is long-lived, then we can expect the following. First,

the productivity gap between never and always will widen over time. Second, starter will

not close the TFP gap with always, since the “always” group will enjoy first-mover

advantage over the starter in improving TFP level. However, neither of these phenomenon

is observed in the figure.15 Also, a large part of the TFP gap between starter group and

always group disappears two years after they start exporting. In short, we find some

15
  Starters begin to improve relative TFP level even before they start exporting. However, as
Bernard and Jensen (1999a) discuss, it is not easy to explain this phenomenon in a theoretically




                                                  21
evidence in favor of learning-by-exporting hypothesis in the Korean manufacturing sector

although the learning effect is rather short-lived.


          Figure 2 also confirms the existence of self-selection in entry into and exit from

the export market. Plants that start exporting have somewhat higher TFP levels compared

to those that never export several years before they enter the export market. Table 10

shows that the TFP gap between those two groups are statistically significant one year

before starting to export. Also, those plants that drop out of the export market exhibit

persistently lower and deteriorating TFP compared with “always” during the pre-exit

period.


          In order to see whether the benefits of exporting are realized in channels other than

TFP improvement, we ran regression (4) with logs of shipments and employment as

dependent variables, respectively. The results are reported in <Figure 3> and <Figure4>.

Again, the estimated coefficients and their standard errors are shown in <Table 11> and

<Table 12>. Similar to the case of TFP, plants that start exporting increase both shipments

and employment at around the time of entering the export market, relative to those plants

that always export or never export. Also, the gaps in levels of shipments and employment

between “always” and “never” are fairly stable over time in percentage terms, suggesting

that the increase in shipments and employment by exporting does not last forever. When

compared with relative TFP movements in Figure 2, one noticeable feature in Figure 3 and

Figure 4 is that the magnitudes of changes in shipments and employment of starters

relative to always and never are not very large during the five-year window. That is,

exporting-related adjustments in shipments and employment may take much longer time,



compelling way.



                                                22
compared with TFP levels. While the reasons for slower adjustment of shipments and

employment are not clearly understood, this may suggest that it takes long time for the

gains in allocation efficiency from exporting to be materialized. The TFP-based selection

and learning effects and similar effects based on shipments and employment, as shown in

Figure 2 to Figure 3 and Table 10 to Table 12, was robust to the exclusion of the crisis

period of 1997 to 1998 when exports growth increased significantly with exchange rate

depreciation.16


        // Figure 3 and 4 here//


        // Table 11 and 12 here//




5. Summary and Concluding Remarks

        This study examines the relationship between exporting and various performance

measures including total factor productivity, using the annual plant-level panel data on the

Korean manufacturing sector during the period of 1990 to 1998. The two key questions

examined are whether exporting improves productivity (learning) and/or whether more

productive plants export (self-selection). This study provides evidence supporting both

self-selection and learning-by-exporting effects, with both effects being more pronounced

at around the time of entry into and exit from the export market. Thus, positive and robust

cross-sectional correlation between exporting and total factor productivity is accounted for

by both selection and learning effects. These results are in contrast with Aw, Chung, and

Roberts (2000) who do not find any strong evidence of self-selection or learning in Korea.


16
   It is possible that the export boom during the crisis period baised the results towards finding
learning effects, if it caused disproportionate output expansion of new exporters.



                                                   23
Similar effects are observed when shipments or employment is considered as a

performance measure. Overall, this study suggests that the benefits from exporting have

been realized not only through resource reallocation channel but also TFP channel in

Korea.


         Although the different conclusion between this study and Aw, Chung, and Roberts

(2000) might well be due to the different time period covered in the analysis, it may also

arise from the different data set employed. Annual panel data employed in this study

allows us to follow more closely the exporting history of plants and to observe important

changes that occur at around the time of entry into and exit from the export market.

However, further study is required to shed more light on this issue.


         If foreign market provides opportunities to improve aggregate total factor

productivity both through intra-plant TFP channel but also through resource reallocation

channel, as suggested by this study, then openness by itself may not be sufficient to exploit

full potential benefits that openness provides. That is, greater openness accompanied by

policies improving resource reallocation will be more effective than policies enhancing

openness alone in order to exploit the potential benefits of openness.


         Finally, it might be too hasty to jump to the conclusion, based on the short-lived

nature of learning effect, that export market does not play a significant role in “sustained”

increase in aggregate productivity. Suppose there are continual entry and exit of producers

in and out of the export market, which is documented in many other studies, and that each

new generation of successful entrants experience learning. Then, although the learning-by-

exporting opportunity may be short-lived from the viewpoint of individual producers,

from the viewpoint of the economy as a whole, exporting may provide an opportunity for



                                              24
continuous improvement of aggregate TFP.




                                           25
                                   References


Aw, B. Y. and G. Batra (1998), “Technology, Exports, and Firm Efficiency in Taiwanese
Manufacturing,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, Vol.7, No.1, pp.93-113.

Aw, B. Y. and A. Hwang, (1995), “Productivity and the Export Market: A Firm-Level
Analysis,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol.47, No.2, pp.313-32.

Aw, B.Y., S. Chung and M. J. Roberts (2000), “Productivity and Turnover in the Export
Market: Micro-level Evidence from the Republic of Korea and Taiwan(China),” The
World Bank Economic Review, Vol.14, No.1, pp.65-90.

Aw, B. Y., X. Chen, and M. J. Roberts (2001), “Firm-level Evidence on Productivity
Differentials, Turnover and Exports in Taiwanese Manufacturing,” Journal of
Development Economics, Vol.66, No.1, pp.51-86.

Ben-David, D. and M. Loewy (1998), “Free Trade, Growth, and Convergence,” Journal of
Economic Growth, Vol.3, pp.143-170.

Bernard, A. B. and J. B. Jensen (1995), “Exporter, Jobs, and Wages in U.S.
Manufacturing: 1976-1987,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics,
Vol.1995, pp.67-112.

Bernard, A. B. and J. B. Jensen (1999 a), “Exceptional Exporter Performance : Cause,
Effect, or Both?”, Journal of International Economics , Vol.47, pp.1-25.

Bernard, A. B. and J. B. Jensen (1999 b), “Exporting and Productivity,” NBER Working
Paper 7135.

Bernard, A. B. and J. Wagner (1997), “Exports and Success in German Manufacturing,
Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, Vol.133, No.1, pp.134-157.

Chen, T. J. and D. P. Tang (1987), “Comparing Technical Efficiency between Import-
Substituting and Export-Oriented Foreign Firms in a Developing Country,” Journal of
Development Economics, Vol.26, No.2, pp.277-89.

Clerides, S. K., S. Lach and J. R. Tybout (1998), “Is Learning by Exporting Important?
Micro-Dynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Vol.113, pp.903-947.

Good, David H., 1985, “The Effect of Deregulation on the Productive Efficiency and Cost
Structure of the Airline Industry, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.

Good, David H., M. Ishaq Nadiri, and Robin Sickles, 1999, “Index Number and Factor
Demand Approaches to the Estimation of Productivity,” in Handbook of Applied
Econometrics: Microeconometrics, Vol II, pp. 14-80. H. Pesaran and Peter Schmidt eds,
Blackwell Publishers, Oxford, UK



                                           26
Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (1991), Innovation and Growth in the World Economy,
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Haddad, M. (1993), “How Trade Liberalization Affected Productivity in Morocco,” Policy
Research Working Paper 1096, Development Research Group, World Bank, Washington,
D.C. Processed.

Hall, R. and C. I. Jones (1999), “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
Per Worker Than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.114, pp.83-116.

Handoussa, J., M. Nishimizu and J. Page (1986), “Productivity Change in Egyptian Public
Sector Industries after the ‘Opening,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol.20, No.1,
pp.53-74.

Feeny, J. (1999), “International Risk Sharing, Learning by Doing, and Growth,” Journal of
Development Economics, Vol.58, No.2, pp.297-318.

Sachs, Jeffrey, and A. Warner (1995), “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No.1, pp.1-95.

Tybout, J. R., (2001), “Plant-and Firm-Level Evidence on ‘New’ Trade Theories,” NBER
Working Paper 8418.

Tybout, J. R. and M. D. Westbrook (1995), “Trade Liberalization and Dimensions of
Efficiency Change in Mexican Manufacturing Industries,” Journal of International
Economics, Vol.31, pp.53-78.




                                            27
Appendix: Measurement of Plant Total Factor Productivity

           Plant total factor productivity is estimated using the chained-multilateral index

number approach as developed in Good (1985) and Good, Nadiri, and Sickles (1997). It

uses a separate reference point for each cross-section of observations and then chain-links

the reference points together over time. The reference point for a given time period is

constructed as a hypothetical firm with input shares that equal the arithmetic mean input

shares and input levels that equal the geometric mean of the inputs over all cross-section

observations. Thus, the output, inputs, and productivity level of each firm in each year is

measured relative to the hypothetical firm at the base time period. This approach allows us

to make transitive comparisons of productivity levels among observations in a panel data

set.17

           Specifically, the productivity index for firm i at time t in our study is measured in

the following way.

                                        t
     ln TFPit = ( ln Yit − ln Yt ) +   ∑
                                       τ
                                         (ln Yτ − ln Yτ
                                        =2
                                                               ) −
                                                              −1


            N                                    t        N
         { ∑ 1 ( Snit + Snt )(ln Xnit − ln Xnt ) + ∑ ∑ 1 (Snτ + Snτ − 1)(ln Xnτ − ln Xnτ − 1) },
             2
           n =1                                τ =2    2
                                                      n =1



           where Y , X , S , and TFP denote output, input, input share, TFP level,

respectively, and symbols with upper bar are corresponding measures for hypothetical

firms. The subscripts τ and n are indices for time and inputs, respectively. In our study,

17
   Good, Nadiri, and Sickles (1996) summarize the usefulness of chaining multilateral productivity
indices succinctly. While the chaining approach of Tornqvist-Theil index, the discrete Divisia, is
useful in time series applications, where input shares might change over time, it has severe
limitations in cross-section or panel data where there is no obvious way of sequencing the
observations. To the contrary, the hypothetical firm approach allows us to make transitive
comparisons among cross-section data, while it has an undesirable property of sample dependency.
The desirable properties of both chaining approach and the hypothetical firm approach can be
incorporated into a single index by chained-multilateral index number approach.



                                                     28
the year 1990 is the base time period.

       As a measure of output, we used the gross output (production) of each plant in the

Survey deflated by the producer price index at disaggregated level. As a measure of capital

stock, we used the average of the beginning and end of the year book value capital stock

in the Survey deflated by the capital goods deflator. As a measure of labor input, we used

the number of workers, which includes paid employees (production and non-production

workers), working proprietors and unpaid family workers. Here, we allowed for the

quality differential between production workers and all the other types of workers. The

labor quality index of the latter was calculated as the ratio of non-production workers’ and

production workers’ average wage of each plant, averaged again over the entire plants in a

year. As a measure of intermediate input, we used the “major production cost” plus “other

production cost” in the Survey. Major production cost covers costs arising from materials

and parts, fuel, electricity, water, manufactured goods outsourced and maintenance. Other

production cost covers outsourced services, such as advertising, transportation,

communication and insurance. The estimated intermediate input was deflated by the

intermediate input price index.

       We assumed constant returns to scale so that the sum of factor elasticity equals to

one. Labor and intermediate input elasticity for each plant are measured as average cost

shares within the same plant-size class in the five-digit industry in a given year. Thus,

factor elasticity of plants are allowed to vary across industries and size classes and over

time. Here, plants are grouped into three size classes according to the number of

employees: 5-50, 51-300, and over 300.




                                             29
Table 1. Number of Exporters and Export Intensity



                                                                                     export
              total                                      exports/shipments ratio
                              non-                                                  growth*
year       number of                      exporters             (percent)
                            exporters                                              (percent)
             plants
                                                        unweighted      weighted
1990         68,690          58,392            10,298      54.8           37.3       9.4
              (100)          (85.0)            (15.0)
1991         72,213          61,189            11,024      54.3            37.3      13.9
              (100)          (84.7)            (15.3)
1992         74,679          63,241            11,438      51.7            36.3      14.7
              (100)          (84.7)            (15.3)
1993         88,864          77,514            11,350      49.9            36.0      12.5
              (100)          (87.2)            (12.8)
1994         91,372          80,319            11,053      47.2            35.9      17.7
              (100)          (87.9)            (12.1)
1995         96,202          85,138            11,064      44.8            37.2      26.7
              (100)          (88.5)            (11.5)
1996         97,141          86,502            10,639      43.6            35.3      8.3
              (100)          (89.0)            (11.0)
1997         92,138          80,963            11,175      44.2            38.0      27.5
              (100)          (87.9)            (12.1)
1998         79,544          67,767            11,777      44.7            48.7      40.4
              (100)          (85.2)            (14.8)

Note: Exports data in the final column are values in current won from Bank of Korea.

Numbers in the parentheses are t-statistics.




                                                 30
Table 2. Performance Characteristics of Exporters vs Non-exporters




                                   1990                         1994                      1998

                                        non-                         non-                      non-
                          exporters                    exporters                 exporters
                                      exporters                    exporters                 exporters

employment
                           153.6          24.5          119.4           20.0       95.1           17.8
(person)
shipments
                          11,505.5        957.0        17,637.1        1,260.3   25,896.8        1,773.8
(million won)
production per worker
                            50.5          26.8           92.4           47.0      155.0           74.2
(million won)
value-added per worker
                            16.5           11.3          31.0           20.4       51.3           29.6
(million won)

TFP                        0.005          -0.046        0.183          0.138      0.329          0.209

capital per worker
                            16.8           11.9          36.0           21.9       64.6           36.7
(million won)
non-production worker/
total employment            24.9          17.1           27.5           17.5       29.6           19.2
(percent)
average wage
                            5.7            5.1           10.3            9.2       13.7           11.5
(million won)
average production wage
                            5.5            5.1           10.0            9.2       13.1           11.4
(million won)
average non-production
                            6.8            5.3           11.6            9.4       15.6           12.4
wage (million won)
R&D/shipments
                              -             -            1.2             0.6       1.4             0.6
(percent)




                                                  31
Table 3. Exporter Premia

                                                                                      (unit : %)
                                                           estimated exporter premia
                                                                industry and       industry, region,
                                             no control
                                                             region controlled    and size controlled
1990
employment (person)                            123.4              117.2
shipments (million won)                        186.4              186.6                  47.9
production per worker (million won)             64.0               70.2                  48.3
value-added per worker (million won)            30.2               35.1                  21.7
TFP                                             5.1                5.9                   2.5
capital per worker (million won)               32.0                39.3                  31.3
non-production worker/
                                                15.6               26.6                  24.8
total employment (percent)
average wage (million won)                      11.8               16.3                   8.1
average production wage (million won)            7.1               12.3                   6.7
average non-production wage
                                                25.7               27.0                   8.4
(million won)
1994
employment (person)                            112.9              108.6
shipments (million won)                        179.3              175.4                  47.4
production per worker (million won)             67.0               67.3                  47.6
value-added per worker (million won)            33.9               34.3                  23.5
TFP                                             4.5                4.5                   3.8
capital per worker (million won)               55.1               51.4                   34.5
non-production worker/
                                                17.8               24.2                  22.5
total employment (percent)
average wage (million won)                      12.5               15.0                   9.7
average production wage (million won)            8.6               11.7                   8.4
average non-production wage
                                                22.6               23.0                   8.8
(million won)
R&D/shipments (percent)                        -54.7               -54.9                 -6.4
1998
employment (person)                            102.2              93.6
shipments (million won)                        181.3              166.3                  54.4
production per worker (million won)             79.3               72.9                  54.7
value-added per worker (million won)            48.4               43.9                  32.5
TFP                                            12.0               10.2                   7.5
capital per worker (million won)               57.3               46.6                   32.9
non-production worker/
                                                15.6               22.1                  24.4
total employment (percent)
average wage (million won)                      19.1               17.9                  12.5
average production wage (million won)           14.8               14.1                  10.5
average non-production wage
                                                25.5               23.6                  12.0
(million won)
R&D/shipments (percent)                        -48.2               -45.6                 -7.4

Note : * All coefficients are significant at 1 percent level.




                                                32
Table 4. Ex-ante Export Premia for Future Exporters : 1990-1994, 1995-1998
                                                                                  (unit : %)
                                                        ex-ante export premia
                                                          industry and        industry, region,
                                           no control
                                                        region controlled   and size controlled
1990
                                              52.9            47.9
employment (person)
                                             (16.2)          (16.2)
                                              78.0            71.5                 15.8
shipments (million won)
                                             (15.4)          (16.2)                (5.7)
                                              25.7            24.1                 16.4
production per worker (million won)
                                              (7.6)           (8.7)                (6.0)
                                              17.3            15.8                 11.1
value-added per worker (million won)
                                              (6.6)           (6.6)                (4.6)
                                               1.6             2.4                  0.6
TFP
                                              (1.1)           (1.8)                (0.5)
                                              16.5            15.2                 14.6
capital per worker (million won)
                                              (3.2)           (3.4)                (3.2)
non-production worker/                        14.6            15.6                 13.5
total employment (percent)                    (5.1)           (6.2)                (5.3)
                                               5.4             4.1                  1.3
average wage (million won)
                                              (3.1)           (2.6)                (0.8)
                                               3.2             2.5                  1.0
average production wage (million won)
                                              (1.8)           (1.5)                (0.6)
average non-production wage                   11.1             9.5                  0.5
(million won)                                 (5.5)           (4.8)                (0.3)
1995
                                              43.3            43.0
employment (person)
                                             (19.9)          (21.4)
                                              72.2            69.2                 18.4
shipments (million won)
                                             (20.9)          (22.7)                (9.6)
                                              30.0            27.2                 19.5
production per worker (million won)
                                             (13.0)          (14.2)               (10.3)
                                              16.4            13.9                  9.8
value-added per worker (million won)
                                              (9.2)           (8.6)                (6.1)
                                               0.9            -0.0                 -0.9
TFP
                                              (0.9)          (-0.0)               (-0.9)
                                              33.8            29.9                 25.3
capital per worker (million won)
                                              (9.1)           (9.5)                (8.0)
non-production worker/                        13.7            16.9                 15.9
total employment (percent)                    (7.0)           (9.8)                (9.1)
                                               3.7             3.3                  1.0
average wage (million won)
                                              (3.1)           (3.1)                (0.9)
average non-production wage                    2.2             2.1                  0.8
(million won)                                 (1.7)           (1.9)                (0.7)
                                               7.5             6.5                  0.0
average production wage (million won)
                                              (5.5)           (4.8)                (0.0)
                                             -25.5           -25.0                  0.8
R&D/shipments (percent)
                                             (-2.1)          (-1.9)                (0.1)

Note : * Numbers in the parentheses are t-statistics.



                                              33
Table 5. Ex-ante Growth Rate Premia of Future Exporters : 1990-1994, 1995-1998

                                                                                     (unit : %)
                                                    estimated ex-anti growth rate premia
                                                              industry and         industry, region,
                                           no control
                                                           region controlled     and size controlled
1990 – 1993 growth rates
employment (person)                            2.8                 2.6                  5.1
                                              (4.8)              (4.5)                 (8.9)
shipments (million won)                        3.6                 3.8                  6.0
                                              (3.6)              (3.8)                 (6.1)
production per worker (million won)            1.0                 1.3                  1.1
                                              (1.1)              (1.5)                 (1.3)
value-added per worker (million won)          -1.0                -0.6                  -0.5
                                             (-1.1)              (-0.7)                (-0.6)
TFP                                            0.2                -0.0                  0.3
                                              (0.3)              (-0.1)                (0.5)
capital per worker (million won)               1.5                 0.5                  -1.8
                                              (1.0)              (0.3)                 (-1.2)
non-production worker/                        -0.1                 0.1                  -0.5
total employment (percent)                   (-0.1)              (0.2)                 (-0.5)
average wage (million won)                     0.3                 0.4                  0.5
                                              (0.6)              (0.7)                 (0.9)
average production wage (million won)         -0.1                -0.1                  -0.0
                                             (-0.1)              (-0.1)                (-0.0)
average non-production wage                    1.1                 1.2                  1.6
(million won)                                 (1.4)              (1.6)                 (2.1)
1995-1997 growth rates
employment (person)                            3.6                 3.2                   6.2
                                              (6.6)              (5.9)                 (11.7)
                                               5.9                 5.7                   8.3
shipments (million won)                                          (6.0)                  (8.8)
                                              (6.4)
production per worker (million won)            2.1                 2.2                   1.8
                                              (2.5)              (2.6)                  (2.2)
value-added per worker (million won)           1.6                 1.7                   1.2
                                              (1.9)              (2.0)                  (1.3)
TFP                                            1.5                 0.9                   0.8
                                              (2.9)              (1.9)                  (1.5)
capital per worker (million won)              -0.2                -0.1                  -2.1
                                             (-0.2)              (-0.1)                (-1.7)
non-production worker/                         0.2                 0.2                  -0.1
total employment (percent)                    (0.3)              (0.3)                 (-0.1)
average wage (million won)                     1.5                 1.3                   1.1
                                              (2.6)              (2.2)                  (1.8)
average non-production wage                    1.4                 1.1                   0.9
(million won)                                 (2.2)              (1.8)                  (1.5)
average production wage (million won)          0.9                 0.8                   1.0
                                              (1.2)              (1.0)                  (1.3)
R&D/shipments (percent)                       -3.6                -3.3                  -8.8
                                             (-0.4)              (-0.3)                (-0.8)

Note : * Numbers in the parentheses are t-statistics.




                                              34
Table 6. Ex-ante TFP Advantage of Future Exporters:

                                                                                          (unit : %)
                                                      ex-ante TFP premium
                                                           industry and          industry, region,
                                   no control
                                                         region controlled      and size controlled

TFP in 1990 (log)                      12.7                    14.0                    10.2


                                       (2.95)                 (3.39)                   (2.47)

Note : TFP premium in 1990 of those plants that started exporting in 1994 and
            continuously exported there after, over those who never exported during the
            sample period.    Numbers in parentheses are t- statistics.       All coefficients are
            significant at 1% level.




Table 7. TFP Growth Rate Premium of Current Exporters over Various Time

            Horizons



                                                        subsequent annual TFP growth rate premium
                                                                                  industry, region,
                                                          no control
                                                                                 and size controlled
short-run
                                                4.4                           -0.9
  1990-1998
                                                (7.2)                         (-1.3)
medium-run
                                                1.9                           -0.6
  1990-1994
                                                (2.3)                         (-0.6)
                                                5.0                           2.1
  1994-1998
                                                (8.2)                         (2.9)
long-run
                                                3.2                           0.9
  1990-1998
                                                (5.8)                         (1.3)
Note : Short-Run premium is estimated from the pooled time-series cross-section data.
        Medium and Long-run Premia are estimated from cross-section data.                  Numbers
        in parentheses are t-statistics.




                                                 35
Table 8. Shipments Growth Rate Premium of Current Exporters over Various
         Time Horizons

                                            subsequent annual shipments growth rate premium
                                                                          industry, region,
                                                 no control
                                                                         and size controlled
short-run
                                          -7.4                       -3.5
  1990-1998
                                          (-30.7)                    (-12.7)
medium-run
                                          -5.7                       -2.2
  1990-1994
                                          (-20.0)                    (-6.4)
                                          -2.0                       0.3
  1994-1998
                                          (-6.6)                     (0.9)
long-run
                                          -2.7                       -0.1
  1990-1998
                                          (-11.7)                    (-0.5)
Note : Short-Run premium is estimated from the pooled time-series cross-section data.
       Medium and Long-run Premia are estimated from cross-section data.       Numbers in
       parentheses are t-statistics.



Table 9. Employment Growth Rate Premium of Current Exporters over
         Various Time Horizons



                                           subsequent annual employment growth rate premium
                                                                         industry, region,
                                                 no control
                                                                       and size controlled
short-run
                                          -3.0                       5.1
  1990-1998
                                          (-22.6)                    (33.9)
medium-run
                                          -2.7                       1.7
  1990-1994
                                          (-15.5)                    (8.5)
                                          -2.4                       2.2
  1994-1998
                                          (-12.7)                    (10.7)
long-run
                                          -2.2                       1.3
  1990-1998
                                          (-15.0)                    (7.5)
Note : Short-Run premium is estimated from the pooled time-series cross-section data.
        Medium and Long-run Premia are estimated from cross-section data.      Numbers in
        parentheses are t-statistics.




                                           36
     Table 10. Relative TFP Levels Before and After Exporting (or Stopping Exporting)



                                                      plant group
      plant location
                             never        stopper       starter       always            other

                         0.0           2.8           2.1            7.8**        3.0**
-2
                         (0.0)         (1.5)         (1.2)          (8.4)        (5.2)
                         0.4           1.2           3.6*           8.5**        3.2
-1
                         (0.2)         (0.8)         (2.2)          (4.1)        (1.7)
                         0.6           0.9           5.4**          10.4**       4.1*
 0
                         (0.3)         (0.5)         (2.9)          (5.1)        (2.1)
                         2.5           0.6           7.5**          11.0**       5.8**
 1
                         (1.4)         (0.3)         (3.9)          (5.5)        (3.1)
                         -0.3          -0.3          8.2**          9.3**        4.1*
 2
                         (-0.2)        (-0.1)        (4.0)          (4.6)        (2.2)
Note : * (**)indicates that the coefficient is significantly different from Never(-2) at
         5%(1%) level.




          Table 11. Relative Shipments Levels Before and After Exporting (or Stopping

     Exporting)



                                                      plant group
      plant location
                             never        stopper       starter       always            other

                         0.0           150.6**       91.4**         277.6**      123.6**
-2
                         (0.0)         (20.9)        (13.5)         (77.7)       (54.7)
                         -7.0          124.5**       112.0**        265.8**      116.9**
-1
                         (-0.9)        (20.1)        (17.7)         (32.7)       (15.3)
                         -8.1          100.6**       130.8**        264.1**      116.3**
 0
                         (-1.1)        (13.5)        (18.3)         (33.0)       (15.5)
                         -1.0          79.8**        158.0**        265.5**      122.7**
 1
                         (-0.1)        (10.3)        (20.9)         (33.9)       (16.7)
                         -5.8          79.3**        166.4**        262.9**      119.5**
 2
                         (-0.8)        (10.0)        (21.0)         (33.1)       (16.1)
Note : *(**) indicates that the coefficient is significantly different from Never(-2) at
        5%(1%) level.




                                                37
Table 12. Relative Employment Levels Before and After Exporting (or
        Stopping Exporting)

                                                     plant group
     plant location
                            never        stopper       starter       always         other
                        0.0           103.7**       60.4**         195.2**      82.5**
-2
                        (0.0)         (19.7)        (12.2)         (74.8)       (50.0)
                        -6.9          84.4**        74.3**         188.3**      76.0**
-1
                        (-1.3)        (18.7)        (16.1)         (31.8)       (13.6)
                        -5.6          71.6**        85.7**         187.4**      78.1**
 0
                        (-1.0)        (13.2)        (16.4)         (32.1)       (14.3)
                        -4.0          57.6**        101.9**        187.3**      80.0**
 1
                        (-0.8)        (10.2)        (18.5)         (32.7)       (14.9)
                        -6.4          57.9**        106.7**        185.8**      78.1**
 2
                        (-1.2)        (10.0)        (18.4)         (32.1)       (14.4)
Note : *(**) indicates that the coefficient is significantly different from Never(-2) at
5%(1%) level.




                                           38
         <Figure 1> Movements of Share of Exporters and Export Intensity




    <Figure 2> Relative Levels of TFP by Plant Group : Before and After


 0.12

 0.10

 0.08

 0.06

 0.04

 0.02

 0.00

- 0.02
               -2           -1               0        1           2


                    never         starter        stopper        always




                                        39
<Figure 3> Relative Levels of Shipments by Plant Group : Before and After


 3.00


 2.50

 2.00


 1.50

 1.00


 0.50


 0.00


- 0.50
           -2            -1               0         1            2


                 never         starter        stopper         always

<Figure 4> Relative Levels of employment by Plant Group : Before and After


 2.50


 2.00


 1.50


 1.00


 0.50


 0.00


- 0.50
           -2            -1               0        1            2

                 never          starter        stopper         always




                                     40
41
