                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        PHYSICAL AND HUMAN CAPITAL DEEPENING
                           AND NEW TRADE PATTERNS IN JAPAN

                                                Keiko Ito
                                               Kyoji Fukao

                                          Working Paper 10209
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10209


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




The authors would like to thank the editors of this volume and the discussants, Chin Hee Hahn and Ji Chou,
and participants of the Fourteenth NBER Annual East Asian Seminar on Economics for their helpful
comments. The authors are also grateful to Yoshimasa Yoshiike and Tangjun Yuan for undertaking
meticulous data calculations.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Keiko Ito and Kyoji Fukao. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Physical and Human Capital Depening and New Trade Patterns in Japan
Keiko Ito and Kyoji Fukao
NBER Working Paper No. 10209
January 2004
JEL No. C23, F14, F16

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the deepening of the international division of labor and its effect on factor
intensities in Japan, mainly focusing on the manufacturing sector. In the first half of the paper, we
analyze the factor contents of trade and find that Japan’s factor content net-exports of capital and
non-production labor grew rapidly while net-exports of production workers fell by a large amount
during the period from 1980-2000. Interestingly, the decline in the factor content of net-exports of
production workers was almost entirely caused by Japan’s trade with China and Hong Kong.
According to our decomposition analysis, however, most of the macro-economic change in the
capital-labor ratio and the change in the skilled-labor ratio is attributable to a “within-industry”shift
rather than a “between-industry” shift. Although we clearly see a drastic increase in VIIT and
outsourcing to foreign countries, particularly to Asian countries, our empirical analysis provides
only weak evidence that the deepening international division of labor contributes to changes in
factor intensities in each industry. Our results suggest that specialization in the export of skilled-
labor-intensive products may have contributed to the increase in the relative demand for skilled
(professional, technical, managerial, and administrative) labor within industry. However, our results
suggest that changes in trade patterns (specialization in capital-intensive production) cannot explain
the rapid growth of capital-labor ratios in Japan.

Keiko Ito                                               Institute of Economic Research
The International Centre for the Study of East          Hitotsubashi University
Asian Development                                       2-1 Naka, Kunitachi
11-4 Otemachi, Kokurakita                               Tokyo 186-8603
Kitakyushu, Fukuoka 803-0814                            Japan
Japan                                                   k.fukao@srv.cc.hit-u.ac.jp
ito@icsead.or.jp


Kyoji Fukao
1.   Introduction

      Until the beginning of the 1990s, Japan accomplished comparatively high economic growth

through an exceptionally rapid accumulation of physical and human capital. Table 1.1 compares

growth accounting results for the US economy (by Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh, 2002) with those for

the Japanese economy (Fukao, Inui, Kawai, and Miyagawa, 2003). We can see that, compared with

the US, Japan’s economic growth until 1990 was relatively more dependent on labor quality growth

and increases in physical capital per capita. However, as is well-known, high economic growth based

on rapid capital accumulation is not sustainable in the long-run because of the diminishing rate of

return to physical and human capital.

                                             INSERT Table 1.1

      Evidence suggests that Japan is caught in this trap of diminishing rates of return. Figure 1.1

shows that as the physical capital-output ratio increased over the past three decades in Japan, the rate

of return to physical capital declined continuously. Comparing South Korea and Japan with other

OECD economies, Pyo and Nam (1999), showed that the two countries both enjoyed a more rapid

rise in their capital output ratios but also suffered a faster decline in the rate of return to capital.

Turning from physical to human capital, Katz and Revenga (1989) found that while educational

earnings differentials expanded drastically in the US in the 1980s, the college wage premium in

Japan increased only slightly. As Genda (1997) showed, the underlying reason is that the

employment of skilled workers such as older college graduate males expanded rapidly in Japan,

resulting in an excess supply of skilled workers relative to the limited availability of management

positions that contributed to the stagnation of earnings for older college graduates. Probably partly as

a result of these declines in the rate of return, the accumulation of physical and human capital has




                                                   2
slowed down over the past decade (Table 1.1).1

                                               INSERT Figure 1.1

        We should note that according to standard international trade theory, rapid growth based on

capital accumulation will be sustainable if the economy gradually specializes in physical and human

capital intensive products. Under such a specialization process, the factor price equalization

mechanism will work to offset the diminish rate of return to physical and human capital. For Japan,

the 1990s were an age of “globalization”: the country has expanded its international division of labor

with other East Asian countries through international trade and direct investment. The purpose of

this paper is to examine this deepening of the international division of labor and evaluate how much

of the diminishing rate of return mechanism was cancelled out by the international division of labor.

        Several recent studies, such as Feenstra and Hanson (1996b, 1999, 2001), Kimura (2001), and

Fukao, Ishido, and Ito (2003), have shown that the fragmentation of the production process and

vertical intra-industry trade between developed and developing economies may have enhanced the

vertical division of labor within each industry. This type of international division of labor would

cause a deepening of the physical and human capital within each industry in developed economies.

However, since the resulting capital deepening will occur within each industry, we cannot correctly

analyze this type of division of labor by using inter-industry trade data. Consequently, we study the

international division of labor by looking at both inter-industry trade and intra-industry trade.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we examine physical and

human capital deepening in Japan. In section 3, we take a broad look at Japan’s inter-industry trade

and factor contents in order to measure to what extent Japan’s capital deepening is offset by




1
    Godo (2001) found that the speed of catch-up of Japan’s average schooling years to the US level slowed
down during the 1980s because of the decline in the Japan/US ratio in average schooling years for tertiary
education.


                                                     3
international trade. In section 4, after providing an overview of the changes in Japan’s intra-industry

trade and vertical division of labor, we conduct econometric analyses to investigate the determinants

of the changes in factor intensities using industry-level data. Section 5, finally, presents our

conclusions.




2. Physical and Human Capital Deepening in the Japanese Economy

    In this section, we look at the trends of physical and human capital deepening in Japan and

examine the macro-economic change in the capital-labor ratio and the change in the skilled-labor

ratio (the percentage of skilled labor in total labor) by decomposing these changes into the

contribution of the increase in the capital-labor ratio or the share of non-production workers within

each industry (the “within effect”) and the contribution of the reallocation between industries (the

“between effect”).

      First, we consider the increase in the capital-labor ratio and the share of non-production (or

skilled) workers in the manufacturing sector as well as the Japanese economy as a whole. As Figure

2.1 shows, the capital-labor ratio measured as real capital stock (in 1990 price) divided by the

number of workers has increased considerably over the last three decades: the capital-labor ratio for

both the economy as a whole and manufacturing industry grew five-fold from three million yen per

person in 1970 to 15 million yen per person in 1998.

                                            INSERT Figure 2.1

      In order to examine the human-capital deepening in Japan, we compiled data on the number of

non-production or skilled workers using the data of the Population Census. “Skilled workers” are

persons whose profession is classified either as “professional and technical” or as “managerial and

administrative.” We define “non-production workers” here as persons whose profession falls into

one of the following categories: professional and technical occupations, managers and administrators,



                                                  4
clerical and secretarial occupations, sales occupations, services occupations, protective occupations,

occupations      in        agriculture,      forestry     and     fishing,   occupations   in   transportation   and

telecommunications, and other occupations. The definition of “non-production workers” is much

broader than the definition of “skilled workers” and includes not-highly educated workers. The share

of non-production (or skilled) workers in the total number of workers has been increasing, as shown

in Figure 2.2, though the growth rate is much more moderate than that of the capital-labor ratio. In

the period from 1980–2000, the share of non-production workers in manufacturing increased from

27.7% in 1980 to 30.7% in 2000.2 The share of skilled workers also grew during 1980-2000: in the

manufacturing sector, it rose from 9.0% to 10.5%, while in the economy as a whole it expanded from

9.8% to 13.9%.3

                                                          INSERT Figure 2.2

     The increase in the capital-labor ratio and in the share of non-production (or skilled) workers can

be decomposed into the contribution of the increase within each industry (“within effect”) and the

contribution of the reallocation between industries (“between effect”) using the following

decomposition formula:
                       n                 n
            ∆P = ∑ S i ∆Pi + ∑ Pi ∆S i
                      i =1           i =1

                  i: industry (i=1, 2, ..., n)
                              n      n              n            n
                  P = ∑ K i / ∑ Li , or            ∑ Ls, i / ∑ Li
                             i =1   i =1           i =1         i =1

                 Pi=Ki/Li: Capital-labor ratio in industry i, or




2
    This latter value, though, is substantially below the peak of 32.3% reached in 1997. The decline in the
share of non-production workers since 1998 is most likely the result of firms’ restructuring efforts – the
dismissal of managers, sales personnel, etc. – following the further deterioration of the Japanese
economy.
3
    For details on the compilation of the skilled/non-production workers data, see Appendix.


                                                                5
                   =Lsi/Li: Share of non-production (or skilled) workers in total number of workers in

                              industry i

                 Si= Li/L: Share of workers in industry i in total number of workers in the economy as

                         a whole or in the manufacturing sector

Variables with an upper bar denote the average value of the period. ∆ denotes the change in the

variable overtime. The first term of the right hand side represents the increase in the factor intensity

within each industry (“within effect”) while the second term represents the reallocation between

industries (“between effect”).

        Ideally, we should use the most disaggregated cross-industry data available for our

decomposition analysis. However, because of the data limitation, we had to use the relatively

aggregated data of the JIP database for our decomposition analysis.4 We should note that our

estimates of the within effect might suffer from upward biases as a consequence of this aggregation

problem.

        The results of our decomposition analysis are reported in Tables 2.1 and 2.2. Table 2.1, which

summarizes the decomposition of capital-labor ratio growth, shows that there was a negative

between effect for most periods of 1970-1998, indicating the decline of the capital-intensive sectors

of the economy. Moreover, the magnitude of the between effect is very small throughout the entire

1970-1998 period and most part of the growth of capital-labor ratio is attributable to the within effect.

On the other hand, Table 2.2, which summarizes the decomposition of the growth of the share of

skilled or non-production workers, shows that here the between effect was positive in all cases,

showing that the share of human capital intensive industries has continuously increased both in the

manufacturing sector and in the economy as a whole. The within effect was also positive with the



4
    In the following decomposition, we used data of 35 manufacturing industries and 43 non-manufacturing
industries.


                                                    6
exception of two cases in the period of 1990-2000, and it was always greater than the between effect

except for these two cases. The major implication of our results is that the within effect is very large.

Some part of the within effect may have been caused by the international division of labor within

each industry. We analyze this issue in section 4.

                                         INSERT Tables 2.1 and 2.2

      Our decomposition analysis thus suggests that physical and human capital deepening in the

Japanese economy is mostly attributable to the within-industry shift, not to the between-industry

shift, though we could see a negative between effect during the period 1990-2000 for the share of

non-production workers in the manufacturing sector and the share of skilled workers in the whole

economy. In the last two decades, and particularly in the 1990s, the age of “globalization,” both the

within-industry capital deepening and the between-industry allocation may have been caused by

expanding international trade. The between-industry shift may be partly explained by the change in

patterns of inter-industry trade which affects the size of each industry in Japan, while the

within-industry shift may be explained by the change in patterns of intra-industry trade which affects

the mixes of factor inputs in each industry. In the following sections, we will examine the change in

Japan’s trade patterns and analyze the determinants of the changes in factor intensities in Japan.




3.   Japan’s Inter-industry Trade and Factor Contents

      In this section, we take a general look at the pattern of Japan’s inter-industry trade in the last

two decades. Next, we estimate how factor contents in Japan’s international trade changed during

this period.




3.1 Overview of Japan’s International Trade

      Although Japan’s overall import-GDP ratio has gradually declined over the last two decades,



                                                     7
imports of manufactured products have actually grown faster than the economy as a whole (Table

3.1). As Figure 3.1.B shows, the increase in imports mainly concentrated on electrical machinery and

labor intensive goods, such as apparel and wooden products, which in this figure are classified as

“other manufacturing products.” Since the share of the manufacturing sector in GDP declined during

this period, the ratio of imports of manufactured products to gross value added in the manufacturing

sector increased rapidly: by 11.5 percentage-points from 15.2% in 1985 to 26.7% in 2000 (Table 3.1).

The United States experienced a similar trend during the 1980s, when this ratio jumped by 12.4

percentage-points from 18.3% in 1978 to 30.7% in 1990 (Sachs and Shatz 1994). We would expect

an impact of a similar scale on Japan’s manufacturing sector as a result of the recent surge in

imports..5

                                       INSERT Table 3.1 and Figure 3.1

        On the other hand, the commodity composition of Japan’s exports at the two-digit level has

remained relatively stable over the last fifteen years (Figure 3.1.A). Nevertheless, looking at trade

patterns at a more detailed commodity classification level, it becomes clear that Japan’s

specialization has changed: the country is increasingly specializing in the export of capital goods and

key parts and components in the automobile and electrical machinery sector, while it has become a

net importer of many household electrical goods.6

        Japan’s new imports of electrical machinery and labor intensive products are mainly provided

by East Asian economies. Figure 3.2 shows that nine East Asian economies (China, Hong Kong,


5
    Comparing export shares and import penetration in the US, Canada, UK and Japan during the period
from 1974-93, Campa and Goldberg (1997) found import penetration to be extremely stable and
significantly lower in Japan than in the other countries. However, if we were to conduct a similar analysis
using more recent data, it seems probable that this conclusion no longer holds.
6
    The share of machine parts in Japan’s total exports to East Asia increased from 31.7 % in 1990 to
40.2 % in 1998, while the share of capital goods, which include some machine parts, increased from
53.2 % to 56.8 % during the same period (MITI 1999).


                                                    8
Taiwan, Korea, Singapore, Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines, and Malaysia) provided 64.2% of

Japan’s electrical machinery imports and 49.2% of Japan’s imports of “other manufacturing

products” in 2000. The East Asian economies’ share in Japan’s total imports of machinery and

intermediate products such as metal products and chemical products has also increased rapidly.

                                             INSERT Figure 3.2

      As a result of these trends, East Asia during the 1990s became the most important destination

for and origin of Japan’s international trade. As Figure 3.3 shows, trade with the nine East Asian

economies accounted for 48.5% of Japan’s total manufactured imports and 41.0% of total

manufactured exports in 2000.

                                             INSERT Figure 3.3

      This rise in Japan’s imports of labor intensive products and exports of capital and technology

intensive products (such as machinery and advanced intermediate products) can be easily recognized

as a deepening of the international division of labor with the relatively unskilled-labor abundant East

Asian economies. But how can we interpret the rapid increase in the two-way trade in electrical

machinery? Table 3.2, presenting Japan’s bilateral trade in electrical machinery with China and Hong

Kong in 1999 at the 3-digit level, provides a clue.

                                             INSERT Table 3.2

      This table shows two important facts. First, at the detailed commodity level, there seems to be

a division of labor within the electrical machinery industry. With China and Hong Kong, Japan is a

net importer of relatively labor-intensive products (such as television and radio-broadcast receivers

and electrical household goods) and a net exporter of technology-intensive other products. This

means that in order to correctly understand the division of labor and factor contents in trade between

Japan and East Asia, we need to analyze trade patterns at the detailed commodity level; otherwise,

the analysis will suffer from aggregation bias problems (Feenstra and Hanson 2000).



                                                      9
        The second important fact this table shows is the existence of huge intra-industry trade

between Japan and China plus Hong Kong. For example, in the case of television receivers, the total

trade value is 37 times greater than the trade balance. It seems that we need to analyze intra-industry

trade in order to correctly evaluate the impact of trade on Japanese economy.




3.2 Factor Contents in Japan’s Trade of Manufacturing Products

        In this subsection, we analyze the changes in factor contents in Japan’s trade. In order to avoid

aggregation bias, we should calculate factor contents at the most disaggregated level possible.7 The

most disaggregated data on direct factor requirements are those available in the Report on Industrial

Statistics of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, which is based on the Census of

Manufactures. The data is classified by the 4-digit Standard Industrial Classification for Japan,

which listed 540 manufacturing industries in 1990.

        There is no direct converter between this industry classification and the 9-digit HS

classification used by the Ministry of Finance for the compilation of Japan’s international trade

statistics. In order to link the two sets of data – factor requirements and international trade – we used

the basic industry classification of the Japan Input-Output Tables 1990 by the Management and

Coordination Agency, which lists 341 manufacturing industries, as our benchmark classification.

Using supplementary converter tables of the I-O statistics, we converted both the factor requirement

data and the international trade data into the basic I-O classification. As a result, we obtain factor

requirement and international trade data for 246 manufacturing industries.8 In order to estimate



7
    Using Management and Coordination Agency, Japanese Government “1980-85-90 Linked Input-Output
Tables,” Sakurai (2001) estimated factor contents in Japan’s trade for the years 1980, 85, and 90.
8
    The factor requirement data of the Census of Manufactures is on an establishment basis and each
establishment is classified by its most important product. Since many establishments produce various
commodities simultaneously, this classification method is problematic. The I-O converter from the


                                                    10
indirect factor requirements, we used the corresponding I-O table.

         Ideally, we would use up-to-date factor requirement data and I-O tables in order to take

account of technology change in Japan. Unfortunately, the factor requirement data is available only

until 1990, because the Census of Manufactures after that year does not cover headquarter activities.

Because of this constraint, we used constant factor requirement and I-O data of 1990 for our analysis

of the entire 1980-2000 period.9

         Factor content in Japan’s trade in year t (t = 1980, 1990, 2000) is calculated by

          X t = D ( I − A) −1 Tt

where (K × 1) vector Xt =[xk,t] denotes the total contents of factor k in Japan’s trade of year t. (K × J)

matrix D =[dk,j] denotes the quantity of primary factor k directly used per unit of output in industry j

in year 1990. (J × J) matrix A is the input-output matrix of year 1990.10 (J × 1) vector Tt is the

net-export vector of year t in 1990 prices. In order to derive trade data in 1990 prices, we used the

deflators of the Management and Coordination Agency’s Japan Linked Input-Output Table (various

years) and the Wholesale Price Index of the Bank of Japan at the 3-digit level.11

         We analyzed factor content in terms of the following four primary factors: physical capital (in




Census of Manufactures to the basic I-O classification takes account of this problem and converts
establishment-based data into activity-based data. We used the I-O converter in order to construct the
factor requirement data for each I-O classification-based industry. Therefore, our factor requirement data
were also transformed into the activity-based data.
9
     Because of this methodology, there is a risk of overestimating factor contents in recent trade in the case
of industries where total factor productivity has grown rapidly.
10
     The input-output matrix here covers only manufacturing industries. Therefore, our analysis does not
include indirect factor requirements through changes in production in non-manufacturing industries.
11
     The conversion of trade statistics at the HS 9-digit level into trade data at classified at the basic
industry level of the I-O tables in 1990 price was conducted by H. Nosaka, T. Inui, K. Ito and K. Fukao as
part of the Japan Industrial Productivity (JIP) database project. The result is included in the JIP database.
For more detail on this database see Fukao, Inui, Kawai, and Miyagawa (2003).


                                                       11
1990 prices, book value), production labor (number of workers), non-production labor (number of

workers), and land (in 1990 prices, book value). In order to analyze how the increase in Japan’s trade

with the East Asian economies affected Japan’s factor markets, we subdivided Japan’s total net

exports in each industry into gross exports and gross imports by six regions, namely, (1) China and

Hong Kong, (2) the NIEs-3 (Taiwan, South Korea, and Singapore), (3) the ASEAN-4 (Indonesia,

Thailand, Malaysia, and The Philippines), (4) the US, (5) the EU, and (6) all other economies.

      The results of the factor content analysis for the years 1980, 1990, and 2000 are reported in

Table 3.3. Reflecting Japan’s huge trade surplus, Japan is a net exporter of all the four primary

factors. For example, according to our calculations, in the year 2000, Japan recorded factor-content

net exports of 363,000 production workers, which represents 4.7 % of the total of production

workers (7,717,000) in manufacturing in 1990. Compared with the trade pattern observed in 1990,

the 2000 figure for factor content net-exports of production labor represents a decline of 42%. This

decline was almost entirely caused by Japan’s trade with China and Hong Kong (Table 3.4). In the

year 2000, about one-third of factor content gross-imports of production workers came from China

and Hong Kong (Table 3.3).

                                     INSERT Table 3.3 and Table 3.4

      In the case of non-production workers, there were factor content net-exports of 378,000

production workers in the year 2000, which represents 10.9% of the total of non-production workers

(3,456,000) in manufacturing in 1990. Compared with trade patterns in 1980, net-exports of

non-production workers have increased by 89,000, which is equivalent to 2.6% of the total of

non-production workers in 1990. The major increase in this factor content occurred in Japan’s trade

with the US (Table 3.4).

      In the case of land, factor content net-exports in 2000 amounted to 1.36 trillion yen (in 1990

prices), which is equivalent to 10.5 % of the total land value (12.9 trillion yen) used in



                                                 12
manufacturing in 1990. Net exports of land have gradually declined over the last twenty years (Table

3.4).

        Capital stock factor content net-exports in 2000, meanwhile, stood at 9.12 trillion yen (in 1990

prices), which represents 16.5% of the total capital stock (55.4 trillion yen) in manufacturing in 1990.

Compared with 1980, this represent an increase in net-exports of capital stock by 1.1 trillion yen or

2.0% of the total capital stock in 1990 (Table 3.4).

        Relative to the total amount of each of the four primary input factors used in manufacturing,

Japan exported a large amount of capital and non-production labor but only a small amount of

production labor in 2000. Since non-production workers on average are more educated than

production workers and Japan is a country abundant in physical and human capital, the above results

are consistent with the Heckscher-Ohlin theory.

        As Table 3.3 shows, in the period from 1980-2000, Japan’s factor content net-exports of

production workers fell by 3.3%, while net-exports of non-production workers rose by 2.6%. This

change in trade        patterns   has   the   effect    of   increasing   the   implied   supply-ratio   of

production/non-production workers available to the manufacturing sector for other use by about

5.9%. More than one-half of this change (3.2%) was caused by Japan’s trade with China and Hong

Kong.

        During 1980-2000, Japan’s factor content net-exports of capital stock grew by 2.0%, while

net-exports of workers overall (production and non-production) decreased by 1.5%. This change in

the trade pattern has the effect of reducing the implied supply of capital stock per worker available to

the manufacturing sector for other use by 3.5%. Thus, compared with the impact on the implied

supply ratio of production/non-production workers, the effect of recent changes in trade patterns on

the implied supply of capital stock per worker has been small.

        By a similar calculation using the results of the factor content analysis at the 4-digit level



                                                       13
carried out by Feenstra and Hanson (2000), we can evaluate the impact of US trade on its factor

markets. This shows that in the period of 1982-94, changes in US trade patterns had the effect of

increasing the implied supply ratio of production/non-production workers available to the

manufacturing sector for other use by 1.0%, while the implied supply of capital stock per worker

available to the manufacturing sector for other use fell by 2.3%.12 Thus, compared with the US,

Japan experienced a much more drastic change in factor content net-exports over the last two

decades in terms of its implied supply ratio of production/non-production workers available to the

manufacturing sector for other use.

        The trends shown here mean that, Japan’s factor content net-exports have changed in a

direction that offsets the effect of the accumulation of physical and human capital per capita. Japan

has come to export more physical and human capital intensive products over the past two decades.

However, compared with the rapid deepening of physical and human capital in the macro-economy

described in Section 2, the offsetting effect of international trade seems to be small. Table 3.5

compares physical and human capital deepening in the Japanese manufacturing sector as a whole

with that purely attributable to changes in factor contents of trade. Although the average annual

growth rate of capital-labor ratio for the manufacturing sector total is 7.60% for the 1980-1998

period, the growth rate becomes very small at 0.18 % when we only take account of change in factor

contents of trade. As for the growth rate of the share of non-production workers, the offsetting effect

of international trade is also small for the 1980-1990 period and throughout the 1980-2000 period.

However, in the 1990s, the contribution of international trade to the growth of the share of

non-production workers in the Japanese manufacturing sector is much larger, which implies a


12
     In the period of 1982-94, the United States saw an increase in its factor content net-imports of
production (non-production) workers in manufacturing of 8.2% (7.2%). It also experienced a rise in factor
content net-imports of capital stock in manufacturing of 5.5% and a decline in net-exports of (production
plus non-production) workers of 7.8% of total workers in manufacturing.


                                                   14
significant effect of international trade on Japan’s human capital deepening.

                                           INSERT Table 3.5




4.    Japan’s Intra-Industry Trade and Determinants of Factor Intensity within Industry

        So far, we have found that the macro-level capital-labor ratio has been increasing over the last

two decades, and that most of the increase is attributable to the within-industry shift and not the

between-industry shift. Moreover, most of the macro-level increase in the skilled or

non-production labor share in the total number of workers has also been induced by the

within-industry shift. As has been argued in previous studies, the international division of labor

through the fragmentation of production processes and the import of unskilled labor-intensive

intermediate inputs may have contributed to an increase in the relative demand for skilled labor in

each industry. That is, if firms fragment their production into discrete activities and move

non-skill-intensive activities abroad, then trade will shift employment toward skilled workers within

those industries. This type of international division of labor has been referred to as “outsourcing” in

the recent literature. Feenstra and Hanson (1996a, 1996b, 1999) and Hijzen, Görg and Hine (2003),

for example, provide econometric evidence of a positive relationship between outsourcing and the

demand for skilled labor. Although the international fragmentation of production has been increasing

rapidly in Japan in recent years, too, contributing to changes in trade patterns, studies analyzing the

impact of fragmentation on labor and capital are very limited.13

        Moreover, vertical intra-industry trade (VIIT), i.e. intra-industry trade where goods are

differentiated by quality, may have a large impact on factor demands within each manufacturing

industry in Japan. As Falvey (1981) pointed out in his seminal theoretical paper, commodities of the



13
     An exception is Sakurai (2000), who conducts a similar analysis for Japan. See section 4.2 for the
details.


                                                   15
same statistical group but of different quality may be produced using different mixes of factor inputs.

Therefore, developed economies like Japan may export physical and human capital-intensive

products of high-quality and import unskilled labor-intensive products of low quality from

developing economies. As a result, an increase in VIIT may also raise the physical and human

capital intensity in Japan.

        In the following subsections, we briefly outline the changes in outsourcing and VIIT patterns

by industry in Japan for the period from 1988–2000.14 We also discuss the relationship between

changes in factor demand and trade patterns by industry. Using industry-level as well as firm-level

data, we conduct econometric analyses to investigate the determinants of the observed growth in the

skilled-labor share in total workers and in the capital-labor ratio. We should note that following

analyses are limited to the manufacturing sector due to data constraints.




4.1 Industry-Level Overview of Fragmentation and Factor Intensity

        Japan’s trade patterns have undergone various changes over time: in particular, the share of

trade with Asian countries in overall trade has increased markedly. In this subsection, utilizing

Japan’s customs data and the JIP database, we investigate VIIT and outsourcing from foreign

countries by industry, and analyze the impacts of these trends on shift in factor demand in Japan.

        Figure 4.1 shows the share of VIIT, a broad outsourcing measure, and a narrow outsourcing

measure by industry for the year 2000, while Figure 4.2 presents the average annual growth rates of

these values from 1988–2000 by industry.15 Following major preceding studies such as Greenaway,

Hine, and Milner (1995) and Fontagné, Freudenberg, and Péridy (1997), our VIIT measure is


14
     As for the capital-labor ratio, due to data constraints, our analysis focuses only on the period from
1988-98.
15
     For the definition of VIIT and broad and narrow outsourcing measures, see Appendix. For more
detailed analyses on VIIT in Japan and East Asia, see Fukao, Ishido, and Ito (2003).


                                                    16
calculated based on the assumption that the gap between the unit value of imports and the unit value

of exports for each commodity reveals the qualitative differences of the products exported and

imported between the two countries. Our measures of broad and narrow outsourcing are constructed

following Feenstra and Hanson (1999). The broad outsourcing measure expresses imported

intermediate inputs relative to total expenditure on non-energy intermediate inputs in each industry.

The narrow outsourcing measure is expressed by the imported intermediate inputs purchased from

the same JIP industry as the good being produced divided by the total expenditure on non-energy

intermediate inputs in each industry. Figure 4.1 shows that the level of the VIIT share in the year

2000 was relatively high (more than 30 percent) in publishing and printing, other chemicals, metal

products, electrical machinery, other electrical machinery, and precision machinery and equipment.

On the other hand, the broad outsourcing measure was high (more than 15 percent) in food products

(livestock products and processed marine products), apparel and accessories, lumber and wood

products, leather and leather products, basic chemicals, chemical fibers, non-ferrous metals, other

electrical machinery, and precision machinery and equipment. The narrow outsourcing measure was

high (more than 5 percent) in food products (livestock products and processed marine products),

lumber and wood products, pulp, paper, and paper products, leather and leather products, basic

chemicals, petroleum products, steel manufacturing, non-ferrous metals, other electrical machinery,

other transportation equipment, and precision machinery and equipment. Figure 4.2 shows that the

VIIT share and outsourcing measures increased in most manufacturing sectors during the period

from 1988–2000. In particular, we find that the outsourcing measures increased relatively more in

food products, textile products, and machineries, while the VIIT share increased relatively more in

food products, textile products, petroleum and coal products, non-ferrous metals and motor vehicles.

                                    INSERT Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.2

      Next, let us look at the correlations between changes in factor intensities, the VIIT share, and



                                                 17
the outsourcing measures. Table 4.1 summarizes the correlation coefficients between the annual

growth rates of the shares of skilled workers, non-production workers, the VIIT share, and the broad

and narrow outsourcing measures for the period from 1988–2000. Although we can see a positive

correlation between skilled workers’ share and the VIIT share, the correlation coefficient is not

statistically significant. Moreover, the correlation coefficients between the capital-labor ratio and the

VIIT share and between non-production workers’ share and the VIIT share are negative, though not

significant. As for changes in the outsourcing measures and factor intensities, a significantly positive

correlation can be seen only in the case of skilled workers’ share. Therefore, the simple correlation

coefficient analysis does not provide strong support for the conjecture that outsourcing or VIIT may

have contributed to physical and human capital deepening in each industry.

                                              INSERT Table 4.1




4.2 Econometric Analysis

      In this section, we conduct a statistical analysis of the determinants of factor intensities using

the industry-level data from 1988–2000. Several previous studies have analyzed the impact of

fragmentation on skill upgrading (human capital deepening). Using detailed industry-level data for

the US, Feenstra and Hanson (1996a, 1996b, 1999) estimate the effect of international outsourcing

on wage inequality. Hijzen, Görg and Hine (2003) conduct a similar analysis using UK data for 53

manufacturing industries for the period from 1982–1997. As for Japan, Sakurai (2000) analyzes this

issue using data for 39 manufacturing industries for the period from 1987–1990. While the studies

on the US and the UK found a strong positive relationship between outsourcing and wage inequality,

Sakurai’s (2000) study on Japan did not produce such clear-cut evidence. Sakurai explains that his

ambiguous result might be due to the short estimation period. The present paper aims at applying

and extending the Feenstra and Hanson approach by using JIP industry-level data (35 manufacturing



                                                   18
industries) for the period from 1988–2000. In addition, we take account of the role of skill-biased

technological change (SBTC) in the increase in skilled (non-production) worker intensity, utilizing

the JIP IT (Information Technology) database.16 As Hijzen, Görg and Hine (2003) mention, the

inclusion of the 1990s in the analysis is thought to be crucial as international fragmentation and

information technology progressed rapidly in the past decade. However, one drawback of our

analysis is that we cannot calculate wage bills for skilled (non-production) and unskilled

(production) workers due to data constraints. Therefore, we assume that the relative wage rates of

skilled (non-production) and unskilled (production) workers have not changed over time, and we use

the ratio of the number of skilled (non-production) workers to the total number of workers as a proxy

for the share of skilled (non-production) workers’ wage bill in the total wage bill.

        A translog cost function approach, based on the work of Berman, Bound and Griliches (1994)

and Feenstra and Hanson (1996b), is usually employed in the literature to estimate skill upgrading

and we follow this approach here. Similarly, following previous studies, we consider capital as a

fixed input in the short-run, while skilled and unskilled (non-production and production) workers are

variable factors of production. Therefore, the short-run translog cost function can be presented as:

                        J                    K
                                                             1 J J
         ln Ci = α 0 + ∑α j ln wij + ∑ β k ln xik +           ∑∑γ js ln wij ln wis
                       j =1                  k =1            2 j =1 s =1
                                     K   K                   J K
                                  1
                              +     ∑∑ kl ik il ∑∑
                                  2 k =1 l =1
                                              δ ln x ln x +
                                                            j =1 k =1
                                                                      ϕ jk ln wij ln xik
                                                                                                      (4.1)

where Ci is the variable cost for industry i, wij denotes the wages of workers in skill group j, and xik

denotes the fixed inputs or outputs k. Differentiating the translog cost function with respect to wages


16
     According to the argument put forward by Feenstra and Hanson (1999), both skill-biased technological
change and outsourcing can be considered to be associated with within-industry changes in skill intensity
as a result of their effect on the relative productivity of different skill groups. That is, as fragmentation or
outsourcing take the form of moving unskilled labor-intensive processes from a developed country to a
developing country, they have a similar effect as technological change.


                                                            19
yields the factor payments to skill group j over the total wage bill.

                       J               K
         S ij = α j + ∑ γ js ln wij + ∑ϕ jk ln xik
                      s =1            k =1                                                               (4.2)

Assuming that quality-adjusted wages will be identical across industries, the wage terms can be

dropped from the right-hand-side of the equation (4.2). We consider technological change, VIIT, and

outsourcing as structural variables and assume there are three kinds of capital, i.e., IT hardware, IT

software, and non-IT capital. A full set of year dummies is included in order to capture

economy-wide skill upgrading as well as year-to-year changes in the wage levels faced by all

industries. Therefore, we estimate the following equation:

         S ijt = ϕ j 0 + ϕ j1 ln (IThard / VA)it + ϕ j 2 ln (ITsoft / VA)it + ϕ j 3 ln ( NonIT / VA)it
                + ϕ j 4 ln VAit + ϕ j 5 (RD exp/ VA)it + ϕ j 6VIITit + ϕ j 7 Outsourcing it + ϕ j 8 Dt
                + ν i + ε it

                                                                                                         (4.3)

where IThard, ITsoft, and NonIT denote IT hardware stock, IT software stock, and non-IT capital

stock, respectively; VA is value added in industry i, RDexp/VA is a proxy for technological change

calculated as expenditure on research and development over value added, VIIT represents the VIIT

value over industry i’s shipment, Outsourcing reflects either broad or narrow outsourcing, and D is a

full set of year dummies. Subscript t represents time. In order to examine different effects of VIIT

with Asian countries and VIIT with other countries, we prepare three variables representing VIIT:

first, Japan’s VIIT with all countries in the world divided by the industry’s shipment; second, Japan’s

VIIT with nine Asian countries divided by the industry’s shipment; and third, Japan’s VIIT with all

the countries except for the nine Asian countries divided by the industry’s shipment.17

        In addition, using the industry-level data, we examine whether the international division of



17
     For more details on the definition of the variables and data sources, see Appendix.


                                                       20
labor contributed to physical capital deepening in Japan. We use the capital-labor ratio (physical

capital stock divided by number of workers, KL) as the dependent variable and regress it on the

logarithm of the wage rate relative to the rental price of capital (ln(wage/rental price)) and variables

representing the degree of the international division of labor.

      The results of the GLS estimation are presented in Table 4.2. This shows that the estimated

coefficients on ln(IThard/VA), ln (VA), and RDexp/VA are significantly positive in all cases where

skilled workers’ share (SKILLED) or non-production workers’ share (NONPROD) in the total

number of workers is used as the dependent variable (columns (1) to (4)). The results imply that: 1)

IT hardware intensity has a positive impact on skill upgrading, and skill-biased technological change

may have increased the share of skilled (non-production) workers; 2) the scale-effect is positive and

greater value-added is associated with a higher skilled (non-production) workers’ share; and 3) R&D

intensity which is a proxy for technological change, has a positive impact on skill upgrading. On the

other hand, a significantly negative coefficient is obtained for ln(NonIT/VA) in all the cases but one

for columns (1) to (4), which suggests that increases in non-IT capital intensity favor unskilled

(production workers) in Japan. As for IT software intensity, the estimated coefficients are positive in

columns (1) and (2) but negative in columns (3) and (4), though they are not statistically significant

in any of the cases.

      As for the VIIT share, the estimated coefficients are significantly positive in columns (1) and

(2) but statistically insignificant in columns (3) and (4), suggesting that VIIT raises the skill-intensity

calculated as the share of workers whose occupation is classified as professional and technical or

managerial and administrative. Moreover, looking at the magnitude of the coefficients in column (2),

VIITasia9/shipment has a much larger coefficient than VIITnon-asia9/Shipment. This may reflect the

fact that vertical FDI in the Asian countries tends to consist of the transfer of low-skill production

work to these countries while high-skilled employees remain at home. We can confirm that Japanese



                                                    21
manufacturing industries realized skill upgrading as a result of the international division of labor

with the nine Asian countries. When the skill-intensity is calculated as the share of non-production

workers, however, VIIT does not have a significant impact on skill upgrading though the estimated

coefficient on VIIT is positive in columns (3) and (4). This result might be a reflection of the fact

that Japanese firms reduced the share of non-production and non-professional workers (such as sales

persons) in the course of the restructuring efforts during the 1990s.

      Although narrow outsourcing has a positive coefficient and the difference between broad and

narrow outsourcing has a negative coefficient in columns (1) to (4), none of coefficients are

significant. We could not find strong evidence that outsourcing to foreign countries contributed to

skill upgrading in Japan, which is not consistent with the results of previous studies on the United

States and the United Kingdom.

      As for the capital-labor ratio (column (5)), none of the explanatory variables except for the

VIIT variable have statistically significant coefficients. Although VIITworld/shipment has a

significantly positive coefficient, the small value of the Wald-statistics indicates the weak

explanatory power of the equation. Again, we could not obtain strong evidence that VIIT and

outsourcing contributed to physical capital deepening in Japan, suggesting that capital deepening

was caused by other factors.

                                              INSERT Table 4.2




5. Conclusion

      Our goal in this paper has been to investigate the changing trade patterns and their effect on

factor intensities in Japan, mainly focusing on the manufacturing sector. Given the observation that

the capital-labor ratio and the share of skilled workers in the total number of workers have been

growing for the last couple of decades, we first conducted decomposition analyses and found that



                                                  22
most of the macro-economic change in the capital-labor ratio and the change in the skilled-labor

ratio were attributable to a within-industry shift rather than a between-industry shift. The

between-industry shift can be partly explained by the change in patterns of inter-industry trade which

affects the size of each industry. However, the large within-industry effect led us to suspect that the

division of labor and intra-industry trade between Japan and Asian countries may have contributed to

the within-industry increase in capital intensity and skilled-labor intensity. Therefore, we first

analyzed factor contents of trade from the aspect of inter-industry trade, and then analyzed whether

the deepening of the international division of labor and vertical intra-industry trade contributed to the

within-industry change in factor intensities in Japan.

      We found that Japan’s factor content net-exports of capital and non-production labor grew

rapidly while net-exports of production workers fell by a large amount. Interestingly, the decline in

the factor content of net-exports of production workers was almost entirely caused by Japan’s trade

with China and Hong Kong. Although international trade to a considerable extent contributed to the

growth in the share of non-production workers in the Japanese manufacturing sector as a whole,

most of the macro-level accumulation of physical capital was not offset by the growth in factor

content net-exports of physical capital.

      Although we clearly saw a drastic increase in VIIT and outsourcing to foreign countries,

particularly to Asian countries, our empirical analysis provided only weak evidence that the

deepening international division of labor contributed to the change in factor intensities in Japan. We

did not find a significant and robust positive relationship between fragmentation and capital-labor

ratios. As for skill intensity, we found that VIIT had a strong positive effect on the increase in the

share of skilled workers when these were defined as those holding professional and technical or

managerial and administrative occupations. However, we did not find such a relationship when the

skill-intensity was calculated as the share of non-production workers. We should note that the skilled



                                                   23
(professional, technical, managerial, and administrative) labor share in the total number of workers is

only around 10% and is much lower than the share of non-production workers which is around 30%.

According to our results, specialization in the export of skilled-labor-intensive products may have

contributed to the increase in the relative demand for skilled (professional, technical, managerial,

and administrative) labor within industry. However at the same time, our results could also imply

that changes in trade patterns (specialization in capital-intensive production) did not offset the excess

supply of capital in Japan. Probably one plausible explanation for this small offsetting effect might

be that VIIT or fragmentation patterns are not determined by the abundance of capital endowments,

but by other factors such as endowments with skilled labor, the agglomeration of industries,

highly-developed supporting industries, etc. Davis and Weinstein (2003), who empirically tested the

determinants of the firm-level trade patterns, conclude that after controlling for national factor

accumulation, firm level export decisions seem to have little correlation with the capital intensity of

their production process. We do not know yet whether this story applies to the case of industry-level

trade patterns and which factors matter for trade patterns. This is, however, an issue that deserves

closer scrutiny in future investigations.




                                                   24
Appendix. Definition of Variables Used in the Econometric Analysis and Data Sources




1. Labor data

      Data on skilled and unskilled labor were constructed mainly using the Population Census of

Japan, published by Statistics Bureau, Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts, and

Telecommunications. The Population Census is the most fundamental and reliable survey and is

conducted every five years, covering all permanent and temporary residents in Japan. The survey

report provides data on employment by detailed occupational classification (3-digit-level) and by

industry. We used the 1980, 1985, 1990, and 1995 employment data as benchmarks and interpolated

the data for years between the benchmarks. As for the years after 1995, we utilized the Employment

Status Survey data, published by Statistics Bureau, Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs,

Posts, and Telecommunications, because the results of the 2000 Population Census have not been

released yet. The Employment Status Survey is based on a series of surveys that cover approximately

one percent of the working population. We first calculated the skilled labor share for 1992, 1997, and

2002 based on the Employment Status Survey. Then, for the 1996 and 1997 data on skilled labor, we

extended the 1995 employment data by occupation and industry using the growth rate of the skilled

labor share from 1992 to 1997. For the 1998, 1999 and 2000 data, we extended the 1997 data using

the growth rate of the skilled labor share from 1997 to 2002. The Population Census and the

Employment Status Survey allow us to construct a measure of skill that is more accurate than the one

based on production and non-production labor generally used in preceding studies. In the Population

Census and the Employment Status Survey, workers are basically classified according to 10 Major

Groups as shown in Appendix Table 1. We distinguished two skill groups (skilled or unskilled) as

well as production/non-production classifications. Skilled workers are those classified in Major

Groups 1 (Professional and Technical Occupations) and 2 (Managers and Administrators). Otherwise,



                                                 25
workers are classified as unskilled. Moreover, production workers are those classified in Major

Group 9 (Plant and Machine Occupations, Craft and Related Occupations, and Occupations in

Mining and Construction). Workers classified in all the other Major Groups are categorized as

non-production workers.

                                           INSERT Appendix Table 1




2. Measurement method and data source for vertical intra-industry trade

      In order to identify vertical and horizontal IIT we adopt a methodology used by major

preceding studies on vertical IIT such as Greenaway, Hine, and Milner (1995) and Fontagné,

Freudenberg, and Péridy (1997). The methodology is based on the assumption that the gap between

the unit value of imports and the unit value of exports for each commodity reveals the qualitative

differences in the products exported and imported between the two economies.

      We break down the bilateral trade flows of each detailed commodity category into the

following three patterns: (a) inter-industry trade (one-way trade), (b) intra-industry trade (IIT) in

horizontally differentiated products (products differentiated by attributes), and (c) IIT in vertically

differentiated products (products differentiated by quality). Then the share of each trade type is

defined as:

                                     ∑ (M
                                       j
                                              Z
                                              kk ' j   + M kZ'kj )
                                                                                                  (A1)
                                     ∑ (M
                                       j
                                              kk ' j   + M k 'kj )


where the variables are defined as

      M kk'j: value of economy k’s imports of product j from economy k';

      Mk'kj: value of economy k'’s imports of product j from economy k;

      UVkk'j: average unit value of economy k’s imports of product j from economy k';

      UVk'kj: average unit value of economy k'’s imports of product j from economy k.


                                                        26
The upper-suffix Z denotes one of the three intra-industry trade types, i.e., “One-Way Trade” (OWT)

“Horizontal Intra-Industry Trade” (HIIT) and “Vertical Intra-Industry Trade” (VIIT) as in Appendix

Table 2.

      For our analysis, we chose to identify horizontal IIT by using the range of relative

export/import unit values of 1/1.25 (i.e., 0.8) to 1.25.

Appendix Table 2. Categorization of trade types

           Type             Degree of trade overlap                             Disparity of unit value

“One-Way Trade”              Min( M kk ' j , M k 'kj )
                                                         ≤ 0.1
 (OWT)
                             Max( M kk ' j , M k 'kj )                              Not applicable

“Horizontal                  Min( M kk ' j , M k 'kj )                            1   UVkk ' j
                                                         >0.1                       ≤          ≤ 1.25
Intra-Industry    Trade”
                             Max( M kk ' j , M k 'kj )                          1.25 UVk 'kj

(HIIT)

“Vertical Intra-Industry     Min( M kk ' j , M k 'kj )           UVkk ' j         1           UVkk ' j
                                                         >0.1               <        or 1.25<
Trade” (VIIT)                Max( M kk ' j , M k 'kj )           UVk 'kj        1.25          UVk 'kj



      We used Japan’s customs data provided by the Ministry of Finance (MOF). Japan’s customs

data are recorded at the 9-digit HS88 level and the data classified by HS88 are available from the

year 1988. The 9-digit HS88 code has been changed several times for some items, and the HS code

was revised in 1996. Using the code correspondence tables published by the Japan Tariff Association

for code changes, we made adjustments to make the statistics consistent with the original HS88 code.

In Japan’s customs statistics, export data are recorded on an f.o.b. basis while import data are on a

c.i.f. basis. We should note that our estimate of the VIIT share is biased upward because of this

difference.




                                                         27
3. Outsourcing measures

      Following Feenstra and Hanson (1999) and other previous studies, we constructed outsourcing

measures as follows:

For each industry i, we measure imported intermediate inputs as


      Σｊ[input purchases of good j by industry i]*[(imports of good j)/(consumption of good j)]

                                                                                                 (A2)

where consumption of good j is measured as (shipments + imports - exports). The broad measure of

foreign outsourcing is obtained by dividing imported intermediate inputs by total expenditure on

non-energy intermediate inputs in each industry. The narrow measure of outsourcing is obtained by

restricting attention to those inputs that are purchased from the same JIP industry as the good being

produced. Using Japan’s customs data, Hiromi Nosaka, Tomohiko Inui, Keiko Ito, and Kyoji Fukao

compiled trade data at the basic industry classification of the I-O tables in 1990 prices as part of the

Japan Industrial Productivity (JIP) database project at the Economic and Social Research Institute,

Cabinet Office, Government of Japan. The correspondence between the Fukao-Ito industry

classification and the 1980-85-90 Japan Linked Input-Output standard classification for

manufacturing industries is presented in Appendix Table 3. The correspondence between the JIP

classification and the Fukao-Ito classification for manufacturing industries is presented in Appendix

Table 4. When calculating the outsourcing measures, we first calculated the input coefficients by

Fukao-Ito industry and aggregated the imported intermediate inputs in each Fukao-Ito industry into

the corresponding JIP industry. As for the narrow outsourcing measure, we restricted the Fukao-Ito

industry subscripts i and j in equation (A2) to be within the same JIP industry. We should note that

we only took account of intermediate inputs from manufacturing industries.

                                  INSERT Appendix Tables 3 and 4




                                                  28
4. Other variables used in the industry-level econometric analyses

IT hardware (million yen, 1990 prices)

        We mainly used IT hardware stock data in the JIP database. For details on the JIP database,

see Fukao, Inui, Kawai, and Miyagawa (2003). Tangible IT assets (hardware) include office

machines, computers, computer peripherals, communications equipment, optical instruments and

medical instruments. As only data until 1998 are available in the JIP database, we extended the IT

hardware stock until 2000 by using the annual growth rate of real IT hardware stock from 1998 to

2000 in JCER (Japan Center for Economic Research) IT data.18

IT software (million yen, 1990 prices)

        We constructed industry-level software stock data using the JIP database, the JCER IT data,

and software investment data underlying Motohashi (2002) and Jorgenson and Motohashi (2003).19

The JCER data provide real software stock by 2-digit industry but include only order-made software.

In the JIP database, real software stock data which cover in-house software and general application

software as well as order-made software are available until 1999. Therefore, we first divided the JIP

software stock value at the macro-level into each 2-digit industry using the distribution ratios in the

JCER IT data. Then, we further divided it into the JIP industry classification, using the distribution

ratios of IT hardware by JIP industry. Since the JIP software stock data are available only until 1999,

for the year 2000, we calculated the macro-level real software stock, using Motohashi’s software

investment data and software deflators.

Non-IT physical capital stock (million yen, 1990 prices)

        Physical capital stock data including IT hardware stock by industry are available in the JIP




18
     We wish to thank Professor Tsutomu Miyagawa at Gakushuin University and Ms. Yukiko Ito at the
Japan Center for Economic Research for providing the JCER IT data.
19
     We are also grateful to Dr. Kazuyuki Motohashi at Hitotsubashi University for providing the data.


                                                     29
database until 1998. We extended the data up to 2000 by using the investment data in METI’s Report

on Industry Statistics, which is based on the Census of Manufactures. First, we aggregated the data

on investment in fixed assets in the Report on Industry Statistics into the JIP industry-level and then

deflated them using the gross domestic capital formation deflator (plant and equipment) in the

Annual Report on National Accounts released by the Cabinet Office, Government of Japan. We

assumed a depreciation rate of 10 percent and estimated the real physical capital stock for 1999 and

2000. Non-IT physical stock is defined as physical capital stock minus IT hardware stock.

Value added (million yen, 1990 prices)

         We used value added data in the JIP database up to 1998. The data for 1999 and 2000 were

constructed using the SNA Input-Output Tables released by the Cabinet Office, Government of

Japan.

R&D expenditure (million yen, 1990 prices)

         We used R&D expenditure data in the JIP database up to 1998. We extended the data up to

2000 using the Report on the Survey of Research and Development, Ministry of Public Management,

Home Affairs, Posts and Telecommunications. The deflators were taken from the Annual Report on

the Promotion of Science and Technology, Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture.

VIIT (%)

         The variable VIIT is defined as the share of vertical intra-industry trade in total trade values.

For our definition of vertical intra-industry trade and data sources, see Appendix 2.

VIITworld/Shipment (%)

         This variable is calculated as (VIIT*(exports+imports)/2/domestic shipment). VIITworld takes

account of Japan’s trade with all countries in the world. Data on domestic shipments were taken

from the JIP database up to 1998 and from the SNA Input-Output Tables for 1999 and 2000.

VIITasia9/Shipment (%)



                                                    30
      This variable is calculated in the same way as VIITworld/Shipment. VIITasia9 takes account of

Japan’s trade with the following nine Asian countries: China, Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore,

Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand.

VIITnon-asia/Shipment (%)

      This variable is calculated in the same way as VIITworld/Shipment. VIITnon-asia takes

account of Japan’s trade with all countries other than the nine Asian countries.

KL (million yen per person, 1990 prices)

      The capital-labor ratio was calculated using physical capital stock data and data on number of

workers taken from the JIP database for 1988–1998.

Wage (1990=1.0)

      The labor quality-adjusted wage index was taken from the JIP database for 1988–1998.

Rental price (1990=1.0)

      The rental price index of capital was taken from the JIP database for 1988–1998.




                                                  31
                                           References

Berman, Eli, John Bound, and Zvi Griliches (1994) “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor

          within U.S. Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures,”

          Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 109, pp. 367–98.

Campa, Jose and Linda S. Goldberg (1997) “The Evolving External Orientation of Manufacturing: A

          Profile of Four Countries,” Economic Policy Review, Volume 3, Number 2, pp. 53–81.

Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein (2003) “Why Country Trade: Insights from Firm-Level

          Data,” forthcoming in Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, December

          2003.

Falvey, Rodney E. (1981) “Commercial Policy and Intra-Industry Trade,” Journal of International

          Economics, 11, pp. 495–511.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson (1996a) “Foreign Investment, Outsourcing, and Relative

          Wages,” in Robert C. Feenstra, Gene M. Grossman, and Douglas A. Irwin, eds., The

          Political Economy of Trade Policy, pp. 89–127, Cambridge, Mass. and London: The MIT

          Press.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson (1996b) “Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage

          Inequality,” American Economic Review, Vol. 86, pp. 240–245.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson (1999) “The Impact of Outsourcing and

          High-Technology Capital on Wages: Estimates for the United States, 1979–1990,” The

          Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114, Issue 3, pp. 907–940.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson (2000) “Aggregation Bias in the Factor Content of

          Trade: Evidence from U.S. Manufacturing,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 90, no. 2,

          pp. 155–160..

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson (2001) “Global Production Sharing and Rising



                                               32
          Inequality: A Survey of Trade and Wages,” NBER Working Paper No. 8372, July, National

          Bureau of Economic Research.

Fontagné, Lionel, Michael Freudenberg, and Nicholas Péridy (1997) “Trade Patterns Inside the

          Single Market,” CEPII Working Paper No. 1997-07, April, Centre D’Etudes Prospectives

          et D’Informations Internationales.

Fukao, Kyoji, Tomohiko Inui, Hiroki Kawai, and Tsutomu Miyagawa (2003) "Sectoral Productivity

          and Economic Growth in Japan, 1970–98: An Empirical Analysis Based on the JIP

          Database," forthcoming in Takatoshi Ito and Andrew Rose, eds., Productivity and Growth,

          East Asia Seminar on Economics Volume 13, The University of Chicago Press.

Fukao, Kyoji, Hikari Ishido, and Keiko Ito (2003) “Vertical Intra-Industry Trade and Foreign Direct

          Investment in East Asia,” forthcoming in Journal of the Japanese and International

          Economies, December 2003.

Genda, Yuji (1997) “Japan: Wage Differentials and Changes since the 1980s,” in Toshiaki

          Tachibanali ed. Wage Differentials: An International Comparison, Macmillan Press:

          London.

Godo, Yoshihisa (2001) “Estimation of Average Years of Schooling by Levels of Education for Japan

          and the United States, 1890–1990,” mimeo, Tokyo: FASID.
Greenaway, David, Robert Hine, and Chris Milner (1995) “Vertical and Horizontal Intra-Industry
          Trade: A Cross Industry Analysis for the United Kingdom,” Economic Journal, Vol.105,
          November, pp.1505–1518.

Hijzen, Alexander, Holger Görg and Robert C. Hine (2003) “International Fragmentation and

          Relative Wages in the UK,” IZA Discussion Paper Series No. 717, February, Bonn:

          Institute for the Study of Labor (available at www.iza.org).

Jorgenson, Dale W. and Kazuyuki Motohashi (2003) “Economic Growth of Japan and the United

          States in the Information Age,” RIETI Discussion Paper Series 03-E-015, Tokyo:



                                                 33
          Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry.

Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh (2002) “Growth in U.S. Industries and

          Investments in Information Technology and Higher Education,” paper prepared for

          NBER/CRIW Conference on Measurement of Capital in the New Economy, April 2002.

Katz, Lawrence F., and Ana L. Revenga (1989) “Changes in the Structure of Wages: The United

          States vs. Japan,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, vol. 3, pp.

          522–553.

Kimura, Fukunari (2001) “Fragmentation, Internalization, and Inter-firm Linkages: Evidence from

          the Micro Data of Japanese Manufacturing Firms,” in Leonard K. Cheng and Henryk

          Kiezkowski, eds., Global Production and Trade in East Asia, Norwell: Kluwer Academic

          Publishers.

MITI (Ministry of International Trade and Industry, Government of Japan) (1999) Keizai Hakusho

          (White Paper on International Trade), Tokyo: MITI.

Motohashi, Kazuyuki (2002) “IT Investment and Productivity Growth in the Japanese Economy and

          a Comparison to the United States” RIETI Discussion Paper Series 02-J-018, Tokyo:

          Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry (in Japanese).

Pyo, Hak K., and Kwang-Hee Nam (1999) “A Test of the Convergence Hypothesis by Rates of

          Return to Capital: Evidence from OECD Countries,” mimeo, Seoul National University.

Sachs, J. D., and H. J. Shatz (1994) “Trade and Jobs in U.S. Manufacturing,” Brookings Papers on

          Economic Activity, vol. 19, pp. 1–84.

Sakurai, Kojiro (2000) “Gurobaru-ka to Rodo Shijo: Nihon no Seizogyo no Keisu [Globalization and

          Labor Market: The Case of Japanese Manufacturing],” Keizai Keiei Kenkyu [Economics

          Today], Vol.21-2, November, Tokyo: Research Institute of Capital Formation,

          Development Bank of Japan.



                                                  34
Sakurai, Kojiro (2001) “How Does Trade Affect the Labor Market? Evidence from Japanese

         Manufacturing,” paper presented at the Semi-annual Conference of the Japan Economic

         Association, October 7–8th, 2001, Hitotsubashi University.




                                               35
Table. 1.1 Sources of Economic Growth: US-Japan Comparison
<Panel A> The Result of Growth Accounting for the US Economy by Jorgenson et al (2002): 1973-2000                             (Annual Rate, %)
                                                   Labor
                                                productivity                 Contribution of
                     Real GDP      Man-hour      (GDP/man-                    labor quality
                        growth      growth      hour) growth  TFP growth         growth       Contribution of capital sevices/man-hour growth
                                                                                                              Contribution of Contribution of
                                                                                                Sub-total
                                                                                                                 IT capital     non-IT capital
                           a           b           c=a-b         d=c-e-f            e             f=g+h               g               h
   1973-1995                 2.78%       1.44%          1.33%         0.26%           0.27%           0.80%             0.37%            0.43%
   1995-2000                 4.07%       1.99%          2.07%         0.62%           0.21%           1.24%             0.87%            0.37%
Jorgenson et al. (2002)

<Panel B> The Result of Growth Accounting for the Japanese Economy: 1973-1998                                                               (annual rate, %)
                                                           Labor
                                                        productivity                     Contribution of
                     Real GDP          Man-hour          (GDP/man-                        labor quality
                      growth            growth          hour) growth     TFP growth          growth      Contribution of capital services/man-hour growth
                                                                                                                          Contribution of Contribution of
                                                                                                            Sub-total
                                                                                                                            IT capital    non-IT capital
                          a                b               c=a-b           d=c-e-f             e             f=g+h              g                  h
    1973-83                   3.56%             1.53%          2.03%           -0.30%              0.65%         1.68%              0.16%              1.52%
    1983-91                   3.94%             1.79%          2.15%            0.40%              0.46%         1.29%              0.37%              0.92%
    1991-98                   1.25%            -0.08%          1.34%            0.03%              0.21%         1.10%              0.33%              0.76%
                                                                                                            1995-98                 0.52%              0.63%

Source: Fukao et al. (2003), Table 2.2. Original figures are calculated from JIP database.




                                                                               36
             Figure 1.1 Japan's Capital-Output Ratio and Rate of Return to
                                  Capital: 1973-1998
      3                                                                                          25.0%

                            Capital-Output Ratio( Left Axis)

                            Real Rate of Return to Capital (Right Axis, %)

   2.5
                                                                                                 20.0%




      2

                                                                                                 15.0%


   1.5


                                                                                                 10.0%

      1




                                                                                                 5.0%
   0.5




      0                                                                                          0.0%
          1973
          1974
          1975
          1976
          1977
          1978
          1979
          1980
          1981
          1982
          1983
          1984
          1985
          1986
          1987
          1988
          1989
          1990
          1991
          1992
          1993
          1994
          1995
          1996
          1997
          1998




The numerator of the rate of return to capital is the current surplus of the national accounts
deflated by the GDP deflator.
Source: JIP Database




                                                      37
                        Figure 2.1 Trend of Capital-Labor in Japan
   (mil.yen / person)
    18
                         Real capital stock / Number of total
                         workers in Japan
    16
                         Real capital stock / Number of total
                         manufacturing workers
    14


    12


    10


     8


     6


     4


     2


     0
     70

     72

     74

     76

     78

     80

     82

     84

     86

     88

     90

     92

     94

     96

     98

     00
   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   20




Source: Authors' calculation based on JIP Database.




                                                   38
            Figure 2.2 Share of Skilled and Non-production
                       Workers in Total Workers
  0.35




   0.3



  0.25                             Share of non-production workers in
                                   total manufacturing workers

                                   Share of skilled workers in Japan's total
   0.2                             workers

                                   Share of skilled workers in total
                                   manufacturing workers
  0.15




   0.1



  0.05




     0
         1980
         1981
         1982
         1983
         1984
         1985
         1986
         1987
         1988
         1989
         1990
         1991
         1992
         1993
         1994
         1995
         1996
         1997
         1998
         1999
         2000




Source: Authors' calculation based on Population Census data.




                                       39
Table 2.1 Decomposition of Capital-Labor Ratio Growth

<Panel A> Decomposition of capital-labor ratio growth: manufacturing sector
                                                                                                   (annual rate, %)
                                            1970-80             1980-90            1990-2000          1980-2000
Growth rate of K-L ratio                         11.24                6.43                4.18                6.65

   Between effect                                  -0.45               -1.01               -0.05               -0.90

   Within effect                                   11.69                7.44                4.24                7.55

<Panel B> Decomposition of capital-labor ratio growth: the whole economy
                                                                                               (annual rate, %)
                                            1970-80             1980-90             1990-98        1980-98
Growth rate of K-L ratio                         14.65                6.01                3.70            5.97

   Between effect                                   0.13               -0.81               -0.45               -0.92

   Within effect                                   14.52                6.82                4.15                6.89

Note: The capital-labor ratio is defined as the real capital stock (in 1990 price) divided by the number of workers.
Source: Authors' calculation based on JIP database.




                                                         40
Table 2.2 Decomposition of the Growth of the Share of Skilled or Non-Production Workers

<Panel A> Decomposition of the growth of the share of non-production workers: manufacturing sector
                                                                  (annual rate, %)
                                  1980-90          1990-2000        1980-2000
Growth rate of the share                  1.00             0.08              0.55

  Between effect                              0.12               0.16                0.14

  Within effect                               0.88               -0.07               0.41

<Panel B> Decomposition of the growth of the share of skilled workers: manufacturing sector
                                                                   (annual rate, %)
                                  1980-90          1990-2000         1980-2000
Growth rate of the share                  0.65              0.97              0.84

  Between effect                              0.29               0.25                0.27

  Within effect                               0.36               0.71                0.57



<Panel C> Decomposition of the growth of the share of skilled workers: the whole economy
                                                                  (annual rate, %)
                                  1980-90         1990-2000         1980-2000
Growth rate of the share                  2.88              1.03             2.10

  Between effect                              1.02               1.06                1.02

  Within effect                               1.86               -0.02               1.08

Source: Authors' calculation based on Population Census data and the JIP database.




                                                            41
Table 3.1 Japan's Share of Imports and Manufacturing Sector in GDP, Employment, and Gross Value Added

                                                                                                          Imports of
                                                                                        Share of         manufactured
                                Imports of                            Share of
           Imports of goods                                                          manufacturing         products
                               manufactured       Imports of       manufacturing
                  and                                                                sector in total   (CIF)/gross value
                                 products        services/GDP      sector in total
             services/GDP                                                              employed            added by
                                (CIF)/GDP                              GDP
                                                                                        persons          manufacturing
                                                                                                            sectoir

  1980               15.1%               5.1%              1.7%             29.2%             26.2%              17.4%
  1985               11.3%               4.5%              1.6%             29.5%             26.5%              15.2%
  1990                9.4%               5.3%              1.6%             28.2%             26.2%              18.7%
  1995                7.8%               5.0%              1.3%             24.7%             24.7%              20.3%
  2000                9.5%               6.3%              1.3%             23.4%             22.3%              26.7%
Notes: Official SNA statistics for the year 2000 are based on 1993 SNA. For years before 1989, only statistics based on
1968 SNA are available. In order to make long-term comparisons we derived values for 2000 by an extrapolation based
on values of 1995 and the 1995-2000 growth rate of each variable reported in SNA statistics based on 1993 SNA.

Sources: Economic and Social Research Institute, Cabinet Office, Government of Japan, Annual Report on National
Accounts 2002 , Economic Planning Agency, Government of Japan, Annual Report on National Accounts 2000 .




                                                                  42
                       Figure 3.1.A Commodity Composition of Japan's Exports: 1980-2000

     100%                                                                                                          Other manufactured products

      90%                                                                                                          Precision machinery

                                                                                                                   Transportation equipment
      80%
                                                                                                                   Electrical machinery
      70%
                                                                                                                   General machinery

      60%                                                                                                          Metal products

      50%                                                                                                          Metal

                                                                                                                   Pottery
      40%
                                                                                                                   Petroleum and coal products
      30%
                                                                                                                   Chemical products

      20%                                                                                                          Pulp

                                                                                                                   Textiles
      10%
                                                                                                                   Food
        0%
              1980


                       1982


                                 1984


                                          1986


                                                   1988


                                                            1990


                                                                     1992


                                                                              1994


                                                                                       1996


                                                                                                   1998


                                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                                   Minerals

                                                                                                                   Agricultural products


Sources: Economic and Social Research Institute, Cabinet Office, Government of Japan, Annual Report on National Accounts 2002 ,
       Economic Planning Agency, Government of Japan, Annual Report on National Accounts 2000 .




                                                                                              43
                               Figure 3.1.B Commodity Composition of Japan's Imports: 1980-2000

     100%
                                                                                                                    Other manufactured products

      90%                                                                                                           Precision machinery

                                                                                                                    Transportation equipment
      80%
                                                                                                                    Electrical machinery
      70%
                                                                                                                    General machinery

      60%                                                                                                           Metal products

      50%                                                                                                           Metal

                                                                                                                    Pottery
      40%
                                                                                                                    Petroleum and coal products
      30%
                                                                                                                    Chemical products

      20%                                                                                                           Pulp

                                                                                                                    Textiles
      10%
                                                                                                                    Food
        0%
              1980


                        1982


                                  1984


                                          1986


                                                   1988


                                                            1990


                                                                     1992


                                                                              1994


                                                                                        1996


                                                                                                    1998


                                                                                                           2000
                                                                                                                    Minerals

                                                                                                                    Agricultural products


Sources: Economic and Social Research Institute, Cabinet Office, Government of Japan, Annual Report on National Accounts 2002 ,
       Economic Planning Agency, Government of Japan, Annual Report on National Accounts 2000 .




                                                                                               44
                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                    40
                                                                                                    50
                                                                                                    60
                                                                                                    70
                                                                                                    80
                                                                                                    90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              80
                                                                                         Fo                                                                                                                        Fo
                                                                                              od                                                                                                                      od
                                                                                    Te                                                                                                                         Te
                                                                                       xt                                                                                                                         xt
                                                                                          il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          by Commodity

                                                                                              es                                                                                                                     ile
                                                      Pe           Ch                                                                                                            Pe           Ch                         s
                                                        t ro            em                                                                                                         t ro            em
                                                             le              ic           Pu                                                                                            le                           Pu
                                                               um               al            lp                                                                                          um            ic               lp
                                                                                    pr                                                                                                                     al
                                                                     an                                                                                                                         an             pr
                                                                         d             od                                                                                                           d             o du
                                                                            co             uc                                                                                                          co
                                                                                al             ts                                                                                                          al          ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          s
                                                                                    pr                                                                                                                         pr
                                                                                       od                                                                                                                         od
                                                                                           uc                                                                                                                         uc
                                                                                               ts                                                                                                                        ts
                                                                                      Po                                                                                                                         Po
                                                                           Iro            tte                                                                                                         Iro            tte
                                                                                n             ry                                                                                                           n            ry
                                                                   N               and                                                                                                        N               an




     Source: Ministry of Finance, Trade Statistics
                                                                      on
                                                                                         St                                                                                                      on               d
                                                                           -fe               ee                                                                                                       -fe           St
                                                                                                l                                                                                                                      ee
                                                                               rro
                                                                                    us
                                                                                                                                                                                                          rro             l
                                                                                                                                                                                                               us
                                                                         M              m                                                                                                           M               m
                                                                            et              et                                                                                                         et             et
                                                                               al              al                                                                                                         al             al
                                                                  G                P                                                                                                         G                Pr




45
                                                                     en               ro                                                                                                        en                o
                                                                         er              du                                                                                                         er              du
                                                                            al               ct                                                                                                        al              ct
                                                                El              m               s                                                                                          El              m              s
                                                                   ec               ac                                                                                                        ec               ac
                                                         Tr            tri             hi                                                                                           Tr            tri             hi
                                                             an            ca             ne                                                                                            an            ca             ne
                                                                sp             lm             ry                                                                                           sp             lm            ry
                                                                   or               ac                                                                                                        or               ac
                                                                      ta               hi                                                                                                        ta               hi
                                                                         tio               ne                                                                                                       tio              ne
                                                                 P            n               ry                                                                                            P            n              ry
                                                     O            r             eq                                                                                              O            r             eq
                                                       th           ec              ui                                                                                            th           ec              ui
                                                          er           isi             pm                                                                                            er           isi              pm
                                                             m             on               en                                                                                          m             on               en
                                                                an              m               t                                                                                          an              m              t
                                                                   uf               a ch                                                                                                      uf
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ac            a ch
                                                                      ac
                                                                          tu             i ne                                                                                                        tu             in
                                                                              re                                                                                                                         re            er
                                                                                 d            ry                                                                                                            d             y
                                                                                    pr                                                                                                                         pr
                                                                                       od                                                                                                                         od
                                                                                           uc                                                                                                                         uc
                                                                                               ts                                                                                                                        ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure 3.2.A Share of Nine East Asian Economies in Japan's Exports




                                                                                                           Figure 3.2.B Share of Nine East Asian Economies in Japan's Imports
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1980




                                                                                                    2000
                                                                                                    1990
                                                                                                    1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 3.2 Share of Nine East Asian Economies in Japan's Trade in Manufacturing Products: 1980-2000,
Figure 3.3 Japan's Major Trade Partners: Manufacturing Products, 1980-2000

                 (A) Share of Major Trade Partners in Japan's Exports of
                                Manufactured Products

      100%
       90%
       80%                                                      Other Economies
       70%                                                      EU
       60%
                                                                NAFTA
       50%
                                                                ASEAN 4
       40%
       30%                                                      NIEs 3
       20%                                                      China and Hong Kong
       10%
        0%
                 1980       1985       1990     1995   2000


                 (B) Share of Major Trade Partners in Japan's Imports of
                                 Manufactured Products

      100%
       90%
       80%
                                                                Other Economies
       70%
                                                                EU
       60%
                                                                NAFTA
       50%
                                                                ASEAN 4
       40%
                                                                NIEs 3
       30%
                                                                China and Hong Kong
       20%
       10%
        0%
                 1980       1985       1990     1995   2000

Source: Ministry of Finance, Trade Statistics




                                                 46
Table 3.2 Japan's Trade in Electrical Machinery and Office Machines with China and Hong Kong in 1999
                                                                                                    (billion yen)

                                                             Japan's exports to Japan's imports
                                                                                                  Japan's net-
                                                              China and Hong from China and
              Commodity classification, SITC R3                                                 exports to China
                                                                Kong (f.o.b.      Hong Kong
                                                                                                and Hong Kong
                                                                   base)          (f.o.b. base)

   75-Office machines & automatic data processing machines             275.3             231.0             44.2
     751-Office machines                                               173.5             117.2             56.3
     752-Automatic data processing machines & units                     59.0              83.7            -24.8
     759-Parts of and accessories suitable for 751-752                  42.8              30.1             12.7
   76-Telecommunications & sound recording apparatus                   316.7             302.5             14.1
     761-Television receivers                                           37.5              39.5             -2.1
     762-Radio-broadcast receivers                                       6.8              41.2            -34.4
     763-Gramophones, dictating, sound recorders etc                     n.a.              n.a.             n.a.
     764-Telecommunications equipment and parts                        272.4             221.8             50.6
   77-Electrical machinery, apparatus & appliance                     1377.9             454.2            923.7
     771-Electric power machinery and parts thereof                     65.7             122.7            -57.0
     772-Elect.app.such as switches, relays, fuses, pl                 235.2              65.9            169.4
     773-Equipment for distributing electricity                         48.7              63.9            -15.2
     774-Electric apparatus for medical purposes                        12.9               1.2             11.7
     775-Household type, elect.& non-electrical equipment               14.1              52.3            -38.3
     776-Thermionic, cold & photo-cathode valves, tubes                724.0              85.7            638.3
     778-Electrical machinery and apparatus, n.e.s.                    277.3              62.6            214.8
                               Total                                  1969.8             987.7            982.1
Source: Statistics Canada, World Trade Analyzer 2001 .




                                                      47
Table 3.3 Factor Contents (Direct plus Indirect) of Trade for Japan's Manufacturing Sector: 1980-2000, by Region

Production labor                           Gross exports                                 Gross imports                            Net exports
                               1980            1990          2000             1980           1990          2000       1980           1990       2000
World total                     923,474       1,388,633     1,941,421          306,751        761,507     1,578,368    616,723        627,125    363,053
  China and Hong Kong            73,317          97,278       242,423           22,976         87,209       513,402     50,341         10,070   -270,979
  NIEs 3                         99,132         198,831       353,213           54,302        138,387       218,617     44,830         60,444    134,596
  ASEAN 4                        61,937         103,502       189,007           10,060         51,945       177,053     51,877         51,557     11,953
  US                            223,380         440,972       583,364           90,578        178,069       273,127    132,801        262,903    310,237
  EU                            133,426         286,382       324,457           61,872        174,314       208,738     71,554        112,068    115,719
  Other economies               332,281         261,667       248,957           66,963        131,583       187,430    265,318        130,084     61,527

Non-production labor                       Gross exports                               Gross imports                              Net exports
                               1980            1990         2000              1980         1990           2000        1980           1990       2000
World total                     408,313         675,630      985,796           118,829      291,902        607,572     289,484        383,728    378,224
  China and Hong Kong            31,756          44,161      119,781             5,861       21,364        127,705      25,895         22,797     -7,924
  NIEs 3                         46,089         100,185      186,061            15,805       44,569        106,804      30,285         55,617     79,257
  ASEAN 4                        28,616          50,583       96,495             3,679       16,693         79,591      24,937         33,890     16,904
  US                             96,813         215,813      294,537                         87,408        136,926      54,537        128,405    157,610
  EU                             60,203         141,939      169,484            26,359       70,748         90,007      33,844         71,191     79,477
  Other economies               144,836         122,948      119,439            24,850       51,119         66,540     119,986         71,829     52,900

Land (million yen, in 1990                 Gross exports                                 Gross imports                            Net exports
          prices)               1980           1990          2000             1980           1990          2000        1980          1990        2000
World total                    2,367,285      3,154,935     4,251,546          782,374      1,777,449     2,895,281   1,584,911    1,377,486    1,356,265
   China and Hong Kong           202,601        223,700       557,028           39,703        128,046       621,391     162,899        95,654     -64,362
   NIEs 3                        282,507        502,354       807,407          107,479        275,660       437,886     175,028       226,694     369,521
   ASEAN 4                       183,807        271,144       428,155           34,754        124,603       337,695     149,052       146,541      90,460
   US                            522,355        931,945     1,195,965          228,689        418,488       565,778     293,666       513,457     630,186
   EU                            297,871        591,223       655,089          149,588        397,799       457,527     148,284       193,424     197,562
   Other economies               878,144        634,570       607,902          222,161        432,854       475,004     655,982       201,716     132,898

Capital stock (million yen,                Gross exports                                 Gross imports                            Net exports
     in 1990 prices)            1980           1990          2000             1980           1990          2000        1980          1990        2000
World total                   11,087,602    15,378,504     21,701,611        3,068,328      7,169,480    12,586,585   8,019,274    8,209,024    9,115,026
  China and Hong Kong            944,937      1,111,021     2,901,756          145,135        469,155     2,313,326     799,802       641,866     588,430
  NIEs 3                       1,327,911      2,442,986     4,195,098          403,842      1,113,916     2,263,765     924,069    1,329,070    1,931,333
  ASEAN 4                        878,622      1,312,625     2,286,969          114,037        401,754     1,552,102     764,585       910,871     734,867
  US                           2,479,216      4,629,732     6,052,100          975,571      1,879,475     2,710,964   1,503,645    2,750,257    3,341,137
  EU                           1,372,409      2,903,521     3,353,937          629,500      1,691,120     2,012,755     742,909    1,212,401    1,341,182
  Other economies              4,084,507      2,978,619     2,911,750          800,244      1,614,061     1,733,673   3,284,263    1,364,559    1,178,077




                                                                                    48
Table 3.4 Changes in Factor Contents (Direct plus Indirect) of Net Exports for Japan's
Manufacturing Sector: 1980-2000, by Region
Production labor
                                                      Net exports
                                1980-90                1990-2000               1980-2000
World total                    10,403 (0.1%)         -264,073 (-3.4%)        -253,670 (-3.3%)
   China and Hong Kong        -40,272 (-0.5%)        -281,049 (-3.6%)        -321,321 (-4.2%)
   NIEs 3                      15,614 (0.2%)           74,152 (1.0%)           89,766 (1.2%)
   ASEAN 4                       -320 (-0.0%)         -39,603 (-0.5%)         -39,924 (-0.5%)
   US                         130,101 (1.7%)           47,335 (0.6%)          177,436 (2.3%)
   EU                          40,513 (0.5%)            3,651 (0.0%)           44,164 (0.6%)
   Other economies           -135,234 (-1.8%)         -68,557 (-0.9%)        -203,792 (-2.6%)

Non-production labor
                                                           Net exports
                                    1980-90                1990-2000                 1980-2000
World total                        94,244 (2.7%)            -5,505 (-0.2%)           88,739 (2.6%)
  China and Hong Kong              -3,098 (-0.1%)          -30,721 (-0.9%)          -33,819 (-1.0%)
  NIEs 3                           25,332 (0.7%)            23,641 (0.7%)            48,973 (1.4%)
  ASEAN 4                           8,953 (0.3%)           -16,986 (-0.5%)            -8,033 (-0.2%)
  US                               73,868 (2.1%)            29,205 (0.8%)           103,073 (3.0%)
  EU                               37,347 (1.1%)             8,286 (0.2%)            45,632 (1.3%)
  Other economies                 -48,157 (-1.4%)          -18,929 (-0.5%)          -67,087 (-1.9%)

Land (million yen, in 1990 prices)
                                                           Net exports
                                   1980-90                  1990-2000                1980-2000
World total                     -207,425 (-1.6%)           -21,221 (-0.2%)         -228,646 (-1.8%)
  China and Hong Kong            -67,244 (-0.5%)          -160,017 (-1.2%)         -227,261 (-1.8%)
  NIEs 3                          51,666 (0.4%)            142,826 (1.1%)           194,492 (1.5%)
  ASEAN 4                         -2,512 (-0.0%)           -56,080 (-0.4%)          -58,592 (-0.5%)
  US                             219,791 (1.7%)            116,729 (0.9%)           336,521 (2.6%)
  EU                              45,140 (0.3%)              4,138 (0.0%)            49,278 (0.4%)
  Other economies               -454,267 (-3.5%)           -68,818 (-0.5%)         -523,085 (-4.1%)

Capital stock (million yen, in 1990 prices)
                                                            Net exports
                                     1980-90                 1990-2000                  1980-2000
World total                        189,751 (0.3%)           906,001 (1.6%)           1,095,752 (2.0%)
    China and Hong Kong          -157,936 (-0.3%)           -53,436 (-0.1%)           -211,372 (-0.4%)
    NIEs 3                         405,001 (0.7%)           602,262 (1.1%)           1,007,263 (1.8%)
    ASEAN 4                        146,286 (0.3%)          -176,004 (-0.3%)            -29,718 (-0.1%)
    US                          1,246,611 (2.2%)            590,880 (1.1%)           1,837,492 (3.3%)
    EU                             469,492 (0.8%)           128,781 (0.2%)             598,273 (1.1%)
    Other economies            -1,919,705 (-3.5%)          -186,482 (-0.3%)         -2,106,186 (-3.8%)
Notes: Data in parentheses denote the ratio of factor contents to total input in Japan's manufacturing
sector in 1990. The data on total input are taken from the Ministry of International Trade and Industry,
Census of Manufactures 1990 .




                                                   49
Table 3.5 Physical and Human Capital Deepening in the Japanese Manufacturing Sector

                                                                                     (annual rate, %)
                                                  1970-80        1980-90      1990-2000 1980-2000
Growth rate of capital-labor ratio
   Manufacturing sector total                          11.24           6.43          5.51*         7.60**
   Changes in factor contents of trade               n.a.             -0.06          0.41           0.18

Growth rate of the share of non-production workers
   Manufacturing sector total                  n.a.                    1.00          0.08           0.55
   Changes in factor contents of trade         n.a.                    0.18          0.23           0.21
*
The growth rate of the capital-labor ratio denotes the average annual growth rate from 1990 to 1998.
**
 The growth rate of the capital-labor ratio denotes the average annual growth rate from 1980 to 1998.
Source: Authors' calculation based on the results of Tables 2.1, 2.2, and 3.4.




                                                          50
                                                                                                                                                  Pro Li
                                                                                                                                                      c             v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (%)
                                                                                                                                              Ri esse estoc
                                                                                                                                                 ce d m k
                                                                                                                                                    po                          p
                                                                                                                                                         lish arin rodu




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   50



                                                                                                                                                              ing e pr cts
                                                                                                                                                                   , fl odu
                                                                                                                                                                       ou
                                                                                                                                                                           r m cts
                                                                                                                                                                                 illi
                                                                                                                                                                                      ng
                                                                                                                                                                               Ot
                                                                                                                                                                                   he
                                                                                                                                                                                       r fo
                                                                                                                                                                                            o




     Source: Authors' calculation.
                                                                                                                                                                                   Be ds
                                                                                                                                                                                       ve
                                                                                                                                       Fa                                                  rag
                                                                                                                                          bri                                                  e
                                                                                                                                             cs                                       To s
                                                                                                                                                an                                         ba
                                                                                                                                                   do                                         cco
                                                                                                                                                       the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VIIT Share




                                                                                                                                                            r te
                                                                                                                                                                 x                            S
                                                                                                                                                       Ap tile p Sp ilk
                                                                                                                                                            p
                                                                                                                                                Lu ar rodu inni
                                                                                                                                                                                 c ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Broad Outsourcing




                                                                                                                                                    mb el a
                                                                                                                                                         er nd ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Narrow Outsourcing




                                                                                                                                                             an acc
                                                                                                                                                                 d w es
                                                                                                                                                                       oo sori
                                                                                                                                                Pu                         d p es
                                                                                                                                                   lp,                          rod
                                                                                                                                                        pa                            uc
                                                                                                                                                            pe
                                                                                                                                                                r, p                      ts
                                                                                                                                                      Pu ap
                                                                                                                                                                        e           F  u
                                                                                                                                                           b
                                                                                                                                               Le lish r pr nitu                        r
                                                                                                                                                   ath ing od
                                                                                                                                                       er                           u re
                                                                                                                                                           an and cts
                                                                                                                                                              dl
                                                                                                                                                                   eat rint   p
                                                                                                                                                                       he ing
                                                                                                                                                                          rp
                                                                                                                                                                              r
                                                                                                                                                                     Ru oduc
                                                                                                                                                                          bb ts
                                                                                                                                                                              er
                                                                                                                                                                      Ba prod
                                                                                                                                                                           sic uc
                                                                                                                                                                               ch ts
                                                                                                                                                                       Ch emi
                                                                                                                                                                            em cals
                                                                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                                                      Ot cal f
                                                                                                                                                                          he ibe
                                                                                                                                                               Pe r c rs
                                                                                                                                                                   tro he
                                                                                                                                              Sto                      leu mi
                                                                                                                                                  ne                        m cal
                                                                                                                                                     , cl                       pro s
                                                                                                                                                          ay              C           d




51
                                                                                                                                                              &              oa ucts
                                                                                                                                                                   gla l p
                                                                                                                                                                       ss ro
                                                                                                                                                              Ste prod ducts
                                                                                                                                                                    el
                                                                                                                                                                       ma ucts
                                                                                                                                                                            nu
                                                                                                                                                                               fac
                                                                                                                                                                                     tur
                                                                                                                                                                                         in
                                                                                                                                                                 No O g
                                                                                                                                             G                        n -           th e
                                                                                                                              Eq               en                        ferr           r
                                                                                                                                uip               era                         ou steel
                                                                                                                                   me                 lm                           s
                                                                                                                                     nt                     ach Me meta
                                                                                                                                        an
                                                                                                                                          ds                     in e
                                                                                                                                                                             tal
                                                                                                                                                                                  p          ls
                                                                                                                                                                     ry rod
                                                                                                                                              up
                                                                                                                                                 pli Ele uip cts          eq              u
                                                                                                                                                    es
                                                                                                                                                        for ctrica men
                                                                                                                                                  Ot hous l ma t
                                                                                                                                                      he eh chi
                                                                                                                                                          r e old ne
                                                                                                                                                             lec                           r
                                                                                                                                                                  tric use y
                                                                                                                                                                       al
                                                                                                                                                                           ma
                                                                                                                                          Ot                                   ch
                                     Figure 4.1 Vertical Intra-Industry Trade Share and Outsourcing Share by Industry: 2000




                                                                                                                                             he                         M inery
                                                                                                                                                                            oto
                                                                                                                                      Pre r tr
                                                                                                                                          cis ans                               rv
                                                                                                                                             ion po                                  eh
                                                                                                                                                                                         icle
                                                                                                                                                  ma rtatio                                   s
                                                                                                                                                      ch n e
                                                                                                                                                          ine qu
                                                                                                                                                               ry            ipm Shi
                                                                                                                                                                   &                            p
                                                                                                                                                                       e en s
                                                                                                                                                             Ot quip t
                                                                                                                                                                  he m
                                                                                                                                                                      r m en
                                                                                                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                                                               M anuf
                                                                                                                                                                    an             act
                                                                                                                                                                       ufa ur
                                                                                                                                                                            ctu ing
                                                                                                                                                                                 rin
                                                                                                                                                                                      gt
                                                                                                                                                                                          ota
                                                                                                                                                                                              l
                                                                                                    (%)
     -20             -15         -10            -5               0    5           10           15         20

                                         Livestock products


                                Rice polishing, flour milling

                                                                                   VIIT Share
                                                     Beverages                     Broad Outsourcing
                                                                                   Narrow Outsourcing
                                                          Silk


                           Fabrics and other textile products


                                 Lumber and wood products


                                 Pulp, paper, paper products


                                Leather and leather products


                                             Basic chemicals


                                            Other chemicals


                                              Coal products


                                        Steel manufacturing


                                         Non-ferrous metals


                               General machinery equipment


                Equipment and supplies for household use



           (-32.7)                           Motor vehicles


                            Other transportation equipment


                                        Other manufacturing




Growth rate of VIIT share: ? ln (VIIT/Total trade)
Growth rate of broad outsourcing share: ? ln (Broad outsourcing/Total intermediate inputs)
Growth rate of narrow outsourcing share: ? ln (Narrow outsourcing/Total intermediate inputs)


Figure 4.2 Annual Growth Rate of Vertical Intra-Industry Trade Share and Outsourcing
                           Share by Industry: 1988-2000




                                                                          52
Table 4.1 Correlation Coefficient Matrix

               (a)               (b)                (c)               (d)               (e)            (f)
         Capital-Labor     Skilled Worker    Non-production                           Broad         Narrow
                                                                   VIIT Share
            Ratio               Share         Worker Share                          Outsourcing    Outsourcing

(a)                  1

(b)           0.435 ***                1

(c)           0.471 ***         0.592 ***                 1

(d)          -0.059             0.262             -0.050                    1

(e)          -0.017             0.292 *           0.210             -0.147                     1

(f)           0.146             0.299 *           0.203              0.009             0.554 ***             1


Note: Each variable denotes the average annual growth rate for the period from 1988 to 2000.
     * significant at 10% level, *** significant at 1% level.
Source: Authors' calculation.




                                                              53
Table 4.2 GLS Estimation Results

Dependent variable:
   Skilled workers' share in total number of workers (SKILLED)
   Non-production workers' share in total number of workers (NONPROD)
   Capital-labor ratio (KL)
                                   SKILLED           SKILLED      NONPROD                   NONPROD
                                       (1)               (2)           (3)                       (4)
ln (IThard/VA)                     1.4988 ***        1.3981 ***    1.7536 ***                2.0452 ***
                                     (7.30)            (7.07)        (5.49)                    (6.32)
ln (ITsoft/VA)                     0.0364            0.0348       -0.0509                   -0.0401
                                     (0.43)            (0.45)       (-0.46)                   (-0.33)
ln (NonIT/VA)                     -0.7162 **        -0.5542 **    -0.5864                   -0.9365 **
                                    (-2.58)           (-2.02)       (-1.26)                   (-2.02)
ln VA                              1.0596 ***        1.0844 ***    1.4477 ***                1.4978 ***
                                     (7.20)            (6.92)        (5.17)                    (6.04)
RDexp/VA                           3.0787 **         2.4287 *      3.8564 *                  5.5175 **
                                     (2.18)            (1.85)        (1.79)                    (2.38)
ln (wage/rental price)

VIITworld/Shipment               0.1521 ***                              0.0351
                                  (3.68)                                  (0.84)
VIITasia9/Shipment                                   0.2241 ***                              0.0370
                                                       (3.10)                                  (0.24)
VIITnon-asia/Shipment                                0.0009 *                                0.0005
                                                       (1.78)                                  (0.92)
outsourcing (narrow)             0.0061              0.0033              0.0075              0.0099
                                   (0.73)              (0.44)              (0.68)              (0.83)
outsourcing (difference)        -0.0320             -0.0189             -0.0315             -0.0718
                                  (-1.14)             (-0.72)             (-0.70)             (-1.45)
_cons                           -1.6644             -2.4111             14.4863 ***         14.8355 ***
                                  (-0.67)             (-0.94)              (3.22)              (3.61)

N                                  439                 439                 439                 439
Wald                             325.60 ***          271.41 ***          187.69 ***          221.39 ***

Note: 1) Presence of AR(1) autocorrelation within panels and heteroskedasticity across panels is assumed.
    2) The numbers in parentheses are z-statistics.
    3) All equations include year dummies which are suppressed here. The estimation period for equations (1) to (4) is 1988-
2000, and the estimation period for equation (5) is 1988-1998.
    *significant at 10% level, ** significant at 5% level, ***significant at 1% level (two-tailed test).
Source: Authors' calculations.




                                                      54
Appendix Table 1. Occupational Classification in the Population Census

Major Groups
       1 Professional and Technical Occupations
       2 Managers and Administrators
       3 Clerical and Secretarial Occupations
       4 Sales Occupations
       5 Services Occupations
       6 Protective Service Occupations
       7 Occupations in Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing
       8 Occupations in Transportation and Telecommunication
       9 Plant and Machine Occupations, Craft and Related Occupations, and Occupations
         in Mining and Construction
      10 Other Occupations



Skilled workers: Groups 1 and 2
Production workers: Group 9




                                                55
Appendix Table 3. Correspondence Table: Fukao-Ito Classification correspondence to 1980-85-90 Japan Linked Input-
Output Standard Classification (manufacturing)


Fukao-Ito Classification                                 Linked I-O           Fukao-Ito Classification                             Linked I-O
  57 Beef meat (bone meat), Pork (born meat), Poultry       1111-010
                                                              meat, other meat112 (bone
                                                                                     Woven
                                                                                        meat)
                                                                                            fabric apparel, Knitted apparel           1521-011
  58 By-products of slaughtering and meat processing 1111-015                   113 Other wearing apparel and clothing accessories 1522-011
  59 Processed meat products                                1112-011            114 Carpets and floor mats, Bedding, Other ready-made 1529-090
                                                                                                                                        textile products
  60 Bottled or canned meat products                        1112-021            115 Timber                                            1611-011
  61 Animal oils and fats                                   1112-031            116 Plywood                                           1611-021
  62 Drinking milk                                          1112-041            117 Wooden chips                                      1611-031
  63 Dairy products                                         1112-042            118 Wooden products for construction                  1619-091
  64 Frozen fish and shellfish                              1113-011            119 Other wooden products, n.e.c.                     1619-099
  65 Salted, dried or smoked seafood                        1113-021            120 Wooden furniture and fixtures, Wooden fixtures 1711-010
  66 Bottled or canned seafood                              1113-031            121 Metallic furniture and fixtures                   1711-031
  67 Fish paste                                             1113-041            122 Pulp, Waste paper                                 1811-011
  68 Fish oil and meal                                      1113-051            123 Foreign paper and Japanese paper                  1812-011
  69 Other processed seafoods                               1113-099            124 Paperboard                                        1813-011
  70 Milled rice                                            1114-011            125 Corrugated cardboard                              1813-021
  71 Other grain milling                                    1114-019            126 Coated paper and building (construction) paper 1813-022
  72 Wheat flour                                            1114-021            127 Corrugated card board boxes, Other paper containers,
                                                                                                                                      1821-010
                                                                                                                                           Paper textile for medic
  73 Other grain milled products                            1114-029            128 Other pulp, paper and processed paper products 1829-090
  74 Noodles                                                1115-011            129 Newspapers                                        1911-011
  75 Bread                                                  1115-021            130 Printing, plate making and bookbinding            1911-021
  76 Confectionery                                          1115-022            131 Publishing                                        1911-031
  77 Bottled or canned vegetables and fruits                1116-011            132 Ammonia                                           2011-011
  78 Preserved agricultural foodstuffs (other than bottled  1116-021
                                                               or canned)       133 Chemical fertilizer                               2011-021
  79 Refined sugar                                          1117-011                                                                  2011-029
  80 Other sugar and by-products of sugar                   1117-019            134 Soda ash                                          2021-011
  81 Starch                                                 1117-021            135 Caustic soda                                      2021-012
  82 Dextrose, syrup and isomerized sugar                   1117-031            136 Liquid chlorine                                   2021-013
  83 Vegetable oils, Cooking oil                            1117-040            137 Other industrial soda chemicals                   2021-019
  84 Vegetable meal                                         1117-043            138 Titanium oxide                                    2029-021
  85 Crude salt                                             1117-051            139 Carbon black                                      2029-022
  86 Salt                                                   1117-052            140 Other inorganic pigments                          2029-029
  87 Condiments and seasonings                              1117-061            141 Compressed gas and liquified gas                  2029-031
  88 Prepared frozen foods                                  1119-011            142 Other industrial inorganic chemicals              2029-099
  89 Retort foods                                           1119-021                                                                  2029-011
  90 Dishes, sushi, lunchboxes, School lunch (public), School
                                                            1119-090lunch (private),
                                                                                143 Other
                                                                                     Ethylene
                                                                                          foods                                       2031-011
  91 Refined sake                                           1121-011            144 Propylene                                         2031-012
  92 Beer                                                   1121-021            145 Other petrochemical basic products                2031-019
  93 Ethyl alcohol for liquor manufacturing                 1121-031            146 Pure benzene                                      2031-021
  94 Whiskey and brandy                                     1121-041            147 Pure toluene                                      2031-022
  95 Other liquors                                          1121-099            148 Xylene                                            2031-023
  96 Tea and roasted coffee                                 1129-011            149 Other petrochemical aromatic products             2031-029
  97 Soft drinks                                            1129-021            150 Acetic acid                                       2032-011
  98 Manufactured ice                                       1129-031            151 Acetic acid vinyl monomer                         2032-012
  99 Feeds                                                  1131-011            152 Styrene monomer                                   2032-013
 100 Organic fertilizers, n.e.c.                            1131-021            153 Synthetic rubber                                  2032-014
 101 Tobacco                                                1141-011            154 Synthetic alcohol, Ethylene dichloride, Acrylonitrile,
                                                                                                                                      2032-019
                                                                                                                                           Ethylene glycol, Othe
 102 Raw silk                                               1511-011            155 Methane derivatives                               2039-021
 103 Fiber yarns                                            1511-021            156 Oil and fat industrial chemicals                  2039-031
                                                            1511-031            157 Plasticizers                                      2039-041
                                                            1511-041            158 Synthetic dyes                                    2039-051
                                                            1511-099            159 Other industrial organic chemicals                2039-099
 104 Cotton and staple fiber fabrics (inc. fabrics of synthetic
                                                            1512-011
                                                                   spun fibers)                                                       2039-011
 105 Silk and artificial silk fabrics (inc. fabrics of synthetic
                                                            1512-021
                                                                 filament fibers)
                                                                                160 Thermo-setting resins                             2041-011
 106 Woolen fabrics, hemp fabrics, and other fabrics 1512-031                   161 Thermoplastic resin, Polyethylene (low density), 2041-091
                                                                                                                                      Polyethylene (high density
                                                            1512-091            162 High functionality resins                         2041-092
                                                            1512-099            163 Other resins                                      2041-099
 107 Knitting fabrics                                       1513-011            164 Rayon, acetate                                    2051-011
 108 Yarn and fabric dyeing and finishing (processing on    1514-011
                                                               commission only) 165 Synthetic fibers                                  2051-021
 109 Rope and nets                                          1519-011            166 Medicaments                                       2061-011
 110 Fabricated textiles for medical use                    1519-031            167 Soap and synthetic detergents, Surface active     2071-010
 111 Other fabricated textile products                      1519-099            168 Cosmetics, toilet preparations and dentifrices    2071-021




                                                                      56
(continued)
  169 Paints and varnishes                                  2072-011           228 Electric wires and cables, Optical fiber cables      2721-010
  170 Printing ink                                          2072-021                                                                    2721-012
  171 Photographic sensitive materials                      2073-011           229 Rolled and drawn copper and copper alloys            2722-011
  172 Agricultural chemicals                                2074-011           230 Rolled and drawn aluminum                            2722-021
  173 Gelatin and adhesives, Other final chemical products, 2079-011
                                                                Catalyzer, Petroleum
                                                                               231 Non-ferrous
                                                                                        refinery products
                                                                                                   metal castings
                                                                                                          (inc. greases)
                                                                                                                  and forgings          2722-031
                                                            2079-090           232 Nuclear fuels                                        2722-041
  174 Gasoline                                              2111-011           233 Other non-ferrous metal products                     2722-099
  175 Jet fuel oils                                         2111-012           234 Metal Products for Construction                      2811-011
  176 Kerosene                                              2111-013           235 Metal Products for Architecture                      2812-011
  177 Light oils                                            2111-014           236 Other metal Products, n.e.c.                         2899-090
  178 Heavy oil A                                           2111-015           237 Boilers, Turbines, Engines                           3011-010
  179 Heavy oils B and C                                    2111-016           238 Conveyors                                            3012-011
  180 Naphtha                                               2111-017           239 Refrigerators and Air Conditioning Apparatus         3013-011
  181 LPG (Liquified Petroleum gas)                         2111-018           240 Pumps and Compressors                                3019-011
  182 Other petroleum refinery products                     2111-019           241 Other General industrial machinery and equipment,    3019-090
                                                                                                                                           Industrial Robots
  183 Coke                                                  2121-011           242 Mining, Civil engineering and Construction Machinery 3021-011
  184 Other coal products                                   2121-019           243 Chemical machinery                                   3022-011
  185 Paving materials                                      2121-021           244 Metal Machine Tools                                  3024-011
  186 Plastic films and sheets, Plastic plates, pipe and bars,
                                                            2211-010
                                                                Foamed plastic245
                                                                                products,
                                                                                    Metal Industrial
                                                                                            Processingplastic
                                                                                                        Machinery
                                                                                                              products, Reinforced plastic
                                                                                                                                        3024-021
                                                                                                                                            products, Plastic contain
  187 Tires and inner tubes                                 2311-011           246 Agricultural machinery                               3029-011
  188 Other rubber products                                 2311-019           247 Textile Machinery                                    3029-021
  189 Rubber footwear                                       2319-011           248 Food Processing Machinery                            3029-031
  190 Plastic footwear                                      2319-021           249 Sawmill, Wood Working, Veneer and Plywood 3029-091
  191 Leather footwear                                      2411-011           250 Pulp, Equipment and Paper Machinery                  3029-092
  192 Leather and fur skins                                 2412-011           251 Printing, Bookbinding and Paper Processing           3029-093
  193 Miscellaneous leather products                        2412-021           252 Casting Equipment                                    3029-094
  194 Sheet glass, Safety glass and multilayered glass, Glass
                                                            2511-010
                                                               Fiber and Glass253
                                                                                FiberPlastic
                                                                                       products,
                                                                                             Processing
                                                                                                 n.e.c. Machinery                       3029-095
  195 Glass processing materials, Other glass products 2519-090                254 Semiconductor Making Equipment, Other Special 3029-099
                                                                                                                                        Industrial Machinery, n.e.c
  196 Cement                                                2521-011           255 Machinists' precision tools, Metal molds, Bearing,3019-021
                                                                                                                                         Other general Machines a
  197 Ready mixed concrete                                  2522-011                                                                    3031-090
  198 Cement products                                       2523-011           256 Copy Machine, Electronic Calculator, Word Processing 3111-010Machine, Other Off
  199 Pottery, china and earthenware for construction 2531-011                 257 Vending Machines                                     3112-011
  200 Pottery, china and earthenware for industry           2531-012           258 Amusement Machinery                                  3112-012
  201 Pottery, china and earthenware for home use           2531-013           259 Other Machinery for Service Industry                 3112-019
  202 Clay refactories                                      2599-011           260 Electric Audio Equipment, Magnetic Tapes and Discs   3211-010
  203 Other structural clay products                        2599-021           261 Radio and Television sets                            3211-021
  204 Carbon and graphite products                          2599-031           262 Household Electric Appliance                         3211-099
  205 Abrasive                                              2599-041           263 Electric Computing Equipment (Main Parts, Accessory  3311-010
                                                                                                                                               Equipment)
  206 Miscellaneous ceramic, stone and clay products 2599-091                  264 Wired Communication Equipment, Radio Communication   3321-010Equipment, Other
                                                            2599-099           265 Video Recording and Playback Equipment               3331-010
  207 Pig iron                                              2611-011           266 Electric Measuring Instruments                       3332-011
  208 Ferroalloys                                           2611-021           267 Semiconductor Devices, Integrated Circuits           3341-010
  209 Crude steel (converters), Crude steel (electric furnaces)
                                                            2611-030           268 Electron Tubes                                       3359-011
  210 Scrap iron                                            2612-011           269 Generators                                           3411-011
  211 Steel, Steel strip (ordinary steel), Steel bar (ordinary
                                                            2621-010
                                                               steel, Other hot270
                                                                                rolled
                                                                                    Electric
                                                                                        steel (ordinary
                                                                                               Motors steel)                            3411-012
  212 Hot rolled steel (special steel)                      2621-016           271 Relay Switches and Switchboards, Transformers and    3411-020
                                                                                                                                            reactors, Other Industria
  213 Steel pipes and tubes (ordinary steel)                2622-011           272 Electric Lighting Fixtures and Apparatus             3421-011
  214 Steel pipes and tubes (special steel)                 2622-012           273 Electric Bulbs                                       3421-031
  215 Cold-finished steel                                   2623-011           274 Batteries, Wiring Devices and Supplies, Electrical3421-090
                                                                                                                                         Equipment for Internal Co
  216 Coasted steel                                         2623-012           275 Passenger Motor Cars                                 3511-011
  217 Forged steel                                          2631-011           276 Trucks, Buses and Other Cars, Motor Vehicle Parts3511-019
                                                                                                                                          and Accessories
  218 Cast steel                                            2631-012           277 Two-wheel Motor Vehicles                             3531-011
  219 Case iron pipes and tubes                             2631-021           278 Internal Combustion Engines for Motor Vehicles 3541-021
                                                                                                                                        and Parts
  220 Case materials (iron)                                 2631-031           279 Steel Ships                                          3611-011
  221 Forged materials (iron)                               2631-032           280 Ships Except Steel Ships                             3611-021
  222 Iron and steel shearing and slitting, other iron or steel
                                                            2649-090
                                                                 products      281 Internal Combustion Engines for Vessels              3611-031
  223 Copper                                                2711-011           282 Repair of Ships                                      3611-101
  224 Lead and Zinc (inc. regenerated lead)                 2711-021           283 Rolling Stock                                        3621-011
                                                            2711-031           284 Repair of Rolling Stock                              3621-101
  225 Aluminum (inc. regenerated lead)                      2711-041           285 Aircrafts                                            3622-011
  226 Other non-ferrous metals                              2711-099           286 Repair of Aircrafts                                  3622-101
  227 Non-ferrous metal scrap                               2712-011           287 Bicycles                                             3629-011




                                                                       57
(continued)
  288 Transport Equipment for Industrial Use         3629-091
  289 Other Transport Equipment, n.e.c.              3629-099
  290 Camera                                         3711-011
  291 Other Photographic and Optical Instruments     3711-099
  292 Watches and Clocks                             3712-011
  293 Professional and Scientific Instruments        3719-011
  294 Analytical Instruments, Testing Machine, Measuring
                                                     3719-021
                                                          Instruments
  295 Medial Instruments                             3719-031
  296 Toys, Sporting and Athletic Goods              3911-010
  297 Musical Instruments, Audio and Video Records, other
                                                     3919-010
                                                          Information Recording Materials
  298 Writing Instruments and Stationery             3919-031
  299 Small Personal Adornments                      3919-041
  300 "Tatami" (Straw Matting) and Straw Products    3919-051
  301 Ordnance                                       3919-061
  302 Miscellaneous Manufacturing Products           3919-099




                                                                 58
Appendix Table 4. Correspondence Table
                  --- JIP Classification correspondence to Fukao-Ito Classification (manufacturing)---

JIP Industry                                         Fukao-Ito Classification
    11 Livestock products                               57     58      59     60    61     62     63
    12 Processed marine products                        64     65      66     67    68     69
    13 Rice polishing, flour milling                    70     71      72     73
    14 Other foods                                      74     75      76     77    78     79     80     81
                                                        84     85      86     87    88     89     90     99
    15   Beverages                                      91     92      93     94    95     96     97     98
    16   Tobacco                                       101
    17   Silk                                          102
    18   Spinning                                      103
    19   Fabrics and other textile products            104 105 106 107             108    109    110     111
    20   Apparel and accessories                       112 113 114
    21   Lumber and wood products                      115 116 117 118             119
    22   Furniture                                     120 121
    23   Pulp, paper, paper products                   122 123 124 125             126    127    128
    24   Publishing and printing                       129 130 131
    25   Leather and leather products                  191 192 193
    26   Rubber products                               187 188 189 190
    27   Basic chemicals                               132 133 134 135             136    137    138     139
                                                       142 143 144 145             146    147    148     149
                                                       152 153 154 155             156    157    158     159
                                                       162 163
    28   Chemical fibers                               164 165
    29   Other chemicals                               166 167 168 169             170    171    172     173
    30   Petroleum products                            174 175 176 177             178    179    180     181
    31   Coal products                                 183 184 185
    32   Stone, clay & glass products                  194 195 196 197             198    199    200     201
                                                       204 205 206
    33 Steel manufacturing                             207 208 209 210
    34 Other steel                                     211 212 213 214             215    216    217     218
                                                       221 222
    35 Non-ferrous metals                              223 224 225 226             227    228    229     230
                                                       233
    36 Metal products                                  234 235 236
    37 General machinery equipment                     237 238 239 240             241    242    243     244
                                                       247 248 249 250             251    252    253     254
                                                       257 258 259 278             281
    38   Electrical machinery                          269 270 271
    39   Equipment and supplies for household use      260 261 262
    40   Other electrical machinery                    263 264 265 266             267    268    272     273
    41   Motor vehicles                                275 276
    42   Ships                                         279 280 282
    43   Other transportation equipment                277 283 284 285             286    287    288     289
    44   Precision machinery & equipment               290 291 292 293             294    295
    45   Other manufacturing                           186 296 297 298             299    300    301     302




                                                     59
