NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PSYCHOLOGY AND THE MARKET
Edward L. Glaeser
Working Paper 10203
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10203
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Psychology and the Market
Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 10203
December 2003
JEL No. H0, H8
ABSTRACT
Prospect theory, loss aversion, mental accounts, hyperbolic discounting, cues, and the endowment
effect can all be seen as examples of situationalism – the view that people isolate decisions and
overweight immediate aspects of the situation relative to longer term concerns. But outside of the
laboratory, emotionally-powerful situational factors – frames, social influence, mental accounts –
are almost always endogenous and often the result of self-interested entrepreneurs. As such,
laboratory work and, indeed, psychology more generally, gives us little guidance as to market
outcomes. Economics provides a stronger basis for understanding the supply of emotionally-relevant
situational variables. Paradoxically, the rise of situationalism actually increases the relative
importance of economics.
Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 315A
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

I.

Introduction

The relationship between economics and other social sciences is schizophrenic.
Economists who work on politics or sociology are exporters who use economic tools to
analyze traditional topics of these sister disciplines. Conversely, economists who work
on psychology are importers. Behavioral economists use insights from psychology to
improve our understanding of the traditional topics of economics. This one-sided
interaction with psychology is only appropriate if economics is so weak that we need
psychology to reconstruct our discipline and if our tools have little to say about
psychological phenomena.
Both of these statements are false. Economics is neither so weak nor psychology so
strong that economists should content themselves with applying psychology to economic
problems. Economics has as much to give to psychology as psychology has given to
economics.
Over the past two decades, predictions that came from the convenient assumptions of
powerfully rational cognition and simple preferences have been challenged by an
increasingly large number of facts. The unifying thread of much of behavioral economics
is situationalism— the idea that decisions are made based on very local influences, not
long-run well-being (Ross and Nisbett, 1991). Prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky,
1979) tells us that people put enormous weight even when those reference points are
quite arbitrary and ephemeral. Mental accounting (Thaler, 1985) tells us that people
often make decisions ignoring events and consequences outside of a particular narrow
domain. Hyperbolic discounters place an exceptional weight on the present and cuetheory emphasizes ephemeral situational forces. People display negative altruism in
ultimatum games based on a modest, situational cue.
While situationalism requires economics to change and grow, it does not challenge the
core of the discipline. Bayes’ rule and perfect cognition do not lie at the heart of our

2

discipline; neither Adam Smith nor Alfred Marshall ever thought humans were all that
perfect. The heart of economics is the principle that people respond to incentives. The
central tool that enables economists to understand market-wide phenomena is our concept
of an equilibrium in which returns are equalized across activities. Psychology is not
going to argue that human beings don’t respond to incentives, nor is it going to suggest
that risk-free opportunities for profit will be ubiquitous.
If anything, situationalism creates more of a problem for psychology than for economics.
In the real world, situations are man-made. To understand heterogeneity across time and
space, psychologists need theories that explain how exogenous variables shift the supply
of cues, framing and other situational factors. For example, psychology tells us that
people form beliefs in large part by listening to people around them, so it isn’t a surprise
that cognitive errors can propagate and persist. But psychology doesn’t help us to
understand the exogenous factors that lead to different errors in different times and
places. No laboratory based science is going to explain why anti-Semitism exploded in
19th century Germany but not in 19th century Italy.
If we combine economic insights about the understanding of the supply of influence and
psychological insights about the impact of that influence, then we have a chance to
understand equilibrium outcomes. For example, social psychologists document that
people respond angrily to attacks against themselves and to stories about attacks against
seemingly innocent victims. These stories can produce hate. Economics helps us to craft
an equilibrium model of supply of hate-fulfilling stories. An economic model of hate (as
in Glaeser, 2002) can use the economic focus on incentives and equilibrium to create
predictions about where we should expect to see outbreaks of hatred.
In Section III, I discuss the application of economics to the psychological phenomena of
widespread cognitive errors. These mistaken beliefs abound. 88 percent of Pakistanis
and 76 percent of Moroccans believe that the Arab terrorists did not destroy the World

3

Trade Center.1 75 percent of the Northern Irish and 71 percent of Americans believe in
the existence of the Devil, while only 33 percent of the English, 19 percent of the French
and 11 percent of Danes think that there is some sort of Mephistopheles. Either the Irish
or the Danes are wrong.
The applications of economics to the formation of aggregate cognitive errors suggest a
number of comparative statics. These errors will be more common when the costs of
making mistakes to the individual are low. As a result, we should expect more error in
the political arena (because no one’s vote directly matters) than in the market arena
(because making foolish purchases is at least somewhat costly). These errors will be
more common when mistaken beliefs strongly complement supplier’s returns. Mistaken
beliefs will be more common when errors increase the current flow of utility. Thus, if
people enjoy anticipating a rosy future, they should believe stories that make them overly
optimistic and in particular, they should happily accept stories about a life after death.
Beliefs with strong complementarities across people will be particularly likely to spread.
In other words, if a first believer gains by convincing a second believer, then this will
make mistakes more likely to spread. The applications of the equilibrium concept to
psychology suggests that access to consumers’ attention and the ability to mislead them
will tend to be offset by costly provision of services (such as entertainment) to
consumers.
Finally, in Section IV, I turn to the normative implications of bringing psychology to
economics and economics to psychology. The behavioral economists’ most profound
attack on the neoclassical paradigm is in the area of welfare economics, where the selfcontrol literature suggests more freedom is not necessarily better (e.g. Phelps and
Pollock, 1968, Laibson, 1997). Section IV argues that while the behavioral economists
have ably illustrated the flaws inherent in consumer decisions, policy decisions require
weighing the losses from error in the market with the losses from errors in the political

1

These figures are not unusual for the Islamic world. 89 percent of Kuwaitis and 74 percent of Indonesians
share this view according to Gallup polls taken in 2002.

4

sphere. After all, we don’t have the option of a perfectly informed, social planner who
maximizes our welfare. Psychological errors in the political market will tend to be far
more severe than errors in the product market. As a result, increased psychological
realism will probably tend to make us more, not less, wary of government intervention.
II.

Situationalism and Economics

The thread that runs through much behavioral economics is that individuals often do a
bad job maximizing their long-run welfare. In some papers, suboptimal behavior stems
from limited powers of reasoning (e.g. Slovic, 1972, Tversky and Kahneman, 1974,
Griffin and Tversky, 1992, Camerer, Ho and Chong, 2002). In other papers, extreme
orientation towards the present causes people to neglect future well-being (Strotz, 1956,
Laibson, 1997). The most subversive papers argue that decisions are so context
dependent that we should treat preferences as either highly unstable or essentially
nonexistent (e.g. Kahneman and Tversky, 1979, Thaler, 1985, Kahneman, Wakker and
Sarin, 1997, Ariely, Loewenstein and Prelec, 2003).
If the first wave of behavioral economics attacked the view that people perfectly
maximize their own well-being, the second wave has tried to replace the simple economic
model of individual decision-making with an almost equally simple, but more empirically
accurate alternative. This enterprise is stymied by what could be called Tolstoy’s
Corollary on Suboptimal Behavior: there is generally only one way to maximize
correctly but there are an uncountable number of ways to screw up.2

Current behavioral

economics can be seen as a battle against Tolstoy’s Corollary and an attempt to impose
order on the tremendous variety of human error. Tolstoy’s Corollary also means that
while pre-behavioral economics could advance by incorporating increasingly powerful
optimization techniques, post-behavioral economics will be less able to advance by
borrowing mathematical tools and will require greater reliance on evidence.

2

This is a natural implication of Tolstoy’s famous line from Anna Karenina: "Happy families are all alike.
Every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way."

5

Ross and Nisbett (1991) argue that the central lesson of a large body of psychological
research is the importance of temporary, situational factors in decision-making.
Likewise, one way to read much of behavioral economics is that the most common
reason that people fail to maximize long-run welfare is that ephemeral aspects of the
situation strongly influence decisions. Certainly the most important element in prospect
theory (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979) is that people are extremely sensitive to an
ultimately, fairly arbitrary reference point. Moreover, Rabin (2000) and Barberis, Huang
and Thaler (2003) argue that the observed aversion towards small-value risky gambles is
essentially incompatible with utility functions that are defined over long-run outcomes.
The evidence seems to suggest that individuals treat each gamble as distinct and care
about the attributes of the gamble, not the resulting wealth distribution.
Mental accounting (Thaler, 1985), which suggests that people compartmentalize and
often treat decisions as separate from many related events, is also situationalist. Camerer,
Babcock, Loewenstein and Thaler (1997) show that a short run situational factor, like
today’s income, appears to have stronger income effects on daily labor supply than more
permanent income.3 The endowment effect (Thaler, 1994) is similarly situationalist and
suggests that people care a great deal about keeping mugs, even when they have
randomly received the mugs and have only owned those mugs for seconds. Cue theory
(Laibson, 2001) explicitly models the impact of ephemeral factors with no long-run
consequence. Even hyperbolic discounting can be understood as reflecting the
overwhelming power of local factors. The penchant to be vengeful towards anonymous
strangers (e.g. Fehr and Gachter, 2000) can also be seen as more evidence for the power
of the situation. The well-studied impact of framing suggests that a minor change in the
words that describe an experiment can significantly change the outcome of the
experiment.
The power of the situation probably stems from the emotional components of decisionmaking. Local stimuli trigger emotions and these emotions influence decisions (as in
Romer, 2000). The impact of emotions is complex; emotions impact both beliefs and
3

Farber (2003) has recently challenged these results.

6

preferences. But the power of emotions does not mean that decisions are random. In the
short run, people can overrule their emotional responses. In the long run, people can
become adept at manipulating their own emotions (as in Laibsonian, 2001 cuemanagement). Furthermore, emotional responses themselves generally serve some
evolutionary purpose and as such they are not random. Nonetheless, because emotions
matter, decisions are influenced by short-run elements of a situation that influence
emotions but that don’t seem related to long-run well-being.
While it is incontrovertible that psychology challenges some cherished economic
assumptions, it is less obvious that situationalism troubles the core pillars of economics.
Economics can easily incorporate the key lessons of situations and, ultimately, economics
will have much to say about how people will craft situations that impact themselves and
others (see e.g. Mullainathan and Shleifer, 2003). As I will argue in the next section, it
is psychology that is in trouble. The fact that psychology has come to emphasize the
importance of endogenous, man-made situations actually confirms psychology’s inability
to explain differences in aggregate outcomes across space and time.
At its core, economics has two positive pillars and one normative prescription. The first
positive tenet is the principle that people respond to incentives, or as Adam Smith wrote
“it is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker that we expect our
dinner, but from their regard to their own interest.” The second positive tenet is that in
equilibrium returns are equalized across different activities, or that there is an absence of
arbitrage. Adam Smith used this tenet as the basis of his seminal discussion of wage
differences across occupations. The marriage of the equilibrium condition (which
generates prices) and the incentive principle (which dictates the response to prices)
provides economics with its ability to predict equilibrium quantities.
These tenets are modified, not destroyed, by the introduction of psychology in
economics. Behavioral economists have emphasized that people respond to more than
prices and that in some circumstances, people can’t even figure out the real price of
something. But this doesn’t mean that incentives don’t matter. Given that price effects

7

still work in birds and other species that are even less intellectually savvy than humans
(see Herrnstein, 1997), there is no reason to suspect that greater attention to noncognitive, situational factors will lead us away from the view that human beings respond
to incentives.
The situationalist paradigm also requires modification, not destruction, of the equilibrium
concept. The power of the local, situational factors means that some people will not be
detached enough to respond to higher returns in one activity or asset. But just as not
everyone is perfectly rational arbitrageur, not everyone is blind to arbitrage opportunities
either. The most fascinating strain of work in behavioral economics has focused on
mixed markets where there are both perfectly rational and irrational actors (Akerlof and
Yellen, 1985, Russell and Thaler, 1985, and DeLong, Summers, Shleifer and Waldmann,
1990).4 The important question for economists is not whether consumers are rational as
independent actors, but rather how heterogeneously rational consumers aggregate,
especially when rational self-interested sellers are trying to exploit less than perfectly
rational buyers (as in DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2002). These papers modify the
existing paradigm, but the predictive power of these models still comes from the presence
of some arbitrageurs.
Most importantly, psychology in general and situationalism in particular has challenged
the third tenet of traditional economics: freedom is good or welfare increases with the
size of an individual’s choice set. If people don’t maximize their welfare, then won’t
things be better if the government intervenes? Of course, this sentence critically assumes
a degree of government benevolence that seems wholly at odds with the past four
millennia of human experience. In Section IV of this paper, I will discuss more
thoroughly the impact of psychology on normative economics. Introducing psychology
should reduce our faith in private actors, but it must reduce our faith in governments as
well, probably by a much greater degree.

4

Other papers on the interaction of perfectly and imperfectly rational actors in a market include Shleifer
and Vishny (1997), Barberis, Shleifer and Vishny (1998), Barberis, Huang and Santos (2001) and
Scheinkman and Xiong (2003).

8

III.

The Potential Contributions of Economics to Psychology

Situationalism challenges economics, but it poses a much more critical problem for
psychology. If psychology had produced the result that human beings make decisions
based on immutable personality factors that are determined at birth, then economics
would seem to have little to add. In that case, great advances in the social sciences would
come from psychologists mapping and explaining the genetic roots of personality.
But psychology has produced the opposite result— immutable personality characteristics
are usually found to matter little, while minor changes in framing or social influence can
deeply shade behavior. In the real world, framing and social influence are not determined
by psychologist experimenters, but rather by other actors pursuing their own goals.5
People supply frames and social influence, which is lucky for economists, because
economics has a long tradition of thinking about supply.
The psychological research on Nazi-like behavior illustrates how situationalism creates a
need for economics. In the wake of World War II, a series of psychological experiments
showed that normal Americans could be induced to act barbarically. Milgram (1963)
documents that subjects were willing to follow orders from an authority figure to cause
pain to an innocent bystander. Haney, Banks and Zimbardo (1973) show the readiness
with which student subjects adopt the identity of sadistic guards. These experiments
show the ease with which situation can influence behavior and they refute the view that
Nazi-like behavior couldn’t happen in America. But the experiments don’t explain why
Nazism, and its incumbent attitudes, occurred in Germany but not in the U.S. In
Germany, Nazi-producing situations were supplied. In the U.S., they were not. The key
empirical puzzle is understanding these cross-sectional differences in supply.
Similarly, social psychology has excelled in the study of prejudice at the individual level,
but has failed to explain patterns of prejudice over time and space. Psychologists can

5

Romer (1996) represents a seminal paper in this area that continues to shape my understanding of the
topic.

9

measure prejudice, and they have mapped the cognitive roots of discrimination and
shown how prejudice can be increased or diminished in laboratory experiments. Like
most other things, beliefs appear to be quite malleable and appropriately managed local
influences can increase and reduce the degree of discrimination in particular settings. But
does this really help us to understand why prejudice against minorities differs across time
and space, or why Catholics are hated in some places, and Jews in others? Psychology
describes the mental technology with which prejudice can be formed, but it does not
explain how much that technology will actually be used in different settings.
More generally, the psychological focus on the situation makes it inherently a partial
equilibrium science and means that psychology will always need economics, or some
equivalent, to allow it to understand the world. Social psychology, which one might
think is focused on using psychology to explain social outcomes, instead “studies the
psychological processes that people have in common with one another that make them
susceptible to social influence” (Aronson, Wilson and Ackert, 2002). But documenting
the power of social influence tells us nothing about the supply of social influence and to
understand the world, we need to understand both the supply and effect of social
influence, situation and framing. To avoid the problem of infinite regress (the situation
was supplied because the supplier was influenced by some other situation), models must
be generated that link exogenous factors with supply. To provide a model that explains
supply as the result of exogenous factors, we will almost surely be led back to simple
economic reasoning that links supply to returns and returns to market structure.
One way to think about this seeming paradox—that it is through psychology’s insistence
on the primacy of social influence that economics’ influence is assured—is that the great
achievement of economics is understanding aggregation. Our discipline has always been
about the wealth of nations, not individuals, and as psychologists are the first to
emphasize, aggregates do not merely sum up individuals. Gustave LeBon (1895) wrote
“the fact that [people] have been transformed into a group puts them in possession of a
sort of collective mind which makes them feel, think, and act in a manner quite different
from that in which each individual of them would feel, think, and act were he in a state of

10

isolation.” Psychology shows the crucial role of aggregation; economics itself has the
tools with which to understand aggregation.
This leads to the role that economics can play in improving psychology. The economic
approach to psychology might start with the vast psychological literature that documents
the malleability of human perceptions and emotional states. The economics approach
would then ask how, in equilibrium, those perceptions and states end up being
manipulated. The incentive principle may be quite valuable, since incentives can be
primitive, while situation and social influence seem generally endogenous. The
equilibrium concept, where heterogeneous actors interact and create aggregate outcomes
that are wildly different from the outcomes that would occur if people were in isolation,
can serve as the starting point for understanding psychological aggregates. If
psychology has improved economics by giving us a richer understanding of the
individual, then perhaps economics can improve psychology by giving it a better
understanding of the market.
I now turn to the formation of cognitive errors or mistaken beliefs. As mentioned above,
88 percent of Pakistanis and 76 percent of Moroccans believe that the Arab terrorists did
not destroy the World Trade Center. 60 percent of Americans believe that the poor are
lazy; only 26 percent of Europeans have this view. 60 percent of Europeans think that
the poor are trapped, while only 29 percent of Americans share this view.6 The available
evidence suggests that the poor in America work harder than many of the European poor
and the exit rates out of poverty are higher in Europe than in the U.S. (Alesina and
Glaeser, 2003).
Many psychological phenomena can be seen as examples of cognitive errors. Racial
prejudice can be understood as statistical discrimination gone awry. Irrational hatred can
be interpreted as the mistaken belief that someone is out to do you harm (Glaeser, 2002).
Nationalism may be the mistaken view that your welfare is intrinsically bound up with

6

These facts come from the World Values Survey, various years, and details are in Alesina, Glaeser and
Sacerdote (2002).

11

the success of your own country, particularly in the military sphere.7 Given the degree of
conflict between religious beliefs, at least some of the major religions must be false, so
the formation of at least some religious beliefs can be thought of as the formation of
mistaken beliefs.
Erroneous beliefs abound and in a sense this is a rebuke to the most conventional of
economic views. After all, the usual economist’s model of belief formation is that people
follow Bayes’ rule. It is hard to see how Bayesian updating can explain why Americans
believe so strongly in the Devil. Psychology seems more realistic and tells us that people
are very susceptible to influence and are likely to believe things that they are told.8
While this is surely true, it doesn’t tell us what people will be told. For this we need a
framework with both people who listen and people who supply tales of varying degrees
of veracity. 9
What do the incentive principle and the no arbitrage equilibrium predict about the level
and form of false beliefs? An economic model of false beliefs would have a demand
side, consumers who can be misled, and a supply-side, actors who stand to benefit by
misleading the public. Ordinary consumers are subject to manipulation, but they also can
take steps to correct their beliefs, either by acquiring better information or sometimes just
by the costly process of thinking logically, before these beliefs become the basis for later
actions. Suppliers can provide stories and images at a cost. The profits to suppliers will
come through the consumers’ decisions to buy their products or elect them to office. I
now discuss the implications of this framework for the prevalence of false beliefs.
Implication # 1: False beliefs will be more common when making the right decision
doesn’t yield large benefits to individuals.

7

Nationalism can also be seen as the mistaken belief that members of your country are your family.
Asch (1955) is the classic psychological experiment documenting that people will regularly declare that a
shorter line is longer if other people in the room declare this falsehood to be true.
9
Romer (1996) deeply influenced my understanding of this topic.
8

12

This obvious implication is a straightforward application of the incentive principle, and it
will show up in many applications (e.g. Mullainathan and Shleifer, 2003). When people
have the ability to correct their errors, they will spend more to correct these errors when
the cost of these errors is higher. As such, errors should be particularly obvious in
situations where the costs of screwing up to any individual consumer are small. In
Glaeser (2002), this implication suggests hatred is harder to create in integrated
communities or against large groups. Frequent interaction with a minority means that
erroneously believing in the evils of that minority carry costs. In places like the Middle
East where Americans are rare, hating Americans is pretty costless, at least to any one
individual, so the incentive to gather correct information about Americans is low.
A natural implication of this claim is that we should expect to see much more error in the
political sphere than in the economic sphere. For any one individual voter, the costs of
political errors are trivial. When the only value of accuracy is that you vote a little more
wisely, it is hard to imagine that people will work hard to undo misleading indoctrination.
Indeed, errors such as beliefs about September 11 or income mobility really only matter
for political decisions, so we shouldn’t be surprised about the degree of error.10 As I will
discuss in Section IV, this tendency for greater accuracy in commercial than in political
decisions helps buttress the case for laissez-faire.
Implication # 2: Mistaken beliefs are more common when errors lead to large returns for
information suppliers.
Again, this implication follows from the incentive principle.11 We should expect to see a
proliferation misleading signals and other cues when incorrect beliefs are complements to
buying sellers’ commodities or supporting politicians. The advertising industry is the
most important economic example of these systematic attempts to mislead, where
suppliers attempt to convince buyers that their products will yield remarkable benefits.
10

In principle, beliefs about income mobility might also matter for economic decisions (as in Benabou and
Tirole, 2002), but there is ample evidence that suggests that people are capable of accurately ascertaining
their own returns to effort even when they believe something totally different about society at large.
11
Mullainathan and Shleifer (2003) also derive a variant on this comparative static. When consumers
actually demand misleading stories, they are more likely to be supplied.

13

Of course, since error-based purchasing imposes costs on buyers, we should expect
consumers to work to undo the misleading information. The battle for truth in consumer
markets pits incentivized suppliers against incentivized consumers. Markets where the
producers gain tremendously by being the top supplier, but consumers lose little if they
choose the wrong start product (such as superstar-type markets), may be areas when we
would expect errors to be common because the producers are better incentivized than
consumers.
In the political market, suppliers are also much more incentivized than voters. The
political entrepreneurs who supply erroneous beliefs receive large benefits from selling
their ideas. Each individual pays little from accepting these beliefs at face value, so we
should expect widespread error. For example, Alesina and Glaeser (2003) argue that the
differing beliefs about income distribution between the U.S. and Europe are the result of
politically inspired indoctrination. In both Europe and the U.S., political leaders on the
left pushed a Marx-inspired ideology that emphasized class solidarity and the unfairness
of the capitalist system. Leaders on the right emphasized economic opportunity and the
laziness of the poor. These ideas were pushed on the political stump and in the
classroom. The eventual difference in beliefs between Europe and the U.S. reflects not
economic reality, but rather the political success of socialists in Europe and capitalists in
the U.S.
This implication is also helpful in understanding politicians’ supply of hateful stories
about minorities. Politicians will try to build hatred against minorities when those
minorities stand to particularly lose from the politicians’ policies. As such, anti-welfare
politicians will build hatred against African-Americans because those African-Americans
are disproportionately poor. Ethnic groups that are in the middle of the income
distribution will not be targeted, because the politician doesn’t build support by vilifying
those groups. In Glaeser (2002), I argue that this logic can explain why anti-Semitism
flourished in late 19th century Germany and Austria, but not in Italy and the United
States.

14

Financial markets have some similarities to the political arena. As in the case of politics,
there are highly incentivized suppliers who try to push their own worldview.
Kindleberger (1989, p. 35) describes the anatomy of a typical bubble “professional
company promoters—many of them rogues interested only in quick profits—tempted a
different class of investors, including ladies and clergymen.” Investors have a much
stronger incentive than voters to figure out the truth, but this incentive is muted by the
Keynesian beauty contest aspect of financial markets. This social aspect of asset markets
implies that investors are as motivated to determine the beliefs of other investors as to
assess the truth. As it can be more profitable to invest on a widely believed lie than on
the truth, the incentives to learn the truth are muted.
Implication # 3: Consumers will be more likely to accept false beliefs when those beliefs
make them happier.
Consumers may have an incentive to learn the truth, but if they enjoy anticipating a good
future, then there is a reverse incentive to believe stories about future success. As such,
consumers will tend to be over-optimistic (because they happily believe stories about
their own future success) and there will be a steady demand for flattery. Consumers
therefore face a tradeoff between the costs of erroneous decisions based on overoptimistic beliefs and the benefits of anticipating a rosy future. This force might predict
that people who own assets currently are particularly likely to believe new rumors about
the good prospects of those assets because these rumors confirm their own good
judgment.

Flattery is also an inherent element in the way that nationalism is sold.

Nowhere is the demand for pleasant stories more obvious than in religion. Many of the
successful religions teach of a delightful post-death experience. Naturally, consumers
find a belief in heaven more appealing than belief in mortality. Given how attractive it is
to believe in an afterlife, and given that this belief need not carry any costs, it is actually a
puzzle that anyone doubts the existence of heaven. If the costs of convincing people that
an afterlife exists are sufficiently low, and if there is free entry in the religious
marketplace, then atheism cannot be a market outcome. Given the existence of atheistic

15

consumers and given that people prefer to believe in eternal life relative to mortality (at
least when that belief has no strings attached), then a new entrant should be able to earn
positive rents by supplying a belief in heaven without any attendant moral strictures.
One answer to this puzzle is that suppliers of attractive beliefs about life after death end
up acquiring some market power and then extract resources by tying access to heaven
with behavior that benefits these suppliers. Individuals then need to choose between
accepting the belief in heaven, with its accompanying moral obligations, and believing
that existence ends at the grave. The absence of belief in an afterlife in some European
countries can conceivably be explained by the lack of free entry in the religious market
and anti-clerical indoctrination by politicians seeking to weaken the political power of the
church.12 Where there is free entry in the religion market, the equilibrium principle
suggests that across religions, we should expect to see those religions that are most
successful in convincing people that an afterlife exists are also those that extract the most
resources from their adherents.
Implication #4: We should expect to see a proliferation of beliefs with strategic
complementarities across people, i.e. beliefs that induce believers to convince others of
the same belief.
This implication is variant on the fads literature (Bikchandani, Hirshleifer and Welch,
1992). The incentive principle predicts beliefs that create incentives for their own
propagation will spread particularly rapidly. If a consumer that acquires a particular
belief then has an incentive to indoctrinate his neighbor, then each new believer is also a
new supplier. Believers become suppliers because the moral obligation to indoctrinate is
part of the belief system. Indeed, we shouldn’t be surprised that religious belief systems

12

Glaeser and Sacerdote (2001) argue that anti-clerical indoctrination in Europe is the natural outcome of
the political battles of the 19th century where leftists fought against a church-king alliance.

16

often depict missionary activity as a great good.13 Religions that don’t advocate
missionary activity are unlikely to survive in a free market.
Believers can also become suppliers because their beliefs induce them to take actions
which have high returns if others share their beliefs. For example, the value of a stock
purchase increases if others also believe that a particular company is poised for economic
greatness. Likewise, political beliefs also display these strategic complementarities.
Once you believe that the Republicans are far better leaders than the Democrats, you
have an incentive to induce your neighbors to believe the same thing, since the
probability of the Republicans being in office is a function of the number of people who
share your beliefs. Of course, in large markets, this incentive to indoctrinate will be
weak.
This implication tells us that suppliers will craft beliefs that create incentives for
indoctrination. It also tells us that we should expect widespread errors in situations
where strategic complementarities in beliefs exist across people. Again this favors
accuracy in consumer markets over political markets. In many cases, consumers who
think a particular commodity is good have an incentive to discourage this belief in others
because their demand will increase the price. As argued above, voters have an incentive
to ensure that their neighbors share their beliefs.
Implication # 5: Activities which give access to consumers’ attention will yield direct
benefits to those consumers and will be costly to suppliers.
This implication follows from the equilibrium principle. Activities such as television,
books and schools require consumers to passively intake broadcast stories and images.
They create an opportunity for suppliers to mislead consumers, and as such they are
valuable. In equilibrium, these opportunities to mislead must be just costly enough to
suppliers to offset the benefits from forming beliefs. The natural form of the costs to
13

In some cases, indoctrination is emphasized but limited to a subset of the population. For example, for
the past 1500 years, Judaism has eschewed general missionary activity, but has strongly emphasized the
moral obligation of parents to rear their children as Jews.

17

suppliers will come in providing direct value to consumers in the form of entertainment
or genuinely useful knowledge. This provision of direct value is needed to compensate
consumers for the losses that they will expect to suffer from having their beliefs
manipulated.
The most obvious application of this analysis is in broadcast television. In this case, an
entire industry exists to provide entertainment for free. This entertainment is the cost
born by suppliers for the opportunity to indoctrinate consumers. Standard economic
logic would seem to suggest that consumer losses from advertising-created errors are
offset by the benefits of free entertainment. Of course, in cases where consumers don’t
internalize all of the costs of their actions (such as in political decisions), the
entertainment will only offset the expected loss to the individual consumer, but not to
society as a whole.
Another example of this equilibrium implication is in the market for higher education.
Private universities have a tremendous opportunity to indoctrinate their students and
many do just that. Many graduates appear to believe that being a loyal alumnus (where
loyalty is often defined through donations) is a positive moral good. Competition in this
market ensures that universities pay for this opportunity to indoctrinate generally by
providing students with skills and quality of life during their time of study. Indeed, in
most elite universities the costs of providing education are much higher than tuition and
are only offset by the ex post donations of students who believe that they have an ethical
obligation to contribute to their alma mater.
IV.

Normative Economics and Psychology

Behavioral economics has occasionally been seen as an excuse for paternalistic
government intervention. After all, if humans don’t maximize their welfare, then
shouldn’t the government maximize for them? Indeed, the literature on self-control and
hyperbolic discounting (Strotz, 1956, Phelps and Pollak 1968, Thaler and Shefrin, 1981,
Laibson, 1997, Gul and Pesendorfer, 2001) does challenge the idea that more choices are

18

preferred to less which is a direct attack on the third basic tenet of traditional economics.
Situationalism implies that decisions are formed by ephemeral factors that have little to
do with long-run well-being. Widespread cognitive errors also mean that private decision
makers do a poor job at maximizing utility. Together these aspects of behavioral
economics appear to challenge the heart of normative economics and the laissez-faire
tradition.
It is true that if consumers reason poorly and don’t maximize their welfare, then the basis
of traditional welfare economics is in shambles. While the incentive principle and the no
arbitrage equilibrium are likely to survive the integration of psychology, formal welfare
economics certainly requires a major overhaul. But I have my doubts that this overhaul
will ultimately cause us to be more enthusiastic about governmental intervention in the
economy. It seems more likely that a proper appreciation of the limits of mankind will
cause us to be increasingly scared of government intervention and increasingly ardent in
our support for limits on government.
The real case for laissez-faire is not that the individual is perfect, but that the state will do
worse than the private individual, and the strength of this case has always relied more on
the fallibility of the state than on the perfection of markets. As an integral member of the
Scottish enlightenment, Adam Smith’s case for laissez-faire was grounded in the
unarguable historical fact that governments often pursue policies that impoverish and
slaughter their own citizenry. This is, after all, the central theme of Smith’s Scottish
historian contemporaries, David Hume and William Robertson. Human beings surely
make mistakes about their own welfare, but the welfare losses created by these errors are
surely second order relative to the welfare losses created by governments which not only
make errors, but also pursue objectives far from welfare maximization. Individuals may
procrastinate and foolishly invest, but they tend not to voluntarily enroll in concentration
camps.
The debate about government intervention requires understanding the relative losses from
private folly and state malfeasance. Psychology has helped us to appropriately inflate our

19

estimates of the losses from private error. What does psychology tell us that we should
expect from the political sector? Even without considering the market for political
power, we should expect our leaders to be subject to the same biases and emotional
handicaps as citizens. Indeed, individuals who choose to go into politics may be
particularly prone to over optimism and are likely to be fairly aggressive. Both political
villains (Hitler, Stalin, Mao) and heroes (Winston Churchill, Teddy Roosevelt) of the 20th
century are hardly models of clear thinking and emotional balance.
In the monarchical era of Smith and Hume, no one was confused into thinking that
political leaders were likely to maximize the public welfare. However, the advent of
democracy led many to believe that we could trust our governments. Indeed, a large
rational choice literature tends to suggest that people will choose political leaders who
serve their interests and will vote for laws that match their interests. A worldview that
assumes that people are perfectly rational in the political sphere, but wildly irrational in
the economic sphere, might indeed lead one to believe that aggressive government
policies are likely to help us overcome our psychological flaws.
But of course, such a worldview is inconsistent and wrong. As I have argued above, it
seems far more likely that people will be easily misled in the political arena, where no
one voter’s actions matters, than in the economic world, where consumer choices directly
impact consumer welfare. It is not hard to find cases where socially disastrous policies
have received fervent and widespread popular support. While Hitler never received a
popular majority during the Weimar elections, the Nazis and the Communists together
managed to get an overwhelming majority of support. There was strong popular support
in both France and Germany for entry into World War I. Thucydides describes the
popular enthusiasm in both Athens and Sparta for beginning the mutually destructive
Peloponnesian war. If voters were so rational, then a variant of Aumann’s agreeing to
disagree theorem would surely imply that people on both sides can’t favor warfare.
Support from both sides suggests a lack of logical thinking.

20

The American political market has probably produced fewer disasters than any
comparable state over a 200 year period, but this is surely because of a constitution rife
with checks and balances to the unfettered power of the voter, not because of any
perfection in the American voter. Indeed, American voters seem as prone to emotion and
bias as voters anywhere. Issues like abortion, prayer in schools, and the war on drugs
often dominate political discourse, even when the political office in question will have
practically no ability to influence policies on these topics. Attacks on Mitt Romney
during the recent Massachusetts Gubernatorial campaign focused on his alleged antichoice beliefs, despite the fact that the governor in the profoundly democratic state of
Massachusetts in a country where Roe v. Wade is the law of the land has almost no
ability whatsoever to influence abortion availability.14
The U.S. is not unusual in the dominance of emotionally salient issues that are ultimately
irrelevant to the conduct of policy. During the recent Iraq war, political debate in Spain
centered entirely on the evil of American aggression despite the fact that by that time
there was absolutely nothing that any Spanish leader could do to change the course of the
conflict. Perhaps most absurdly, numerous small cities (such as Cambridge) fervently
debated and enacted laws declaring themselves to be nuclear-free zones, as if these laws
would have any effect on the prevalence of nuclear weaponry. These are only recent
examples of the widespread presence of emotion and erroneous beliefs in the political
market.
We do not yet have the tools to incorporate psychology fully into welfare economics.
But this incorporation cannot be one-sided. We cannot admit the manifold errors that
human beings make in their private lives and then assume that the state will get things
right. As the incentives to fight bias are so much stronger in private decisions than in
political acts, I suspect that incorporating psychology into welfare economics will only
buttress the traditional economists’ belief in limited government.

14

The situation is only made more absurd by the fact that his opponent, Shannon O’Brien, was a protégé of
House Speaker Thomas Finneran who is far more actively pro-life than Romney.

21

V.

Conclusion

The complementarities between psychology and economics are considerable. Insights
from psychology have certainly challenged traditional welfare economics. While
behavioral economics has not pushed us to drop our conventional ideas about what
constitutes an equilibrium, it has changed our understanding of what a no-arbitrage
equilibrium implies, especially in the field of finance. And while behavioral economics
has not yet argued that incentives don’t matter, it has argued that many things are at least
as important as conventional financial incentives.
But while the bulk of behavioral economics has so far focused on the gains to economics
from incorporating some psychology, there are also large gains to psychology from
incorporating some economics, especially when it comes to explaining large-scale
phenomena. Society-wide psychological phenomena such as prejudice and nationalism
cannot be understood without recognizing that they come about through the interaction of
strategic actors who push beliefs on the citizenry as a whole. In a sense, there is a supply
of beliefs that interacts with consumers who essentially “demand” these thoughts. To
understand the equilibrium of the market for beliefs, and to understand differences across
societies, the traditional economic focus on incentives and no-arbitrage equilibrium
seems to offer promise.

22

References
Akerlof, G. and J. Yellen (1985) “Can Small Deviations from Rationality Make
Significant Differences to Economic Equilibria?” American Economic Review 75(4):
708-720.
Alesina A. and E. Glaeser (2003) “Fighting Poverty in the U.S. and Europe: A World of
Difference” Oxford University Press, forthcoming.
Alesina, A. Glaeser, E. and B. Sacerdote (2002) “Why Doesn’t the U.S. Have a European
Style Welfare State?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Ariely, D., Loewenstein, G. and D. Prelec (2003) “’Coherent Arbitrariness:’ Stable
Demand Curves without Stable Preferences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
118(1): 73-105.
Aronson, E., Wilson, T., and R. Akert (2002) Social Psychology (Fourth Edition).
Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Asch, S. E. (1955) “Opinions and Social Influence,” Scientific American 193: 31-55.
Barberis, N., Huang, M. and T. Santos (2001) “Prospect Theory and Asset Prices,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(1): 1-54.
Barberis, N., Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny (1998) “A Model of Investor Sentiment,”
Journal of Financial Economics 49: 307-343.
Barberios, N, Huang, M., and R. Thaler (2003) “Individual Preferences, Monetary
Gambles and the Equity Premium” mimeographed.
Benabou, R. and Tirole, J. (2002) “Belief in a Just World and Redistributive Politics,”
Working Paper.
Bikchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D. and I. Welch (1992) “A Theory of Fads, Fashion and
Cultural Change as Informational Cascades,” Journal of Political Economy 100(5):
992-1026.
Camerer, C., Babcock, L., Loewenstein, G. and R. Thaler (1997) “Labor Supply of New
York City Cabdrivers: One Day at a Time,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2):
407-442.
Camerer, C.F., Ho, T-H and Chong, J. K. (2002) “A Cognitive Hierarchy Theory of OneShot Games: Some Preliminary Results,” Working Paper.
DellaVigna, S., and U. Malmendier (2002) “Contract Design and Self Control,”
mimeographed.
DeLong, J., Shleifer, A., Summers, L. and R. Waldmann (1990) “Noise Trader Risk in
Financial Markets,” Journal of Political Economy 98(4): 703-738.
Farber, H. (2003) “Is Tomorrow Another Day? The Labor Supply of New York Cab
Drivers,” NBER Working Paper No. w9706.
Fehr, E. and S. Gachter (2000) “Fairness and Retaliation: The Economics of
Reciprocity,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14(3): 159-181.
Glaeser, E. and Sacerdote, B. (2001) “Education and Religion,” NBER Working Paper
8080.
Glaeser, E. (2002) “The Political Economy of Hatred” NBER Working Paper # 9171.
Griffin, D. and A. Tversky (1992) “The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of
Confidence,” Cognitive Psychology 24(3): 411-435.

23

Gul, F. and Pesendorfer. (2001) “Temptation and Self-Control,” Econometrica,
forthcoming.
Haney, C., Banks, W. C., and Zimbardo, P. G. (1973) Study of prisoners and guards in a
simulated prison. Naval Research Reviews 9: 1-17. Washington, DC: Office of
Naval Research.
Herrnstein, R. (1997) The Matching Law. New York: Russell Sage.
Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky (1979) “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under
Risk,” Econometrica 47: 263-291.
Kahneman, D., Wakker, P. and R. Sarin (1997) “Back to Bentham? Explorations of
Experienced Utility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2): 375-406.
Kindleberger, C. (1989) Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises.
New York: Basic Books.
Laibson, D. (1997) “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112(2): 443-477.
Laibson, D. (2001) “A Cue Theory of Consumption,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
66(1): 81-120.
Milgram, S. (1963) “Behavioral Studies of Obedience,” Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology 67: 371-378.
Mullainathan, S. and A. Shleifer (2003) “The Market for News,” mimeographed.
Phelps, E.S. and Pollak, R.A. (1968) “On Second-Best National Saving and Game
Equilibrium Growth,” Review of Economic Studies 35: 201-208.
Rabin, M. (2000) "Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem,"
Econometrica 68(5): 1281-1292
Romer, P. (1996) “Preferences, Promises, and the Politics of Entitlement,” in Individual
and Social Responsibility: Child care, education, medical care, and long-term care in
America. Fuchs, Victor R., ed., National Bureau of Economic Research Conference
Report series. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, pp 195-220.
Romer, P. (2000) “Thinking and Feeling,” American Economic Review 90(2): 439-43.
Ross, L. and R. Nisbett (1991) The Person and the Situation. Philadelphia: Temple
University Press.
Russell, T. and R. Thaler (1985) “The Relevance of Quasi-Rationality in Competitive
Markets,” American Economic Review 75(5): 1071-1082.
Scheinkman J. and W. Xiong, (2003) “Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles,”
Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny (1997) “The Limits of Arbitrage,” Journal of Finance 52(1):
35-55.
Slovic, P. (1972) “Psychological Study of Human Judgment: Implications for Investment
Decision Making,” Journal of Finance 27(4): 779-799.
Strotz R. (1956) “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,” Review
of Economic Studies 23(3): 165-180.
Thaler, R. and H. Shefrin (1981) “An Economic Theory of Self-Control,” Journal of
Political Economy 89(2): 392-406.
Thaler, R. (1994) The Winner’s Curse. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Thaler, R. (1985) “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice,” Marketing Science 4(3):
199-214.

24

Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman (1974) “Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases,” Science 185(4157): 1124-1131.

25

