                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MANAGED CARE, DRUG BENEFITS AND MORTALITY:
                         AN ANALYSIS OF THE ELDERLY

                                       Gautam Gowrisankaran
                                          Robert J. Town

                                        Working Paper 10204
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10204


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2004




We thank Victor Aguirregabiria, Joe Altonji, Bryan Dowd, Randy Ellis, Michael Keane, Joe Newhouse
and seminar participants at Boston University, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, University
of Minnesota and Yale University for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Gautam Gowrisankaran and Robert J. Town. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Managaed Care, Drug Benefits and Mortality: An Analysis of the Elderly
Gautam Gowrisankaran and Robert J. Town
NBER Working Paper No. 10204
January 2004, Revised July 2006
JEL No. I11, I12, I18, C33

                                          ABSTRACT

We seek to investigate whether managed health care can affect mortality, and if so, through which

mechanisms. We estimate the impact of Medicare+Choice (M+C), Medicare’s managed care

program, on elderly mortality, using a county-level panel from 1993 to 2000. We control for

endogenous M+C penetration rates with county fixed effects and instrumental variables. We

construct instruments using the identification created by the fact that M+C payment rates are based

on 3    to 8   year lagged fee-for-service (FFS) costs in the county. We find that enrollment in

managed care without prescription drug coverage significantly increases mortality while enrollment

in managed care with drug coverage has no significant impact, both relative to FFS. The impact of

managed care penetration on mortality from heart disease appears to follow a similar pattern. The

estimates suggest that a 10-percentage point increase in M+C non-drug coverage would cause 51,000

additional deaths among the aged population in 2000.

Gautam Gowrisankaran
John M. Olin School of Business
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1133, Simon Hall 277
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
and NBER
gautam_gowrisankaran@nber.org

Robert J. Town
Division of Health Services Research and Policy
School of Public Health
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
rjtown@umn.edu
1. Introduction

        In the United States, the 1990s saw a dramatic rise of a relatively new organizational

mechanism for financing and organizing health care: managed care. By the end of the decade the

vast majority of individuals with private health insurance were enrolled in some form of

managed care (Glied, 2000). By using utilization management, writing high powered contracts

with plan providers, and perhaps most importantly, exercising bargaining power over providers,

managed care offers a potentially more efficient alternative to traditional indemnity health

insurance.1 However, part of the reduction in costs from managed care may be due to a lower

quality of care.

        The potential efficiency gains from managed care have influenced government policy.

Starting in 1982, the Medicare administration offered managed care plans to its enrollees as a

way to reduce expenditures in this gigantic government program. By 2000, 15% or over 6

million Medicare enrollees opted for a private health maintenance organization (HMO) instead

of traditional Medicare insurance. More recently, the government implemented the Medicare

Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act (MMA) of 2003 with two intertwined

legislative intents: moving Medicare further towards managed care and increasing access to drug

coverage for Medicare enrollees through managed care plans. Drug coverage has become

increasingly important because of the development of many useful drug therapies over the last 30

years (Lichtenberg, 2002a and 2002b). The MMA has been criticized on several dimensions,

including by researchers who believe that it may result in lower quality care and cause plans to

design benefits in order to exploit adverse selection (see McAdams and Schwartz, 2006).

        The purpose of this study is to evaluate the impact of Medicare HMOs on the quality of

1
 For instance, Cutler, McClellan and Newhouse (2000) find that the main effect of managed care is to lower prices
paid to providers.

                                                       2
healthcare, using data from 1993 to 2000. We define quality using what is generally considered

the most important outcome measure, mortality, in our case mortality for the elderly.2 Medicare

HMOs may offer benefits that exceed the basic Medicare package. Generally the most valued

additional benefit is drug coverage and hence a related purpose of this study is to evaluate the

impact of drug coverage, as provided by HMOs, on mortality. We specify a model of HMO

entry, pricing and benefit decisions, and Medicare enrollee plan choices and health outcomes.

We use the model to derive estimating equations and methods that are consistent with

endogenous selection into HMOs and, in conjunction with the estimates, to provide evidence on

the equilibrium provision of quality and the extent of adverse selection in this market and on the

relative benefit to costs of the Medicare HMO program and Medicare drug coverage.

         We hope that our study will inform the policy debate on the impact of Medicare HMOs

and drug coverage on health outcomes, and through that, provide more general evidence on the

impact of managed care on the quality of healthcare. The literature on the impact of Medicare

HMOs on mortality has not reached any consistent conclusions,3 and neither has the overall

literature on the effect managed care of penetration on health outcomes.4 A likely reason for the

inconsistent findings may be an endogeneity problem, where people are likely to select into

HMOs and drug coverage on the basis of their health status, and health status is not perfectly

observed. A number of other studies that assess the impact of managed care penetration on

different outcomes have attempted to control for this endogeneity problem with a variety of

2
  There are many other measures of health outcomes including (but not limited to) morbidity, physical functioning
status, psychosocial functioning and quality of life (Donabedian, 1985). We focus on mortality as it is
unambiguously a measure of health outcomes, measurement error is modest and it is readily measured with available
data.
3
  While Maciejewski et al. (2001) and Riley et al. (1989, 1991) find that Medicare HMO enrollees have a lower
probability of death than other Medicare enrollees, other studies find no significant difference between the groups
for breast cancer, prostate cancer, end-stage renal dialysis, and acute myocardial infarction (see Lee-Feldstein et al.,
2000, Roetzheim et al., 2000, Potosky et al., 1999, Eggers et al., 2002, and Sada et al., 1998).
4
  A review by Miller and Luft (2002) reports that over the period 1997-2001, 9 studies find that HMOs lead to lower
mortality, 12 find that HMOs lead to higher mortality, and 6 find no difference.

                                                           3
methods.5

        Our data provide us with a unique source of quasi-experimental variation that allows us

to address the endogeneity problem in a manner that is consistent with our model. The quasi-

experimental variation is based on peculiarities of the method by which the Medicare

administration reimbursed HMOs for providing healthcare to its enrollees: until 1997, HMOs

were reimbursed with a fixed payment rate based on the mean realized per-capita FFS

expenditures in the county over a six year period, from 8 years prior to 3 years prior.6 Provided

that unobserved shocks to health status in a county are sufficiently independent that there is no

correlation between the shocks in a given year and three years prior, the payment rate can be

used to construct instruments. The unobserved shocks are more likely to be independent if we

include sufficient observed measures of health status. Our observed measures are extensive; they

include a county fixed effect, the contemporaneous health status of younger people (as measured

by mortality), detailed demographic data, and measures of supplemental health coverage (such as

Medigap and Medicaid). We also provide evidence on the empirical validity of the independence

assumption.

        As an example of the forces that will identify our parameters, suppose County A in 1993

has a Medicare patient who undergoes a costly and rare procedure for a potentially fatal

condition, such as a heart transplant or a heart assist implant.7 This will substantially boost

County A’s reimbursement rate in 1996 relative to 1995, which will cause plans to enter and

offer drug benefits and lower prices (see Town and Liu, 2003). This will, in turn, increase

5
  Baker and Brown (1999) use instruments formed from the size distribution of firms (without fixed effects), Cutler,
McClellan, Newhouse (2000) use fixed effects, and Dranove, Simon and White (2002) use fixed effects with long
differences.
6
  As we detail below, the reimbursement scheme was different for the last three years of our sample, but the same
basic idea for identification will apply.
7
  In 2002 Medicare paid for 484 heart transplants and 562 heart assist implants. The cost of these procedures to
Medicare often exceeds $370,000 and $240,000, respectively. A good portion of health care costs consist of such
costly and rare procedures.

                                                         4
enrollment in HMOs that offer drug coverage, which may affect County A’s mortality rate in

1996. If unobserved health shocks that cause mortality are not correlated between 1993 and

1996, this will provide an appropriate and useful source of identification of the impact of

managed care and drug coverage on mortality.

       The remainder of this paper is divided as follows. Section 2 provides a background on the

institutional framework. Section 3 explains our model and inference. Section 4 details the data.

Section 5 presents the results. Section 6 concludes.

2. Institutional background

       We focus on the Medicare program for the aged, which served 35 million of the 41

million Medicare enrollees in 2003. This traditional fee-for-service (FFS) Medicare program

consists of several parts. Part A covers hospital stays (with a small deductible) and catastrophic

care. Part A enrollment is automatic. In addition, enrollees can (and mostly do) enroll in Part B

for a premium (that was $43.80 per month in 1998). Part B covers physician services with a 20%

coinsurance; lab and diagnostic tests; outpatient services with a 20% co-payment; and mental

health care with a 50% co-payment. Medicare’s Part A and B programs do not cover long-term

care, prescription drugs, preventive care, dental care, or eye care.

       In 1982, Congress passed the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) which

directed the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), now called the Centers for Medicare

and Medicaid Services (CMS), to contract with HMOs to provide a managed care option to

Medicare enrollees. Under Medicare+Choice (M+C) or Medicare Part C, the names for the

program starting in 1997, an HMO can contract with Medicare to offer an M+C plan for a given

county and year. In counties with available M+C plans, Medicare beneficiaries can enroll or

disenroll in an M+C plan on a monthly basis. Beneficiaries who disenroll in an M+C plan are


                                                  5
automatically enrolled into Medicare FFS Part A.

        Each contracting HMO agrees to accept all Medicare enrollees residing in the county

who enroll with it, and to provide and assume the risk for all Part A and B covered services to

the individual, within a set provider network.8 The HMO is also allowed to provide extra

benefits, most notably drug coverage, reduced copays for physician visits, dental benefits, and

coverage for eyeglasses and durable medical equipment. In exchange for providing healthcare,

the HMO receives a per-enrollee payment from CMS. In addition, the plan could charge a

monthly premium to the enrollee.9 The offered premiums and benefits are subject to CMS

approval. For instance, prior to the enactment of the Budget Balanced Act of 1997 (BBA) each

Medicare HMO had to be an existing commercial HMO in the metropolitan area with a Medicare

HMO enrollment capped at 50% of its total enrollment in the area.

        Each year from 1982 until 1997, CMS set the per-enrollee HMO payment at 95% of its

projected Part A and B cost to treat a similar enrollee in the FFS program. The per-enrollee

payment is the sum of a county/year-specific base payment and an increment based on age and

gender, and Medicaid, institutional and end-stage renal disease statuses of the enrollee. Until

1997, the projected base cost was the mean Medicare FFS claims for that county, for the period

from eight to three years prior.

        In 1997, President Clinton signed the Balanced Budget Act (BBA). The BBA (and its

subsequent modifications) altered Medicare’s payment methodology. From 1998 onwards, the

monthly base payment rate was set to the maximum of three figures: a blended input price

(which mixes an adjusted national rate and an area-specific rate); a floor rate of $367; and a


8
  More precisely, for a given M+C contract, HMOs submit proposed service areas, which are clusters of counties in
a given locale, to CMS for approval.
9
  Premiums were constrained to be non-negative during our sample period, although CMS started permitting
negative premiums after our sample period.

                                                       6
minimum rate increase of 2% per year. Subsequent legislation in the Balanced Budget

Refinement Act of 1999 (BBRA) increased the floor rate to $475 (and $525 for large urban

counties) and added a 5% increase in the payments to previously underserved markets, starting in

2000. Importantly, updates to the county payments remained unaffected by new Medicare FFS

claims in the county, implying that base payment rate continued not to be based on claims data in

the county within the previous three years. The post-BBA payment formula led to a substantial

relative decrease in the payment rate for most counties.

       The 2003 MMA significantly changed the payment formula to Medicare HMOs, renamed

the HMO program Medicare Advantage (MA) and established prescription drug coverage known

as Medicare Part D. Part D drug coverage involves a peculiarity known as a “donut hole” where

enrollees are partly covered for the first $2,250 of pharmaceutical expenditures in a year, but

then must pay all of the additional expenses until their total out-of-pocket expenditures reaches

$3,600 at which point they are insured by catastrophic coverage.

       Most Medicare FFS enrollees (92%) also have supplemental insurance that offers

additional benefits above Parts A and B. This supplemental insurance is either individually

purchased, provided by the government (through Medicaid, Veterans Affairs, or State

Pharmaceutical Assistance) or by an employer. Often this coverage provides prescription drug

benefits. Davis et al. (1999) report that of the non-M+C Medicare beneficiaries in 1995, 13%

also had Medicaid (which provided drug coverage to 90% of this group), 35% had employer

sponsored Medigap insurance (86% with drug coverage), 31% purchased Medigap in the

individual market (46% with drug coverage), 3% had other government sponsored coverage

(80% with drug coverage) and 9% had a mixture of coverage (80% with drug coverage).

3. Model and inference


                                                7
           We develop a simple model of health plan entry, benefit design, consumer choice and

mortality for the M+C market. We do not structurally estimate the model but rather use it to

guide the development of estimating equations and the identification strategy.

           We consider a metropolitan area that is composed of counties c = 1,…,C and existing

commercial HMOs j = 1,…, J . Each year, each commercial HMO simultaneously decides in

which counties, if any, to offer M+C plans. An HMO that offers an M+C plan would provide and

be at-risk for the healthcare of any Medicare enrollee who chooses to enroll with it. Following

the entry decision, each HMO must simultaneously decide on price and benefit structures for

each county in which it operates in the M+C market. Let p jtc denote plan j’s price and b jtc its

benefit design for time t and county c.10 Prices are constrained to be non-negative. We focus on

the binary benefit choice of drug coverage or not. Let d! jtc and n! jtc respectively denote dummy

variables for managed care plan with and without drug coverage.

           There exists a set of Medicare enrollees in each county, i = 1…, I . Let !itc denote health

status, where a higher value of !itc indicates a higher probability of dying during the year. Each

month, each enrollee observes the prices and benefits for each offered plan, and then must make

a discrete choice between one of the M+C plans offered in her county and the outside option,

which is traditional FFS Medicare. We can write utility for any offered plan as:



(1)                    (                 )
            u ijtc = f p jtc ,!itc , b jtc + " ijtc ,




             ()
where f ! is some function and ! ijtc is an idiosyncratic unobservable. We normalize the outside

10
     Plans may offer multiple products with different service offerings, but we do not model this.

                                                            8
                                                                   {
option, FFS Medicare, to have utility u i0tc = ! i0tc . Let h itc ! 0,…,J   } denote the chosen health
plan, which maximizes (1).

        Our choice model may result in adverse selection by enrollees. For instance, an enrollee

in poor health (i.e., with a high !itc ) may be likely to choose an HMO because she values the

service offerings highly. Alternately, she may be unlikely to choose an HMO because she values

access to a broad set of health care providers. One would expect enrollees in poor health to care

more about drug coverage and hence be more likely to choose a plan with d! jtc = 1 than with

n! jtc = 1 , all else being equal.

        The marginal cost to a plan for treating an enrollee depends on the enrollee’s health status

and the plan’s benefits:



(2)                 (          )
        mc ijtc = g !itc , b jtc ,




                        ()
for some function g ! . HMOs will likely compete by offering benefits which are both beneficial

to enrollees and costly.11 Firms may endogenously choose benefits, price and entry or exit to

attract patients with a favorable cost profile, generating a second source of adverse selection.

        In addition to the marginal cost, HMOs face fixed costs for being in the M+C market in

any year. We also allow for dynamic and spatial fixed cost variation: HMOs that were not in the

M+C market in the previous year may incur a sunk cost of entry, HMOs that were in the market

in the previous year and then exit may incur a sunk exit cost (potentially negative), and HMOs


11
  Town and Liu (2003) find that the provision of drug coverage by M+C plans generates significant consumer
welfare.

                                                    9
that operate in more than one county may incur geographic spillover costs (generally negative).

        Each year, the Medicare administration sets a county/year reimbursement rate rtc . The

gross benefit to the HMO is the reimbursement rate rtc times its number of enrollees. The

reimbursement formula changed over time due to the BBA (and subsequent legislation), but

never depended on FFS costs within the immediate three previous years or directly on the M+C

plan’s cost history. Thus, we can express



(3)                 (
         rtc = R t h i!tc! ,mc i0 !tc! 1 ! i ! I, !t ! t " 3,1 ! c! ! C ,   )

                             ()
for some formula R t ! . Firms will have some information, not necessarily perfect, about future

reimbursement rates.

        Following the choice of plans, individuals will realize their illness state, and obtain

medical treatment that will either result in a cure for their illness or in death.12 Let m *itc denote a

latent index for the likelihood of death (we explain below how m *itc translates into actual

mortality). We let m *itc be a function of the individual’s health status and health coverage:




(4)      m *itc = !itc + " d d! h            + " n n! h            ,
                                    itc tc                itc tc




where ! d and ! n , the impacts of managed care with and without drug coverage relative to



12
  Our model does not allow for dynamic treatment effects where an individual might survive but be more likely to
die in a subsequent year based on the received treatment. We explored such specifications but the coefficients on
lagged treatment were small and insignificant.

                                                                       10
remaining in the Medicare FFS sector, are the key parameters of interest.13

         To estimate our model, we express an individual’s health status as a deviation from the

county/year mean, by writing



(5)      !itc = "x tc + # tc + !! itc ,



where x tc are county/year mean observed health status measures, ! is a coefficient vector, ! tc is

a mean zero unobserved component of aggregate mean health status, and !! itc is a mean zero

individual deviation from the aggregate health status. In addition, we proxy for the plan type for

each individual, d! h               and n! h            , with the county/time population means of these variables,
                           itc tc              itc tc




which we define as d tc and n tc , respectively.14 The use of proxies implies that the unobserved

component of mortality will include both !! itc and the difference between the actual plan type and

the population mean plan type. Let this combined unobservable be defined as

                 (                  )     (                   )
e itc ! "! itc + # d d! hitc tc $ d tc + # n n! hitc tc $ n tc . We can then rewrite (4) as




(6)      m *itc = !x tc + " d d tc + " n n tc + # tc + e itc .



         We estimate (6) by aggregating from the individual level to the county/year level and

using linear instrumental variables (IV). We estimate results from two different aggregation

methods to obtain evidence on the robustness of our results to functional form.

13
  We do not allow service offerings besides drug coverage and managed care to affect mortality.
14
   Note that proxy error is different than measurement error in that proxy error will not result in biased coefficient
estimates in a linear regression.

                                                                    11
        For our first method, we let m *itc to be the probability of death for person i and take the

mean of (6) across individuals in the county. Let m tc denotes the Medicare enrollee mortality

                              I
rate, and let ! tc " # tc + $ e itc I . We then obtain:
                             i=1




(7)     m tc = !x tc + " d d tc + " n n tc + # tc .




        For our second method, we let m *itc be a latent illness index, with death occurring if and

only if m *itc > 0 and let e itc be distributed as a logit (i.e., as the difference between two Type 1

extreme value error terms). We further make the assumption that there are enough people within

a county/year so that the sampling error in the Medicare mortality rate will be roughly zero. For

consistency of notation, let ! tc " # tc for this specification. Following Berry (1994), a

transformation of the aggregate mortality rate can then be expressed as a linear function of the

regressors:



            " m tc %
(8)     log $          ' = (x tc + ) d d tc + ) n n tc + * tc .
            # 1 ! m tc &



        Both (7) and (8) may suffer from endogeneity. From (1), enrollees may choose different

service offerings plans on the basis of !itc , and in particular ! tc . This will imply that ! tc will be

correlated with enrollees’ choices of plan, h itc , and through that with d tc and n tc . We control for

the endogeneity using an instrumental variables approach, where functions of the payment rate

                                                             12
are used as instruments for d tc and n tc . Our main identifying assumption is that the residual

component of health status, ! tc , is independent across time, specifically that ! tc is independent

from any 3-year-old or older health shocks. The validity of this assumption depends on the

quality of the aggregate health status variables x tc , which are extensive, as detailed in the

introduction.

       The model and identifying assumption imply that functions of rtc are valid instruments

for both d tc and n tc : functions of rtc will affect the set of available M+C plans, benefit structure

and premiums of the plans, and through that the share of consumers who choose drug and non-

drug plans. In addition, rtc , and hence any function of rtc , is based only on variables 3 years old

or older and will not be correlated with ! tc . Moreover, the model implies that different functions

of rtc are jointly valid instruments for d tc and n tc . The economic reason for this is that the entry

and benefit decisions are non-linear functions of rtc . Hence, d tc and n tc can each be expressed as

a linear combination of multiple non-collinear functions of rtc plus a residual, where the

functions can be indicators for rtc being in different quantiles, for instance. As these multiple

functions can all be excluded from the treatment equation (7) or (8) but all enter separately into

the underlying selection equations determining d tc and n tc , they allow us to jointly identify the

impacts of d tc and n tc on mortality.

       We illustrate the joint identification with a numerical example. Consider a simple data

generating process with many similar counties which differ only in two exogenous dimensions:

! tc and rtc . We let !itc = " tc , let ! tc = ".1 50 percent of the time and ! tc = .1 the other 50



                                                  13
percent, and let rtc vary continuously with a distribution that is independent from ! tc . We

assume that each county contains one (monopolistic) HMO, plan 1, with no fixed or sunk costs

or geographic spillovers. Each HMO knows ! tc and rtc before deciding on entry. We assume

also that there is no consumer selection based on !itc , that the price elasticity of demand is high

enough so that price is always zero and that the idiosyncratic enrollee choice unobservables ! ijtc


                                                         ()
are distributed type I extreme value. The f ! function from (1) will then be only a function of


                  ( )             ( )                (             )   (           )            (         )
b1tc . We let f d! 1tc = 1 , f n! 1tc = 0 , mc i1tc ! tc , d! 1tc = 1.1 ! tc + 1 , and mc i1tc ! tc , n! 1tc = ! tc + 1 so

that drug coverage both increases costs and utility, with a cost complementarity between drug

coverage and illness severity. It is not necessary for us to specify the mortality process.

        By standard logit formulas, the HMO will capture 50% of the market share with a non-

drug M+C plan, and 73.1% with a drug M+C plan. Per-capita profits will be

              (                )          ( )             (                    )
! ( n! 1tc ) = .5 rjtc " ( # tc + 1) and ! d! 1tc = .731 rjtc " 1.1( # tc + 1) . Simple algebra then shows that

when ! tc = ".1 , the firm will enter with no drug coverage for .9 ! rjtc ! 1.18 , with no entry below

this range and drug entry above this range. When ! tc = .1 , the entry pattern is similar, but the

comparable range for entry with no drug coverage is 1.1 ! rjtc ! 1.45 . Thus, non-drug entry will

occur with a mid-range rtc and drug entry with a high rtc , with the exact range depending on ! tc .

        Because of the correlation between ! tc and both d tc and n tc , OLS estimates of (7) with

this data generating process would be inconsistent. However, we could consistently estimate (7)

                              {
with instruments d̂ tc = rjtc > 1.3      }                    {            }
                                             and n̂ tc = 1 ! rjtc ! 1.3 , where         {!}   denotes an indicator

function, as these instruments will be non-collinear predictors of both d tc and n tc . Adding in all


                                                              14
the other features of the model (e.g., multiple firms, consumer adverse selection) will make the

relation between the reimbursement rate and drug or non-drug entry more complicated, but the

same fundamental identification will apply. While the example uses two instruments for

simplicity of exposition, one could add to the predictive power of the instruments by generating

four instruments of indicators based on the cutoffs .9, 1.1, 1.18 and 1.45. Moreover, the dynamic

and geographic cost complementarities in our model imply that we can add further predictive

power by using future and past payment rates and payment rates from nearby counties as

instruments.

           Our actual choice of instruments is complicated by the fact that costs vary significantly

across counties, implying that a payment rate that is generous in one county is not generous in

another. As county population is highly correlated with costs, we normalize the payment rate

based on population, by regressing the payment rate on four measures of population (county

population, health services area (HSA) population, MSA population and county elderly

population). We define the residual from this regression to be the “normalized payment rate,” r̂tc .

We then create 10 instruments based on r̂tc : the rate, its second, third and fourth powers, its log

and the square of its log, and 4 dummies indicating its quintile (with one excluded). We also

create 3 instruments that indicate the mean, minimum and maximum normalized payment rates

in the MSA, to capture the geographic cost complementarities noted above. To exploit the

variation from sunk costs, we then include these same 13 instruments for the previous and

subsequent year,15 for a total of 39 instruments. Because there is a potential tradeoff between

asymptotic efficiency (which dictates more instruments) and small sample bias (which dictates




15
     We let the instrument be zero for years that are not in the sample.

                                                             15
less),16 we also examined results with smaller sets of instruments.

         A potential statistical issue with using these instruments is that they are not strictly

exogenous: though our model and assumptions imply that r̂tc is uncorrelated with ! tc they also

imply that r̂tc is correlated with ! t "3,c and further lagged residuals. Since fixed effects IV

estimates are equivalent to estimates from a mean-differenced instrumental variables

                                                                             #
                                                                                 T
specification, the residual can be expressed as ! tc "                   1
                                                                         T       t̂ =1
                                                                                         ! t̂c . In a short panel, there may be a


                                                                         "
                                                                             T
correlation between r̂tc and this residual due to the                1
                                                                     T       t̂ =1
                                                                                     ! t̂c component of the residual. With a


                                                                                                                   "
                                                                                                                       T
sufficiently long panel, shocks to ! t̂ "3,c (for instance) will have little impact on                         1
                                                                                                               T       t̂ =1
                                                                                                                               ! t̂c . Thus,

the consistency of IV estimates with this type of instrument depends on asymptotics in time.

         With 8 years of data, the asymptotic approximation is likely to be close to valid.

Nonetheless, we develop a forward mean differenced specification which provides consistent

results without requiring a long panel. This specification transforms the estimating equation by

subtracting the forward mean (from t ! 1 to T) for each variable instead of the overall mean,

keeping the same untransformed instruments as in the base specification. Thus, the transformed

                              #
                                  T
residual is ! tc "      1
                       T" t       t̂ = t "1
                                              ! t̂c .17 The instrument r̂tc will then not be correlated with the

transformed residual since the residual does not include long-lagged terms such as ! t "3,c . The

transformation does result in a serial correlation in the residuals and thus we cluster our reported

standard errors at the county level.

4. Data

16
   Different authors suggest different points along this tradeoff. For instance, for a panel data with serial correlation,
Arellano and Bond (1991) suggest using every available instrument while Keane and Runkle (1992) suggest a more
limited set.
17
   For observations in year 1, the difference goes back only to year 1.

                                                                16
         Our study period is 1993-2000. We choose 1993 as the start of the sample as prior to this

year enrollment in Medicare HMOs was very small. We create a county-level panel data set of

mortality rates and other county-specific information. The data come from seven different

sources, listed in Table 1, that we merge together.

         First, the mortality data is constructed using the Multiple Cause of Death data from the

National Vitality Statistics. These data contain abstracted death certificate information including

the county of residence, age, sex, and diagnosed cause of death for all deaths in the U.S. To

ensure confidentiality, the county is listed only for those individuals who reside in a county of

over 100,000 in population. Thus, we limit our sample to counties above this population

threshold. We use these data to construct mortality rates for different age groups and causes of

death.

         Second, we merge the mortality data with county level data from CMS on M+C plan

enrollments, plan prescription drug benefits, total Medicare enrollment, and the M+C constant

dollar payment rate. We define the drug benefit using the base plan as reported by CMS.18 Our

data do not provide the specific limitations of the drug coverage and other available benefit

information is prone to substantial reporting error, and thus our measure of plan benefits is

binary. This is a limitation, as it implies that we must lump different levels of drug coverage

together.

         Third, we use information from CMS on the number of Medicaid enrollees by state and

age category (65 to 74, 75 to 84, and 85 and older). We proxy for the county-level Medicaid

penetration rate with the state-level rate.


18
   This may lead to measurement error to the extent that HMOs offer multiple M+C plans in a county, some with
drug coverage and some without. However, the 2000 Medicare Current Beneficiaries Survey reports that 17.8% of
all M+C enrollees are enrolled in a plan without drug benefits. The corresponding figure in our data is 17.3%,
suggesting that any measurement error is small.

                                                     17
       We gather demographic information from two sources. We use data on county per-capita

income, poverty rates, population by age and race, number of practicing physicians and number

of hospitals from the Area Resource File. We use detailed demographic data from the Census’

Population Estimates Program in order to provide a more complete account of the entire age

distribution of the elderly by county. These data provide annual county level projections of the

population in each year in each county by age and sex category. The age categories that we use

are 64, 65, …, 84, and 85 and older.

       In some specifications, we use data from InterStudy on the county-level commercial

managed care penetration rate and information on the state-level average Medigap premiums

from the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP), one of the largest sellers of Medigap

policies. By regulation, Medigap plan benefits fall into 10 different categories, labeled A-J.

Three of these plans, H-J, offer drug coverage. We use the Plan H data as they were the most

widely available data on Medicare FFS prices for drug coverage. These databases are our sixth

and seventh data sources.

       It is useful to characterize the M+C drug coverage since it is central to this paper. The

structure of the benefit varies across three dimensions: generic drug co-payments, branded drug

co-payments and the total maximum drug expenditure covered by the plan. We have detailed

information on the plan drug benefit structure only for 2000.

       In 2000, approximately 80% of the M+C plans offered drug coverage with a mean

monthly premium of $34.85. Of the plans offering drug coverage, the mean co-pay for generic

prescription drugs is $7.80 (std. dev. = $2.93; median = $7), and the mean co-pay for branded

prescription drugs is $16.16 (std. dev. = $6.12; median = $15). 89% of these plans cap the total

annual enrollee expenditures on drugs, with 37% setting the cap at less than $1,000 per year, and



                                               18
another 37% setting caps of over $3,000 per year.

        It is also useful to compare the prescription drug benefits to those offered through

Medigap. Plans H-J all require a 50% coinsurance on prescription drugs with Plans H and I

capping the annual prescription drug expenditure at $1,250 and Plan J capping it at $3,000.19 The

cost of enrolling in a Medigap policy varies across geography and insurers. For the AARP, the

mean (unweighted) monthly premium across states for plans H-J for 65 to 69 year old is $153.90,

$156.57, and $192.57, respectively. Thus, M+C plans with drug benefits are significantly less

expensive to Medicare enrollees than Medigap plans and, in general, they offer more generous

coverage.

        Tables 2 summarizes the major variables used in the study. The average elderly mortality

rate was 5.08% during the sample period, a figure that declines by .13 percentage point over the

period, suggesting the need for time-specific controls. Cancer and heart disease make up the

biggest components of mortality, together accounting for about 60% of the average mortality

rate. Mortality rates are rapidly increasing in age, ranging from .54% for age 50–59 to 8.59% for

people age 75 or older.

        In 1993, the average M+C penetration rate across counties was 3.3%, a figure that

increased to 15.8% by 2000. Medicare M+C payments were about $445 per month (in constant

2000 dollars), also rising over time. Drug penetration rates were always higher than non-drug

penetration rates. There is substantial variation in the payment rate across counties — the

standard deviation is 18% of the mean in 1993. Not reported in the tables, there is also

substantial variation in the payment rate within a given county across time, with a within–county



19
  Plans H and I differ in other small respects. Plan I covers Medicare Part B excess charges and at-home recovery
expenses while Plan H does not. Plan J offers the same benefits as Plan I with the addition of covering Medicare
Part B deductible and preventive care.

                                                       19
standard deviation of $37.20 Many counties have no M+C plans, or no plans with drug coverage.

For instance, by the end of our sample period, 34.6% of counties in our sample have no M+C

plan with drug coverage.

         Table 4 provides some evidence on the relation between the changes in the M+C payment

rate and the changes in M+C enrollment and elderly mortality rates, over the period 1993 to

2000. This table is meant to give an indication of the forces that will identify the estimates, as the

fixed effects IV estimator with one (endogenous) regressor would be the ratio of the coefficients

of the differenced regressions of mortality on the instruments to the endogenous regressor on the

instruments. The changes in the payment rate are broken into five quintiles. As we might expect,

higher increases in the payment rate change are correlated with higher increases in the total M+C

enrollment rate.21 The trend is most pronounced between the third and fourth quintiles of the

payment increase. Breaking down the enrollment change into drug and non-drug enrollment, a

movement from the fourth to the fifth quintile is associated with an increase in drug enrollment,

but a decrease in non-drug enrollment. In other words, a moderate increase in the payment rate

between 1993 and 2000 was linked with a general increase in managed care enrollment, but a

large increase in the payment rate was linked specifically with an increase in drug coverage and

not with non-drug coverage.

         Turning to the elderly mortality rate, in the fourth payment quintile (the payment quintile

associated with an increase in non-drug HMO enrollment) there is a large increase in elderly

mortality rates. However, there is an equally large decrease in mortality in the fifth quintile of the


20
   The within-county standard deviation is $26.3 prior to the passage of the BBA, and $15.2 afterwards. The smaller
number after the BBA enactment is consistent with the fact that innovations to the payments are largely divorced
from shocks in the county after the enactment. The smaller size of both of these figures relative to the overall figure
shows that the BBA substantially altered the payment scheme, and hence provides us with a useful source of
variation.
21
   The quintiles for the changes in penetration rates do not sum to 3, because they all have mass points at 0, resulting
from counties that had zero penetration in 1993 and 1998.

                                                          20
payment rates which is the quintile associated with a large increase in drug M+C enrollment.

These results foreshadow our regression analysis findings and suggest that the relationship

between mortality and M+C enrollment will indeed be a function of the benefits offered by the

M+C plans.

5. Results

Parameter estimates and implied magnitudes

       Table 4 presents the main results of the paper, estimates of equations (7) and (8). We

present 7 specifications, which differ in the estimation methods, dependent variables and

controls. Specification 1 provides an OLS regression of the log model (8) of the impacts of M+C

drug and non-drug coverages with only year dummies as controls, as a baseline comparison. In

this and all other specifications, the omitted category is Medicare FFS. This specification shows

that a higher M+C non-drug coverage is associated with a lower elderly mortality rate than

Medicare FFS within a year, although without a statistically significant difference, and that M+C

drug coverage is associated with a still lower elderly mortality rate, with a statistically significant

difference from Medicare FFS. This regression is consistent with the idea that managed care and

drug coverage both lower mortality, but also consistent with a number of other hypotheses based

on selection.

       Specification 2 adds in county and year fixed effects and the detailed demographic

controls noted in the table. Unlike Specification 1, this specification shows that counties with an

increase in managed care penetration had an increase in mortality. Consistent with Specification

1, the increase in mortality is higher for counties with non-drug coverage than with drug

coverage. While this specification does control for fixed effects, it does not directly use any

credible source of exogenous variation in the managed care penetration rate or in drug coverage.


                                                  21
        Specification 3 provides our base specification, and uses the fixed effects IV model with

the instruments and forward-mean-differencing procedure detailed in Section 3. We estimate the

impact of M+C drug coverage on elderly mortality to be very similar to Specification 2.

However, we estimate the impact of M+C non-drug coverage to be much worse, with a

coefficient that is almost 7 times as large as in Specification 2. Thus, our main finding is that

M+C plans without drug coverage are significantly worse than ones with drug coverage, but that

M+C plans with drug coverage have no significant mortality impact relative to Medicare FFS.

        Using the coefficients from this specification, we find that moving 1% of Medicare

enrollees, all with the mean mortality rate of 5.08%, from an M+C non-drug plan to an M+C

drug plan would reduce the elderly mortality rate by .014 percentage points. There are other plan

attributes besides drug coverage which may be (positively or negatively) correlated with the drug

benefit. These include the benefit offerings noted in Section 2 as well as the possibility of wider

physician networks. We believe that these attributes are unlikely to have a mortality impact and

hence that our estimated effect is due to drug coverage.22 This information in combination with

the 34.3 million elderly Medicare enrollees in 2000 implies that the 1% move would save about

4,900 lives.

        Evaluating the average economic value of M+C drug coverage is somewhat difficult,

because it depends on the expected number of years and quality of the remaining life for each

person under consideration for receiving drug treatment. However, we can give some plausible

bounds to this value. Conservatively, we assume that the mortality gains from drug coverage are

limited to only one extra year of life, we value only mortality gains and we use $75,000 as the

net value of a life year (following Cutler and McClellan, 2001). This yields an average per-capita

22
  Importantly, very few M+C non-drug enrollees had drug coverage, due to the fact that alternative drug coverages
generally duplicate M+C benefits. For instance, only 9% of M+C non-drug enrollees had drug coverage in 2000,
according to the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey.

                                                       22
value of drug coverage of approximately $1,125. An upper bound calculation can be made by

assuming that a death avoided returns a person to the mean health status and life expectancy of

her age cohort. Using data on mortality probabilities and life expectancy from life tables for 2000

from the National Center for Health Statistics (Arias, 2002) and the same net value of a life year

yields an average per-capita value of approximately $10,200. It is instructive to compare these

values to the cost of drug coverage provision. The typical difference in the annual premiums

between Medigap G and J plans (which are similar in benefits except that only J offers drug

coverage) in 2000 is about $760.23 Thus, even our conservative estimates suggest that drug

coverage adds a substantial benefit over its cost.

           Understanding the relative mortality impact of Medicare FFS and M+C is more subtle.

Due to data limitations, Medicare FFS enrollees with and without drug coverage are combined

into one category. Davis et al. (1999) report that 63% of Medicare FFS enrollees had drug

coverage in 1995. It is likely that Medicare FFS enrollees for whom drug coverage would lower

the probability of mortality are more likely to obtain drug coverage than others, implying that

63% is a likely lower bound on FFS drug coverage for enrollees for whom drug coverage would

lower mortality. The M+C drug coefficient can be interpreted as capturing both the effect of

moving a group to HMOs and of moving some fraction of the group, likely less than 37%, to

drug coverage. Thus, our coefficient estimates are consistent with the notion that HMOs have no

overall mortality impact.

           Specifications 4–7 provide different robustness checks of the findings in Specification 3.

Specification 4 drops the log mortality rate of middle-aged individuals, age 50–59, as a

regressor. This statistically significant control is potentially important because it will proxy for a

variety of time-varying local attributes that can affect mortality and are potentially correlated
23
     Authors’ calculation using AARP data from California.

                                                         23
with the instruments, such as shifting unobserved local demographic patterns or time-varying

local changes to practice style. We find that dropping this younger mortality rate results in

estimated effects of M+C drug and non-drug coverage that are virtually unchanged from

Specification 3. The implication is that while the middle-aged mortality rate in a county is an

important predictor for the elderly mortality rate, the above effects for which it proxies are not

correlated with the instruments, both conditional on all the other regressors. We believe that the

stability of the results across these specifications also provides further evidence against other

potential non-included regressors influencing our main estimated coefficients.

       Specification 5 uses the same controls and instruments as the base but with the linear

model in (7) instead of the log model in (8). Although the coefficients are not directly

comparable to those of the base because of the different dependent variable, we find the same

relative impacts as in the base. In addition, the magnitudes are very similar, with the 1% move

from M+C non-drug to drug plans also reducing the elderly mortality rate by .014 percentage

points. We prefer using the log specification because it allows for the proportional scaling of

factors such as the middle-aged mortality rate.

       Specification 6 reports results from the same specification as the base but using standard

fixed effects IV instead of the forward mean differenced procedure. This procedure generates

coefficients that imply a similar, but slightly higher mortality impact from both the M+C drug

and non-drug than in the base specification. This suggests that the bias from the short panel and

instruments that are not strictly exogenous is small.

       Specification 7 is similar to the base but adds in a state-level proxy for the log Plan H

Medigap premium. We obtain results that are very similar to the base. The Medigap coefficient,

which we do not report in the table, is small and insignificant, with a t statistic of –.54. This



                                                  24
variable is likely not significant in part because it is a rough proxy of the availability of

supplemental coverage and/or because there may be little demand elasticity to Medigap

premiums among enrollees for whom drug coverage might affect mortality. We do not include

the premium for our other specifications because of its lack of significance and the fact that the

premium data are not available everywhere and hence would lower the sample size. We also

estimated, but do not report, specifications with fewer instruments. These specifications also give

similar results.24

        Table 5 provides evidence on the impact of M+C drug and non-drug coverage on a

number of different groups. All specifications use the FE IV forward-mean-differenced method

to control for endogenous selection into plan type. The specifications follow the base with some

small deviations in the controls, noted in the table.

        Specifications 1 and 2 report the impact of M+C drug and non-drug coverage on

mortality for the 65–74 and 75+ age groups, respectively. We find results that are similar to the

base specification, with some small differences. The M+C drug coefficient for the 65–74 group

changes sign to negative but is still insignificant. The non-drug M+C coefficients remain

significant and large, though are slightly different in magnitudes than the base.

        Specifications 3 and 4 estimate the impact of M+C drug and non-drug coverage on

disease–specific elderly mortality rates. We chose the two diseases with the largest mortality for

the elderly, cancer and heart disease. We find that M+C drug enrollment causes a significantly

positive increase in the heart disease mortality rate, with M+C non-drug enrollment causing an

even larger impact, though not significant. These results suggest that managed care (as opposed

to the lack of drug coverage) causes worse outcomes for cardiac care, consistent with evidence


24
   These specifications are available in an appendix to the NBER Working Paper version of this paper,
http://www.nber/org/papers/w10204.

                                                 25
that managed care provides less intensive cardiac care (see Chernew, Gowrisankaran and

Fendrick, 2002) and that intensive cardiac treatments have a beneficial mortality impact (see

Cutler, 2004). The results for cancer are somewhat different, in that M+C drug coverage causes a

small and insignificant negative impact on mortality, while M+C non-drug coverage has a

positive but insignificant impact on mortality. During our sample period, it is unlikely that

intensive cancer treatments had substantial mortality impacts. However, anti-nausea drugs,

which may contribute to survivorship by increasing the tolerance for chemotherapy, are mostly

not covered by Medicare FFS.

       Specification 5 estimates the impact of M+C coverage on the 50 to 59 year old mortality

rate, in order to test whether there are spillovers from Medicare managed care enrollment into the

non-Medicare population. We include the commercial managed care penetration rate for this

regression, in order to control for the health care of this cohort. The coefficients on the M+C

penetration rates have the same sign as in Table 5 and are similar in magnitude to the base

estimates, but are insignificant. Thus, it is unclear from these results whether there are spillovers

from the Medicare managed care market to other forms of managed care.

Specification tests

       The causal interpretation of our results above depends crucially on our assumption of

exogenous instruments. Accordingly, we have performed a number of statistical tests of the

validity and usefulness of our instruments, all using our base specification, Table 4 Specification

3.

       First, we tested the power of our instruments, by performing first-stage regressions of the

endogenous regressors d tc and n tc on the instruments and exogenous regressors, as suggested by

Bound, Jaeger and Baker (1995). As in the base specification, our tests forward mean difference


                                                 26
variables to allow for fixed effects. These tests show that the instruments are strong predictors.

We can strongly reject the null hypothesis that the instruments do not enter in these regressions,

         (             )                          (       )
with F 38,464 = 11.94, p = .00 for d tc and F 37,464 = 2.33, p = .00 for n tc , using clustered

residuals. The reason for this result is that the substantial within-county variation in the payment

rates is driving M+C enrollment and drug benefits. We also jointly estimated the same two

equations with a multivariate regression, in order to test whether the coefficients apart from the

fixed effects are the same across the two equations. The test strongly rejects the coefficients

                           (       )
being the same with F 99,3498 = 12.87, p = .00 . This implies that the first-stage projections of

d tc and n tc are significantly different from each other, which is necessary to jointly identify the

effects of drug and non-drug managed care coverage.

          Second, we provide evidence on the serial correlation of the residual health shocks ! tc ,

since our main identifying assumption is a lack of correlation between ! t " 3,c and ! tc . Although

this assumption is not directly testable, we can obtain some evidence by examining the

correlation of the residual from a reduced-form regression of the dependent variable log      ( )
                                                                                                m tc
                                                                                               1! m tc



on all exogenous variables, including the instruments and fixed effects. We estimate this

reduced-form regression specifying a within-county AR(1) process for the residual, and find an

estimated correlation of ! = .1478 , which implies that the estimated correlation after 3 years is

!3 = .0032 . This does not seem consistent with a sizeable, positive serial correlation between

! t " 3,c and ! tc .

          Third, we tested for the endogeneity of M+C drug and non-drug coverage, by performing

a Wu (1973) – Hausman (1978) test of our base specification against a specification without

instruments, as given in Table 4, Specification 2. We can reject the exogeneity of the M+C

                                                  27
                           ()
coverage rates, with ! 2 2 = 4.24, p = .01 .

           Last, we performed the LM test of overidentifying restrictions created by the fact that we

have 39 instruments but only 2 endogenous regressors.25 We fail to reject the assumption that the

                                        ( )
instruments are exogenous, with ! 2 37 = 33.2, p = .65 .

Explanation of our findings

           A likely explanation for our finding is that M+C drug coverage encourages the elderly to

take life–extending prescription drugs by lowering the marginal cost of drugs. There is

substantial support for this in the literature. Anecdotally, physicians report that financially

constrained patients “extend” their prescriptions by taking their drugs less frequently than

prescribed (Lagnado, 1999).

           The literature provides data-driven supporting evidence for this explanation. In 1995,

86.6% of Medicare beneficiaries had a prescription filled (Adams et al., 2001). Several studies

(Lillard, Rogowski and Kington (1999), Davis et al. (1999) and Stuart and Grana (1998)) find a

positive correlation between prescription insurance coverage and prescription drug usage in the

elderly population. Poisal and Murray (2001) estimate that Medicare enrollees without drug

coverage fill 2.4 fewer prescriptions than enrollees with drug coverage. Poisal and Chulis (2000)

find that among Medicare enrollees with 3 or more limitations to the activities of daily living

(ADLs), those without drug coverage use 43% less prescription drugs in dollar terms than the

same population with prescription drug coverage. Using data from employer-based health

coverage, Goldman et al. (2004) finds that increased out-of-pocket expenditures reduced the use

of drugs for a variety of conditions.

           None of these studies attempts to control for unobserved selection into drug coverage or

25
     See Hansen (1982).

                                                  28
managed care. While these studies generally examine relatively small samples, without enough

power to identify mortality differences, some recent studies (Lucarelli, 2006 and Yang, Gilleskie,

and Norton, 2004) find that increased drug coverage reduces mortality among the elderly.

       It is also useful to compare our estimated magnitude of 4,900 lives from the 1%

movement to drug coverage to the literature. We perform “back-of-the-envelope” calculations

for three common conditions for which data were available, high cholesterol, hypertension and

diabetes, using the following formula: ! mortality = base mortality rate ! (% increase in

mortality from condition) ! prevalence of condition in Medicare population ! % reduction in

mortality from prescription drug use ! % reduction in prescription drug use from lack of

insurance ! 1% ! size of Medicare population. We use a conservative base mortality rate of

3.5%. Adams et al. (2001) report that the absence of drug coverage reduces the use of

hypertension drugs for individuals with high blood pressure by 23%. We use this estimate for all

three conditions, as it appears to be roughly the median estimate from the sparse literature on

compliance.

       Our estimates indicate a large impact of drug coverage among patients with high

cholesterol. This condition is prevalent⎯50% of the elderly population has blood serum

cholesterol levels in excess of 240 mg/dL (National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey

III). Pekkanen et al. (1990) reports that serum blood cholesterol in excess of 240 mg/dL

increases mortality risk by 350% for the elderly while Shepherd et al. (1995) find that

pharmaceutical treatment for high blood cholesterol reduces all-cause mortality by 22%.

Combining the estimates yields a savings of 700 lives from drug coverage for high cholesterol

enrollees. Performing similar calculations for hypertension and diabetes yield mortality increases




                                               29
of 240 and 330 lives, respectively.26 Since our “back-of-the-envelope” calculations of three

common conditions result in an expected increase of approximately 1,260 lives, this suggests

that our estimated value of 4,900 lives is plausible.

Adverse selection and equilibrium provision of quality

        Our model implies the possibility of consumer selection into managed care plans based

on their attributes. Our results from Table 4 suggest that there is in fact substantial adverse

selection. In particular, a comparison of Specifications 1 and 3 shows that even though mortality

rates for M+C plans are substantially lower than for Medicare FFS, the causal effect of these

plans is not to lower mortality rates. This shows that managed care plans are attracting a

selection of patients who are less likely to die than the average Medicare FFS enrollee.27

        Comparing Specifications 2 and 3, we see that a substantial portion of the relative

selection into non-drug plans is based on the unobserved severity of illness, ! tc . In particular, an

examination of the coefficients suggests that non-drug M+C enrollees are in significantly better

health than drug M+C enrollees, and that this adverse selection is based on different levels of the

unobserved severity of illness, ! tc . We verified this pattern by performing simple regressions

using fitted values of ! tc from the base specification. A regression of d tc on ! tc and year

dummies yielded a positive coefficient on ! tc with a t-statistic of 5.13, while a similar regression

of n tc on ! tc yielded a negative coefficient with a t-statistic of –5.36.

        Recall that our model has two potential sources of selection, enrollees and HMOs. The

signs of the correlations noted above suggest that enrollees with high unobserved illness severity

are disproportionately selecting drug plans, which is the demand response that we might expect.

26
  The inputs into the mortality formula for hypertension and diabetes are available from the authors upon request.
27
  Consistent with this, Town and Liu (2003) show that M+C enrollees have lower medical costs than Medicare FFS
enrollees.

                                                       30
Any HMO response to unobserved illness severity is likely to be the opposite, as there is likely a

complementarity between illness severity and the cost of prescription drug treatment. Thus, the

results imply that any HMO response to unobserved illness severity is dominated by the

consumer response. This is consistent with the fact that information about enrollee health shocks

may take longer to filter to firms than to the enrollees themselves and the fact that HMOs must

make decisions annually, while enrollees can make decisions monthly. Note that managed care

plans attract people with low observed illness severity, consistent with HMO selection, but

possibly also with enrollee selection.

       Although adverse selection was present in the market for M+C drug plans, it did not

cause this market to collapse. For instance, 71% of M+C enrollees were enrolled in drug plans, a

figure that was increasing over time. Moreover, in 2000, 87% of M+C enrollees in plans without

drug coverage had at least one plan with drug coverage in their county. This contrasts with other

situations where plans with generous benefits have gone into a death spiral and collapsed after

the payer implemented a payment scheme where the generous plans were reimbursed at the same

rate as the less generous plans, similar to M+C (see Cutler and Reber, 1998). The likely reasons

why the M+C drug market did not collapse includes the facts that the majority of plans capped

the drug benefit to limit the adverse selection, that M+C plans attracted healthy elderly people on

average (which compensated for the fact that drug plans attracted less healthy people than non-

drug plans), and that in many counties the government reimbursement during our sample period

was generous thereby overcoming incentives induced by adverse selection.

       In spite of the fact that the M+C market did not collapse, our results suggest that its

equilibrium outcomes may not be optimal. Specifically, since we find that there are significant

net benefits associated with HMOs offering drug coverage, in the presence of adverse selection



                                                31
and insufficient reimbursement the number of plans offering that benefit is likely to be less than

is optimal. There is some evidence that this is occurring in the Medicare HMO market. Among

counties/years in our sample with an HMO present, 23.6% had no HMO that offered drug

coverage. In addition, the literature has found that non-drug M+C plans offer more benefits than

drug plans, and that these non-drug benefits are valued by enrollees.28 Given that these non-drug

benefits and drug benefits are very unlikely to be substitutes, this suggests that the market may

sometimes underprovide attributes besides drug coverage. Last, though we did not model this,

information problems may also cause further market failures. For instance, in 2000, 40% of non-

drug M+C enrollees were enrolled in a plan that once offered drug coverage, suggesting the

possibility that some enrollees without drug coverage did not know that their drug coverage had

been dropped.

6. Conclusions

        This study examines the impact the Medicare HMO program and drug coverage on the

elderly mortality rate using a fixed effects IV estimator that is consistent with endogenous

selection into managed care plans and drug coverage. We find that enrollment in an HMO that

does not provide drug benefits significantly increases mortality while enrollment in an HMO

offering drug coverage has no significant impact relative to Medicare FFS coverage. This finding

is robust across a variety of IV specifications and holds for different age groups of the elderly.

The magnitudes of our findings are large, but also consistent with the literature. Our findings

suggest that the benefits of drug coverage are much higher than the costs.

        The likely explanation for our results is that drug benefits causes Medicare enrollees to

use more drugs which extends their lives. While we do not have evidence on the potential impact
28
  Consistent with this explanation, McBride (1998) finds an inverted U-shape relationship between the payment rate
and the provision of M+C non-drug benefits while Town and Liu (2003) find an inverse correlation between the
value of the M+C non-drug benefit offered by the plan and the likelihood they offer drug benefits.

                                                       32
of drug coverage for Medicare FFS patients, we believe it will be similar since the methods of

service provision are similar across the two types of plans. Apart from their role in the provision

of drug benefits, HMOs appear to have little effect on mortality, although there is weak evidence

that their cancer treatment quality may be better than Medicare FFS but that their heart disease

treatment quality may be worse than Medicare FFS.

       Our results suggest several policy implications. Most directly, they imply that policies to

extend drug coverage to the elderly would be beneficial. In addition, they imply that moving

Medicare enrollees towards managed care plans is not likely to have any adverse mortality

consequences. The passage of the 2003 MMA is evidence that Congress made similar

assessments, although the specifics of the MMA Part D drug coverage are significantly different

from the typical M+C drug coverage that we evaluate. Our results also imply that there are

substantial selection differences between Medicare HMOs and Medicare FFS, and in particular,

that M+C non-drug plans tend to attract enrollees with a higher unobserved health status than

average. The unobserved nature of the selection also suggests that any attempts by the Medicare

administration to better adjust payments for observed patient risk status may not completely

eliminate the adverse selection. However, reimbursement schemes that paid plans more to

provide drug benefits to enrollees would alleviate this selection problem, and potentially help the

market function more efficiently.




                                                33
References



Adams, A., Soumerai, S., and Ross-Degnan, D. (2001). “Use of antihypertensive drugs by

       Medicare enrollees: Does type of drug coverage matter?” Health Affairs 20(1): 276-286.

Arellano, M. and Bond, S. (1991). “Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo

       evidence and an application to employment equations,” Review of Economic Studies 58:

       277-297.

Arias, E. (2002). United States Life Tables, 2000, National Vital Statistics Reports 1(2),

       Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.

Baker, L.C. and Brown, M.L. (1999). “Managed care, consolidation among health care

       providers, and health care: evidence from mammography,” RAND Journal of Economics

       30(2): 351-374.

Berry, S. (1994). “Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation,” RAND Journal

       of Economics 25(2): 242-62.

Bound, J., Jaeger, D.A., and Baker, R. (1995). “Problems with instrumental variables estimation

       when the correlation between the instruments and the endogenous explanatory variables

       is weak,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 90: 443-50.

Chernew, M., Gowrisankaran, G., and Fendrick, A.M. (2002). “Payer type and the returns to

       bypass surgery: evidence from hospital entry behavior,” Journal of Health Economics 21:

       451-474.

Cutler, David M. (2004). Your Money or Your Life. New York: Oxford University Press.

Cutler, David M. and McClellan, Mark (2001). “Is technological change in medicine worth it?”

       Health Affairs 20: 11-29.


                                               34
Cutler, David M., McClellan, Mark, and Newhouse, Joseph P. (2000). “How does managed care

       do it?” RAND Journal of Economics 31: 526-48.

Cutler, David M. and Reber, Sarah J. (1998). “Paying for health insurance: the trade-off between

       competition and adverse selection,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(2): 438-66.

Davis, M., Poisal, J., Chulis, G., Zarabozo, C., and Cooper, B. (1999). “Prescription drug

       coverage, utilization, and spending among Medicare beneficiaries,” Health Affairs 18(2):

       231-243.

Donabedian, A. (1985). The Methods and Findings of Quality Assessment and Monitoring: An

       Illustrated Analysis, Vol. 3. Ann Arbor, MI: Health Administration Press.

Dranove, D., Simon, C., and White, W. (2002). “Is managed care leading to consolidation in

       healthcare markets?” Health Services Research 27(3): 573-94.

Eggers, P.W., Frankenfield, D.L., Greer, J.W., McClellan, W., Owen, W.F. Jr., and Rocco, M.V.

       (2002). “Comparison of mortality and intermediate outcomes between Medicare dialysis

       patients in HMO and fee for service,” American Journal of Kidney Disorders 39(4): 796-

       804.

Glied, S. (2000). “Managed care,” in Handbook of Health Economics. Cuyler, A. and Newhouse,

       J., ed., Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

Goldman, D.P., Joyce, G.F., Escarce, J.J., Pace, J.E., Solomon, M.D., Laouri, M., Landsman,

       P.B., and Teutsch, S.M. (2004). “Pharmacy benefits and the use of drugs by the

       chronically ill,” Journal of the American Medical Association 291 (19): 2344-2350.

Hansen, L. (1982). “Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators,”

       Econometrica 50: 1029-54.

Hausman, J. (1978). “Specification tests in econometrics,” Econometrica 46: 1251-71.



                                               35
Keane, M.P. and Runkle, D.E. (1992). “On the estimation of panel-data models with serial

       correlation when instruments are not strictly exogenous,” Journal of Business and

       Economic Statistics 10: 1-9.

Keeler, E., Brook, R.H., Goldberg, G.A., Kamberg, C. J., and Newhouse, J.P. (1985). “How free

       care reduced hypertension in the health insurance experiment,” Journal of the American

       Medical Association 254: 1926 – 1931.

Lagnado, L. (1999). “Drug costs can leave elderly a grim choice: pills or other needs,” Wall

       Street Journal Nov. 11: A1.

Lee-Feldstein, A., Feldstein, P., Buchmueller, T., and Katterhagen, G. (2000). “The relationship

       of HMOs, health insurance, and delivery systems to breast cancer outcomes,” Medical

       Care 38(7):705-718.

Lichtenberg, F. (2002a). “Sources of U.S. longevity increase, 1960 – 1997.” Cambridge, MA:

       NBER Working Paper 8755.

Lichtenberg, F. (2002b). “The effect of changes in drug utilization on labor supply and per-capita

       output.” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper 9139.

Lillard, L., Rogowski, J., and Kington, R. (1999). “Insurance coverage for prescription drugs:

       effects on use and expenditures in the Medicare population,” Medical Care 37(9): 926-

       936.

Lucarelli, C. (2006). “An analysis of the Medicare prescription drug benefit.” Mimeo, Cornell

       University.

Maciejewski, M. L., Dowd, B., Call, K., and Feldman, R. (2001). “Comparing mortality and time

       until death for Medicare HMO and FFS beneficiaries,” Health Services Research 35(6):

       1245-1265.



                                               36
McAdams, D. and Schwarz, M. (2006). “Perverse incentives in the Medicare prescription drug

       benefit.” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper 12008.

McBride, T. (1998). “Disparities in access to Medicare managed care plans and their benefits,”

       Health Affairs 17(6): 170-180.

Miller, R.H. and Luft, H.S. (2002). “HMO plan performance update: an analysis of the literature,

       1997-2001,” Health Affairs 21(4): 63-86.

Pekkanen, J., Linn, S., Heiss, G., Suchindran, C.M., Leon, A., Rifkind, B.M., and Tyroler, H.A.

       (1990). “Ten-year mortality from cardiovascular disease in relation to cholesterol level

       among men with and without preexisting cardiovascular disease,” New England Journal

       of Medicine 322(24): 1700-1707.

Poisal, J. and Chulis, G. (2000). “Medicare beneficiaries and drug coverage,” Health Affairs

       19(2): 248-256.

Poisal, J. and Murray, L. (2001). “Growing differences between Medicare beneficiaries with and

       without drug coverage,” Health Affairs 20(2): 74-85.

Potosky, A.L., Merrill, R.M., Riley, G.F., Taplin, S.H., Barlow, W., Fireman, B.H., and Lubitz,

       J.D. (1999). “Prostate cancer treatment and ten year survival among group/staff HMO

       and fee-for-service Medicare patients,” Health Services Research 34(2): 525-46.

Roetzheim, R.G., Gonzalez, E.C., Ferrante, J.M., Pal, N., Van Durme, D.J., and Krischer, J.P.

       (2000). “Effects of health insurance and race on breast carcinoma treatments and

       outcomes,” Cancer 89(11): 2202-2213.

Riley, G., Lubitz, J., and Rabey, E. (1991). “Enrollee health status under Medicare risk contracts:

       An analysis of mortality rates,” Health Services Research 26(2): 137-163.

Riley, G., Rabey, E., and Kasper, J. (1989). “Biased selection and regression toward the mean in



                                                37
       three Medicare HMO demonstrations: A survival analysis of enrollees and disenrollees,”

       Medical Care 27(4): 337-347.

Sada, M.J., French, W.J., Carlisle, D.M., Chandra, N.C., Gore, J.M., and Rogers, W.J. (1998).

       “Influence of payor on use of invasive cardiac procedures and patient outcome after

       myocardial infarction the United States,” Journal of the American College of Cardiology

       31(7): 1474-1480.

Shepherd, J., Cobbe, S.M., Ford, I., Isles, C.G., Lorimer, A.R., MacFarlane, P.W., McKillop,

       J.H., and Packard, C.J. (1995). “Prevention of coronary heart disease with pravastatin in

       men with hypercholesterolemia,” New England Journal of Medicine 333(20): 1301-1307.

Stuart, B. and Grana, J. (1998). “Ability to pay and the decision to medicate,” Medical Care

       36(2): 202-211.

Town, R.J. and Liu, S. (2003). “The welfare impact of Medicare HMOs,” Rand Journal of

       Economics 34: 719-736.

Wu, D. (1973). “Alternative tests of independence between stochastic regressors and

       disturbances,” Econometrica 41: 733-50.

Yang, Z, Gilleskie, D., and Norton, E. (2004). “Prescription drugs, medical care, and health

       outcomes: a model of elderly health dynamics.” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper

       10964.




                                              38
                                       Table 1:
                                 Mortality Data Table




          Data Set                       Source                       Variables


                                National Center for Health
                                                              Mortality rates by age and
Multiple Cause of Death Data      Statistics ⎯ National
                                                                   cause of death
                                    Vitality Statistics
State-County-Plan Penetration
                                                             M+C enrollments by HMO
    file and M+C/AAPCC           Center for Medicare and
                                                             benefit structure and CMS
Standardized Per Capita Rates      Medicaid Services
                                                                   payment data
          of Payment

                                 Center for Medicare and     Medicaid enrollments by age
 Medicaid Program Statistics
                                   Medicaid Services                classification

                                                             Population by race, poverty
                                                              rates, per-capita income,
     Area Resource File            Area Resource File
                                                                number of MDs and
                                                                      hospitals.

                                                             Predicted population by age
Population Estimates Program      Bureau of the Census
                                                                 and sex categories


                                                                 Commercial HMO
         InterStudy                    InterStudy
                                                                    enrollment


                                                                 Medigap Premiums
     Medigap Premium                     AARP
                                                                    for Plan H




                                           39
                                           Table 2:
                              Summary statistics by county and year

          Variable                Entire sample              1993                     2000
  Mortality rate, age 65+
                                    5.08 (.52)            5.17 (.46)             5.04 (.56)
            (%)
 Mortality rate, age 65-74
                                    2.54 (.38)            2.64 (.36)             2.41 (.39)
            (%)
  Mortality rate, age 75+
                                    8.26 (.76)            8.59 (.66)             8.16 (.73)
            (%)
 Mortality rate, age 50-59
                                     .54 (.13)             .58 (.14)             .51 (.13)
            (%)
  Heart disease mortality
                                    1.73 (.28)            1.83 (.27)             1.64 (.27)
    rate, age 65+ (%)
 Cancer mortality rate, age
                                    1.00 (.18)            1.15 (.11)             1.11 (.12)
          65+ (%)
     MDs per capita
                                     2.5 (1.8)             2.3 (1.6)             2.6 (1.8)
       (thousands)
   Hosp. beds per capita
                                     3.4 (2.1)             3.9 (2.3)             3.0 (1.9)
        (thousands)
       Percent elderly              12.5 (3.9)            12.4 (3.6)             12.5 (3.8)
         Income
                                    $25.2 (6.7)          $20.9 ($4.5)          $29.7 ($7.8)
       (thousands)
   Unemployment rate
                                     5.0 (2.7)             6.5 (2.2)             3.9 (2.4)
           (%)
    Total population
                                    422 (626)             455 (766)              442 (654)
       (thousands)
 M+C drug penetration rate
                                    7.2 (12.0)             1.4 (5.1)            11.9 (14.9)
           (%)
  M+C drug penetration
                                    49.0 (50.0)           80.3 (40.0)           34.6 (47.6)
      rate = 0 (%)
 M+C non-drug penetration
                                     3.7 (7.8)             1.9 (5.1)             3.9 (8.5)
         rate (%)
 M+C non-drug penetration
                                    59.8 (49.0)           65.5 (47.5)           68.1 (46.7)
      rate = 0 (%)
  M+C monthly payment
                                    $445 ($84)            $398 ($70)            $497 ($72)
      rate (2000 $)
              N                       3,612                  409                      457

Note: each cell provides the mean value with the standard deviation in parentheses.



                                                  40
                                            Table 3:
                            Changes in payment rate, mortality, and
                                M+C enrollment, 1993-2000


                             Percentage      Percentage      Percentage      Percentage
  Quintile and range of
                           point change in point change in point change in point change in
   change in payment
                             total M+C     M+C non-drug      M+C drug          elderly
          rate:
                             enrollment      enrollment      enrollment       mortality

            1
                                -1.3                -.89            -.40              .016
       [$40 – $80]

            2
                                -.16                .11             -.26              .019
       [$81 – $95]

           3
                                -.47             .0075              -.47             -.030
      [$96 – $107]

            4
                                 .20                1.1             -.93              .050
      [$108 – $124]

            5
                                 1.8             -.0036             2.1              -.055
      [$125 – $216]

Note: Each cell provides the mean percentage point change of the given variable when the
change in the M+C payment rate is in the specified quintile, after subtracting the overall mean
change percentage point from 1993 to 2000.




                                               41
                                                            Table 4:
                                          Elderly mortality rate on M+C penetration rates

                          Dependent                          M+C         log (age
                                            M+C drug
                           variable                        non-drug       50–59             Estimation
                                            coverage                                                      N
                          using 65+                        coverage      mortality           method
                                              ( !d )
                          mortality                          (!n)          rate)


                    (1)   log   ( )
                                 m tc
                                1! m tc
                                             –.162**
                                              (.034)
                                                            –.043
                                                            (.049)
                                                                                       OLS with only
                                                                                       year dummies
                                                                                                         3,605
No IV




                    (2)   log   ( )
                                 m tc
                                1! m tc
                                               .027
                                              (.015)
                                                            .047**
                                                             (.018)
                                                                           .035**
                                                                            (.008)
                                                                                        Fixed effects    3,605



                                ( )
                                                                                       Forward mean
                                               .016         .314**         .026**
Base




                                 m tc
                    (3)   log                                                           differenced      3,597
                                1! m tc       (.040)         (.110)         (.008)
                                                                                           FE IV


                                ( )
                                                                                       Forward mean
                                 m tc          .014         .320**
                    (4)   log                                                           differenced      3,597
                                1! m tc       (.041)         (.111)
                                                                                           FE IV
                                                                                       Forward mean
Robustness checks




                             m tc             .0008        .0149**         .238**
                    (5)                                                                 differenced      3,597
                                             (.0019)         (.005)         (.072)
                                                                                           FE IV


                    (6)   log   ( )
                                 m tc
                                1! m tc
                                               .039
                                              (.043)
                                                            .353**
                                                             (.123)
                                                                           .032**
                                                                            (.009)
                                                                                              FE IV      3,597



                                ( )
                                                                                       Forward mean
                                 m tc          .047         .420**         .029**
                    (7)   log                                                           differenced      2,971
                                1! m tc       (.044)         (.125)         (.009)
                                                                                      FE IV, Medigap

Note: All specifications include year fixed effects. Specifications 2 through 6 include the
following controls: percent elderly in Medicaid, percent of population 65 and over, percent of
population in poverty, log per capita income, unemployment rate, MDs and hospital beds per
capita, percent white, black and Hispanic, five regional time trends, the percent of elderly at each
age/sex cell and county fixed effects. Specification 7 includes these controls and the log of the
Medigap Plan H premium. All standard error calculations are clustered at the county level. The
instrument set is as specified in Section 3.

** Significant at the 1% level
* Significant at the 5% level


                                                                42
                                               Table 5:
                  Mortality rates for different groups on M+C penetration rates

        Dependent variable                               M+C
                                   M+C drug                             log (age 50–59
          using log   ( )
                       m tc
                      1! m tc
                                 coverage ( ! d )
                                                       non-drug
                                                     coverage ( ! n )
                                                                        mortality rate)
                                                                                           N


           Mortality rate             .038               .277*              .030**
  (1)                                                                                     3,597
             age 75+                 (.049)              (.129)              (.010)


           Mortality rate            –.040               .370**             .022**
  (2)                                                                                     3,597
            age 65–74                (.056)               (.146)             (.014)


          Heart disease              .167*                .311               .004
  (3)                                                                                     3,597
         mortality rate 65+          (.071)              (.171)             (.015)


         Cancer mortality            –.118                .179              .035**
  (4)                                                                                     3,597
            rate 65+                 (.064)              (.173)              (.019)


           Mortality rate            –.028                .223
  (5)                                                                                     3,479
            age 50–59                (.089)              (.258)


Note: All estimation is performed using the forward-mean-differenced FE IV estimator. All
specifications include the following controls: percent population in Medicaid for age range,
percent of population 65 and over, percent of population in poverty, log per capita income,
unemployment rate, MDs and hospital beds per capita, percent white, black and Hispanic, five
regional time trends, the percent of elderly at each age/sex cell and year and county fixed effects.
Specifications 3 and 4 include the heart disease and cancer mortality rates for age 50-59,
respectively. Specification 5 includes the commercial HMO penetration rate. All standard error
calculations are clustered at the county level. The instrument set is as specified in Section 3.

** Significant at the 1% level
* Significant at the 5% level




                                                    43
                                        Appendix Table 1:
                              Estimation using alternate instrument sets


                                                          M+C
                                     M+C drug                            log (age 50–59
             Instruments                                non-drug                               N
                                   coverage ( ! d )                      mortality rate)
                                                      coverage ( ! n )


           39 instruments:
                                        .016              .314**             .026**
  (1)   see base specification                                                               3,597
                                       (.040)              (.110)             (.008)
               in paper


            13 instruments:
              current-year              .009               .202              .027**
  (2)                                                                                        3,597
         instruments from the          (.040)             (.126)              (.008)
           base specification

            8 instruments:
        same as (2) except for         –.0155             .323*              .026**
  (3)   no quintiles or squared                                                              3,597
                                       (.042)             (.163)              (.008)
                log r̂tc

            10 instruments:
          same as (2) except            .008               .216             .030**
  (4)                                                                                        3,605
         without neighboring           (.040)             (.129)            (.0079)
         county information

        8 instruments: same as
        (4) except without log         –.0028             .323*              .026**
  (5)                                                                                        3,605
            r̂tc or its square         (.044)             (.138)              (.008)




Note: All estimation is performed using the forward-mean-differenced FE IV estimator. Dependent
variable is log   ( ) using 65+ mortality. Specifications include the following controls: percent
                    m tc
                   1! m tc

elderly in Medicaid, percent of population 65 and over, percent of population in poverty, log per
capita income, unemployment rate, MDs and hospital beds per capita, percent white, black and
Hispanic, five regional time trends, the percent of elderly at each age/sex cell and year and county
fixed effects. All standard error calculations are clustered at the county level. Specification 1 is the
base specification, also in Table 4, Specification 3.

** Significant at the 1% level
* Significant at the 5% level
