                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          DOES THE LENGTH OF MATERNITY LEAVE
                               AFFECT MATERNAL HEALTH?

                                             Pinka Chatterji
                                             Sara Markowitz

                                          Working Paper 10206
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10206


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




We gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from Mike Grossman, Dhaval Dave and Frank Heiland. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Pinka Chatterji and Sara Markowitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Does the Length of Maternity Leave Affect Maternal Helath?
Pinka Chatterji and Sara Markowitz
NBER Working Paper No. 10206
January 2004
JEL No. I1

                                             ABSTRACT

The objective of this paper is to investigate the impact of the length of maternity leave on maternal

health in a sample of working mothers. Two measures of depression and a measure of overall health

are used to represent maternal health. Ordinary Least Squares models provide baseline estimates,

and instrumental variables models account for the potential endogeneity of the return-to-work

decision. The findings suggest that returning to work later may reduce the number or frequency of

depressive symptoms, but the length of time before returning to work is not associated with a lower

probability of being a likely case of clinical depression. Similarly, there is little evidence that longer

maternity leave impacts physical and mental health as measured by frequent outpatient visits during

the first six months after childbirth.

Pinka Chatterji
Center for Multicultural Mental Health Research
120 Beacon Street
Somerville, MA 02143
and NBER
pchatterji@charesearch.org

Sara Markowitz
NBER
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016
and Rutgers University
smarkow@andromeda.rutgers.edu
       In the United States, 51% of mothers of infants currently work outside of the home

(Bureau of Labor Statistics 2003). Among mothers who return to work during the first year after

childbirth, almost all return to work by the third month (Klerman and Leibowitz 1994). Given

the large number of mothers who are balancing employment with the care of a young infant,

there has been increasing interest in researching the effects of maternal employment during

infancy on child health and development. Recent studies suggest that some forms of maternal

employment during the child’s first year are associated with subsequent increases in behavior

problems and negative effects on children’s cognitive development (Brooks-Gunn et al. 2002,

Waldfogel et al. 2002, Blau and Grossberg 1992, Baum 2003).

       The results of previous studies suggest that making longer maternal leave available to

working mothers may have real benefits for children. However, despite the interest in the impact

of the length of maternal leave on children’s outcomes, there has been very little research on how

the length of maternal leave after childbirth may impact maternal health and well-being. This

information is important not only from an individual mother’s perspective, but from a policy

perspective as well. Although the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 was motivated by

concerns about the health of infants and postpartum women, there is little empirical evidence

regarding whether or not longer maternity leave actually affects maternal health (Hyde 1995).

Moreover, some states have recently passed or are considering legislation that would mandate

businesses to provide paid family leave. This policy change would likely increase the length of

maternity leave but at a cost to states, employees and businesses Without information about the

health impact of longer maternal leave after childbirth, it is difficult to weigh the costs and

benefits of these proposed state-level policy changes.




                                                  1
       The objective of this paper is to inform the debate over family leave policy by

investigating how the length of maternal leave affects maternal health in a sample of mothers

who returned to work after childbirth. Data used in the paper come from the National Maternal

and Infant Health Survey of 1988. We examine the impact of the timing of returning to work on

two aspects of maternal health. Maternal mental health is measured by the Center for

Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D), a widely-used screening tool for depression.

A second measure of maternal health is represented by a dummy variable indicating whether or

not the mother had at least 3 outpatient visits for any health problems during the 6 months after

childbirth. We estimate baseline models using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) methods and then

address the potential endogeneity of the return-to-work decision using instrumental variables

(IV) methods.

       The results indicate that among employed mothers of infants, returning to work later is

associated with fewer depressive symptoms, but it is not associated with the probability of

meeting a threshold of depressive symptoms that is indicative of clinical depression. Holding

other factors constant, an incremental increase in length of maternal leave from work would

reduce depressive symptoms on average by 5 to 10 percent. There is no statistically significant

association between the length of maternal leave and having had at least 3 postpartum outpatient

visits for mental and physical health problems.

       In this study, depressive symptoms are measured, on average, about 13 months after the

mother has returned to work. Therefore, the analysis suggests that longer maternal leave may

have lasting benefits for maternal mental health. These findings contribute to the growing

literature on maternal leave policy, which primarily focuses on the benefits of leave for infant




                                                  2
health and development, by demonstrating that longer maternal leave also may have benefits for

the health of mothers.



   1   Returning to work and maternal health

   Theoretical Motivation

       Previous research suggests that the postpartum work experience is challenging for many

employed mothers. Mothers who have recently returned to the workforce have to balance dual,

time-intensive roles, while also dealing with the health problems and life changes that all

postpartum women, employed or not employed, typically face. These issues may include

physical recovery from childbirth, postpartum blues or depression, changes in marital

relationships and role identities, and infant health problems (Gjerdingen et al. 1993, Gjerdingen

et al. 1995, McGovern et al. 1997, Ellis and Hewitt 1985, Mercer 1985).

       The models of household production and the production of health (Becker 1965,

Grossman 1972) illustrate the problem and provide the motivation for this study. Consider the

utility function of a working mother which includes her own health and the health of her child,

both of which are produced with market goods and time. Utility is maximized subject to budget

and time constraints, where time is divided between time spent in the labor market, time spent

investing in the health and well-being of her child, and time spent investing in her own physical

and mental health. The optimal quantities of child health and maternal health demanded by the

mother depend on the marginal utilities and the shadow prices of these two commodities. The

shadow prices of child health and maternal health are the marginal costs associated with the

additional time and good inputs needed to produce an incremental unit of health.




                                               3
       An increase in the opportunity cost of time, which occurs when the mother re-enters the

labor force, increases the shadow prices of both maternal health and child health. However, the

net effect of the return to work on the quantities of maternal and child health demanded by the

mother depends on the relative strength of two effects. First, the pure income effect predicts that

the mother will demand more of both commodities (child health and maternal health). That is,

mothers who return to work earlier have more income, and therefore will demand more of all

commodities, compared to mothers who return to work later. Second, the rise in the opportunity

cost of time would induce substitution in consumption away from the commodity whose shadow

price has a relatively larger time component, since that commodity’s shadow price would rise in

relation to the shadow price of the other commodity, holding other factors constant.

       The substitution effect may induce an increase or a decrease in the quantity of maternal

health demanded, depending on the maternal and child health production processes. If the

production of maternal health is relatively more time intensive than the production of child

health, the return to work would induce a substitution away from maternal health. However, if

maternal health is relatively less time intensive than child health, the substitution and income

effects would predict an increase in maternal health as a result of the return to work. As a result,

the combined impacts of the income and substitution effects are theoretically ambiguous. It is

difficult to speculate on the relative time intensity of the production of child health versus mother

health; therefore, the direction of the total effect of returning to work on maternal health must be

studied empirically.

       At the empirical level, we hold household income constant in all of the models. As a

result, we capture a pure substitution effect rather than the net effect of the income and

substitution effect, as described above. The net effect of returning to work on maternal health is




                                                4
still ambiguous theoretically because it depends on the time intensity of producing maternal

health relative to the time intensity of producing child health.

Previous Research

       To the best of our knowledge, no previous study in the economics literature has explored

the effect of the length of maternity leave on maternal wellbeing. In the economics literature,

most of the research on maternal leave has focused on the impact of leave and leave policies on

labor market outcomes, such as employment, wages and job continuity (Baum 2003; Klerman

and Leibowitz 1999; Waldfogel 1998), and child health and development (Winegarden and

Bracy 1995, Ruhm 2000, Baum 2003). These latter studies suggest that longer maternity leave

has positive effects on children’s health and development.

       Winegarden and Bracy (1995) and Ruhm (2000) use time-series of data from European

countries to study the effect of paid maternal leave on child health. Both Winegarden and Bracy

and Ruhm find that longer paid leave is associated with reductions in infant mortality; Ruhm

additionally finds that longer maternal leave is associated with lower rates of young child

mortality. Baum (2003), using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,

demonstrates that returning to work within the first three months of life is associated with lower

cognitive test scores during childhood. These studies suggest that longer maternal leave after

childbirth may benefit infant health and development.

       A few studies from other disciplines have explored the impact of returning to work on the

mother’s health. In regards to physical health, employed postpartum women have higher rates of

respiratory infections, breast symptoms, and gynecologic problems compared to postpartum

women who are not employed (Gjerdingen et al. 1995, Gjerdingen et al. 1993). This research on

physical health is based on a sample of 436 first-time mothers in Minnesota. In regards to




                                                5
mental health, there is some mixed evidence that among employed mothers, returning to work

earlier increases depressive symptoms. Hyde et al. (1995), for example, uses a sample of 570,

mostly white mothers in Wisconsin to explore the postpartum employment experience. They

find that among mothers back at work four months postpartum, short length of maternal leave

increased the probability of depression, but only among mothers who also had marital concerns

and mothers who felt their jobs were unrewarding. Gjerdingen et al. (1994), based on a sample

of 436 married, employed, first-time mothers in Minnesota, find that returning to work within 24

weeks after childbirth, as well as longer work hours, are associated with poor mental health.

These studies are based on small, non-representative samples. Moreover, it is not clear whether

or not the association between shorter maternity leave and increased depressive symptoms is

causal.

          McGovern et al. (1997) address some of these problems by using a larger sample of 654

employed mothers in Minnesota, and by accounting for the possibility that the timing of the

return-to-work decision is endogenous. They find that maternity leave length has a positive

effect on mothers’ wellbeing, measured at about seven months postpartum using a generic

measure of mental health, vitality and role function. As identifying instruments, these

researchers use a set of variables that measure the infant’s health endowment (birth-weight and

gestation, congenital anomalies), the infant’s race, health insurance, maternal leave policies,

child care arrangements and job characteristics. These variables are shown in the analysis to be

reasonably adequate predictors of maternal leave length. However, it seems unlikely that they

can be validly left out of the maternal health equation. For example, there is evidence from other

studies that infant health and child care arrangements affect maternal stress and depression




                                                6
(McLennan et al. 2001, Mandl et al. 1999, Gjerdingen et al. 1995). No results from over-

identification tests are shown to justify these exclusions.

       McGovern et al. (1997) contribute to the limited literature on the effect of the length of

maternal leave on maternal wellbeing by addressing the potential endogeneity of the timing of

returning to work. We build on this study in the following ways. First, we use state-level labor

market conditions and state-level maternal leave policies as identifying instruments, rather than

the potentially endogenous individual characteristics used by McGovern et al. (1997). We

believe that state-level variables are more likely than individual-level variables to be exogenous

to the model.

       Second, we test the set of identifying instruments to gauge whether or not they can be

validly left out of the maternal health equation, and to determine whether or not they are

reasonably strong predictors of the length of maternal leave from work. We also estimate all

models using several sets of independent variables to see whether the estimates are sensitive to

the variables included in the model, some of which may be endogenous.

       Third, we improve upon McGovern et al. by using data from the National Maternal and

Infant Health Survey (NMIHS), which includes a national, racially diverse sample of mothers.

The McGovern et al. sample is limited to the Twin Cities region of Minnesota, and 91% of the

sample respondents are White. Because the NMIHS was a national survey that over-sampled

African-American and low birth-weight infants, our sample respondents come from all fifty

states and almost 50% of our analysis sample is non-White. It is important to note, however, that

the analysis sample used in the paper is not necessarily representative of employed mothers in

1988. Consequently, the results should still be generalized with caution.




                                                 7
     2   Modeling the Return- to-Work and Maternal Health Relationship

         This paper is based on the hypothesis that among mothers who were employed while

pregnant and who return to work during the first six months of the child’s life, longer leave from

work will impact maternal health, although the direction of the impact is theoretically

indeterminate. The study focuses on estimating the following equation:

1)       H = b0 + b1E + b2X + b3Y+ u + e.

This equation is specific to the mother/child dyad. The dependent variable H is a measure of

maternal health, which in our case is represented by two measures of depressive symptoms, and

a measure indicating whether or not the mother had at least 3 outpatient visits during the first 6

months after childbirth.

         We focus on maternal mental health as well as physical health because depression is the

leading cause of lost years of healthy life among women, as measured by disability-adjusted life

years (DALYs) (Murray and Lopez 1996). Depression is particularly common among women

with young infants, 10 to 20% of whom develop postpartum depression within six months of

delivery (Miller 2002). Moreover, maternal depression is important to study as an outcome

because it is associated with adverse outcomes for children, including insecure infant/mother

attachment and children’s behavior problems (Civic and Holt 2000, Martins and Gaffan 2000).

         The main independent variable of interest is E, the length of time after the birth of the

child when the mother returns to work. We hypothesize that returning to work will alter the

demand for maternal health, generating measurable differences in health status among women

with varying durations of time away from the labor force. The coefficient on E will show the

direction and magnitude of this effect.

         The vector X includes observed maternal factors that may affect maternal health, such as




                                                 8
the mother’s age, marital status, number of children, education, occupation, and income. The

vector Y includes observed child-specific factors that may influence maternal health, such as the

child’s health endowment. Specific details about the variables included are discussed below. In

addition to these measured variables, there may exist unobserved, individual-level factors that

are associated with both health status and employment decisions. These unobserved factors are

represented by u in Equation 1, and e is a random disturbance term.

       Initially, a standard ordinary least squares (OLS) model is used to estimate equation 1.

Estimating equation 1 by OLS, however, can lead to biased and inconsistent estimates if a

problem of reverse causality exists (e.g. postpartum health affects the timing of returning to

work), or if unobserved, mother-specific factors exist that influence both maternal health and

return-to-work decisions (e.g. u is correlated with E and H). It is difficult to predict the direction

of the bias – some mothers experiencing depressive symptoms and other health problems may

return to work later because of their health, but others may choose to return to work sooner, in an

effort to overcome postpartum health problems. We attempt to account for this problem using

instrumental variables (IV) methods, which purge the potentially endogenous return-to-work

variable of its correlation with the error term.

       The OLS and IV models are estimated with a set of basic covariates that are exogenous

from the mother’s perspective, and with a full set of covariates that includes potentially

endogenous variables such as smoking and occupation. The endogeneity of the timing of return-

to-work with respect to maternal health is tested using the Durbin-Wu-Hausman test, and all

models are estimated using robust standard errors that account for clustering of observations at

the state level. Additionally, the validity of the over-identifying restrictions is tested, and the

predictive power of the identifying instrumental variables is assessed.




                                                   9
   3   The National Maternal and Infant Health Survey

       This study uses data from the National Maternal and Infant Health Survey of

1988 (NMIHS). The objective of the NMIHS was to investigate the determinants of negative

pregnancy outcomes. The survey respondents were a national sample of women between 15 and

49 years old who had a pregnancy in 1988. The NMIHS over-sampled very low birthweight,

low birthweight and African-American infants. Initially, 26,355 women were sampled based on

birth certificates, death certificates, and reports of fetal death from 1988. The sample includs

13,417 women who had live births, 4,772 women who had fetal deaths and 8,166 women who

had infant deaths. This paper uses data only from NMIHS respondents who had live births in

1988 (USDHHS 1992).

       Of the 13,417 mothers who had live births, 9,953 completed the survey, a response rate

of 74 percent. On average, mothers of live births completed the NMIHS survey 17 months after

the child’s birth (USDHHS 1992). The NMIHS dealt with non-item response by imputing many

variables using the hot-deck imputation procedure (see USDHHS 1992 for more details about

this procedure). In most cases, this imputation affected less than 1 percent of respondents

(USDHHS 1992).

Analysis Sample

       We limit the sample to eligible respondents of at least 18 years of age who had worked at

any point during pregnancy, and who had returned to work by the time the infant was six months

old. We exclude mothers with infants older than 24 months at the time of the survey, mothers

who were no longer employed at the time of the interview, and mothers who are currently

pregnant with another child by the time of the survey. The sample is limited to mothers who




                                                10
returned to work within 6 months in order to ensure that depressive symptoms were measured

after the mother has returned to work. These exclusions reduce the sample size to 1,762

mothers.

        Limiting the sample to mothers who returned within 6 months eliminates the problem

that some mothers who were interviewed relatively early and who returned to work relatively

late actually completed the depression screener before they returned to work. We limit the

sample to adult mothers because the focus of the study is employment. Mothers who are

currently pregnant with another child are excluded because the new pregnancy may affect their

depressive symptoms and health services utilization.

Dependent Variables

1.      Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale

        The NMIHS survey includes a Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-

D) to measure depressive symptoms. The CES-D is one of the most widely used psychiatric

scales in existence. The scale captures symptoms of depression, and includes 20 items that focus

on mood, somatic problems, interactions with others, and motor functioning, such as “I felt

lonely,” “my sleep was restless,” and “I could not get going.”1

        The respondent is asked to respond to each item according to a 4-point Likert scale, with

higher values corresponding to higher frequency of the item in the past week. For example, for

the item “I felt lonely,” mothers responded either “less than 1 day” (zero points), “1-2 days” (1

point), 3-4 days (2 points), or 5-7 days (3 points). The final CES-D score is computed by adding

the points assigned to each item. The maximum score is 60 (20 items x maximum of 3 points per

item), and a score of 16 or higher is generally considered a likely case of clinically defined

1
  In the NMIHS, two items of the CES-D were imputed using the hot-deck method because of item non-response in
5 to 10 percent of cases. These two items were “people were unfriendly” and “I talked less than usual.”



                                                    11
depression. However, the CES-D scale does not correspond to a DSM-IV diagnosis of major

depression. It is used primarily as a screening tool for depression, not as a diagnostic tool (Eaton

et al. 2003).

        Because the CES-D is highly skewed to the right in these data, we use the natural log of

the total CES-D score as a dependent variable in this analysis. We also consider a dummy

variable indicating whether or not the respondent’s score is equal to or exceeds 16. This dummy

variable is not equivalent to a psychiatric diagnosis of depression, but it does capture respondents

who are experiencing many symptoms of depression, or several symptoms with high frequency,

in the past week (Eaton et al. 2003).

        Ideally, we would have liked to measure depression at the same point in time for all

mothers (e.g. when all infants were 1 year old). Unfortunately, this approach is not possible

because although all of the infants were born in 1988, the mothers did not complete the

depression screener when all of their infants were a particular age. It is possible that the timing

of return to work impacts the mother’s depressive symptoms differently depending on the current

age of the child. Although we do limit the sample to mothers whose children are 24 months old

or younger, this issue remains a limitation of the analysis. Since the youngest infant in the

sample was 6 months old at the time of the survey, the sample is effectively limited to mothers of

infants who are between 6 and 24 months old.

        In all of the models, we control for how long the mother has been back at work at the

time of the interview. This variable is likely to be negatively correlated with the timing of the

mother’s return to the labor force – mothers who took relatively long maternity leaves are more

likely to have returned to work more recently compared to mothers who took shorter leaves from




                                                12
work. For this reason, we examine the sensitivity of the estimates to the inclusion and exclusion

of this variable. Results are discussed below.

       The CES-D captures depressive symptoms measured when each respondent’s infant is 6

to 24 months old. About 50% of mothers experience increases in emotional reactivity for up to

several weeks following the birth of a child (Miller 2002). This period of “postpartum blues” is

transient and should be distinguished from postpartum depression, a mental disorder that affects

nearly 10 to 20% of mothers in the US within six months of delivery (Miller 2002). Postpartum

depression is defined as major depression that has its onset during the postpartum period, which

lasts for up to six months after delivery (American Psychiatric Association 1994). The CES-D

cannot be used to diagnose postpartum depression, or any other form of depression. However,

the CES-D may capture some symptoms associated with this condition. The 6 to 24 months

postpartum time period is well outside the period during which postpartum blues is prevalent, but

some mothers may be experiencing postpartum depression.

2.     Postpartum Utilization of Outpatient Health Services

       We capture another dimension of maternal health using a measure of the mother’s

postpartum health services utilization. NMIHS respondents were asked to report the number of

outpatient visits they made to a clinic or physician concerning their own physical or mental

health during the first six months after childbirth. The American College of Obstetricians and

Gynecologists recommends that healthy postpartum women have one outpatient visit 4 to 6

weeks after childbirth (American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of

Obstetricians & Gynecologists 1997). Since the NMIHS over-sampled low birth-weight infants,

who may be more likely than normal weight infants to have had complicated deliveries,

outpatient utilization may be higher than normal for the analysis sample, even if the mothers are




                                                 13
not experiencing postpartum health problems. For this reason, we measure maternal health using

a dummy variable set equal to one if the mother had at least 3 outpatient visits during the first 6

months after childbirth. This variable is a crude indicator of poor postpartum health.

         Clearly, using a measure of health services utilization to proxy maternal health has

limitations. Health care utilization is influenced by many factors other than health, and although

we can control for many of these factors (e.g. insurance status, health behaviors), some remain

unobserved. The use of IV methods will address the possibility that unobserved factors that are

associated with health services utilization are also correlated with the timing of return to work.

NMIHS respondents were not asked about the exact timing of outpatient visits, the reasons for

their outpatient visits, or physical health symptoms they experienced during the first six months

after childbirth.2 Moreover, they provided this information on health care utilization

retrospectively.

         Despite these limitations, considering health services utilization in addition to depressive

symptoms as outcomes enhances this analysis for several reasons. First, the timing of returning

to work may impact physical and well as mental health, and the utilization measure may capture

physical health problems. Second, respondents were asked about health care utilization that took

place within the first six months after childbirth. Since approximately 50% of the sample

returned to work within 8 weeks and over 75% returned within 12 weeks, this outcome captures

much of the short-term health impact of returning to work. In contrast, depressive symptoms

were measured more than a year (on average) after the mother has returned to work. Focusing



2
  Because the exact timing of the outpatient visits within the 6 month period is not known, we cannot be certain that
the outpatient visits occurred before or after the mother returned to work. This issue affects the interpretation of the
results. Preparing for the return-to-work (both physically and emotionally) could affect maternal health – therefore,
in these models, it is not clear whether it is the actual return to work or the preparation for returning to work that
affects outcomes. Although this distinction may not matter from a policy perspective, this problem remains a
limitation of the analysis.



                                                          14
on depressive symptoms alone, therefore, would limit the analysis to studying the effect of the

timing of returning to work on long-term, mental health of mothers. Considering both outcomes

allows one to study both the short and long term effects of the timing returning to work on

maternal health.

Independent Variables

        The main independent variable of interest in this study is the number of weeks after

giving birth when the mother returns to employment.3 This variable was constructed by NMIHS

based on the mother’s reported date of return to work and the child’s date of birth, which is

confidential and not provided to researchers. In the analysis sample, the mean child age when

the mother returned to work was 9 weeks. To proxy the intensity of work, we also include as a

covariate whether or not the mother worked part-time (defined as less than 35 hours) at the time

of the interview. Because this variable may be endogenous to the model, we examine the

sensitivity of the estimates to this variable by estimating models with and without part-time

work, as well as other job characteristics, as covariates.

        The timing of the return to work decision may be affected by policies such as the

youngest age at which most day care centers will admit a child (i.e. 6 or 8 weeks) or the length of

time covered by state-level family and medical leave laws (typically 6, 8, 12 or 16 weeks at the

time the respondents were surveyed). For this reason, we use as alternative variables a series of

dichotomous indicators for the following categories: 1) whether or not the mother returned to

work between 6 and 8 weeks postpartum; 2) whether or not the mother returned to work between

8 and 12 weeks postpartum; and 3) whether or not the mother returned to work later than 12


3
 We do not have information regarding whether or not the mother returned to the same employer. However,
previous research by Klerman & Leibowitz suggests that during the time period when NMIHS mothers gave birth,
most mothers who worked full-time during pregnancy continued to work for the same employer after childbirth
(Klerman & Leibowitz 1999).



                                                     15
weeks postpartum. These cutoffs are chosen to correspond with the second, third, and fourth

quartiles in the distribution of length of maternal leave in the analysis sample. Because returning

to work at or within 6 weeks postpartum represents the omitted category, the estimated effects of

these thresholds are relative to women who stay out of the labor market for the shortest period of

time.

        In addition to the length of leave from work, maternal depressive symptoms and

outpatient services utilization are likely to be influenced by numerous other personal and family-

level factors. Previous research suggests that important predictors of postpartum depression

include poor prenatal mental and physical health, low social support, concerns about child care

arrangements, young maternal age, and low income. (McGovern et al. 1997, Gjerdingen et al.

1995, Gjerdingen and Chaloner 1994, Gjerdingen et al. 1993, Gjerdingen and Froberg 1991,

Gjerdingen et al. 1991, Chaudron et al. 2001, Deal and Holt 1998). To proxy these factors, we

include the following variables in all of the models: (1) mother’s age in years; (2) mother’s

education (dummy indicators with high school graduate as the baseline, dropout, some college

completed, four-year college degree); (3) household income; (4) race/ethnicity (dummy

indicators with white as the baseline, African-American, Hispanic, Asian); (5) number of months

between return to work date and interview date; (6) the number of other children in the

household; and (7) a dummy variable indicating whether or not the mother is married.

        Previous research suggests that other factors, such as socioeconomic stresses, insurance

status, preexisting depression and health problems, and poor infant health may affect maternal

depression as well as health services use (McLennan et al. 2001, Mandl et al. 1999). For this

reason, in some models, we include the following measures of socioeconomic stress: (8) whether

or not the mother receives welfare, and (9) whether or not the mother has any kind of health




                                               16
insurance. Although we have no direct measures of the mother’s physical and mental health

before the child was born, we have proxies for prenatal health behaviors which may be correlated

with her health status at the time. These proxies are: (10) whether or not the mother smoked

during pregnancy, and (11) whether or not the mother initiated prenatal care during the first

trimester. Finally, to proxy the mother’s prenatal health and child’s initial health endowment, we

include: (12) whether or not the mother was advised by a doctor to take stay in bed for at least a

week during the pregnancy; (13) whether or not the child was born prematurely (before 37 weeks

gestation); and (14) whether or not the child was low birth-weight (less than or equal to 2500

grams). It is arguable as to whether or not these variables are endogenous to the return to work

decision. By both excluding and including this set of variables, we are able to gauge the

sensitivity of the return to work coefficient to these factors in the OLS regressions.

       Because previous work shows that employment factors, work intensity, and child care

arrangements is associated with maternal postpartum depression and health, we also include in

some models: (15) the mother’s occupational class (other occupation as the baseline, manager,

service or technical); (16) whether or not the mother currently works part-time; and (17) child

care arrangements (daycare center as the baseline, non-relative babysitter, relative babysitter, and

other type of child care). All of these independent variables are potentially endogenous.

Consequently, the OLS and IV models are estimated with and without this richer set of variables.

Identifying Instrumental Variables

       The NMIHS respondents gave birth in 1988, when the United States was one of just two

industrialized countries that did not have a national maternal leave policy (Hyde 1995). The

Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993 guarantees 12 weeks of unpaid leave for

eligible mothers and the right to return to their jobs. However, before this national legislation




                                                17
was passed, many states had laws that provided some of the leave provisions, or more generous

provisions, that currently are covered by the FMLA (Department of Labor 1990, RAND 1995).4

As of 1990, 30 states had some kind of maternity or parental leave law, ranging from laws that

allow only for leave for the mother during recovery from childbirth to laws that allow for up to

one year of leave for either parent to care for an infant (Department of Labor 1990). Of the 30

states with maternity/paternal laws of some kind, 12 states had laws that applied to state

employees only. Most state laws regarding leave exempted small businesses, but the definition

of a small business varied by state (Family & Medical Leave Commission 1995). Several states

in 1990 also had temporary disability laws, which provided some salary support during leave

from work (Department of Labor 1990). The temporary disability laws covered all employers

with at least one employee (Family & Medical Leave Commission 1995).

        In this study, we use the cross-sectional variation in these state-level policies to

instrument for the length of the mother’s leave from work. We use two dummy indicators to

represent these state policies: (1) whether or not the state had any kind of job-protected maternity

leave law in 1988 that applied to private-sector workers, not just state employees; and (2)

whether or not the state had a temporary disability law in 1988. These data come from Waldfogel

(1999) and the Department of Labor (Department of Labor 1990). We expect that mothers who

lived in states with maternity leave laws and disability laws will take longer leaves from work

compared to mothers who lived in states without these laws.

         Following Baum’s (2003) previous work on maternal employment and child

development, we use additional instruments which are intended to proxy local labor market

conditions. Mothers living in more economically depressed labor markets are expected to return

4
 Some businesses also voluntarily offered employees leave options before the FMLA was enacted. We do not
explore these variables as potential identifying instruments because the mother’s choice of occupation and industry



                                                        18
to work earlier than other mothers because of concerns about retaining their jobs. Also, women

with higher potential earnings in the market, as proxied by local per capita income, are expected

to return to work sooner than other women. However, state-level labor market variables are not

expected to directly impact maternal health after controlling for a range of individual-level

socioeconomic factors.

       To proxy local labor market conditions, Baum (2003) uses measures such as the local

unemployment rate, the percentage of the local labor market that is female, local per capita

income, and the percentage of the local population that has a high school and college degree.

We have access to state but not local identifiers for NMIHS respondents. Therefore, we proxy

local labor market conditions by using state-level measures of unemployment, the percentage of

women in the labor force, the percentage of the population with a college degree, and average

real per capita income.

   4 Results

       Table 1 displays means and standard deviations for all variables used in the

analysis. The average CES-D score in the sample was 9.5, and 20 percent of the respondents had

a CES-D score of at least 16, which is considered to be an elevated rate of depressive symptoms

that may be indicative of clinical depression. This high rate of depression is consistent with

other research based on NMIHS. McLennan et al. (2001), for example, use a sample of 7,537

mothers from NMIHS and report that 24 percent had a CES-D score of at least 16.. About 18

percent of mothers in the sample report having made at least 3 visits to an outpatient provider

during the first 6 months after childbirth.




may be endogenous.



                                                19
         On average, the sample mothers returned to work 9 weeks after childbirth, and more than

75 percent had returned to work by the time their infants were 12 weeks old (Figure 1). This

finding is consistent with the work of Klerman and Leibowitz (1994), who find that most

mothers who return to work during the first year do so within 3 months of childbirth. Almost all

mothers in the sample have at least a high school degree (97 percent), and 44 percent have

completed some college or a college degree. The sample includes a large proportion of African-

American mothers (40 percent) and low birth-weight infants (23 percent) because the NMIHS

over-sampled these groups. However, the sample is only 5 percent Hispanic and 3 percent

Asian.

         Table 2 shows results from all models that are estimated with the log of the CES-D score

as the dependent variable. Columns (1)-(3) display OLS estimates with increasingly richer

specifications. Column (1) presents a model with only basic, socio-demographic variables

included on the right hand side. Column (2) shows a model that also includes potentially

endogenous socioeconomic and infant health endowment variables. Finally, column (3) displays

a model that additionally includes employment characteristics and child care arrangements as

covariates. Columns (4)-(6) show IV models that correspond to each of the OLS specifications

presented in columns (1)-(3).

         All of the models indicate that returning to work later is associated with fewer depressive

symptoms (Table 2, columns (1)-(6)). In the OLS models, returning to work a week later is

associated with a 1 percent decline in the mother’s CES-D score. At the sample mean of 9, this 1

percent drop is a reduction of about 1 point in the CES-D score, which could correspond to no

longer validating a particular depressive symptom in the past week, or experiencing a depressive

symptom less frequently in the past week. The OLS models show no evidence that the timing of




                                                20
returning to work is correlated with other, observed characteristics that also affect depressive

symptoms. The magnitude of the estimated effect remains virtually the same regardless of the

model specification.

       The OLS models do not account for the possibility of reverse causality -- mothers may

return to work later or earlier as a response to their depressive symptoms. Also, the OLS

estimates may be confounded by unmeasured characteristics that are correlated with both the

timing of returning to work and depression. IV methods account for these problems by purging

the potentially endogenous return-to-work variable of its correlation with the error term.

       The IV results support the OLS findings – in every case, returning to work later is

associated with a statistically significant reduction in depressive symptoms (Table 2, columns

(4)-(6)). The magnitude of the IV estimates, however, is five times larger than the OLS

estimates. Returning to work one week later is associated with a 5-6 percent reduction in

depressive symptoms, which corresponds to a decrease of 5 points at the mean CES-D score.

Like the OLS estimates, the IV estimates are not sensitive to the covariates included in the

models.

       The identifying instrumental variables perform reasonably well in these models. The F-

test on the identifying instruments ranges from approximately 11 to 13 which is statistically

significant at the 0.001 level. The over-identification test suggests that the instruments can be

validly excluded from the depression equation. The Durbin-Wu-Hausman test is used to test for

the consistency of the OLS estimate. The null hypothesis is rejected in every case at the 5%

level, but not at the 1% level. Thus, there is some evidence that the IV estimates should be the

preferred estimates.




                                                21
       All of the OLS and IV models presented in Table 2 were re-estimated without the

variable measuring how long the mother had been back at work at the time of the interview.

This variable is negatively correlated with the length of the mother’s maternity leave, with a

statistically significant correlation coefficient of -0.200. The OLS estimates from these models

that exclude the length of time that the mother has been back at work are similar in magnitude to

those presented in Table 2, although they are no longer statistically significant. The exclusion of

the length of time back at work variable affects the magnitudes of the IV estimates, but the

estimates remain negative and statistically significant. The IV estimates are the preferred

estimates based on the Durbin-Wu-Hausman test even when the length of time back at work

variable is excluded. Returning to work a week later is associated with a statistically significant,

9-10 percent decrease in depressive symptoms in these models, which is almost twice the 5-6

percent decrease reported in Table 2. Results are available upon request.

       Table 3 shows results from all models that are estimated with a dependent variable that is

a dummy variable indicating whether or not the mother had a CES-D score of at least 16. This

threshold is commonly used as a cutoff for a likely clinical case of depression. In all of the OLS

and IV models, returning to work later is associated with a small reduction in the probability of

being a depressive case. However, the estimated effects are not statistically significant in any of

the models. These findings suggest that while returning to work later may reduce the number or

frequency of depressive symptoms, it is not associated with a lower probability of being a likely

case of clinical depression.

       When the clinical depression models are estimated without the variable measuring how

long the mother has been back at work, the OLS estimates are still negative and statistically

insignificant. However, when this back at work variable is excluded, the IV estimates become




                                                22
statistically significant at the 0.10 level in all but the most fully specified IV model (e.g. this

model includes the covariates listed in Column 6 in Table 3). The IV models suggest that

returning to work a week later reduces the probability of having a CES-D score of at least 16 by

2 percentage points, which at the sample mean of 0.200 is a 10 percent reduction in the

probability of being clinically depressed.

        Taken together, the depression models in Tables 2 and 3 indicate that returning to work

later is associated with a 5 to 6 percent reduction in depressive symptoms, but there is weaker

evidence that returning to work later reduces the probability of meeting a threshold of 16 on the

CES-D. These findings may suggest that the timing of returning to work affects depressive

symptoms only among employed mothers who have CES-D scores less than 16 (e.g. the healthier

mothers, in terms of depression). To examine this possibility, we estimate the models in Table 2

again splitting the full sample into two sub-samples – mothers with CES-D scores of at least 16

(clinically depressed) and mothers with CES-D scores less than 16 (not clinically depressed).5

        The results in the sample of mothers who are not clinically depressed are very similar to

those based on the full sample (results not shown, but are available upon request). However,

among the clinically depressed mothers, there is no statistically significant relationship between

returning to work and CES-D score. The inclusion or exclusion of the length of time the mother

has been back at work does not affect these results. The models suggest, then, that the timing of

returning to work is associated with depressive symptoms, but mainly among mothers who

probably would not meet criteria for clinical depression.

        We consider health care utilization in Table 4. The dependent variable in these models is

a dummy variable indicating whether or not the respondent visited an outpatient physician or


5
 To keep things simple in this exercise, we ignore the complications involved in running the regression models on
sub-samples that are divided based on the dependent variable.



                                                       23
clinic at least 3 times during the six months after childbirth. This measure is intended to proxy

the mother’s physical and mental status during the time period when she first returns to work. In

contrast, maternal depressive symptoms, which were the focus of Tables 3 and 4, were measured

on average about a year after the mother returned to work.

        The OLS results in Table 4 (columns (1)-(3)) indicate that returning to work later is

associated with a very small, marginally statistically significant increase in the probability of

having had at least 3 outpatient visits. It is likely that these results are confounded by effect of

health on the timing of returning to work – mothers in poor health may postpone their return to

employment. The IV results, which address this potential problem, suggest the opposite.

Returning to work later is associated with a reduction in the probability of having at least 3

outpatient visits, but the size of the effect is very small and statistically insignificant. The F-tests

on the identifying instruments are statistically significant at the 0.001 level and the over-

identification test suggests that the instruments can be validly excluded from the second stage

equation, but the Durbin-Wu-Hausman test cannot reject the consistency of OLS estimate.

        At the time the NMIHS data were collected, states that had maternal leave policies

generally specified that eligible employees were entitled to a 6, 8, 12, or 16 week leave (Family

& Medical Leave Commission 1995). Moreover, some states have licensing standards that

prohibit daycare centers from accepting children younger than 6 weeks old (National Resource

Center for Health & Safety in Child Care 2003). Daycare centers also typically have their own

policies that include accepting infants starting at 6 or 8 weeks old. These state-level and daycare

policies may have resulted in many mothers returning to work around the time their children

have reached a particular age, such as 6 weeks old. In the analysis sample, the quartiles in the

distribution of the return-to-work variable corresponded approximately to 6 weeks or less (first




                                                  24
quartile), 6 to 8 weeks (second quartile), 8 to 12 weeks (third quartile), and more than 12 weeks

(fourth quartile).

        Table 5 shows results from models that include dummy variables indicating that the

mother returned to work 6 to 8 weeks after childbirth, 8 to 12 weeks after childbirth, or more

than 12 weeks after childbirth. The baseline category includes mothers who returned to work 6

or fewer weeks after childbirth. Columns (1)–(3) show results from models that are estimated

with the log CES-D score as the dependent variable, while columns (4)-(6) display estimates

from models with a dummy variable indicating a score of at least 16 on the CES-D as the

dependent variable. Finally, columns (7)-(9) present findings from models with a dummy

variable indicating at least 3 outpatient visits as the dependent variable. OLS models are shown

since the consistency of OLS could not be rejected for two of the three outcomes. However,

these OLS models do not account for the potential endogeneity of the return-to-work decision

and therefore should be considered lower-bound estimates of the true effects (since all previous

IV estimates were larger in magnitude than the corresponding OLS estimates).

        The results suggest that mothers who return to work between 6 and 8 weeks after

childbirth are not statistically different in terms of their depressive symptoms compared to

mothers who return within 6 weeks. However, mothers who return to work between 8 and 12

weeks of childbirth have 11 to 12 percent lower CES-D scores than mothers who return within 6

weeks (Table 5, columns (1)-(3)). Returning to work more than 12 weeks after childbirth is only

slightly more beneficial than returning 8 to 12 weeks after childbirth – these mothers who take

the longest leaves have CES-D scores that are about 14 to 15 percent lower than mothers who

take the shortest leaves (Table 5, columns (1)-(3)). None of the return-to-work dummy




                                               25
indicators are associated with meeting the threshold of a score of at least 16 on the CES-D (Table

5, columns (4)-(6)).

       Columns (7)-(9) of Table 5 show that there are no statistically significant associations

between the shorter lengths of maternal leave and outpatient services utilization in the first six

months after childbirth. However, returning to work more than 12 weeks after child birth is

associated with an increase in the probability of having at least 3 outpatient visits during the first

6 months, although this relationship is statistically significant only at the 10% level. Note that

for this group of women who took the longest leave from work, it is most likely that the visits

may have occurred prior to return to work, thus making it difficult to draw any firm conclusions

based on this measure of return to work.



   5 Conclusions

           Previous economic research on maternal employment has focused on understanding

   how the length of maternal leave after childbirth impacts children’s health and development.

   This study extends this literature by examining the effect of maternal leave length on the

   health of the mother. We focus on depression because of its very high prevalence among

   women of childbearing age, because of its potential negative effects on children, and because

   this disorder tends to be chronic. We also consider outpatient health services utilization in

   the first 6 months after childbirth as an alternative measure of the mother’s health.

           The results suggest that longer leave from work is associated with considerable

   declines in depressive symptoms. This finding persists regardless of model specification, or

   whether IV methods are used to address the potential endogeneity of returning to work.

   Specifically, increasing maternal leave from 6 or fewer weeks to 8 weeks or 12 weeks is




                                                 26
associated with an appreciable decline in depressive symptoms of approximately 11 percent

and 15 percent, respectively. These magnitudes, which come from OLS models, mean that

mothers are experiencing fewer symptoms of depression, or are experiencing depressive

symptoms with less frequency or both.

       However, there is only weak evidence that returning to work later lowers the

probability of having a CES-D score of 16 or higher. Moreover, it appears that returning to

work later will have mental health benefits mainly for mothers who probably are not

clinically depressed (mothers with CES-D scores less than 16). There is no evidence that

returning to work later alters the probability of having at least 3 outpatient visits in the 6

months after childbirth.

       In sum, the findings suggest that longer maternal leave after childbirth may have

lasting benefits for maternal mental health. If this effect is causal, as this paper suggests,

policies that support longer maternity leave may have the added benefit of reducing

depressive symptoms among employed mothers. However, there is no evidence that longer

maternal leave affects potential cases of clinical depression, nor overall physical and mental

health as measured by outpatient visits.




                                             27
References

American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
Fourth Edition. Washington DC: American Psychiatric Press, 1994.

American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists,
Guidelines for Perinatal Care, 4th Edition, Chapter 4-Anetnatal care, 1997.

Baum CL. Does early maternal employment harm child development? An analysis of the
potential benefits of leave taking. Journal of Labor Economics 2003; 21: 409-448.

Becker GS. A theory of the allocation of time. Economics Journal 1965; 75: 493-517.

Blau FD, Grossberg AJ. Maternal labor supply and children’s cognitive development. Review
of Economics and Statistics 1992; 74: 474-81.

Brooks-Gunn J, Han WJ, Waldfogel J. Maternal employment and child cognitive outcomes in
the first three years of life: the NICHD Study of Early Child Care. Child Development 2002; 73:
1052-72.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employment characteristics of families in 2000,
ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/news.release/History/famee.04192001.news, Accessed 11/7/03.
Chaudron LH, Klein MH, Remington P, Palta M, Allen C, Essex MJ. Predictors, prodromes,
and incidence of postpartum depression. Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics & Gynecology
2001; 22: 103-12.
Civic D, Holt VL. Maternal depressive symptoms and child behavior problems in a nationally
representative birthweight sample. Maternal & Child Health Journal 2000; 4: 215-21.
Department of Labor, Women’s Bureau, State Maternity/Parental Leave Laws. Facts on
Working Women No. 90-1. June, 1990.
Deal LW, Holt VL. Young maternal age and depressive symptoms: results from the 1988
National Maternal and Infant Health Survey. American Journal of Public Health 1998; 88: 266-
70.
Eaton WW, Muntaner C, Smith C, Tien A, Ybarra M. Center for Epidemiologic Studies
Depression Scale: Review and Revision (CESD and CESDR). In: The use of psychological
testing for treatment planning and outcomes assessment. Ed: Maruish ME, Third Edition,
Chapter 40, Volume III, 2003.
Ellis D, Hewatt R. Mothers’ postpartum perceptions of spousal relationships. Journal of
Gynecologic and Neonatal Nursing 1985; 14: 140.
Family and Medical Leave Commission, A Workable Balance: Report to Congress on Family
and Medical Leave Policies, 1995. Accessed on-line at
http://www.dol.gov/esa/regs/compliance/whd/fmla/family.htm, 11/03.


                                              28
Gjerdingen DK, Froberg D. Predictors of health in new mothers. Social Science & Medicine
1991; 33: 1399-407.

Gjerdingen DK, Chaloner KM. The relationship of women’s postpartum mental health to
employment, childbirth, and social support. Journal of Family Practice 1994;38: 465-472.

Gjerdingen DK, Froberg DG, Chaloner KM, McGovern PM. Changes in women’s physical
health during the first postpartum year. Archives of Family Medicine 1993; 2: 277-83.

Gjerdingen DK, McGovern PM, Chaloner KM, Street HB. Women’s postpartum maternity
benefits and work experience. Family Medicine 1995;27: 592-8.

Grossman M. The demand for health: a theoretical and empirical investigation. Occasional
Paper No. 119, 1972. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hyde JS. Women and maternity leave: Empirical data and public policy. Psychology of Women
Quarterly 1995; 19: 299-313.

Hyde JS, Klein MH, Essex MJ, Clark R. Maternity leave and women’s mental health.
Psychology of Women Quarterly 1995; 19: 257-285.

Klerman JA, Leibowitz A. The work-employment distinction among new mothers. Journal of
Human Resources 1994; 29: 277-303.

Klerman JA, Leibowitz A. Job continuity among new mothers. Demography 1999; 36: 145-55.

Mandl KD, Tronick EZ, Brennan TA, Alpert HR, Homer CJ. Infant health care use and maternal
depression. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 1999;153: 808-13.

Martins C, Gaffan EA. Effects of early maternal depression on patterns if infant-mother
attachment: a meta-analytic investigation. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 2000; 41:
737-46.

Mercer R. The process of maternal role attainment over the first year. Nursing Research 1985;
34: 198.

McGovern P, Dowd B, Gjerdingen D, Moscovice I, Kochevar L, Lohman W. Time off work and
the postpartum health of employed women. Medical Care 1997; 35: 507-21.

McLennan JD, Kotelchuck M, Cho H. Prevalence, persistence, and correlates of depressive
symptoms in a national sample of mothers. Journal of the American Academy of Child &
Adolescent Psychiatry 2001;40: 1316-23.

Miller LJ. Postpartum depression. JAMA 2002;287: 762-765.




                                             29
Murray CJL, Lopez AD, eds. The global burden of disease and injury series, volume 1: a
comprehensive assessment of mortality and disability from diseases, injuries, and risk factors in
1990 and projected to 2020. Cambridge, MA: Published by the Harvard School of Public Health
on behalf of the World Health Organization and the World Bank, Harvard University Press,
1996.

National Resource Center for Health & Safety in Child Care, website accessed 12/1/03 at
http://nrc.uchsc.edu/.


RAND Labor and Population Program Research Brief. Time-out for new mothers: Some issues
for maternity leave policy. December 1995, Accessed on-line at
http://www.rand.org/publications/RB/RB5009/RB5009.html, 11/03.
Ruhm CJ. Parental leave and child health. Journal of Health Economics 2000;19: 931-60.
United States Department of Health & Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics.
National Maternal and Infant Health Survey 1988 [computer file]. Hyattsville MD: US
Department of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer],
1991. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
[distributor], 1992.
Waldfogel J. The family gap for young women in the US and Britian: can maternity leave make
a difference? Journal of Labor Economics 1998; 16: 505-45.
Waldfogel J. Family leave coverage in the 1990s. Monthly Labor Review October 1999; 13-21.
Waldfogel J, Han WJ, Brooks-Gunn J. The effects of early maternal employment on child
cognitive development. Demography 2002; 39: 369-92.
Winegarden CR, Bracy PM. Demographic consequences of maternal-leave programs in
industrial countries: Evidence from fixed-effects models. Southern Economic Journal 1995; 61:
1020-35.




                                               30
                              Table 1: Sample Means and Standard Deviations
                                               (N = 1,762)

            Variable                                          Definition                                  Mean
                                                                                                        (standard
                                                                                                        deviation)

                                                   Maternal Health

CES-D Depression Score              Score on Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression                   9.47
                                    screener                                                              (9.37)
Depressive Case                     Dummy variable =1 if respondent reports a score of at least           0.198
                                    16 on the CES-D, 0 otherwise
At least 3 outpatient visits in     Dummy variable =1 if respondent reports having visited a              0.184
first six months after childbirth   clinic or physician for mental or physical health problems at
                                    least 3 times in the first 6 months after childbirth, 0 otherwise

                                            Length of Maternal Leave

Number of weeks since birth         The infant’s age in weeks when the respondent returned to              9.18
when mother returned to work        work                                                                  (4.99)
Mother returned to work 6           Dummy variable = 1 if respondent returned to work when                0.256
weeks after childbirth or sooner    infant was 6 weeks old or younger, 0 otherwise

Mother returned to work             Dummy variable = 1 if respondent returned to work when                0.251
between 6 and 8 weeks after         infant was between 6 and 8 weeks old, 0 otherwise
childbirth

Mother returned to work             Dummy variable = 1 if respondent returned to work when                0.264
between 8 and 12 weeks after        infant between 8 and 12 weeks old, 0 otherwise
childbirth

Mother returned to work more        Dummy variable = 1 if respondent returned to work when                0.230
than 12 weeks after childbirth      infant was older than 12 weeks, 0 otherwise


                                           Other Independent Variables

Mother’s age                        Mother’s age in years                                                 27.81
                                                                                                          (5.03)
High school dropout                 Dummy variable =1 if respondent is a high school dropout, 0           0.034
                                    otherwise
Some college                        Dummy variable =1 if respondent completed some college but            0.242
                                    did not graduate, 0 otherwise
College graduate                    Dummy variable =1 if respondent                                       0.192
                                    is a college graduate, 0 otherwise
Income                              Household income                                                      31,064




                                                        31
Hispanic                           Dummy variable =1 if respondent is Hispanic, 0 otherwise       0.053

African-American                   Dummy variable = 1 if respondent is African-American, 0        0.389
                                   otherwise
Asian                              Dummy variable = 1 if respondent is Asian, 0 otherwise         0.025

Married                            Dummy variable = 1 if respondent is married, 0 otherwise       0.775

Number of children                 Number of children in household                                1.50

Time between return to work        How long in months the mother has been back at work at the     13.12
date and interview date            time of the interview                                          (4.29)
Welfare recipient                  Dummy variable = 1 if respondent receives AFDC, 0              0.026
                                   otherwise
Physician advised bed rest         Dummy variable =1 if respondent reports that her physician     0.236
                                   advised her to stay in bed for at least one week during her
                                   pregnancy, 0 otherwise
Premature infant                   Dummy variable = 1 if respondent’s child was born earlier      0.210
                                   than 37 weeks gestation, 0 otherwise
Low birth-weight                   Dummy variable = 1 if respondent’s child was low birth-        0.228
                                   weight, 0 otherwise
Prenatal care in first trimester   Dummy variable = 1 if respondent initiated prenatal care       0.895
                                   during first trimester, 0 otherwise
Insured                            Dummy variable = 1 if respondent has health insurance, 0       0.850
                                   otherwise
Smoked daily during pregnancy      Dummy variable = 1 if respondent smoked daily during           0.178
                                   pregnancy, 0 otherwise
Mother currently works part-       Dummy variable = 1 if respondent worked less than 35 hours     0.231
time                               per week at the time of the interview, 0 otherwise
Manager                            Dummy variable = 1 if respondent has a managerial              0.261
                                   occupation, 0 otherwise
Technical                          Dummy variable = 1 if respondent has a technical occupation,   0.460
                                   0 otherwise
Service                            Dummy variable = 1 if respondent has a service occupation, 0   0.148
                                   otherwise
Relative babysitter                Dummy variable =1 if respondent has a relative who watches     0.487
                                   child on workdays, 0 otherwise
Non-related babysitter             Dummy variable =1 if respondent has a babysitter (not a        0.310
                                   relative) who watches child on workdays, 0 otherwise
Other child care                   Dummy variable =1 if respondent uses other child care          0.071
                                   arrangements
State unemployment rate            State unemployment rate in 1988                                5.62

State female labor force           State female labor force participation in 1988                 0.568
participation




                                                      32
State college degree             % of state population with college degree or higher            0.189

State income                     Average real per capita income in state in 1988                16,924
                                                                                                (2,475)
State leave law                  Dummy variable =1 if state had passed by 1988 any type of      0.187
                                 maternity leave law that applies to private sector employees
                                 (not just state employees), 0 otherwise

State temporary disability law   Dummy variable =1 if state had passed by 1988 a temporary      0.145
                                 disability law, 0 otherwise




                                                   33
          Figure 1: Distribution of Length of Maternal Leave in Weeks

    .15




    .1
Density




    .05




    0
             0          5          10          15          20              25
                       Age of Child in Weeks when Mother Returns to Work




                                        34
                         Table 2: Depression Score and Length of Maternal Leave
                                                    Estimate
                                                  (T-Statistic)
                                                  Dependent Variable: Log CES-D Score
                                            OLS                                           IV
                              (1)          (2)                (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)

                             Basic      Full set of    Model (2) plus     Basic      Full set of   Model (5)
                           Covariates   covariates     occupation and   Covariates   covariates plus occupation
                                                         child care                              and child care
                                                          variables                                variables
Number of weeks since        -0.010        -0.010         -0.010           -0.051       -0.052      -0.055
birth when mother           (-1.94)       (-1.84)        (-1.90)          (-2.39)      (-2.41)     (-2.32)
returned to work
Mother’s age                 -0.009        -0.009           -0.009         -0.005       -0.005      -0.005
                            (-1.74)       (-1.80)          (-1.77)        (-0.910)     (-1.02)     (-0.860)
High school dropout           0.195         0.141            0.119          0.177        0.128       0.104
                             (1.87)        (1.31)           (1.12)         (1.57)       (1.08)      (0.870)
Some college                 -0.098        -0.094           -0.084         -0.106       -0.104      -0.099
                            (-1.69)       (-1.66)          (-1.37)        (-1.95)      (-1.95)     (-1.71)
College graduate             -0.140        -0.127           -0.104         -0.154       -0.145      -0.123
                            (-2.01)       (-1.79)          (-1.32)        (-2.40)      (-2.22)     (-1.63)
Income in low-middle         -0.237        -0.231           -0.224         -0.252       -0.255      -0.247
quartile                    (-2.96)       (-2.99)          (-2.84)        (-3.20)      (-3.40)     (-3.23)
Income in high-middle        -0.202        -0.197           -0.185         -0.185       -0.191      -0.180
quartile                    (-2.49)       (-2.30)          (-2.17)        (-2.29)      (-2.31)     (-2.17)
Income in highest            -0.416        -0.415           -0.392         -0.369       -0.379      -0.355
quartile                    (-4.49)       (-4.25)          (-3.78)        (-4.14)      (-4.06)     (-3.49)
Hispanic                      0.299         0.302            0.304          0.344        0.350       0.357
                             (2.88)        (2.74)           (2.70)         (2.97)       (2.86)      (2.85)
African-American              0.288         0.280            0.278          0.335        0.326       0.332
                             (4.98)        (4.72)           (4.24)         (4.94)       (4.73)      (4.22)
Asian                         0.191         0.187            0.189          0.237        0.231       0.239
                             (2.00)        (1.81)           (1.81)         (2.58)       (2.32)      (2.34)
Married                      -0.138        -0.119           -0.119         -0.118       -0.108      -0.107
                            (-2.15)       (-1.98)          (-1.97)        (-1.70)      (-1.64)     (-1.59)
Number of children           -0.034        -0.033           -0.035         -0.047       -0.045      -0.050
                            (-1.52)       (-1.50)          (-1.70)        (-2.04)      (-1.96)     (-2.21)
Time between return to       -0.018        -0.017           -0.017         -0.028       -0.027      -0.028
work date and interview     (-3.47)       (-3.24)          (-3.11)        (-3.94)      (-3.77)     (-3.68)
data
Welfare recipient                           0.356            0.345                       0.314       0.288
                                           (2.26)           (2.24)                      (2.04)      (1.91)
Prescribed bed rest                         0.142            0.142                       0.153       0.152
                                           (2.45)           (2.45)                      (2.60)      (2.57)
Premature infant                           -0.007           -0.006                      -0.025      -0.024
                                          (-0..080)        (-0.070)                    (-0.270)    (-0.270)
Low birth-weight                           -0.016           -0.015                      -0.006      -0.006
                                           (0.840)         (-0.190)                    (-0.080)    (-0.080)
Prenatal care in first                     -0.102           -0.098                      -0.064      -0.060
trimester                                 (-1.27)          (-1.17)                     (-0.700)    (-0.630)
Insured                                     0.055            0.063                       0.082       0.092
                                           (0.950)          (1.04)                      (1.39)      (1.48)



                                                      35
Smoked daily during                                  0.059            0.054                                  0.038           0.033
pregnancy                                           (1.20)           (1.10)                                 (0.800)         (0.690)
Works part-time                                                       0.042                                                  0.068
                                                                     (0.620)                                                (0.960)
Manager                                                              -0.051                                                 -0.027
                                                                    (-0.540)                                               (-0.270)
Technical                                                            -0.031                                                 -0.007
                                                                    (-0.430)                                               (-0.100)
Service                                                               0.039                                                  0.064
                                                                     (0.530)                                                (0.810)
Relative babysitter                                                  -0.015                                                  0.023
                                                                    (-0.220)                                                (0.310)
Non-related babysitter                                               -0.073                                                 -0.045
                                                                    (-0.940)                                               (-0.510)
Other child care                                                     -0.061                                                 -0.084
                                                                    (-0.630)                                               (-0.810)

Over-identification test                                                                    2.36             2.52           2.27
(test stat and p-value)                                                                    (0.798)          (0.773)        (0.812)
Hausman test                                                                                5.26             5.30           5.59
(test stat and p-value)                                                                    (0.022)          (0.021)        (0.018)
F-test on instruments                                                                      12.74            12.24          10.62
 (test stat and p-value)                                                                   (0.000)          (0.000)        (0.000)
N                                                                                 1,762
            T-statistics computed from Huber-White standard errors with adjustment for clustering on state of residence.




                                                               36
                          Table 3: Depressive Case and Length of Maternal Leave
                                                    Estimate
                                                  (T-Statistic)
                              Dependent Variable: Dummy variable indicating a score of at least 16 on CES-D
                                OLS (Linear Probability Model)                            IV
                               (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)

                             Basic      Full set of    Model (2) plus     Basic      Full set of   Model (5) plus
                           Covariates   covariates     occupation and   Covariates   covariates    occupation and
                                                         child care                                  child care
                                                          variables                                   variables
Number of weeks since         -0.001       -0.001         -0.001           -0.012       -0.013         -0.013
birth when mother            (-0.730)     (-0.660)       (-0.670)         (-1.38)      (-1.40)        (-1.33)
returned to work
Mother’s age                  -0.002       -0.002           -0.002         -0.001       -0.001        -0.001
                             (-0.890)     (-0.780)         (-0.800)       (-0.390)     (-0.340)      (-0.310)
High school dropout            0.060        0.050            0.043          0.055        0.047         0.039
                              (0.920)      (0.760)          (0.640)        (0.830)      (0.690)       (0.570)
Some college                  -0.030       -0.029           -0.026         -0.032       -0.032        -0.030
                             (-1.12)      (-1.08)          (-0.950)       (-1.22)      (-1.21)       (-1.10)
College graduate              -0.029       -0.026           -0.022         -0.032       -0.031        -0.027
                             (-1.26)      (-1.12)          (-0.890)       (-1.52)      (-1.42)       (-1.14)
Income in low-middle          -0.039       -0.037           -0.033         -0.043       -0.044        -0.039
quartile                     (-1.19)      (-1.13)          (-1.00)        (-1.32)      (-1.32)       (-1.17)
Income in high-middle         -0.046       -0.045           -0.040         -0.041       -0.044        -0.039
quartile                     (-1.48)      (-1.36)          (-1.18)        (-1.35)      (-1.35)       (-1.17)
Income in highest             -0.095       -0.095           -0.089         -0.082       -0.086        -0.080
quartile                     (-2.43)      (-2.29)          (-1.95)        (-2.07)      (-2.03)       (-1.71)
Hispanic                       0.019        0.019            0.022          0.031        0.032         0.035
                              (0.610)      (0.590)          (0.700)        (1.04)       (1.02)        (1.14)
African-American               0.074        0.072            0.075          0.086        0.085         0.089
                              (2.83)       (2.74)           (2.75)         (3.17)       (3.05)        (2.91)
Asian                          0.019        0.019            0.017          0.032        0.031         0.030
                              (0.340)      (0.330)          (0.280)        (0.600)      (0.570)       (0.520)
Married                       -0.083       -0.078           -0.077         -0.078       -0.075        -0.074
                             (-2.30)      (-2.22)          (-2.14)        (-2.09)      (-2.06)       (-1.98)
Number of children             0.005        0.005            0.004          0.001        0.002         0.000
                              (0.590)      (0.600)          (0.490)        (0.170)      (0.200)       (0.050)
Time between return to        -0.003       -0.003           -0.003         -0.006       -0.006        -0.005
work date and interview      (-1.29)      (-1.20)          (-1.10)        (-1.98)      (-1.94)       (-1.87)
data
Welfare recipient                           0.095            0.097                       0.084         0.082
                                           (0.930)          (0.980)                     (0.820)       (0.830)
Prescribed bed rest                         0.025            0.026                       0.028         0.029
                                           (1.06)           (1.14)                      (1.24)        (1.30)
Premature infant                           -0.003           -0.003                      -0.008        -0.008
                                          (-0.110)         (-0.110)                    (-0.270)      (-0.260)
Low birth-weight                           -0.011           -0.011                      -0.008        -0.009
                                          (-0.310)         (-0.330)                    (-0.230)      (-0.260)
Prenatal care in first                     -0.007           -0.004                       0.004         0.006
trimester                                 (-0.180)         (-0.110)                     (0.090)       (0.130)
Insured                                     0.005            0.005                       0.012         0.013
                                           (0.150)          (0.150)                     (0.390)       (0.390)



                                                      37
Smoked daily during                                  0.009            0.008                                  0.003           0.003
pregnancy                                           (0.330)          (0.300)                                (0.130)         (0.110)
Works part-time                                                       0.007                                                  0.014
                                                                     (0.260)                                                (0.500)
Manager                                                              -0.031                                                 -0.025
                                                                    (-0.940)                                               (-0.720)
Technical                                                            -0.032                                                 -0.025
                                                                    (-1.18)                                                (-0.890)
Service                                                              -0.003                                                  0.004
                                                                    (-0.080)                                                (0.120)
Relative babysitter                                                   0.005                                                  0.015
                                                                     (0.150)                                                (0.430)
Non-related babysitter                                                0.032                                                  0.040
                                                                     (0.920)                                                (1.08)
Other child care                                                      0.006                                                 -0.001
                                                                     (0.130)                                               (-0.020)
Over-identification test
(test stat and p-value)                                                                     4.79             4.80           4.27
                                                                                           (0.443)          (0.443)        (0.511)
Hausman test                                                                                2.24             2.29           2.28
(test stat and p-value)                                                                    (0.135)          (0.130)        (0.131)
F-test on instruments                                                                      12.74            12.24          10.62
 (test stat and p-value)                                                                   (0.000)          (0.000)        (0.000)
N                                                                                 1,762
            T-statistics computed from Huber-White standard errors with adjustment for clustering on state of residence.




                                                               38
                Table 4: At Least Three Outpatient Visits and Length of Maternal Leave
                                                  Estimate
                                                (T-Statistic)
                           Dependent Variable: Dummy variable indicating at least 3 outpatient visits during 6
                                                       months after childbirth
                              OLS (Linear Probability Model)                             IV
                             (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)             (6)

                            Basic      Full set of    Model (2) plus     Basic      Full set ofModel (5) plus
                          Covariates   covariates     occupation and   Covariates   covariates occupation and
                                                        child care                               child care
                                                         variables                                variables
Number of weeks since        0.004         0.004          0.003           -0.002       -0.002      -0.004
birth when mother           (1.91)        (1.79)         (1.72)          (-0.310)     (-0.250)    (-0.460)
returned to work
Mother’s age                -0.001        -0.001           -0.001         -0.000       -0.000        -0.004
                           (-0.370)      (-0.350)         (-0.460)       (-0.080)     (-0.130)      (-0.180)
High school dropout          0.043         0.024            0.033          0.040        0.023         0.030
                            (0.780)       (0.450)          (0.620)        (0.740)      (0.420)       (0.580)
Some college                 0.010         0.011            0.005          0.009        0.010         0.003
                            (0.440)       (0.490)          (0.210)        (0.390)      (0.440)       (0.120)
College graduate             0.008         0.009           -0.007          0.006        0.007        -0.010
                            (0.320)       (0.370)         (-0.250)        (0.240)      (0.280)      (-0.370
Income in low-middle         0.027         0.034            0.033          0.024        0.031         0.029
quartile                    (1.07)        (1.31)           (1.25)         (1.00)       (1.23)        (1.14)
Income in high-middle        0.016         0.022            0.016          0.019        0.022         0.016
quartile                    (0.850)       (0.980)          (0.640)        (0.970)      (1.02)        (0.680)
Income in highest            0.053         0.057            0.044          0.060        0.062         0.050
quartile                    (1.58)        (1.57)           (1.21)         (1.58)       (1.57)        (1.27)
Hispanic                    -0.030        -0.034           -0.024         -0.023       -0.028        -0.016
                           (-0.570)      (-0.710)         (-0.470)       (-0.410)     (-0.530)      (-0.300)
African-American            -0.010        -0.015           -0.005         -0.003       -0.009         0.004
                           (-0.530)      (-0.730)         (-0.240)       (-0.130)     (-0.380)       (0.150)
Asian                        0.071         0.061            0.069          0.078        0.067         0.077
                            (1.30)        (1.09)           (1.16)         (1.36)       (1.15)        (1.22)
Married                     -0.063        -0.058           -0.058         -0.060       -0.056        -0.056
                           (-2.77)       (-2.39)          (-2.40)        (-2.54)      (-2.27)       (-2.24)
Number of children           0.002         0.004            0.005         -0.000        0.003         0.003
                            (0.200)       (0.520)          (0.600)       (-0.050)      (0.320)       (0.320)
Time between return to      -0.002        -0.002           -0.002         -0.004       -0.003        -0.004
work date and interview    (-1.04)       (-0.910)         (-1.05)        (-1.50)      (-1.30)       (-1.54)
data
Welfare recipient                          0.118            0.108                       0.112         0.099
                                          (1.66)           (1.50)                      (1.52)        (1.31)
Prescribed bed rest                        0.053            0.051                       0.054         0.053
                                          (2.34)           (2.28)                      (2.38)        (2.30)
Premature infant                          -0.010           -0.008                      -0.013        -0.011
                                         (-0.340)         (-0.280)                    (-0.400)      (-0.360)
Low birth-weight                           0.062            0.062                       0.063         0.063
                                          (2.07)           (2.04)                      (2.08)        (2.07)
Prenatal care in first                     0.010            0.008                       0.015         0.014
trimester                                 (0.340)          (0.280)                     (0.510)       (0.480)
Insured                                   -0.012           -0.010                      -0.008        -0.005



                                                     39
                                                   (-0.380)         (-0.320)                               (-0.270)        (-0.170)
Smoked daily during                                 -0.023           -0.019                                 -0.026          -0.022
pregnancy                                          (-1.03)          (-0.840)                               (-1.17)         (-1.00)
Works part-time                                                       0.019                                                  0.023
                                                                     (0.930)                                                (1.09)
Manager                                                               0.059                                                  0.063
                                                                     (1.81)                                                 (1.92)
Technical                                                             0.038                                                  0.042
                                                                     (1.67)                                                 (1.83)
Service                                                               0.036                                                  0.040
                                                                     (1.10)                                                 (1.20)
Relative babysitter                                                   0.003                                                  0.009
                                                                     (0.120)                                                (0.340)
Non-related babysitter                                                0.028                                                  0.033
                                                                     (1.01)                                                 (1.13)
Other child care                                                      0.019                                                  0.015
                                                                     (0.550)                                                (0.450)
Over-identification test
(test stat and p-value)                                                                     8.78             6.88           6.45
                                                                                           (0.118)          (0.230)        (0.265)
Hausman test                                                                                0.700            0.550          0.820
(test stat and p-value)                                                                    (0.402)          (0.460)        (0.366)
F-test on instruments                                                                      12.74            12.24          10.62
 (test stat and p-value)                                                                   (0.000)          (0.000)        (0.000)
N                                                                                 1,762
            T-statistics computed from Huber-White standard errors with adjustment for clustering on state of residence.




                                                               40
                                     Table 5: Summary of Maternal Health and Length of Maternal Leave Models
                                                                          OLS Estimate
                                                                           (T-Statistic)
                                     Dependent Variable:                           Dependent Variable:                            Dependent Variable:
                                      Log CES-D Score                   Dummy variable indicating a score of at least    Dummy variable indicating at least 3
                                                                                       16 on CES-D                    outpatient visits during 6 months after birth
                            (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)              (8)            (9)

                          Basic          Full set of   Model (2) plus      Basic        Full set of   Model (5) plus      Basic        Full set of     Model (8)
                        Covariates       covariates    occupation and    Covariates     covariates    occupation and    Covariates     covariates         plus
                                                         child care                                     child care                                    occupation
                                                          variables                                      variables                                   and child care
                                                                                                                                                       variables
Returned to work 6-8       -0.025           -0.020           -0.018          -0.013         -0.014        -0.013          0.0001          0.005           0.006
weeks after               (-0.430)         (-0.320)         (-0.300)        (-0.690)       (-0.700)      (-0.660)        (0.0004)        (0.220)         (0.260)
childbirth
Returned to work 8-        -0.120           -0.111           -0.109          -0.030         -0.029        -0.030          0.005           0.007          0.007
12 weeks after            (-2.01)          (-1.86)          (-1.85)         (-1.14)        (-1.08)       (-1.10)         (0.190)         (0.280)        (0.250)
childbirth
Returned to work           -0.149           -0.144           -0.146          -0.016         -0.015        -0.015          0.055           0.053          0.050
more than 12 weeks        (-1.97)          (-1.91)          (-1.97)         (-0.570)       (-0.540)      (-0.520)        (1.90)          (1.78)         (1.72)
after birth
N                                                                                            1,762
T-statistics computed from Huber-White standard errors with adjustment for clustering on state of residence.
All models also include mother’s age, education, income, race, marital status, number of children, and timing of interview. Models 2, 3, 5, 6, 8 and 9 also
include welfare, child health status, prenatal care, insurance, maternal bed rest during pregnancy, and smoking. Models 3, 6 and 9 also include part-time work,
occupation, and child care arrangements.




                                                                                 41
