NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FOREIGN LOBBIES AND US TRADE POLICY
Kishore Gawande
Pravin Krishna
Michael J. Robbins
Working Paper 10205
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10205
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004

We are grateful to Alan Deardorff, Gene Grossman, Gordon Hanson, James Levinsohn, Giovanni Maggi,
Devashish Mitra, Dani Rodrik, and seminar participants at the University of Chicago, University of Michigan,
Pennsylvania State University, Southern Methodist University, Stanford University, Syracuse University,
Texas A&M University, University of Texas at Austin, World Bank Research Department, Yale University
and the 2002 Meetings of the American Economic Association for many helpful comments and discussions.
Gawande and Krishna gratefully acknowledge the hospitality and the intellectual and financial support of the
Stigler Center for Study of the Economy and the State at the University of Chicago, Graduate School of
Business and the International Economics Section at Princeton University where some of this research was
conducted. Financial support in the form of a Salomon faculty research grant from Brown University and
a grant from the National Science Foundation (SES-0004302) is gratefully acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Kishore Gawande, Pravin Krishna, and Michael J. Robbins. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Foreign Lobbies and US Trade Policy
Kishore Gawande, Pravin Krishna, and Michael J. Robbins
NBER Working Paper No. 10205
January 2004
JEL No. D72, D78, F12, F13, F14
ABSTRACT
In popular discussion much has been made recently of the susceptibility of government policies to
lobbying by foreigners. The general presumption has also been that such interactions have a
deleterious effect on the home economy. However, it can be argued that, in a trade policy context,
bending policy in a direction that would suit foreigners may not in fact be harmful: If the policy
outcome absent any lobbying by foreigners is characterized by welfare-reducing trade barriers,
lobbying by foreigners may result in reductions in such barriers and raise consumer surplus (and
possibly improve welfare). Using a new data set on foreign political activity in the US, this paper
investigates the relationship between trade protection and lobbying activity empirically. The
approach taken in this paper is primarily a structural one. To model the role of foreign and domestic
lobbies in determining trade policy, we develop first a theoretical framework building on the wellknown work of Grossman and Helpman (1994); the econometric work that follows is very closely
linked to the theory. Our analysis of the data suggests that foreign lobbying activity has significant
impact on trade policy - and in the predicted direction: Tariffs and non-tariff barriers (NTBs) are
both found to be negatively related with foreign lobbying activity. We consider also extended
specifications in which we include a large number of additional explanatory variables that have been
suggested in the literature as determinants of trade policy (but that emerge from outside of the
theoretical structure described above) and confirm the robustness of our findings in this setting.
Kishore Gawande
Texas A&M University
kgawande@bushschool.tamu.edu
Pravin Krishna
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
pravin_krishna@brown.edu

Michael J. Robbins
University of Pennsylvania
mrobbins@law.upenn.edu

I. Introduction
A growing body of work in economics views trade policy as being determined not by a
benign welfare-maximizing government (as was assumed in the traditional treatments of this
topic) but rather by interactions between politicians and organized special interest groups.1
The emphasis in much of this literature (particularly on the empirical side) has been on the
link between domestic industry lobbies and the government. Recent events,2 however, have
shifted the focus in popular discussion (as well as in the consequent policy proposals related
to campaign finance reform) to foreign lobbies and the extent to which these are involved in
the political process; the general presumption being that such interactions between foreigners
and the domestic government have a deleterious effect on the home economy.
In a trade policy context, however, it can be argued that bending policy in a direction
that would suit foreigners may not in fact be harmful: If the policy outcome absent any
involvement by foreigners is characterized by welfare-reducing (or sub-optimal) trade barriers, lobbying by foreigners for reductions in such barriers may in fact shift trade policy in
a direction that improves domestic consumer surplus (and possibly welfare).3 But is it so?
Do foreign lobbies have a significant effect on US trade policy? If so, by what magnitude?
It is this relationship between foreign lobbies and trade barriers that this paper attempts to
investigate empirically.
1

See, for instance, the pioneering papers by Findlay and Wellisz (1982), Hillman (1982), Bhagwati and
Feenstra (1982), Mayer (1984), Magee, Brock and Young (1989) and, most recently, the pioneering work of
Grossman and Helpman (1994). This interest group approach to modeling trade policy determination itself
has antecedents in the seminal work of Stigler (1971), Peltzman (1976) and Becker (1983), all of whose work
on regulation focused, inter alia, on why the political process favors specific industries over others.
2
These include the widespread accusations relating to foreign campaign contributions in the 1996 US
Presidential campaign and the conviction of Representative Jay Kim (Republican-CA) for his acceptance of
illegal contributions from Korean sources. For a more detailed discussion of these events and an attempt
to quantify the significant presence of foreign lobbies in the US, see the recent MIT Ph.D. dissertation of
Byoung-Joo Kim (1999).
3
It is perhaps worth emphasizing emphasize that while lower trade barriers (on account of foreign lobbying,
say) can certainly be expected to improve consumer surplus, they do not necessarily translate into aggregate
welfare improvement. The latter would require a demonstration that trade barriers, in the absence of foreign
lobbies, would in fact be at a sub-optimal level − a contention whose validity is difficult to evaluate given
the imperfectly competitive nature of the product market assumed in our analysis (as will be discussed in
detail shortly) and the complex combination of tariff and non-tariff barriers actually imposed in reality. Our
focus in the present paper is solely on the relationship between lobbying activity and trade policy.

2

The theoretical foundation that we develop to motivate our estimating equations borrows
extensively from the well-known model of endogenous policy determination developed by
Grossman and Helpman (1994) − which is altered here suitably to account for the role of
foreign lobbies. This framework assumes a government that trades off its desire to deliver a
higher level of welfare to its polity with its desire for political contributions from organized
industry lobbies (which, in turn, provide political contributions to the government so it may
move policy in a direction that would suit them). A substantial merit of this framework,
from at least the standpoint of empirical testing, is that despite its relative rigor and complexity, trade policy is predicted to be a simple function of relatively few variables. This,
as we show, proves to be true even after foreign political involvement is introduced. In the
import-competing sectors, for instance, equilibrium tariffs are simply a log-linear function
of the import-penetration ratio, the import demand elasticity, the presence (or absence) of
domestic and foreign lobbying activity in that sector and finally a parameter that measures
the emphasis that the government places on contributions relative to overall welfare. This
parsimonious specification enables relatively easy econometric implementation − a task that
we accomplish using econometric methodology similar to that detailed in the recent and
pioneering work of Goldberg and Maggi (1999) and Gawande and Bandhyopadhyay (2000).4

Our estimation results suggest that foreign lobbying has a statistically and economically
significant impact on trade policy: The presence of an organized foreign lobby representing a
particular industrial sector appears to have as much effect in lowering trade barriers against
imports in that sector as does the presence of a domestic lobby in raising trade barriers
there. Ceteris paribus, US consumers gain unambiguously from the presence of foreign
political activity. To evaluate the robustness of our results, we also estimate “extended”
specifications in which we include a large number of additional explanatory variables that
have been suggested in the literature as determinants of trade policy (but that emerge from
outside of the theoretical structure described above).5
4

See also the recent paper by Mitra et al. (2002) which uses this framework to investigate the endogenous
determination of trade policy in Turkey.
5
Trefler (1993), which studied the protective impact of trade barriers in a context where protection

3

As we discuss in greater detail later, the results are highly robust to changes in data handling
and construction methodology and to changes in specification. Estimates of the parsimonious
specification implied by the theory compare very well with those obtained from the extended
regressions discussed above.
Overall then, this paper makes the following contributions: First, it is the only formal study
of foreign lobbying activity and its economic impact of which we are aware. While several
scholars and observers have commented on the presence and importance of foreign lobbying
in the context of trade policy formulation,6 none has studied it in the manner or the detail
that we do here. Second, a substantial component of the research effort on this paper has
involved the compilation of a new data set on foreign political activity (whose structure and
sources we describe in detail in Section V and in the attached Data Appendix). Finally,
we believe that our results, which run counter to much of the popular opinion on foreign
lobbies, contribute to the public debate on the impact of foreign lobbies that has recently
arisen in the context of discussions on campaign finance reform.
The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes briefly the extent of foreign
lobbying and the evolution of the legal context in which foreign lobbies operate in the US.
Section III describes the theoretical framework that underlies our empirical exercise. Section
IV presents the econometric model and discusses data and estimation issues in detail. Section
V describes our results. Section VI concludes.

II. Foreign Political Activity in the United States
Government concern regarding foreign influence on policy has a long history in the United
States. Thus, for instance, political activity by foreigners was very much on the mind of
itself was treated as endogenous and reported dramatic evidence to this effect, is an excellent example of
work in this tradition. As we have discussed in Gawande and Krishna (2001), a recent survey of empirical
analyses in the literature on the political economy of trade policy, the use of extended specifications has the
merit of (a type of) comprehensiveness − every observable variable that we conjecture to be relevant to the
determination of trade policy may be included as an explanatory factor. However, this also has the demerit
that the variables included in the right-hand side sometimes have only very tenuous links with the theories
that motivate their inclusion in the regression equations. On this point, see also Rodrik (1995).
6
See, for instance, Baldwin (1985), Choate (1990) and Hillman and Ursprung (1988).

4

James Madison when he successfully proposed that legislation impacting the commerce of
the United States with foreign powers require only the approval of a simple majority, rather
than a super-majority, as was required for treaties. His reasoning was that foreign powers
could more easily defeat a tariff proposal by influencing, via bribes, the nine (out of the,
then, twenty six) senators required to defeat a super-majority than they could the fourteen
required to defeat a majority. Madison argued that
The power of foreign nations to obstruct our retaliating measures [and with successful retaliation on the injurious restrictions of foreign powers] on them by a
corrupt influence would also be less if a majority should be made competent than
if two-thirds of each House should be required to legislate acts in this case.

The potential for harmful foreign intrigue was very real to the founders and was addressed
in no fewer than fifteen of the Federalist Papers. Alexander Hamilton stated his view of the
corrupting impact of foreign political presence by writing that
One of the weak sides of republics, among their numerous advantages, is that they
afford too easy an inlet to foreign corruption... Hence it is that history furnishes
us with so many mortifying examples of the prevalence of foreign corruption in
republican governments. How much this contributed to the ruin of the ancient
commonwealths has been already disclosed. [Hamilton, Federalist #22]

Further, Hamilton also argued that
Nothing was more to be desired than that every practicable obstacle should be
opposed to cabal, intrigue, and corruption. These most deadly adversaries of republican government might naturally have been expected to make their approaches
from more than one quarter, but chiefly from the desire in foreign powers to gain
an improper ascendant in our councils [Hamilton, Federalist #68].

5

Nevertheless, as Corrado et al.(1997) note,7 for many years there was no ban or limit placed
on foreign political contributions. This changed in 1938 when, in the face of evidence of
Nazi money spent to influence US political debate, Congress passed the so-called Foreign
Agents Registration Act (FARA). This law required agents of foreign entities engaged in
publishing “political propaganda” to register and disclose their activities, but it did not
regulate political contributions. In 1966, after congressional hearings in 1962-63 revealed
campaign contributions to federal candidates by Philippine sugar producers and agents of
Nicaraguan president Luis Somoza, Congress moved to prohibit political contributions in
any US election by any foreign government, political party, corporation or individual (except
foreign nationals who were permanent residents of the US).
The contrast with restrictions on domestic influence in the electoral process may be clarified
as follows. US nationals may make direct political contributions. US corporations and labor
unions, while generally restricted from making contributions from their treasury funds to
election candidates, may still make contributions through “voluntary” funds collected by
“political action committees” (PACs), which are composed of their employees and members
respectively.8 Despite the 1966 regulations (described in the previous paragraph) seeking to
prevent the influence of foreign interests on US policymaking, legal contributions from sources
with foreign ties are still allowed. “Foreign agents”, i.e., US citizens acting as lobbyists for
foreign governments or officials, foreign individuals, or foreign businesses or associations can
make campaign contributions like any other US citizen provided that they are registered with
the Justice Department (in accordance with the Foreign Agent Registration Act (FARA) of
1938 which we have mentioned above) and that the contributions are made with their own
7

The discussion that follows borrows extensively from the comprehensive Brookings survey by these
authors.
8
It is worth pointing out that contributions by US entities may be classified as either being in “hard
money” (which is money that is limited and otherwise regulated through federal election laws and can be
used directly in connection with election for federal office) or in “soft money” (which is generally subject to no
limits but may only be used indirectly in the political process - for such purposes as “getting-out-the-vote”
and “issue advocacy”. Corporations and unions, while banned from making hard money contributions,
except through PACs (as described above), may still make unlimited soft money contributions - as can
individuals. However, since our study is set in the 1970s, soft money contributors and contributions (which
did not really assume significance until the early 1990s) are not an important consideration and we ignore
them entirely.

6

funds. By all popular accounts, the fungibility of cash flows and generally lax monitoring
of the activities of foreign agents has implied that in practice, agents of foreign interests
have contributed actively to political campaigns on behalf of their principals.9 It is on these
foreign agents that we focus our attention in this study.
A measure of the extent of foreign agent activity in absolute terms and in relation to lobbying
by domestic corporate PACs can be obtained by examining the following figures. At the
beginning of the time period of our study, the 1978 election cycle, there were roughly 800
corporate PACs in operation. In comparison, in the same period, there were approximately
250 foreign agents in active operation. In the 1978 election cycle, these corporate PACs
contributed approximately a total of 10 million dollars to federal election campaigns, whereas
foreign agent expenditures added up to about 14 million dollars. Further, it may be noted
that in contrast to foreign agents, domestic PACs are interested in a much broader range of
economic policy making than simply trade policy or other externally related matters. Thus,
it becomes clear that in the trade policy arena, the extent of foreign agent activity was not
of an entirely lower order of magnitude than domestic lobbying. The impact on trade policy
of this lobbying activity by domestic and foreign entities is what we study in the rest of this
paper.

III. Theory
The theoretical framework we use closely parallels that of Grossman and Helpman (1994)
- but with some important modifications to allow for the role of foreign lobbies. Consider
an open economy which is populated by individuals with identical preferences but different
factor endowments. Each individual maximizes utility given by
U = c0 +

X

ui (ci ),

(1)

i

where c0 denotes consumption of the numeraire good, good 0 and ci denotes consumption of
goods i = 1....n. Further, the sub-utilities ui are assumed to be quadratic with parameters
9

For a detailed discussion and accounting of the role of foreign agents in recent campaigns, see
http://www.opensecrets.org.

7

such that domestic demand for the non-numeraire goods is assumed to take the linear form
Pi = A − Qi ,

i = 1....n.

(2)

where Qi denotes aggregate consumption of good i.
Good 0 is assumed to be produced from labor alone by Ricardian technology (with inputoutput coefficient equal to one) and is assumed to be freely traded internationally in perfectly
competitive markets. Goods i = 1...n are assumed to be produced with constant returns
technologies using labor alone (or alternately using fixed and specific capital, as in Grossman
and Helpman, and technology which gives constant returns in labor), but are assumed to be
sold in internationally segmented oligopolistically competitive markets with supply provided
by fixed numbers of domestic and international firms (as in Brander and Krugman (1983))
which compete in Cournot-Nash fashion.10
Focusing on the home market for any good i, and using j(h, f ) as a country index to denote
home (h) and foreign (f ), we let
qij denote the quantity sold of i by any one firm from j
Pi denote the equilibrium price of the good i,
πij denote profits made by an individual firm from j operating in sector i,
τi denote the specific tariff imposed on imports of good i,
nji denote the number of symmetric firms from j operating in sector i,
ni = nhi + nfi denote the total number of firms operating in i, and
ci denote the constant marginal cost of production involved in the production of i.11
10

It should be clear that considering alternative forms of competition, such as Bertrand competition, for
instance, will not alter the basic result which we derive here − that domestic firms would like to have higher
tariffs and that foreign firms would like to have tariffs against them lowered. With non-tariff barriers, we
run into the possibility that both domestic and foreign firms may, under some circumstances, prefer to have
higher levels of barriers on imports, as the well-known work of Krishna (1989) showed. In any event, as we
discuss later, we examine both types of trade barriers separately and allow the results to tell us whether
observed trade barriers are higher or lower with domestic and foreign lobbying.
11
We should note that the assumption here that marginal costs of production are constant across domestic
and foreign firms is made purely for notational convenience. Our resulting expressions do not change if we
were to allow for costs to be different for domestic and foreign firms.

8

For any given tariff rate, the outcome of the oligopolistic competition in the home market
may be easily derived: The nhi home firms each sell a quantity in the domestic market given
by
qih =

nf τi
Ai − ci
+ i ,
ni + 1
ni + 1

(3)

πih = [qih ]2 .

(4)

and have profits given by

Correspondingly, a foreign firm, facing import tax τi , sells
qif

nfi τi
Ai − ci
+
− τi
=
ni + 1
ni + 1

(5)

and makes profits
πif = [qif ]2 .

(6)

Having described the features of the economy which determine equilibrium quantities and
prices of goods as a function of trade policy, we move on to the determination of trade
policy itself: As modeled by Grossman and Helpman (1994), trade policy is determined by
interactions between the government and organized lobbies - here representing (separately)
domestic and foreign firms.
The government’s objective function is assumed to be a weighted function of lobbying contributions and the three components of welfare: consumer surplus, producer surplus and
profits, in the following form:
G=

X
i∈Lh

Cih + a[

X

nhi πih + T R + CS] + b

i

X
i∈Lf

9

Cif ,

(7)

where Lh denotes the sectors with organized domestic lobbies, Cih denotes lobbying contributions by the domestic lobby (if any) in i, Lf denotes the set of organized foreign lobbies,
Cif denotes foreign contributions, TR denotes tariff revenues, CS denotes consumer surplus
and

P

i

nhi πih denotes domestic producer profits, a is a constant reflecting the government’s

preference for welfare relative to domestic campaign contributions and finally b is a constant
reflecting the government’s preference for foreign contributions relative to domestic contributions. Differentiating the weights on foreign and domestic lobbying contributions allows
us to empirically investigate whether they are in fact different.
The lobbies representing domestic and foreign firms in any sector would like trade policy to
be set in a manner that suits them - for example, a domestic lobby in import-competing
sector i would typically want import barriers on imports of i and import subsidies on imports
of all other goods, whereas a foreign lobby in sector i would want this government to subsidize
the imports of i. The interaction between the various lobbies and the government that we
have in mind has the structure of a “menu-auction” problem - exactly as in Grossman and
Helpman (1994). Thus, it is assumed that a lobby representing organized sector i makes
political contributions to the government contingent on the trade policy vector it implements.
The political equilibrium here is the outcome of a two-stage non-cooperative game in which
lobbies choose their political contributions in the first stage and the government sets policy
in the second. An equilibrium is a set of contribution functions (functions of the trade
policy vector), one for each organized lobby group, such that each contribution maximizes
the welfare of the lobby taking as given the joint welfare of the other groups and the political
optimization of the government in the next stage, and an import tax vector that maximizes
government objectives taking the contribution schedules as given.
We assume further that the contribution schedules of the lobbies are “truthful” (using the
terminology of Bernheim and Whinston (1985) and Grossman and Helpman (1994)). This is
to say that they truthfully reflect everywhere the true preferences of the lobbies - since they
pay to the government the excess of the lobby’s gross welfare for any given policy relative to
some base level of net welfare B (which itself is endogenously determined). Formally, such

10

truthful contributions take the form
Cij = max[0, Wij − Bij ],

(8)

where Wij denotes the gross welfare of the lobby representing j in sector i and Bij is a
constant denoting the lobby’s net welfare.12
Letting α denote the fraction of the home population that is organized into any domestic
lobby, we can substitute (8) into the government’s objective function to get as the government’s maximand,
X

nhi πih + α(T R + CS) + a(

X

nhi πih + T R + CS) + b

X

nfi πif .

The first-order condition corresponding to the choice of τi , following from
X

nhi

i∈Lh

(9)

i∈Lf

i∈Lh

∂G
∂τi

= 0, is

X
X ∂πif
∂TR
∂CS
∂πih
∂π h
+a
nhi i + (a + α)
+ (a + α)
+b
= 0.
∂τi
∂τi
∂τi
∂τi
i
i∈Lf ∂τi

(10)

which can be re-written as
(Iih

+ a)

∂π h
nhi i
∂τi
i

X

f
∂TR
∂CS
f ∂πi
+ (a + α)
+ (a + α)
+ b(Ii )
= 0,
∂τi
∂τi
∂τi

(11)

where Iih is an indicator variable that takes the value one if domestic sector i is organized
(i.e., is represented by a lobby) and takes the value zero otherwise, and where Iif is defined
analogously.
Working out the various terms in (11) (using (3), (4), (5) and (6)), substituting these back
in and some tedious algebra (along with a minor approximation) gives us
12

The assumption that contributions are truthful is made here for expositional convenience and, strictly
speaking, need not be made to determine the equilibrium trade policy vector, as Grossman and Helpman
(1994) have shown. On this, see also Goldberg and Maggi (1999).

11

"



τi
2Iih
2a
+
=
Pi
(a + α)
a+α

# 

Xi
mi



"

#

1
2bIif
Xi 1
−
·( )
|i |
(a + α)
mi |i |

(12)

where Xi denotes aggregate production of i in the home economy, mi denotes imports and
i is an imports elasticity measure − it measures the “observed” proportionate change in
imports with changes in prices, i.e.,

∂mi
∂Pi
mi
Pi

, when the price changes are caused by changes in

tariffs. Overall, the prediction of the model regarding the cross-sectional determinants of tariffs (as represented by (12) above) are quite intuitive. Sectors that are politically represented
by organized domestic lobbies are, ceteris paribus, likely to receive more protection (i.e., Iih
enters positively). Sectors in which there is foreign political presence are likely to receive
less protection (i.e., Iif enters negatively). Finally, sectors in which there is neither domestic
political representation nor foreign political presence are predicted to receive positive protection (which should not be surprising − given the assumptions regarding the imperfectly
competitive nature of the product market).13
In closing the theoretical discussion, we note two particular features of the theoretical framework we have just described.
First, consider “counter-lobbying” or the lobbying by sectors for lower import barriers on
goods not produced by them (in a direction counter to that of the producers of these goods).
It should be clear that our treatment of counter-lobbying is entirely analogous to that of
Grossman and Helpman (1994). In both analyses, profits of domestic producers are independent of the prices of goods other than those they sell. And, in both, domestic producers
care about prices of other goods since they are assumed to consume them. The lobbying
by domestic interest groups reflects this concern in both cases (as seen from the fact that
their contributions are contingent on the entire vector of goods prices and not just on the
price of the good they produce). Thus, there is no substantial difference in the assumed
structure of counter-lobbying in our framework when compared with the theory of GrossIt is perhaps worth clarifying that the number of firms, nfi and nhi , and their individual outputs do not
enter on the right-hand side of (12) since their effect is captured for most part by total imports and total
domestic production as represented in (12) by X
m.
13

12

man and Helpman (1994) or with the empirical implementation of tests of this framework
such as the one by conducted by Goldberg and Maggi (1999). We should note further that
in ongoing research, Gawande and Krishna (2003), we are examining the issue of counterlobbying (motivated by cross-sectoral usage of inputs) in a more formal and detailed manner
by extending the theory to allow for heterogeneous usage of intermediate inputs across sectors (i.e., integrating the input-output matrix into the analysis) and using the closed-form
predictions regarding trade protection that are derived as the basis for our estimating equations. However, our estimation results suggest surprisingly little counter-lobbying in US
data. Estimates from simpler specifications that do not take intermediates usage into proper
account are nearly identical to those obtained from the more sophisticated specification that
we have described above.14 We should note also that extensions of the theory of Grossman
and Helpman (1994) (and thus also the present framework) in which labor market linkages
provide a second “general-equilibrium” motivation for counter-lobbying (i.e., in addition to
the intermediates linkages discussed above) can be considered.15 However, the empirical relevance of such general equilibrium linkages in providing a motivation for political lobbying
is likely to be small and we ignore them here.
Second, as we have already noted, varying the theory by assuming a different mode of product
market competition and allowing protection to be provided by alternative instruments, such
as voluntary export restraints may generate the prediction that foreign lobbies and domestic
lobbies work in the same direction. If this were predominantly the case, estimation of (12)
should deliver coefficients on domestic and foreign lobbying with the same sign. This is a
possibility that is not precluded by our estimation methodology (as described below); we are
willing to let the data inform us as to whether this is in fact the case.

14

These results are available from the authors on request.
Thus, for instance, it can be argued that an increase in protection in one sector causes an increase in
labor demand there, raising the price of labor and production costs in all other sectors.
15

13

IV. Econometric Specification, Data and Estimation
Methodology
IV.1 Econometric Specification
Equation (12) motivates our basic estimating equation. After the introduction of an (additive) error term ei , it can be expressed as
"

#

"

#

"

#

Xi
1
Xi 1
Xi 1
ti
= β1
·
+ β2 Iih ·
·
+ β3 Iif ·
·
+ ei ,
1 + ti
mi |i |
mi |i |
mi |i |
where ti denotes the (effective) ad-valorem import tax (i.e.,
2
a+α

and β3 =

2b
− a+α
.

τi
)
Pi −τi

and where β1 =

(13)
h

2a
a+α

i

, β2 =

Clearly, β1 and β2 are predicted to be greater than zero and β3 is less

than zero.
IV.2 Data
In the estimation of the equation (13) above we employ primarily data from the period 19781982. The study is conducted at the four-digit SIC level of disaggregation, and is focused
on U.S. manufacturing industries. Protection is measured using information on both tariffs
and non-tariff barriers.16 The inverse of the import penetration ratio,
Xi
,
mi

is taken directly from the annual survey of manufactures.17 The import demand elasticity,

i , for various industries is taken from the study by Sheills, Deardorff and Stern (1986). These
are estimated at the three-digit SIC level, and are replicated at our four-digit level here.18
16

Previous studies that have examined empirically this new generation of political economy models (such as
Gawande and Bandhyopadhyay (2000) and Goldberg and Maggi (1999)) have generally only used non-tariff
barriers to represent the level of trade protection. Our study is the first to use US tariffs in this context.
17
Since the concordance from the system of trade data (TSUS for these years, and Harmonized system in
recent years) into the SIC system of industrial data is less than perfect, a few industries register zero imports.
For these industries, the inverse import-penetration ratio is undefined and they are dropped. In the end,
our sample comprises of 248 industries and accounts for over two-thirds of manufacturing value-added.
18
The fact that most industry data (including that on political activity) is available at the four-digit level
while data on elasticities is only available at the three-digit level poses a potential problem for us as to the
level of disaggregation at which the analysis is to be conducted. Since much of the interest in the present
exercise is in lobbying activity and since econometric analyses conducted by us elsewhere (Gawande and
Bandhyopadhyay (2000)) suggests that elasticities turn out to bear relatively little of explanatory burden in
this context, we choose to conduct the analysis at the four-digit level here.

14

The binary variables for domestic and foreign political organization, I and I ∗ respectively,
are measured using political expenditures data we have constructed at the four-digit level.
Issues pertaining to their measurement and those of the other variables are discussed at
length below, and an appendix provides further details on their construction.
Protection Measures
The theory on which our model is founded simply dictates that the protection measure
equal the proportional difference between domestic prices and world prices. In practice,
however, choosing between alternative trade barrier measures in order to capture the extent
of protection is a difficult (and familiar) problem. In a world in which tariffs are the only
form of protection, the choice is obvious: the tariff rate itself is the precise measure of the gap
between domestic and foreign prices. When non-tariff barriers (NTBs) are in use instead, the
situation is more difficult because we generally lack even moderately satisfactory measures of
the tariff equivalents of those non-tariff barriers. What many researchers have used instead
is the “coverage ratio,” i.e., the proportion of imports within any industry that is covered by
non-tariff barriers, as the measure of protection by NTBs. When tariffs and NTBs are both
known to be in use, it is hard to argue the merits of one protection measure over another.
We are agnostic on this issue and simply report results using both tariff and NTB coverage
ratios.19
Foreign and Domestic Lobbying Organization
We compiled data on foreign political organization using U.S. government reports on the administration of the Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA). As we have mentioned before,
these are annual reports put together by the Attorney General’s office for the US Congress
19

The problems with using coverage ratios as a proxy for the extent of protection offered by NTBs are many
and have been quite well discussed in the literature. Thus, for instance, the coverage ratio is an imprecise
measure of non-tariff protection for at least the reason that NTBs are heterogeneous in their intensity. That
is, industries with a large fraction of products covered by very lenient NTBs would be measured with a high
coverage ratio and deemed to be highly protected, while industries in which a lower fraction of products are
covered by highly restrictive barriers would be deemed to be less protected, and this may or may not reflect
the aggregate extent of protection actually provided by the NTBs. We have nothing new to add to this issue
here and, as we have just noted, simply proceed by using both tariff and NTB coverage ratios.

15

and contain detailed and extensive records of political spending patterns in the US of foreign
commercial entities from various countries (through so-called “foreign agents” based in the
US). All FARA entries were organized by industry and total spending by foreign commercial entities per unit value-added of imports for each industry was obtained. Similarly, for
domestic lobbies, data was organized by industry and corporate lobby expenditures per unit
value-added were determined by industry (See Data Appendix for details). The compilation of this data and their organization is an innovation in the literature, and a distinctive
contribution of this paper to it. The FARA data we organized and use primarily is from
the years 1978-82. In addition, to check robustness, we also use FARA data from the years
1972-1975. However, as we discuss later, the FARA reports are less detailed in this earlier
time period and so we are forced to organize and limit our estimation exercises with this
data accordingly.
Following the practice of Goldberg and Maggi (1999), thresholds were used to determine
whether the foreign political organization dummy variable was to be assigned a value of one.
This is done with a view to “allowing” for a more continuous representation of the intensity
of lobbying activity while remaining true to the theory that quite specifically requires a
discrete zero-one variable to represent the existence of lobbies. We used several thresholds
for the purpose of investigating the robustness of the results to a variety of definitions
for I ∗ . The domestic political organization variable I was also defined on the basis of
thresholds. In the cases central to our discussion, the domestic political organization dummy
was assigned a value of one if the mean of domestic PAC spending per thousand dollars
of sectoral value-added (in the period under study, 1978-1982) was in excess of 0.05 and
0.10. Foreign political organization was assigned as follows. The percentile distribution
of expenditures per unit value-added was first determined. Four percentile thresholds, in
increasing order of expenditures per unit value-added, are presented in the table: the 0th
percentile, the 50th percentile, the 75th percentile and the 85th percentile. For any given
threshold, say the 50th percentile, the sector was assigned an I ∗ = 1 if that sector was in
that percentile for all of the four years in the sample period (1978, 1979, 1981 and 1982).20
20

To ensure that our results are not being driven by the different ways in which the domestic and foreign

16

A separate set of results is reported for which an additional criterion was used to assign the
foreign political organization variable: the FARA report had to have indicated specifically
that the foreign agent had made efforts to contact officials from the US government. We
take this to imply that those contributions were directed at influencing government policy.
For this subset of the FARA contributions, four different I ∗ ’s were constructed using the
same percentile cutoffs. In sum, eight sets of regressions are reported for each threshold
used to determine domestic political organization: Four sets corresponding to the cutoffs
used to determine foreign political organization and four additional sets when only those
FARA entries which indicated that the relevant foreign agent had specifically made efforts
to lobby the US government were used.
Import Elasticities and Other Variables
Xi
mi

is the inverse import-penetration ratio and is measured using readily available census data

on domestic production and imports. Import demand elasticities were taken from the well
known study by Sheills, Stern and Deardorff (1986). As we have already discussed, in order
to conduct the analysis at the four-digit level (and thereby exploit the detailed information
on industry characteristics - political activity in particular - that are available at this level)
their estimates of elasticities at the three-digit SIC level were replicated at the four-digit
level for this study (i.e., for every four-digit SIC industry, the corresponding three-digit
elasticity was directly used). Since the import demand elasticities on the right-hand side of
(13) are proxied by import demand elasticity estimates rather than actual measures, there
is a potentially severe errors-in-variables problem that must be dealt with, given the widely
varying levels of precision associated with the estimates. We deal with this as in Gawande
and Bandhyopadhyay (2000), where Fuller’s (1986) method is used to purge the elasticity
data of the errors-in-variables problem.
IV.3 Estimation
political organization variables are assigned, we also ran the IV regressions using quartile cut-offs for both.
As we discuss in the next section, this does not impact the results by much. Those results were reported in
the working paper version of this paper and are available from the authors upon request.

17

Estimation of (13) raises a number of issues having to do with the right-hand-side variables
in the equation. First, the right-hand-side variables, the import penetration ratio and the
lobby dummies indicating whether or not a given sector is politically organized in the home
country and abroad, are potentially endogenous. Moreover, what appears on the right-hand
side is not simply a linear function of these endogenous variables but is rather the sum
of non-linear products of these variables. In order to consistently estimate the structural
coefficients of the system, we therefore use the two-stage least squares estimator proposed
by Kelejian (1971). We use as “exogenous” variables mostly those variables used as instruments by Gawande and Bandhyopadhyay (2000) and Goldberg and Maggi (1999): Industry
endowments (such as capital stocks, inventories, labor stocks and industry natural resource
use) are used to instrument for the import penetration ratio. Seller concentration ratios and
unemployment levels are used to instrument for domestic political organization (as suggested
by the well-known work of Olson (1965)) and the ratio of exports by foreigners to the US to
their worldwide exports in an industry (indicative of the relevance of the US as an export
market to these suppliers) is used additionally to instrument for foreign political organization. Following Kelejian’s methodology, in the first stage, reduced form equations for each
of the (transformed) right-hand-side variables (i.e.,

X
m

·

1
,
||

I·

X
m

·

1
||

and I ∗ ·

X
m

·

1
)
||

are esti-

mated using as instruments the exogenous variables listed above, their quadratic terms and
their second-order cross product terms (see also Strickland and Weiss (1976) for a similar
methodology in a different economic context).21 Estimation in the second stage proceeds as
usual.

V. Econometric Results
Summary statistics for variables employed in our analysis are provided in Table A.1 titled
“Descriptive Statistics.” The 1982 tariff data have a sample mean of 6.5%. NTB coverage
ratios have a mean value of 0.08. Of primary interest are the absolute import demand
elasticity || which has a mean of 1.49 and the inverse import penetration divided by the
Kelejian shows that if the nonlinear expressions, for example, X
m · I, are regressed on linear, squared
and first-order cross products of the exogenous variables in the system (13)-(16), then the familiar two-stage
least squares estimator may be directly used, and has the desirable properties of consistency and asymptotic
efficiency.
21

18

absolute import elasticity, or (X/m)/|| (scaled by 100 as noted in the Table A.1), which has
mean .30. As discussed earlier, we also estimate extended regressions in which the additional
variables in the table (concentration ratio, scale, percent-unionized, wage and K/L ratio) are
used.
We use a set of six tables to display our results. Tables I-IV contain estimates of (13)
obtained using a variety of measures to measure the level of protection and threshold levels
to assign I and I ∗ . Consider first Tables IA and IB. Here the protection measure is the tariff
rate. A threshold of PAC spending per thousand dollars of sectoral value-added greater than
0.05 was used to assign the domestic political organization variable. As noted earlier, I ∗ is
assigned using four different quartile cutoffs (corresponding to the four columns of the table).
In determining the quartile cutoffs for assigning I ∗ , Table IA considers all FARA entries in
manufacturing while Table IB includes only those entries which specifically cite attempts
to contact the government on the part of the foreign agent (as the respective table headers
indicate). In Tables IIA and IIB, we present corresponding results with NTB coverage ratios
used as the protection measure (and with methodology otherwise identical to the one used
to get to Tables IA and IB).
In both sets of tables, the coefficients of central interest, β2 and β3 , are statistically significant
and have the signs predicted by the theory. β2 is positive, implying that domestic political
presence, holding all else constant, leads to higher trade barriers. β3 is negative, implying
that foreign political presence, holding all else constant, is correlated with lower tariffs.
This is true in all of the cases that we consider (in IA and IB). Notably, the magnitude of
the foreign coefficient, β3 , tends to be higher when we consider higher percentile thresholds
(with correspondingly smaller number of sectors with organized foreign representation). The
closeness of the magnitudes of the coefficient estimates of β2 and β3 imply that in our theory
the structural coefficient b, which measures the value of a foreign dollar in contributions
relative to a domestic dollar, is about one. That is, the estimates suggest that the government
places about equal weight on a dollar of domestic lobbying contribution as a dollar of foreign

19

lobbying contribution. This is an interesting and robust feature of our results.22
Tables III (A&B) and IV (A&B) present results with thresholds for domestic PAC spending
per thousand dollars of value-added set at 0.10 instead. The results correspond closely to
those presented in Tables I and II (A&B): the coefficient β2 is estimated significant and
positive and the coefficient β3 is estimated significant and negative - just as the theory
predicts. Here too, in almost all cases, the coefficient β3 is estimated to be higher when
higher percentile requirements are imposed on the foreign political organization variable.
Estimates of the coefficient β1 are nearly always estimated to be insignificantly different
from zero. It would appear from the definitions of β1 and β2 (given below (13)), that the
structural parameter a may be recovered as the ratio of β1 to β2 , and this calculation would
suggest that the value of a is insignificantly different from zero. That is, the estimates
suggest that the government formulates trade policy almost entirely on the basis of political
contributions, with little regard for welfare. That conclusion, however, is not necessarily
warranted here: Using the coefficient β2 to infer the value of a, after using the fact that
the fraction of the population that is organized has to be necessarily less than one (i.e.,
α < 1), implies an implausibly high value of a instead.23 This should perhaps not be too
surprising: that plausible estimates of the parameter a have proven difficult to obtain is a
well-known point in the literature by now (See Goldberg and Maggi (1999) and Gawande
and Bandhyopadhyay (2000)).24
22

Formal statistical tests, not reported here, examining the equality of magnitudes of the coefficients β2
and β3 were conducted by us as well. In virtually all the parsimonious models using tariff and NTB data,
this difference is found to not be statistically significant at the 10 percent level (the only exceptions being
parsimonious models run with tariff data and using the 0th percentile cutoff for I ∗ , in which case the difference
is statistically significant at the 5 percent level). This is also true for all the extended models of Tables V
and VI where domestic and foreign lobbying have equivalent effects on tariffs (in opposite directions).
β2
2
23
Note that given our scaling by 100 of (X/m)/, we have a+α
= 100
. Given the estimated values of β2
(around 0.2 - 0.5), this implies a very high value for a, when α < 1.
24
We should note, however, that problematic estimates of a should not lead the reader to necessarily
be sceptical as to whether the estimates of β2 and β3 are informative about the relative impact of other
determinants of trade policy (such as domestic political organization relative to foreign political organization
and so on). As modeled, the “variable” a is constant across industries while the other variables vary in the
cross section. That is to say, the former relates to the level of protection, while the latter also related to the
cross sectional variation in protection.

20

The results based on the 1978-82 FARA data may then be summarized as follows: ceteris
paribus, tariffs and NTB coverage ratios are strongly positively correlated with the presence
of organized import-competing lobbies and negatively related to organized foreign lobbies.
This is in accord with the theory. The quantitative implications of the results are as follows.
Consider the 50th percentile cutoff definition for I ∗ in Table IA. The estimated value of β2
of 0.359 implies that if an industry is domestically organized then an increase of 0.1 in the
scaled value of inverse import penetration - to - import elasticity ratio (where the scaling is
100) will raise the ad valorem tariff by 0.036. The estimated value of β3 of -0.29 implies that
if an industry has foreign political organization then the same increase in the inverse import
penetration-to-import elasticity ratio will lower the ad valorem tariff by 0.017. Hence, we
see a countervailing influence on the U.S. tariff of a similar magnitude exerted by foreign
lobbying. A more unconditional inference about lobbying organization and its impact on
tariffs may also be made: Consider a representative estimate of β2 and β3 of say, 0.2. Given
the mean value of

x
m.

of 0.3 (see Table A.1. with descriptive statistics), this implies that on

average, holding all else constant, the presence of an organized foreign lobby lowers tariffs
in that industry by about 6 percent (which to say lowers the tariff rate from, say, 12 percent
to 6 percent). Conversely, the presence of an organized domestic lobby raises the tariff rate
in that industry by 7.5 percent. These estimates suggest economically significant impacts of
domestic and foreign lobbying.
Finally, we observe the intuitively appealing result that these effects are larger when I and I ∗
are measured at higher percentile or spending requirements. Although the theory does not
explicitly recognize any fixed costs of lobby formation and organization, in practice it is only
after spending exceeds certain amounts that we would expect the industry to be politically
organized for lobbying. The results suggest the presence of such fixed costs.25
As the results reported in Tables I through IV indicate, our results are robust to changes
in the ways in which the data are handled (by varying thresholds levels for the assignment
25

Of course, there are other potential explanations and our analysis does not confirm this as the only
explanation for the observed pattern of coefficient estimates. The “fixed costs” explanation, however, seems
to be a compelling one. For a recent analytical investigation of the issue of endogenous determination of
lobbies (in a Grossman-Helpman context) in the presence of fixed costs of lobby formation, see Mitra (1999).

21

of I and I ∗ or the measures of protection itself). A number of additional robustness checks
were also conducted by us. We discuss these here briefly.26 The first set of robustness checks
involved the time period of our sample. The fact that our sample follows a major multilateral
international trade negotiation round (the Tokyo round of the GATT) may raise doubts as to
whether other factors such as international bargaining influence our estimates.27 We should
note first that proportionality associated with the tariff reduction schemes implemented after
the Tokyo round mitigates this concern somewhat. Nevertheless, we repeated our exercises
using trade protection and FARA data from the period 1972-1975 (which preceded the Tokyo
round, which only started in 1976).28 The limitation on the FARA data from this time period
is that we do not have detailed data in the FARA reports on foreign agent activities. Specifically there is no data for this time period on the actual expenditures by foreign lobbyists
and there are no data indicating specifically whether or not the foreign lobbyists made any
effort to contact the US government. Lacking any data on actual expenditures, we proceeded
first by using simply the 0th percentile criterion (i.e., a sector is assigned I ∗ = 1 if it simply
appears in the FARA data base in each of the years under consideration). In these runs, the
theory still finds a confirmation in the data: the coefficient β2 is estimated significant and
positive and the coefficient β3 is estimated significant and negative. Keeping in mind the
extent of persistence of lobbying activity that we see in data on both domestic and foreign
lobbying and in order to exploit the more detailed information that we have in our FARA
data set on spending in the later period, we estimated (13) differently using data on tariffs
and import penetration from the earlier period (1972-75) and data on political organization
from the later period (1978-82). This amounts to assuming that the distribution of lobbying
expenditures across industries in the period 1972-1975 was identical to the distribution in
the period 1978-1982. The results showed a remarkable degree of similarity with the results
26

We do not present the results of these tests in detail here in the interest of brevity. The detailed results
were, however, reported in an earlier working paper version of this paper which is available from the authors
upon request.
27
As such it is perhaps worth pointing out that this is a standing problem that has not adequately been
dealt with in the literature - the majority of studies on endogenous protection have simply ignored this issue.
28
Of course, this too was preceded by other GATT negotiation rounds. Nevertheless, estimates obtained
using data before the Tokyo round after are roughly similar in magnitude to those obtained using data
after the Tokyo round - suggesting that equilibrium outcomes in trade negotiations too reflect the same
cross-sectional pressures.

22

reported in Tables I-IV. Foreign organization was nearly always negatively correlated with
trade barriers and domestic lobbying nearly always positively so. The consistency of results
using tariff rates from the period prior to the Tokyo round and those after the Tokyo round
should perhaps not be greatly surprising. It is only indicative of the fact that even when
trade barriers are negotiated internationally, equilibrium outcomes are subject to very same
(or similar) domestic lobbying pressures that would operate if international negotiations were
absent. The fact that lobbying data from a later period is used in a regression with trade
policy from a prior period makes these results a less reliable - but it is heartening to see that
our earlier results aren’t contradicted by this run.
A second set of robustness checks involved the protection measure. In addition to the overall
NTB coverage ratio, we also separated NTBs into simply quantitative NTBs and price NTBs
and found the results to be largely invariant to this finer categorization. Foreign lobbying
appears to reduce protection and domestic lobbying appears to raise it.
Finally, since the left-hand-side variable in (13), is censored below zero for some industries
(for example, import subsidies that are akin to negative tariffs are not measured in the
tariff data), we combined the Smith-Blundell (1986) method with Kelejian (1971) to obtain
estimates of the Tobit model (13). The results seem invariant to this change (qualitatively
speaking). Perhaps this should not be so surprising: the extent of censoring in the tariff
data is small, and the Tobit results should therefore have been expected to be close to the
linear instrumental variables estimates.
Extended Regressions
The preceding regressions have all tested the implications of the theory in strict form−restricting
the number of variables on the right-hand side to those narrowly predicted by the theory.
However, the earlier literature on endogenous trade policy has suggested several other variables that may be relevant in explaining protection (see e.g., Baldwin (1985), Trefler (1993)
and Gawande (1998) for a detailed discussion). Thus, for instance, one may expect that
industries with higher seller concentration (and thus presumably more easily organized) or
23

with higher degrees of unionized workers to be better able to secure protection. Industries
with greater numbers of low-skilled and low-wage workers or simply labor intensive industries may be more likely to get protection from governments which have “social justice”
motivations or are subject to democratic pressures. Tables V and VI present our final set of
IV results for tariffs and NTBs, respectively, in which the specification includes a number
of these additional variables on the right-hand side.29 We note first that the coefficients on
many of the variables have the signs suggested and confirmed in the earlier literature.30 Thus,
unionization rates show up as positively impacting the protection rates as do concentration
ratios. Labor-intensive sectors (which are more likely importable sectors) receive higher protection (as indicated by the negative coefficient on the K/L variable), as do industries with
lower wages (and presumably greater numbers of low-skilled workers). Importantly, both
our coefficients of central concern, β2 and β3 , retain their signs and statistical significance
although they both see a drop in magnitudes.
Model Comparisons
Our final set of results concerns the comparison of the extended models presented in Tables
V and IV with the parsimonious specification (12) implied by the theory. We perform these
comparisons of these nested models using the Akaike information criteria (AIC) and the
Schwarz information criteria (SIC).31 The augmented model with nine explanatory variables
outperforms the corresponding parsimonious model on both criteria. For example, the AIC
value of 2.321 in the second column of Table V is lower than the AIC value of 1.281 in the
second column of Table IA. Hence, the extended model (at the 0th percentile I* cutoff) is
29

For brevity, we have only presented results where the threshold for I is set at 0.05 as in Table IA and
IB. Using the higher threshold of 0.10 or 0.25 did not make any qualitative difference to our results.
30
A detailed discussion of the determinants of trade policy discussed in the earlier empirical literature and
the contrast in methodology with recent structural attempts is provided in the recent survey by Gawande
and Krishna (2001).
31
These are preferred over other criteria such as adjusted R2 because they penalize excessive parameterization and reward parsimony. The AIC is computed as [−2(lnL − k)/n] and the SIC value as
[lnL/n − 0.5k/n(lnn)], where n is the sample size, k is the number of regressors, and lnL is the log of
value of the maximum likelihood function. It should be clear that lower AIC values are preferred, while
higher SIC values are preferred. While both criteria penalize the use of additional regressors more strictly
than does the adjusted R2 , the SIC imposes this penalty more severely than does the AIC.

24

preferred over its smaller counterpart by the Akaike criterion. The SIC value of 1.104 in
the second column of Table V is higher than the SIC value of 0.619 in the second column
of Table IA. The extended model is thus preferred over its smaller counterpart even by the
Schwarz criterion. The preference for the extended model is unanimous across all models
estimated, as well as across both measures of protection − tariffs and NTBs. An implication
of this finding is that the parsimonious model does omit possibly important influences. As it
stands, the comparison is between a model built on a sound theory (the parsimonious model)
against an ad hoc exploratory alternative (the extended model). In order for the comparison
to show the way for future models, the alternative hypothesis should ideally emerge from
analysis with the same level of rigor as the null. Nevertheless, the results from the extended
model suggest that the lobbying and electoral influence of unions and the determination of
lobbying organization itself are issues that among the important issues that deserve formal
treatment.

VI. Summary and Conclusions
Our primary interest in this paper is the study of foreign lobbies and their impact on trade
policy. We have pursued this using a structural methodology - where a theoretical framework
was developed and where the econometric work that followed was linked closely to this theory.
Further, to account for the possible role of variables that have traditionally been suggested
as determinants of trade policy (but which do not appear in the parsimonious specification
implied by the theory we develop), we estimated “extended” specifications with a large
number of additional variables included in the regression equation.
Our results suggest that foreign lobbying has a statistically and economically significant
impact on trade policy: The presence of an organized foreign lobby representing a particular
industrial sector appears to have as much effect in lowering tariffs against imports in that
sector as does the presence of a domestic lobby in raising tariffs there. Ceteris paribus, US
consumers gain unambiguously from the presence of foreign political activity. The results
are quite robust to changes in specification.

25

It is our hope that these results, which run counter to much of the popular opinion on
foreign lobbies, will contribute to the public debate that has recently arisen in the context of
discussions on campaign finance reform on the costs and benefits of foreign lobbying activity.

26

Appendix
The variables that appear in (13) are ad valorem tariff rates, domestic production, imports,
import demand elasticities, domestic and foreign political organization. In this data appendix, we provide a detailed description of data sources and data construction methodology
for the political organization variables (especially for foreign political organization). The remaining variables in (13) are quite familiar and we restrict ourselves to just a brief description
here. As we have discussed in the text, IV estimation of (13) also requires information on a
number of additional (instrumental) variables as does the estimation of the extended versions
of (13) we have presented in Tables X and XI. We discuss each of these variables in turn.

Foreign Political Organization: I ∗
The data set used in the estimation of our empirical model was assembled using a report
that is sent annually from the U.S. Attorney General to the U.S. Congress. The report is
required by the 1938 legislation known as the Foreign Agent Registration Act (FARA)32 .
The report collects information about foreign agents, broadly defined, operating within the
United States. The primary results presented in this paper used data taken from the reports
that covered calendar years 1978, 1979, 1981, and 198233 .
Each entry in the FARA annual reports contains the following information:
1. Name and address of the foreign agent34 ,
2. Name of the foreign principal (usually a private firm, a industry association, or a
32

From 1938 until 1950, the report was produced by the Department of State, and then beginning in about
1950, by the Department of Justice
33
The 1980 report was not used because it alone was not distributed to the regional repository libraries as
it fell in-between the years during which hard-copy paper reports were sent out and when microfiche reports
were subsequently distributed. Apparently, the one and only copy of it resides in the Department of Justice
library in Washington DC
34
A foreign agent, in the view of the USDOJ, is somebody who (a.) engages in political activities or
acts in a public relations capacity for a foreign principal, (b.) solicits or dispenses any thing of value
within the United States for a foreign principal, or (c.) who represents the interests of a foreign principal before any agency or official of the U.S. government. This is taken from a “Q&A” document,
http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/fara/q A.htm.

27

government agency),
3. The purpose of the agency, including any U.S. government entities contacted, and
4. Amount of money exchange in return for the agency services.
For each of the years in question there were generally about 1,300 entries. With the exception
of the name of the agent (not useful for our purposes), all of this data was transcribed into
an MS Excel spreadsheet, consisting of five columns:
(i.) The calendar year of the activity,
(ii.) The country of the principal,
(iii.) The name of the principal,
(iv.) The amount of money transacted for the agent’s representation, and
(v.) A “lobbying” indicator variable that was set to “1” if the description supplied in the
report mentioned that the agent contacted either the U.S. Congress or any other U.S.
government agency (including the military).

To this data, taken verbatim from the government report, we added a sixth column. This
represented our best guess for the U.S. Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code that the
industry would fall into (were it producing in the U.S.). This was done using a combination
of the principal’s name (which was often quite straightforward, as in the case of sugar
cooperatives), the description of the representation activity in the FARA report (again,
often helpful if it mentioned, for instance, that the principal was concerned about U.S.
automobile safety regulations), and standard business research tools that provide insight
into an organization’s line of business.
Our object was to provide each entry in our four-year FARA database with a three-digit
SIC code. This task was made easier through the use of a computer-searchable version of

28

the SIC Handbook available on-line35 which allowed us to classify even the most detailed of
components. Allowance was made for the fact that while the government handbook used the
1987-version of the SIC system, the 1982 data set from the Gawande and Bandhyopadhyay
(2000) paper, which we used for information on other variables, was based on the 1972-version
of the SIC system. Only a small fraction of the entries had to have their 1987-version SIC
codes changed to fit the 1972 scheme. We used the full range of the SIC system, even
assigning 9XX SIC codes to principals that were from the government sector, despite the
fact that for this paper we were only interested in SIC codes from the 200 – 399 range, that
is, the manufacturing industries.
Categorization of the Raw Data
The following is a breakdown of the original 5,302 entries by category of the foreign principal:
1. Fully 34% of the entries were from either tourist boards or government and/or private
chambers of commerce that encourage general business contacts.36
2. 21% of the entries were related to government to government contacts that fall into
the realm of international relations and not lobbying for a particular industry.
3. 18% of the entries fell into the service industries (SIC codes 400 – 859).
4. 5% were either agricultural or raw material industries (SIC codes 001 – 199).
5. Only 4% of the entries were foreign political parties that were campaigning among
ethnic diasporas or seeking U.S. government recognition for their cause.
35

see http://www.osha.gov/oshstats/sicser.html.
The large number of entries that fall into this category is somewhat puzzling because these agents, while
they do meet the criteria mentioned in the above footnote, certainly qualify for exemption from reporting
based on the following passage from the same document (http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/fara/q A.htm).
“For example, diplomats and officials of foreign governments, and their staffs, are exempt if properly recognized by the U.S. State Department. Persons whose activities are of a purely commercial nature or of a
religious, academic, and charitable nature are exempt. Lawyers engaged in legal representation of foreign
principals in the courts or similar type proceedings, so long as the attorney does not try to influence policy
at the behest of his client, are exempt. Any agent who is engaged in lobbying activities and is registered
under the Lobbying Disclosure Act is exempt”.
36

29

6. The remaining 18% were manufacturing industries in which we were interested. So,
out of our four years of data, we ended up working with 934 entries from 71 different
countries.

Because it was often impossible to neatly divide entries into a single SIC code, in less than
15% of the 934 entries, we assigned two or (rarely) three SIC codes to a single entry and
then divided the lobbying fees listed in the report equally among these other codes. So,
for instance, if a lumber company was listed as having paid $10,000 for a lobbying effort in
the U.S., we divided this sum into two entries: $5,000 under SIC 241 and $5,000 under SIC
242. Note that the numbers of entries provided above were tabulated before any splitting of
entries took place.
Constructing the Input Table from the Raw Data
In order to incorporate this raw data into our empirical model, we had to convert the above
an indicator variable, “0” for unorganized and “1” for organized, that would correspond to
each SIC code in our data set. This would allow us to compare tariffs in industries with
only an organized domestic sector versus those with both a domestic and foreign organized
lobbying presence.
In the interest of being able to later perform sensitivity analysis on our classification of the
data, we used several different criteria in the assignment of the indicator variable. The most
significant axis on which we divided the data set was:
1. Using the entire 934 entries on the basis that because all of these principals hired
lawyers in the U.S. to represent them in some capacity, that they must be “organized”
in a political-influence sense. Even if the U.S. government was not lobbied directly in
many cases, it is plausible to assume that having a paid representative in the nation’s
capitol would provide some added support, even if it relied upon informal contacts
among individuals in the lobbying community.
2. Using a much more restrictive criteria to determine political organization: that is,
30

counting an industrial sector as organized only if it had a current contract that paid a
positive amount of money and if the description of the activity provided in the FARA
report specifically mentioned a U.S. government agency as having been contacted. Applying these restrictions reduces the number of usable entries to 437 from 48 countries.
It is interesting to note that the industrial sector (SICs 200-399) have a much higher proportion of entries that fall into the more restrictive “organized” category as described above.
For the data set as a whole, only 22.6% (1200 out of 5302) of entries featured positive levels
of lobbying and a direct lobbying connection to the U.S. government. But this contrasts
with the 47% of SICs 200 – 399 industries (438/935) that met both criteria.
To obtain sectoral spending per unit value-added of imports, we used sectoral value-added
in imports data provided by the UNCTAD. Total FARA expenditures by Industry were
divided by imports value-added to obtained the percentile distribution of spending per unit
value-added (for each of the cases corresponding to criteria 1 and 2 above) These distribution
was then used to assign the foreign political organization dummy using quartile thresholds
indicated in the results Tables I-XI.

Domestic Political Organization: I
Domestic political organization was assigned using methodology identical to that used by
Gawande and Bandhyopadhyay (2000) The variable Ii equals 1 if Political Action Committee
campaign contributions/value-added by lobbies associated with industry i are greater than
the threshold limits indicated in the tables. PAC spending data were obtained from the
Federal Election Commission (FEC) for the four congressional election cycles 1977-78, 197980, 1981-82, and 1983-84.
Since corporate PACs are associated with individual firms they were mapped into SIC industries as follows. Using COMPUSTAT tapes, firms were classified into three digit or four-digit
SIC industries. COMPUSTAT data apply only to publicly traded firms, which constitutes
a small percentage of firms associated with corporate PACS.
Where possible, the remaining PACs were classified into two-digit SIC industries using the
31

mapping in Weinberger and Greavey (1984). The classification of PACs to SIC industries
in this manner is one-to-many due to the multi-product nature of most firms. For example,
it is possible that PAC spending by a firm, say, Firm A, maps into a four-digit industry
(5555), a three-digit industry (333) and a two-digit industry (22). In the absence of further
information, our methodology was to split the PAC spending equally across all four-digit
industries into which the spending is mapped (summing up the mapped PAC expenditures at
the industry level would erroneously inflate the measure of PAC spending for some industries
and understate it for others). In the example, suppose PAC spending by Firm A maps into
fifteen four-digit industries (say, one given by 5555, four industries 333x, and ten industries
22xx), and Firm A spent $300,000. Then each of these fifteen four-digit industries would
be allotted $20,000 due to PAC spending by A. For any four-digit SIC industry, summing
across the allotments from various corporate PACs, we obtain total PAC spending by that
industry.
Labor PAC spending is not included in the analysis because most labor PACs are organized
not by industry but by trade, and hence are difficult to classify into SIC industries. For
example, the electrical workers who are employed across all SIC industries are organized
as the (various regional) International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers PAC(s). A few
important exceptions do exist. Thus, contributions by the United Auto Workers Union
(UAW PAC) would in fact map precisely into the auto industries. We decided to maintain
our focus on corporate PACs. Since the big three auto firms were large contributors, adding
the expenditures of the UAW does not change the construction of I, which is the main use
to which the PAC data are put.

Other Variables
The remaining variables that appear directly in (13) are:
Xi
,
mi

the inverse of the import penetration ratio, measured as sectoral [production/imports]/100.

To construct this variable, value-added data were obtained from the American Survey of
Manufactures and data on imports were obtained from the Compatible Trade and Produc32

tion (COMTAP) database.
i , the sectoral import demand elasticities, which were obtained directly from the well known
study of Shiells, Stern and Deardorff (1986). See the discussion in Goldberg and Maggi
(1999).
ti , the effective ad-valorem tariff rates on imports, measured as the customs collection rates,
which were obtained from Professor Robert Feenstra’s database maintained at:
http://www.internationaldata.org/.
NTB Coverage Ratios, the protection measure capturing NTB protection, is the proportion of imports subject to an NTB barrier. This was obtained using data from the UNCTAD
and World Bank Study on non-tariff barriers to trade. See Gawande and Bandhyopadhyay
(2000) for details.

As discussed in the text, estimation of (13) involved the use of instrumental variables for
endogeneity correction. The instruments we used are the actual values, squares and a subset
of cross products of the following variables (mostly obtained from the Annual Survey of
Manufactures):
log(herfindahl), the log of the herfindahl index of firm concentration within an industry
% Scientists and Engineers, the fraction of employees that are scientists and engineers
% Unskilled, the fraction of employees classified as unskilled
Scale, the output per firm
K/L, the capital labor ratio interacted with industry dummies and also

33

%exports sold to the US for the five major exporters to the US France, Germany, Italy,
Japan and the UK.
Finally, the Extended Models include, in addition to some of the variables discussed above,
the following regressors (also mostly obtained from the Annual Survey of Manufactures):
Conc, the 4-firm conc ratio
% Unionized, the fraction of the employees who are unionized
Wage, the production wage
K/L, the capital labor ratio.
Squares (but not cross products) of all instruments are used in the extended models for
endogeneity correction.

34

References
Becker, G., 1983, “A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groups for Political Influence,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Bernheim, B. Douglas and Michael D. Whinston, 1986, “Menu Auctions, Resource Allocation, and
Economic Influence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Bhagwati, J., and Feenstra, R., 1982, “Tariff Seeking and The Efficient Tariff”, in Bhagwati, J.,
ed., Import Competition and Response, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Brander, J., and P. Krugman,1983, “A Reciprocal Dumping Model of International Trade,”Journal
of International Economics, pages 313-321.
Choate, P., 1990, Agents of Influence: How Japan’s Lobbyists in the US Manipulate America’s
Political and Economic System, Alfred A. Knopf, NY.
Corrado, A., Mann, T., Ortiz, D., Potter, T., and Sorauf, F., 1997, Campaign Finance Reform: A
Sourcebook, Brookings Institution Press, Washington DC.
Feenstra, R. C., 1996, “U. S. Imports, 1972-1994: Data and Concordances,” NBER Working Paper
# 5515.
Findlay, R. and Wellisz, S., 1982, “Endogenous Tariffs, the Political Economy of Trade Restrictions
and Welfare,” in J.N. Bhagwati, ed., Import Competition and Response, Chicago and London: The
University of Chicago Press.
Fuller, W., 1986, Measurement Error Models, New York: John Wiley.
Gawande, K., 1998, “Comparing Theories of Endogenous Protection: Bayesian Comparison of
Tobit Models Using Gibbs Sampling Output”, Review-of-Economics-and-Statistics, 80(1), pages
128-40.
Gawande, K., and Bandhopadhyay, U., 2000, “Is Protection for Sale? A Test of the GrossmanHelpman Theory of Endogenous Protection”, Review of Economics and Statistics, pages 139-152.
Gawande, K. and P. Krishna, 2001, “The Political Economy of Trade Policy: Empirical Approaches,” in J. Harrigan ed., Handbook of International Trade, New York: Basil Blackwell. Forthcoming.
Gawande, K., and P. Krishna, 2003, “Lobbying and Counter-Lobbying for Trade Policy: An Empirical Investigation,” Mimeo, Princeton University.
Goldberg, P., and Maggi, G., 1999, “Protection for Sale: An Empirical Investigation”, American
Economic Review.
Grossman, G. and Helpman, E., 1994, “Protection for Sale”, American Economic Review, September.
Grossman, G. and Helpman, E., 1995, “Trade Wars and Trade Talks,” Journal of Political Economy,
August.

35

Hillman, A., 1982, “Declining Industries and Political-Support Protectionist Motives”, American
Economic Review, December, 72(5), pp 1180-87.
Kelejian, H., 1971, “Two Stage Least Squares and Econometric Systems Linear in Parameters but
Non-Linear in the Endogenous Variables”, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 66, pp
373-374.
Kim, Byoung-Joo, 1999, “Explaining the Country Patterns of Foreign Lobbying in the United
States: Issues, Capabilities and Norms”, Ph.D. Dissertation, MIT.
Krishna, K., 1989, “Trade Restrictions as Facilitating Practices”, Journal of International Economics, 26, pp 251-270.
Leamer, E., 1976, Specification Searches, New York, Wiley.
Magee, S. P., Brock, W., and Young, L., (1989), Black Hole Tariffs and Endogenous Policy Theory,
Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, W., 1984, “Endogenous Tariff Formation,” American Economic Review.
Mitra, D., 1999, “Endogenous Lobby Formation and Endogenous Protection: A Long-Run Model
of Trade Policy Determination,” American Economic Review, pp 1116-34.
Mitra, D., Thomakos, D., and Ulubasoglu, M., 2002, “’Protection for Sale’ In A Developing Country: Democracy vs. Dictatorship,” The Review of Economics and Statistics.
Mitra, D., and Dutt, P., 2002, ”Endogenous Trade Policy Through Majority Voting: An Empirical
Investigation,” Journal of International Economics.
Peltzman, S., 1976, “Towards A More General Theory of Regulation,” Journal of Law and Economics 19.
Sazanami, Y., Urata, S., and Kawai, H., 1995, “Measuring the Costs of Protection in Japan”,
Institute for International Economics, Washington DC.
Shiells, C., Stern, R., and Deardorff, A., 1986, “Estimates of the Elasticities of Substitution between
Imports and Home Goods for the United States”, Weltwirtschaftliches-Archiv, 122(3), pages 497519.
Smith, R. J., and Blundell, R. W., 1986, “An Exogeneity Test For a Simultaneous Equation Tobit
Model With An Application to Labor Supply”, Econometrica, 54, pp 679-686.
Stigler, G. 1971, “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” Bell Journal of Economic Management
and Science.
Strickland, A., and Weiss, L., 1976, “Advertising, Concentration and Price Cost Margins”,, Journal
of Political Economy, 1109-21.
Trefler, D., 1993, “Trade Liberalization and the Theory of Endogenous Protection: An Econometric
Study of U.S. Import Policy”, Journal of Political Economy, pp 138-160.

36

A.1. Descriptive Statistics

Variables

Sample Means and
Standard Deviations

t

0.065
(0.060)

NTB Coverage Ratio

(0.082)
(0.137)

X
m /

0.297
(1.641)



1.49
(1.100)

Concentration Ratio

0.4
(0.210)

Scale

0.1
(0.010)

% Unionized

0.45
(0.180)

Wage

0.009
(0.003)

K/L ratio

4.8791
(5.890)

The units of measurement and scaling are as follows:

X
m

is to be multiplied by 100, Scale is in billions of dollars, Employment

is in millions, Wage is average production wage in thousands of dollars per hour, the K/L ratio is in ten thousand dollars per
worker, the rest of the variables are in percentage terms or unit-less. See Data Appendix for detailed variable definitions.

Table IA: Foreign Political Activity and Tariffs (1978-1982)
(Domestic PAC Spending/$ 1K Value Added Cutoff: 0.05)

Parameters

β1
β2
β3

L
% Obs with I ∗ = 1
% Obs with I = 1
AIC
SIC

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

0th P ercentile

25th P ercentile

50th P ercentile

75th P ercentile

-0.007
(0.606)
0.259
(4.203)
-0.766
(1.305)

-0.011
(0.940)
0.334
(5.373)
-0.241
(2.860)

-0.015
(1.265)
0.359
(5.588)
-0.29
(3.282)

-0.015
(1.315)
0.347
(5.726)
-0.286
(3.329)

161.86
0.52
0.65
-1.28
0.62

180.237
0.22
0.65
-1.43
0.69

174.827
0.08
0.65
-1.39
0.67

180.016
0.04
0.65
-1.43
0.69

Table IB: Tariffs with Foreign Activity Directed To Govt (1978-1982)
(Domestic PAC Spending/$ 1K Value Added Cutoff: 0.05)

Parameters

β1
β2
β3

L
% Obs with I ∗ = 1
% Obs with I = 1
AIC
SIC

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

0th P ercentile

25th P ercentile

50th P ercentile

75th P ercentile

-0.008
(0.682)
0.326
(4.709)
-0.186
(2.288)

-0.014
(1.242)
0.331
(5.557)
-0.257
(3.010)

-0.015
(1.309)
0.347
(5.719)
-0.286
(3.324)

-0.016
(1.327)
0.35
(5.730)
-0.29
(3.356)

167.949
0.33
0.65
-1.33
0.64

183.59
0.125
0.65
-1.46
0.71

179.87
0.05
0.65
-1.43
0.69

179.238
0.04
0.65
-1.42
0.69

In each of the regressions, the domestic lobbies are taken to be organized if PAC expenditure for every thousand dollars of
sectoral value added is greater than 0.05. In Table B, a specific indication of contact with the US government in the the FARA
report is an additional requirement for the foreign political organization dummy to take the value one. See main text for details.
The figures in parentheses are t-statistics (absolute values). L denotes the log-likelihood ratio. % Obs with I ∗ = 1 and % Obs
with I = 1 denote the fraction of the total sample for which the dummy variables I ∗ and I were assigned a value of 1.

Table IIA: Foreign Political Activity and NTBs (1978-1982)
(Domestic PAC Spending/$ 1K Value Added Cutoff: 0.05)
Parameters

β1
β2
β3

L
% Obs with I ∗ = 1
% Obs with I = 1
AIC
SIC

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

0th P ercentile

25th P ercentile

50th P ercentile

75th P ercentile

-0.012
(0.578)
0.308
(2.955)
-0.006
(0.061)

-0.015
(0.748)
0.442
(4.151)
-0.263
(1.824)

-0.019
(0.950)
0.461
(4.267)
-0.301
(2.022)

-0.019
(0.962)
0.443
(4.311)
-0.283
(1.945)

31.68
0.52
0.43
-0.23
0.09

46.215
0.22
0.43
-0.35
0.15

45.451
0.08
0.43
-0.34
0.15

49.378
0.04
0.43
-0.37
0.17

Table IIB: NTBs with Foreign Activity Directed To Govt (1978-1982)
(Domestic PAC Spending/$ 1K Value Added Cutoff: 0.05)
Parameters

β1
β2
β3

L
% Obs with I ∗ = 1
% Obs with I = 1
AIC
SIC

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

0th P ercentile

25th P ercentile

50th P ercentile

75th P ercentile

-0.012
(0.588)
0.359
(3.050)
-0.086
(0.622)

-0.017
(0.879)
0.415
(4.042)
-0.229
(1.559)

-0.019
(0.959)
0.443
(4.306)
-0.283
(1.943)

-0.194
(0.972)
0.446
(4.320)
-0.028
(1.970)

36.024
0.33
0.43
-0.27
0.11

48.935
0.125
0.43
-0.37
0.16

49.218
0.05
0.43
-0.37
0.17

49.156
0.04
0.43
-0.37
0.16

In each of the regressions, the domestic lobbies are taken to be organized if PAC expenditure for every thousand dollars of
sectoral value added is greater than 0.05. In Table B, a specific indication of contact with the US government in the the FARA
report is an additional requirement for the foreign political organization dummy to take the value one. See main text for details.
The figures in parentheses are t-statistics (absolute values). L denotes the log-likelihood ratio. % Obs with I ∗ = 1 and % Obs
with I = 1 denote the fraction of the total sample for which the dummy variables I ∗ and I were assigned a value of 1.

Table IIIA: Foreign Political Activity and Tariffs (1978-1982)
(Domestic PAC Spending/$ 1K Value Added Cutoff: 0.10)
Parameters

β1
β2
β3

L
% Obs with I ∗ = 1
% Obs with I = 1
AIC
SIC

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

0th P ercentile

25th P ercentile

50th P ercentile

75th P ercentile

0.007
(0.576)
0.26
(2.689)
-0.062
(0.870)

0.003
(0.197)
0.631
(4.031)
-0.511
(3.108)

-0.004
(0.303)
0.665
(4.258)
-0.564
(3.383)

-0.004
(0.341)
0.596
(4.532)
-0.509
(3.523)

151.61
0.52
0.65
-1.20
0.58

124.506
0.22
0.65
-0.98
0.47

118.192
0.08
0.65
-0.93
0.44

138.408
0.04
0.65
-1.09
0.52

Table IIIB: Tariffs with Foreign Activity Directed To Govt (1978-1982)
(Domestic PAC Spending/$ 1K Value Added Cutoff: 0.10)
Parameters

β1
β2
β3

L
% Obs with I ∗ = 1
% Obs with I = 1
AIC
SIC

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

0th P ercentile

25th P ercentile

50th P ercentile

75th P ercentile

0.008
(0.659)
0.36
(2.964)
-0.177
(1.593)

-0.003
(0.273)
0.57
(4.335)
-0.478
(3.273)

-0.004
(0.331)
0.596
(4.521)
-0.508
(3.513)

-0.005
(0.364)
0.605
(4.532)
-0.519
(3.541)

144.148
0.33
0.65
-1.14
0.55

143.28
0.125
0.65
-1.13
0.54

138.17
0.05
0.65
-1.09
0.52

136.32
0.04
0.65
-1.08
0.52

In each of the regressions, the domestic lobbies are taken to be organized if PAC expenditure for every thousand dollars of
sectoral value added is greater than 0.10. In Table B, a specific indication of contact with the US government in the the FARA
report is an additional requirement for the foreign political organization dummy to take the value one. See main text for details.
The figures in parentheses are t-statistics (absolute values). L denotes the log-likelihood ratio. % Obs with I ∗ = 1 and % Obs
with I = 1 denote the fraction of the total sample for which the dummy variables I ∗ and I were assigned a value of 1.

Table IVA: Foreign Political Activity and NTBs (1978-1982)
(Domestic PAC Spending/$ 1K Value Added Cutoff: 0.10)
Parameters

β1
β2
β3

L
% Obs with I ∗ = 1
% Obs with I = 1
AIC
SIC

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

0th P ercentile

25th P ercentile

50th P ercentile

75th P ercentile

0.008
(0.429)
0.186
(1.243)
0.08
(0.730)

0.007
(0.379)
0.639
(2.736)
-0.436
(1.778)

0.002
(0.105)
0.648
(2.861)
-0.458
(1.891)

0.002
(0.119)
0.579
(2.921)
-0.396
(1.818)

44.016
0.52
0.65
-0.33
0.14

25.111
0.22
0.65
-0.18
0.07

25.937
0.08
0.65
-0.19
0.07

36.782
0.04
0.65
-0.27
0.11

Table IVB: NTBs with Foreign Activity Directed To Govt (1978-1982)
(Domestic PAC Spending/$ 1K Value Added Cutoff: 0.10)
Parameters

β1
β2
β3

L
% Obs with I ∗ = 1
% Obs with I = 1
AIC
SIC

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

0th P ercentile

25th P ercentile

50th P ercentile

75th P ercentile

0.009
(0.461)
0.193
(1.047)
0.082
(0.486)

0.004
(0.220)
0.51
(2.554)
-0.309
(1.395)

0.002
(0.124)
0.578
(2.914)
-0.394
(1.812)

0.002
(0.103)
0.587
(2.935)
-0.405
(1.844)

40.941
0.33
0.65
-0.31
0.13

39.827
0.125
0.65
-0.30
0.13

36.563
0.05
0.65
-0.27
0.11

36.054
0.04
0.65
-0.27
0.11

In each of the regressions, the domestic lobbies are taken to be organized if PAC expenditure for every thousand dollars of
sectoral value added is greater than 0.10. In Table B, a specific indication of contact with the US government in the the FARA
report is an additional requirement for the foreign political organization dummy to take the value one. See main text for details.
The figures in parentheses are t-statistics (absolute values). L denotes the log-likelihood ratio. % Obs with I ∗ = 1 and % Obs
with I = 1 denote the fraction of the total sample for which the dummy variables I ∗ and I were assigned a value of 1.

Table V: Foreign Political Activity and Tariffs - Extended Specification
(1978-1982)
(Domestic PAC Spending/$ 1K Value Added Cutoff: 0.05)

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

0th P ercentile

25th P ercentile

50th P ercentile

75th P ercentile

0.001
(0.143)
0.154
(3.271)
-0.12
(3.235)
0.083
(2.883)
-0.209
(0.661)

-0.002
(0.273)
0.157
(3.297)
-0.175
(3.123)
0.069
(2.493)
-0.463
(1.593)

-0.004
(0.531)
0.151
(3.053)
-0.165
(2.717)
0.072
(2.631)
-0.482
(1.670)

-0.004
(0.587)
0.152
(3.057)
-0.159
(2.729)
0.073
(2.654)
-0.458
(1.578)

0.068
(2.635)
-0.342
(0.169)

0.082
(3.213)
-0.612
(0.309)

0.082
(3.200)
-0.886
(0.441)

0.075
(2.978)
-0.695
(0.348)

K/L ratio

-0.003
(2.616)

-0.002
(2.347)

-0.003
(2.159)

-0.002
(2.214)

L
% Obs with I ∗ = 1
% Obs with I = 1
AIC
SIC

295.82
0.52
0.65
-2.32
1.10

304.2
0.22
0.65
-2.39
1.14

305.9
0.08
0.65
-2.40
1.14

304.8
0.04
0.65
-2.39
1.14

Parameters

β1
β2
β3
Concentration Ratio
Scale
% Unionized
Wage

In each of the regressions, the domestic lobbies are taken to be organized if PAC expenditure for every thousand dollars of
sectoral value added is greater than 0.05. See main text for details. The figures in parentheses are t-statistics (absolute values).
L denotes the log-likelihood ratio. % Obs with I ∗ = 1 and % Obs with I = 1 denote the fraction of the total sample for which
the dummy variables I ∗ and I were assigned a value of 1.

Table VI: Foreign Political Activity and NTBs (1978-1982)
(Domestic PAC Spending/$ 1K Value Added Cutoff: 0.05)

Parameters

β1
β2
β3
Concentration Ratio
Scale
% Unionized
Wage
K/L ratio

L
% Obs with I ∗ = 1
% Obs with I = 1
AIC
SIC

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

I ∗ Expenditures

0th P ercentile

25th P ercentile

50th P ercentile

75th P ercentile

0.0001
(0.003)
0.285
(0.110)
-0.115
(1.330)
0.076
(1.135)
1.412
(1.906)

-0.003
(0.188)
0.323
(2.875)
-0.224
(1.706)
0.062
(0.950)
1.187
(1.741)

-0.005
-0.322
0.311
2.662
-0.206
-1.441
0.066
1.017
1.162
1.709

-0.006
(0.375)
0.325
(2.758)
-0.22
(1.593)
0.067
(1.025)
1.201
(1.745)

0.058
(0.943)
-3.053
(0.642)

0.076
(1.262)
-3.737
(0.804)

0.075
1.239
-4.039
-0.852

0.068
(1.129)
-3.989
(0.842)

-0.0001
(0.047)

0.003
(0.118)

0.001
0.217

0.0005
(0.199)

84.37
0.52
0.65
-0.62
0.25

92.87
0.22
0.65
-0.68
0.29

93.3
0.08
0.65
-0.688
0.287

90.9
0.04
0.65
-0.67
0.28

In each of the regressions, the domestic lobbies are taken to be organized if PAC expenditure for every thousand dollars of
sectoral value added is greater than 0.05. See main text for details. The figures in parentheses are t-statistics (absolute values).
L denotes the log-likelihood ratio. % Obs with I ∗ = 1 and % Obs with I = 1 denote the fraction of the total sample for which
the dummy variables I ∗ and I were assigned a value of 1.

