                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         FAMILY CAP PROVISIONS AND CHANGES IN
                                 BIRTHS AND ABORTIONS

                                               Ted Joyce
                                            Robert Kaestner
                                           Sanders Korenman
                                            Stanley Henshaw

                                         Working Paper 10214
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10214


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Ted Joyce, Robert Kaestner, Sanders Korenman, and Stanley Henshaw. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Family Cap Provisions and Changes in Births and Adoptions
Ted Joyce, Robert Kaestner, Sanders Korenman, and Stanley Henshaw
NBER Working Paper No. 10214
January 2004
JEL No. J1

                                            ABSTRACT

As part of welfare reform efforts in the 1990s, twenty-three states implemented family caps,

provisions that deny or reduce cash assistance to welfare recipients who have additional births. We

use birth and abortion records from 24 states to estimate effects of family caps on birth and abortion

rates. We use age, marital status and completed schooling to identify women at high risk for use of

public assistance, and parity (number of previous live births) to identify those most directly affected

by the family cap. In family cap states, birth rates fell more and abortion rates rose more among

high-risk women with at least one previous live birth compared to similar childless women,

consistent with an effect of the family cap. However, this parity-specific pattern of births and

abortions also occurred in states that implemented welfare reform with no family cap. Thus, the

effects of welfare reform may have differed between mothers and childless women, but there is little

evidence of an independent effect of the family cap.

Ted Joyce                                              Sanders Korenman
NBER                                                   School of Public Affairs
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor                            Baruch College
New York, NY 10016-4309                                17 Lexington Avenue, Box C-408
and NBER                                               New York, NY 10010
ted_joyce@baruch.cuny.edu                              and NBER
                                                       sanders_korenman@baruch.cuny.edu
Robert Kaestner
Institute of Government and Public Affairs             Stanley Henshaw
University of Illinois at Chicago                      Alan Guttmacher Institute
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525                   120 Wall Street
Chicago, IL 60607                                      New York, NY 10005
and NBER                                               shenshaw@guttmacher.org
kaestner@uic.edu
Introduction

        A primary motivation for state and federal welfare reform was the high rate of non-marital fertility and

economic dependence among single mothers. State waivers in the early 1990s gave states authority to

implement policies to reduce the need for public assistance. The state waivers were followed by national

welfare reform legislation, the 1996 Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act

(PRWORA), which adopted many state initiatives and ended the guarantee of long-term cash assistance to

single mothers. Components of welfare reform such as time limits, work requirements and sanctions for non-

compliance, higher earned-income disregards, and increased child care subsidies were all intended to

encourage employment and economic self-sufficiency. Time-limiting benefits and requiring work also

increase the cost of childbearing among welfare recipients or potential recipients, and thus may lower the

incidence of non-marital birth.

        Despite the intentions of policymakers, PRWORA contains few provisions designed specifically to

reward marriage or to penalize non-marital fertility. Only the family cap, which permits states to deny or

reduce cash assistance for additional births to current recipients, operates directly on fertility incentives. In

this paper, we analyze the association between family cap provisions and births and abortions. Our analysis is

distinct because it is the only econometric study of the effect of the family cap that analyzes both birth and

abortion rates among women at risk for public assistance. Most previous analyses of the effect of welfare

reform on fertility behavior have examined only births (Kearney, forthcoming; Joyce, Kaestner and Korenman

2003; Kaushal and Kaestner 2001; Mills et al. 2001; Hovarth-Rose and Peters 2001; Fein 1999; Dyer and

Fairlie 2001).1 Broadening the analysis of the effects of welfare reform to include abortions as well as births

provides additional information on changes in reproductive behavior associated with welfare reform. For

example, a fall in birth rates associated with the family cap may be accompanied by a rise in abortion rates

(Jaganathan and Camasso 2003; Camasso et al. 2003). Moreover, the fall in birth rates should be expected to

1
 Levine (2002) is an exception, but he uses aggregate abortion rates for all adult women; it is questionable, therefore,
whether he is able to identify effects of the family cap on women exposed to the policy. Jaganathan and Camasso (2003)




                                                           1
exceed the rise in abortion rates since women affected by welfare reform may also decrease sexual activity or

increase contraceptive effort in order to control fertility.

        We also estimate the effects of the family cap on pregnancy resolution. Specifically, we investigate

whether the fraction of pregnancies that are terminated, henceforth the abortion ratio, increased with the family

cap. We recognize that the abortion ratio cannot identify changes in sexual activity and contraception in

response to the family cap. However, the abortion ratio has one distinct advantage over measures of birth and

abortion rates: it is measured entirely from vital statistics; no population estimates are required for its

construction. Therefore, we are able to calculate the abortion ratio and examine the effect of the family cap for

small populations with a high proportion of members likely to be affected by the family cap. In addition,

pregnancy resolution is of interest because rates of unintended pregnancy and abortion are high among

unmarried women. Henshaw (1998) estimates that 75 percent of all pregnancies to teens, and 75 percent of all

pregnancies to unmarried women are unintended. In multi-state studies of the family cap, most researchers

have used between-state variation to identify effects of the family cap.2 Controls for other aspects of welfare

reform are included in the regressions or the study period is limited to the pre-TANF years (Hovarth-Rose and

Peters 2001; Dyer and Fairlie 2001). A potential limitation of this strategy is that it is difficult to characterize

and measure the differences in complex multi-faceted welfare reform programs adopted by different states and

enforced to varying degrees (see Moffitt 2003a and 2003b for discussion of these and other evaluation

challenges). We use a within-state design to estimate effects of the family cap on births and abortions separate

from the impact of other policies related to welfare reform. We use parity (0 or 1+ previous births) to define

within-state treatment and comparison groups. Specifically, we compare unmarried adult women with 12 or

fewer years of schooling who have no previous live births to similar women who have had one or more

previous live births. Both groups have a high likelihood of being affected by welfare reform, but only those of


also examine births and abortions but their analysis is unique, since it is based on the experimental evaluation of New
Jersey’s Family Development Program.
2
  These studies estimate models that include state and year fixed effects with a dummy variable for the state and year in
which a family cap policy was implemented. Exceptions are Dyer and Fairlie (2001) and Levine (2002). Dyer and Fairlie




                                                            2
parity one or higher should be affected by the family cap.3 The data used for our analyses were collected

through a joint effort of the National Bureau of Economic Research and the Alan Guttmacher Institute.          We

collected individual induced termination of pregnancy (abortion) records from 24 states and New York City.

This is the largest compilation of such data ever attempted. Most states report these data to the Centers for

Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), but only aggregates are published annually.4 We use the micro-level

data from 1992 to 2000 that amount to a registry of abortions performed in each state each year. As such, they

provide advantages over social or health surveys that ask questions regarding induced terminations. Survey

data available for analyses of the effects of PRWORA on abortions are limited by underreporting and

relatively small samples (Klerman 1998).



Previous Research

        The literature on the effects of welfare policy on pregnancy outcomes (births and abortions) can be

divided broadly between the pre- and post-welfare reform periods. The pre-reform literature is summarized by

Moffitt (1998), who examines fertility, and Klerman (1998), who focuses on abortion. Both reviewers

conclude that financial incentives matter: policies that raise the cost of a birth or abortion tend to discourage

each outcome. Findings from this literature, however, are hardly robust, and for some questions of interest

data are often lacking, especially with regard to abortion.

        The implementation of the family cap in numerous states in the 1990s prompted several researchers to

re-examine the effects of this policy on fertility. Argys, Averett and Rees (2001), for instance, use a sample of

unmarried AFDC recipients from the NLSY (National Longitudinal Survey of Youth) and estimate the

association between incremental cash and food stamps for an additional child and the probability of pregnancy,

and conditional on pregnancy, the probability of giving birth. Although they find a positive association in


use married mothers with no more than a high school education as a within-state comparison group and Levine uses
childless women. In both cases, the analyses are limited to births.
3
  One identifying assumption is that childless women who desire two or more children are not dissuaded from
participating in welfare because of the cap.




                                                          3
some models, they find no effect on pregnancy and birth once they include state-fixed effects. Grogger and

Bronars (2001) use data on twins from the 1980 Census to estimate effects of random differences in the

number of children, and thus of welfare benefits, on the timing of marriage and subsequent births. They

investigate whether time to marriage and time to the next birth are affected by the size of payments for an

additional child. They find some evidence that maximum benefits affect fertility among blacks but not whites,

and they find no effect of incremental benefits on subsequent higher order births. Fairlie and London (1997)

find a positive association between incremental AFDC benefits and fertility among women on AFDC, using

the 1990 SIPP (Survey of Income and Program Participation). However, they find a similar association among

married women and single women who were not on AFDC. They conclude that the association found for

AFDC mothers is spurious.

           Explicit tests of the effects of the family cap on fertility are more recent. Two studies have found a

statistically significant association between the family cap and fertility and three others have found none

(Hovarth-Rose and Peters 2001; Mach 2001; Kearney forthcoming; Dyer and Fairlie 2001; Levine 2002).

However, the two studies that report an association have methodological limitations or inconsistent findings

that undermine their credibility. Hovarth-Rose and Peters (2001), for instance, use vital statistics to analyze

non-marital birth ratios by state and year between 1984 and 1996. They find that the family cap is associated

with a nine percent decline in the non-marital birth ratio among teens and a 12 percent decline among adults in

models with state and year fixed effects. However, 20 of the 23 states that implemented family caps did so in

1995 or later. Thus, Horvath-Rose and Peters had few post-cap observations in their sample. In addition,

some of their other results are counter-intuitive, which raises questions as to the robustness of the

specification. For example, they find that minor parent provisions (waivers that condition eligibility among

teens on co-residence with a parent), are associated with a large increase in the non-marital birth ratio among

adults, while AFDC-UP programs are associated with lower non-marital birth ratios among teens, but not

adults.

4
    With few exceptions, abortions are tabulated by state and one other characteristic such as age or race. For an example,




                                                               4
         Mach (2001) also finds an association between the family cap and fertility. She uses CPS (Current

Population Survey) data, but links households in a given year to their interview in the following year. Thus,

Mach is able to analyze changes in fertility among women on welfare who are exposed to the family cap

compared to their counterparts in states without the cap. She finds that a loss of an incremental benefit of $50

is associated with a 19 percent fall in births. But in Mach’s sample only 25 women in the 23 states with family

caps had an additional birth in the 10-year study period.. Moreover, Mach does not adjust the standard errors

for non-independence within states, and thus her estimates appear overly precise.

         A forthcoming study by Kearney finds no relationship between the family cap and fertility. She uses

monthly national natality statistics stratified by maternal age, education and marital status from 1989 to 1998

to examine the effect of the family cap on births. She finds no evidence that the family cap lowers fertility in

models with state and year fixed effects, and instead finds a positive and statistically significant effect of the

family cap on the fertility of white and black women aged 20 to 34 years with less than high school education

and with at least one previous live birth.

         Levine (2002) also uses national natality files and finds no effect of the family cap. Unlike Kearney,

however, Levine runs separate regressions of births to women of zero and higher parity. He finds that the cap

is associated with a positive and statistically significant effect on births to women of zero parity, but finds no

association between the family cap and births to women of higher parity. Thus, births to women of higher

parity, the group most affected by the family cap, fell relative to births to women of zero parity, the

comparison group, suggestive of an effect of the family cap. However, the difference in coefficients is not

statistically significant.

         Dyer and Fairlie (2001) also find no association between the family cap and fertility. They use the

CPS data to describe the fertility of unmarried women with 12 or fewer years of schooling and at least one

child. In their first approach they limit the panel to states that implemented a family cap prior to the

implementation of the TANF (Temporary Assistance to Needy Families) program and a set of comparison


see http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss4911a1.htm



                                                         5
states without family caps or any other waiver prior to TANF. Identification comes from a comparison of

changes in fertility across cap and non-cap states. They find no association between the family cap and the

probability of an additional birth. In the second approach, they use married women with children and 12 or

fewer years of schooling as a within-state comparison group. Again they find no association between the

family cap and non-marital fertility. The authors also find no effects of the family cap on non-marital

childbearing in separate analyses of New Jersey, contrary to both the experimental and non-experimental

evaluations described below.

         Except for Levine (2002), each of the other studies of the family cap is limited to an analysis of births

and none provide convincing evidence of an effect of additional cash assistance for an additional child on

fertility. However, recently published results from an experimental evaluation of New Jersey’s Family

Development Program provide what many may consider more compelling evidence that the family cap affects

the reproductive behavior of welfare recipients.



New Jersey’s Family Development Program

         As part of its waiver agreement with the federal government, New Jersey undertook an experimental

evaluation of the family cap provision of the New Jersey’s Family Development Program (FDP).

Implemented in October of 1992, the FDP was the first in the nation to impose a cap on benefits for women

that have a child while on welfare.5 The results of the experimental analysis as well as the non-experimental

analysis commissioned subsequent to the experiment were published in two reports (Camasso et al. 1998a;

1998b). The experimental results clearly indicate that the family cap altered reproductive choices of welfare

recipients. Births fell eight percent or 2.2 births per thousand recipients, and abortions rose 12 percent or 3.2

per thousand, among the experimental group relative to the control group. Effects were greatest for blacks,


5
  Neither of the two other experimental evaluations of the family cap has found effects on fertility (Fein 1999; Mills el al.
2001). However, sample sizes in both evaluations were small. In the Delaware’s ABC demonstration there were 1027
participants at risk of pregnancy (Fein 1999); in Arizona’s EMPOWER evaluation there were fewer than 900 women at
risk. Moreover, neither evaluation analyzed abortions presumably because of difficulties in obtaining accurate
information on abortion from surveys. See the review by Grogger, Karoly and Klerman (2002).



                                                              6
with births falling 21 percent and abortions rising 32 percent (relative to black controls). There were no

statistically significant differences in either births or abortions among whites, but the substantial increase in the

use of contraceptives suggests an increased effort to prevent unintended pregnancies (Jagannathan and

Camasso 2003).

         There were, however, methodological problems and some anomalous findings. The family cap

increased the pregnancy rate, despite a statistically significant increase in the use of contraceptive services.

Moreover, effects were concentrated among blacks, and only new as opposed to ongoing welfare cases

responded to the changed incentives. Critics have also challenged the internal validity of the New Jersey

experiment. A survey of participants revealed substantial confusion among women in both experimental and

control groups as to who was subject to the family cap. In addition, a small proportion of caseworkers

admitted to using discretion in the assignment of cases to treatment and control groups (Loury 2000; Rossi

2000).6 Finally, the information provided by the New Jersey experiment is in some respects incomplete, even

abstracting from questions of internal validity (see, e.g., Heckman and Smith 1995 for a general discussion of

limitations of experimental evaluations, and Moffitt 2003b for a discussion of challenges specific to welfare

reform). First, and most obviously, the results pertain to a single state. Second, the effect of the cap in New

Jersey is estimated for women on welfare, but the cap may affect other mothers who are at risk of welfare use

upon the birth of a child, including welfare leavers. Family cap provisions generally require that women who

leave and then return to welfare after a birth must not have received benefits for a specified period before the

additional child is eligible for a higher benefit than children born to mothers on welfare (see, for example,

http://www.spdp.org/famcap/famcapexempt.htm).

         In sum, the results from the New Jersey experiment provide an interesting counterpoint to the non-

experimental studies. The inability to undertake additional experimental studies means that the resolution of

6
 In response to critics, the authors of the New Jersey study demonstrate that actual assignment to the treatment or control
group and not participants’ perception of group assignment is associated with a rise in abortion after the cap (Camasso et
al. 2003). In addition, the authors demonstrate that there was no difference in the attrition rate between the experimental
and control groups (Jagannathan, Camasso and Killingsworth, forthcoming). This is a significant result since a limitation




                                                             7
disagreements about the effect of family caps requires additional non-experimental studies. Moreover, there is

value in extending the analysis of the effect of the family cap on abortion to a larger number of states. Finally,

the simultaneous implementation of several welfare reform policies suggests that a within-state comparison

group would improve the research design. Indeed, the differences between the experimental and non-

experimental findings may be a result of the use of cross-state comparison groups in the non-experimental

studies. We therefore use a large sample of states, a before-after design and with a within-state comparison

group to analyze effects of the family cap on birth and abortion rates.



Research Design and Statistical Methods

Conceptual Overview

        The family cap provides a financial incentive to not have additional children while on welfare. All

else constant, we expect the family cap to lower the probability of an additional birth for women affected by

the policy (Klerman 1998; Grogger et al. 2002). Birth rates can fall either through increased use of abortions

or because of increased use or effectiveness of contraception (including abstinence). Since contraceptive or

sexual behavior can change, decreased birth rates could be accompanied by either increases or decreases in the

abortion rate. In other words, abortion rates would tend to increase if family cap provisions had little effect on

contraception and unintended pregnancies, but abortion rates could decrease if family cap provisions

significantly improved or increased contraception and decreased unintended pregnancies. In any case,

pregnancies should decrease.

        We also examine the effect of the family cap on the abortion ratio (abortions divided by pregnancies).

If the family cap causes abortion rates to rise and birth rates to fall, then the abortion ratio should rise. This

would be the case if the family cap had relatively little effect on contraception. Moreover, estimated effects of

the family cap on the abortion ratio should be consistent with estimated effects of the family cap on abortion




of the research design was the inability to follow women that leave AFDC. They did not discuss effects of potential
discretionary assignment.



                                                            8
and birth rates since changes in the abortion ratio vary directly with changes in the ratio of abortion to birth

rates.

         The advantage of the abortion ratio is that it is measured entirely with vital statistics and requires no

population estimates to calculate. Therefore, we also use estimates of the effect of the family cap on the

abortion ratio to check estimates of the effect of the family cap on abortion and birth rates.

Accurate measurement of abortion and birth rates requires population estimates for some small populations

that are not currently available. Therefore, estimates that are broadly consistent across the three outcomes

suggest that the absence of fully detailed population data does not bias estimates of the effect of the family cap

on abortion rates and birth rates.




Empirical Strategy

         A straightforward research design would entail a comparison of birth and abortion rates before and

after implementation of the family cap among women affected by the change in policy relative to similar

women who were unaffected. It may also be of interest to examine changes in the abortion ratio to see

whether the family cap increased the share of pregnancies that were aborted. A major challenge in analyses of

the family cap has been to define an appropriate comparison group. Studies based on non-experimental data

have identified the effect of the family cap by using states without a family cap as a comparison group

(Hovarth-Rose and Peter 2001; Kearney, forthcoming; Dyer and Fairlie 2001; Mach 2001). However, except

in Arkansas, the family cap was never an isolated policy. Other policies that were simultaneously

implemented such as time limits, work requirements and sanctions for noncompliance may also affect fertility

by reducing the benefits associated with childbearing while on public assistance. Moreover, states vary with

respect to the strictness of these policies, which further complicates the ability to isolate changes associated

with family cap based on changes across states. Finally, states that implement the policy may differ

systematically from states that do not, either because of differences in state characteristics that affect fertility




                                                          9
(e.g., policy differences) or because of differences in populations. Thus, the use of women in non-cap states as

a comparison group may be problematic.

        We use a difference-in-differences-in-differences (DDD) strategy to identify the effect of family cap

provisions on fertility. Among adults, we use low-educated women of zero parity who are not affected by a

family cap provision, but who are at risk for public assistance as a within-state comparison group for similar

women of higher parity who are affected by the family cap. This difference-in-differences (DDcap) assumes

that changes in reproductive choices among low-educated women with no previous live births are a good

counterfactual for changes among similar women of higher parity had a family cap not been enforced.

However, unmarried women with modest human capital and previous live births are much more likely to be

on, or have been on public assistance than their unmarried counterparts with no previous live births. As a

result, the response by women of zero parity to waivers and TANF may differ from that of women with

previous live births, which would undermine the design.7 Our solution is to estimate the same DD in states

without family caps (DDnoncap) to capture changes in births and abortions associated with welfare reform

between women of different parity. Subtracting DDnoncap from DDcap yields the DDD estimate for the family

cap.

        For teens, however, we limit the analysis to those with one or more previous live births. For teens,

schooling and marital status are not useful markers for risk of welfare receipt (that is, since education is not

complete and relatively few teens are married, unmarried nulliparous teens with only a high school education

are not a high-risk group). Birth rates of teens with no previous live births and those with one or more differ

dramatically, and the risk of public assistance use is likely to differ greatly between the two groups. However,

those with at least one previous live birth, although a relatively small proportion of pregnant teens, are at very

high-risk for public assistance. Therefore, we focus on this group and compare their behavior before and after



7
 Grogger, Haider and Klerman (2002) show that the probability of entry into welfare in California fell as much as the
probability of exit rose in the 1990s. This suggests that women of zero parity, a proxy for women at risk of entry, may
have similar responses to welfare reform as women of higher parity, our proxy for women on welfare who are likely to
exit.



                                                           10
 welfare reform in states with and without family caps, which is similar to the research design used in most

 other studies.

          We present estimates of both simple and regression-adjusted DDs and DDDs. As described below,

 we lack detailed population data by state and year for the relevant demographic groups (e.g., parity 0 and

 parity>0) used in our analysis. Thus, we do not use birth and abortion rates as the dependent variables in our

 regression models. Rather, we use the natural logarithm of births and abortions as a dependent variable and

 include the natural logarithm of state population by age and race (along with other variables) in the regression

 models. The coefficients of the policy variables measure relative changes in counts of abortions and births,

 which, adjusted for population, proxy changes in abortion and birth rates. For the abortion ratio, which does

 not depend on population, we are able to estimate both unadjusted and adjusted estimates of the effect of the

 family cap.

          We illustrate the regression model using the abortion ratio as the dependent variable. The

 specification is as follows:


(1)abratioijt = β1Parityijt + β 2 Reform jt + β 3 (Parityijt * Reform jt ) + β 4 (Capstate j * Parityijt ) +
                    β5 (Capstate j * Reform jt ) + β6 (Capstate j * Reform jt * Parityijt )
                    ∑φ   m   X mjt + γ j + λ t + ε ijt




           Let abratio be the abortion ratio in group i, state j and year of conception t and let Parity be a

 dichotomous indicator that is one if the mother has at least one previous live birth; Reform is a dichotomous

 indicator that is one for the years in which the policies associated with welfare reform are in effect.8 We

 define reform as either a pre-TANF waiver or TANF. Let Capstate be one if the state imposed a family cap at

 any time between 1992 and 1999. The specification reflects that the family cap always occurs as either a




 8
  We use the fraction of months in which a waiver or TANF were in effect in the year that welfare reform was
 implemented.



                                                             11
waiver or as part of TANF.9 In other words, we compare changes in the dependent variable among teens and

adult women exposed to welfare reform that includes a family cap to their counterparts exposed to reform but

not the family cap. We also include controls for maximum cash assistance for a family of three, the state

unemployment rate and the unemployment rate lagged one year as well as state (γ) and year (λ) effects.

Estimates of the DD within-family cap states is β3 + β6 ; the cross-state DD is β5 + β6 and the DDD is β6.10

          We use the same specification as in equation (1) to analyze the natural log of abortions and births. But

for these outcomes, we include the natural log of the state population by age and race on the right-hand-side of

equation (1) as a proxy for the more detailed populations classified by marital status, schooling and parity,

which are not available by state and year. In some specifications we also include state-specific linear and

quadratic trends in order to control for smooth changes in the dependent variable associated with variation in

the population. We interpret the coefficients in these regressions as estimates of the relative changes in

abortion and birth rates associated with the family cap, with the caveat that these are approximations given the

lack of detailed population data.

          We use weighted least squares to account for heteroscedasticity in the estimation of equation (1),

weighting by pregnancies. We also use robust procedures to adjust standard errors, clustering observations by

state, following Bertrand et al. (2002). Clustering by state takes into account that observations for different

years within the same policy regime in a state (e.g., before or after reform) are not independent observations.




9
 Arkansas implemented a family cap with no other welfare reform provisions prior to TANF.
10
  Using equation (1), let ab be the outcome of interest. Ignoring state and year fixed effects, which fall out after
differencing, we obtain the following:

E(ab | Parity = 1, Reform = 1, Capstate = 1) = β1 + β 2 + β 3 + β 4 + β 5 + β 6
E(ab | Parity = 1, Reform = 0, Capstate = 1) = β1 + β 4
E(ab | Parity = 0, Reform = 1, Capstate = 1) = β 2 + β 5
E(ab | Parity = 0, Reform = 0, Capstate = 1) =
First Difference, Parity 1 = ( β1 + β 2 + β 3 + β 4 + β 5 + β 6 ) − ( β1 + β 4 ) = ( β 2 + β 3 + β 5 + β 6 )
First Difference, Parity 0 = ( β 2 + β 5 )
Difference-in-differences (DD) within cap states = ( β 2 + β 3 + β 5 + β 6 ) − ( β 2 + β 5 ) = β 3 + β 6
Results for non-cap states follow analogously.



                                                                     12
Data

 Abortions

         We canvassed state health departments between October 2001 and September 2002 in order to obtain

 induced termination of pregnancy files (ITOP) without personal identifiers.11 The characteristics required for

 our analyses were the mother’s age, race, marital status, parity, completed schooling, gestational age of the

 fetus, and the month and year of termination. Eighteen states have the data needed to analyze changes among

 unmarried, low-educated women with a previous live birth. For teens, however, we are able to include 24

 states because we use only age, race and parity to determine risk of exposure to the family cap.12

         Figure 1 displays abortion rates, nationally and for our 24-state sample. The top two series are from

 the Alan Guttmacher Institute provider survey and the bottom series is our 24-state sample as reported by

 state health departments. Regardless of the source or sample, abortion rates (abortions per 1000 women aged

 15-44) declined between 1992 and 2000. Abortion rates fell 17 percent in our 24-states sample as measured

 by AGI and 20 percent as measured by state health departments. State health departments report

 approximately 80 percent of the abortions recorded by AGI. This discrepancy appears relatively constant

 over time.

         Discrepancies between the total number of abortions reported by state health departments and AGI

 vary by state. Table 1 displays abortions by state and source in 1996 for the 24 states in our sample. In 16

 states the difference is less than 10 percent; in four states the difference is between 10 and 15 percent; and in

 three states the difference exceeds 35 percent. Henshaw (2000) offers various explanations for the

 differences in total abortions between AGI and state health departments. Most explanations pertain to staff

 turnover or inexperience as well as provider fear of harassment. However, without additional information, it


11
   As noted, the project was a joint effort between researchers at the National Bureau of Economic Research and the Alan
Guttmacher Institute.
12
   Table 1 in the Appendix displays the results of our data collection. The first three columns list the 31 states from which
we have collected individual-level data on induced abortion. The 20 states listed in the right-hand column will not release
or do not collect information on induced abortion at the individual level with sufficient detail for our purposes. Data for
18 of the 31 states for which we have data are complete with respect to age, race, marital status, schooling and parity
(column 1). The seven states listed in column 2 lack some combination of these characteristics, whereas the states listed
in column 3 have more severe limitations.



                                                             13
 is not possible to determine whether the discrepancy in the number of abortions between AGI and the state

 health departments is related to characteristics of the women, and how this might vary over time.

          Certain characteristics of women are reported more completely in the data than are others. In Table 2

 we show the number of abortions in each state between 1992 and 2000, and the percent of observations

 missing by characteristics of the mother. The most problematic characteristic is education. In six of the 18

 states that consistently report education, the proportion unknown exceeds 10 percent. The second-to-last

 column displays the percent of total observations dropped due to missing data for one or all of the

 characteristics. In the sample of 18 states and New York City, we lose 16 percent of observations in analyses

 that use education, age, race and marital status. In the 24-state sample that is limited to teens, we lose only

 seven percent of the observations since we do not use education and marital status. What is not shown in

 Table 2 is that the proportion of observations missing varies over time due primarily to missing data on

 education, which is potentially problematic in the pre-post analysis of adult women. We can do little about

 the missing data; however, births among adults are well reported and thus a significant decline in births

 unaccompanied by a change in abortions would raise concerns as to the quality of the abortion data. In

 addition, we do not use education in the analysis of teens.



Births

         Information on births is from national natality files. The main measurement issue of concern relates to

marital status in New York and Nevada.13 Due to a change in the methods used to determine marital status,

out-of-wedlock births in New York City declined almost 10 percentage points between 1996 and 1997 (New

York City Department of Health 1998). Similar though smaller changes occurred in Nevada. The problem is

limited to births since marital status on New York City and Nevada induced termination certificates has always


13
  In New York, marital status of the mother is inferred from a paternity acknowledgment or missing father’s name on the
birth certificate. Prior to 1996, Nevada and New York City depended on a comparison of the mother’s and father’s
surnames. In 1997, Nevada changed from inference to a direct question and New York City changed to an inferential
system comparable to upstate New York. In New York City the proportion of births to unmarried women tended to
increase among women aged 15-24 years but decrease among women 30-34 (National Center for Health Statistics, 1999).



                                                          14
been based on a direct question. The change in New York will not affect our estimates since we use New

York only in the teen sample and in these analyses we use all births regardless of marital status.



Population

        We use population estimates to obtain birth and abortion rates. We use three sources of population

data. We use population estimates by state, year, age and race from the US Census Bureau website for annual

birth and abortion rates. These are the most accurate, but are not available by the level of disaggregation (by

marital status, schooling, and parity) we require. We therefore use population estimates from the Current

Population Survey (CPS) to create annual birth and abortion rates by state, year, age, race, marital status, and

schooling for the 18 states in our adult sample. Estimates for a particular year are the weighted average of the

outgoing rotation files from the 12 monthly surveys. Finally, we use the June CPS fertility modules in 1992,

1994, 1998 and 2000 to create population estimates further stratified by parity. We estimate rates only for

aggregates of states in the time-series plots and simple DDs. Population estimates are not reliable enough at

the level of the individual state for the desired subgroups (i.e., age, race, marital status, schooling and parity) to

permit regressions of birth and abortion rates.

        We focus on three outcomes: birth rates, abortion rates and the abortion ratio defined as the fraction of

pregnancies (births plus induced abortions) that end in abortion. We also discuss pregnancy rates, which are

the sum of birth and abortion rates. Each outcome is dated to the year of conception. We subtract gestational

age from the date of the birth or abortion to approximate the date of conception. Thus, the final year of the

analysis is labeled 1999, although many of the births and some of the abortions occurred in 2000.




                                                         15
Samples

        We analyze two samples: adult women 20 to 34 years of age who are unmarried and who have

completed no more than 12 years of schooling, and teens, 15 to 19 years of age.14 We exclude women aged 35

and older because only about 10 percent of all abortions occur at these ages (Koonin et al. 1999), and sample

sizes become small when stratified by race, schooling, marital status and parity. We analyze teens separately

because for teens we use only parity to define teens at risk for public assistance. Furthermore, since we don’t

require information on education or marital status for teens we are able to expand the number of states in our

sample from 18 to 24. We analyze whites and blacks only, because, except for New York City, none of the

states in our adult sample has a sizeable Latino population.



Dependent and Policy Variables

        Information on family cap policies are from Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation of the

Department of Health and Human Services and the State Documentation Project of the Center on Budget and

Policy Priorities (www.cbpp.org and www.spdp.org/tanf.htm). Our definition of states with the family cap

agrees with those of Kearney (forthcoming) and Dyer and Fairlie (2001), except for two minor differences

with respect to the date of implementation.



Results


Time-series: birth and abortion rates

        Figure 2 shows abortion and birth rates (per thousand women) by year of conception for unmarried

women 20 to 34 years of age and with 12 or fewer years of schooling. The population denominator for these

14
  As Kearney (forthcoming) and Joyce, Kaestner and Korenman (2003) have shown, approximately 50 percent of
unmarried mothers with less than 12 years of schooling received public assistance in the previous year. To further
characterize these women, in Appendix Table 2 we present data on the percent of births and abortions to women on
Medicaid in 1994, a proxy for women at risk for public assistance. Data on Medicaid-financed births comes from the
Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System (PRAMS) from 10 states. For abortions, we use AGI’s nationally
representative survey of women that abort (Henshaw and Kost 1996). Two points are noteworthy. First, schooling and




                                                         16
rates is from the annual CPS outgoing rotation files, since we do not stratify by parity. Both birth and abortion

rates turn slightly upwards after 1996 but the rise in birth rates is somewhat more pronounced. Births started

to rise in 1994 and exhibit a slight acceleration in 1996. The minor increase in the abortion rates, however, is

counter to a generally downward trend among women in this socioeconomic stratum, and is clearly counter to

national trends in abortion (Figure 1). The rise in the birth rate, however, is inconsistent with a behavioral

response to welfare reform, which would suggest a decrease.15

         Figure 3 presents birth and abortion rates for teens for states with and without family cap policies.16

Birth and abortion rates trend downward over the 1990s, but the level and trend in each are similar in states

with and without family caps.17


Difference-in-differences in Rates

         Tables 3 and 4 present abortion and birth rates for teens and unmarried adult women 20 to 34 years of

age with 12 or fewer years of schooling, by parity, for periods before and after welfare reform. We use the

June CPS fertility module in 1992 and 1994, to estimate population in states with and without family caps in

1992-1993 and the June CPS fertility module in 1998 and 2000 to estimate population in 1998-1999. There

are 24 states for the teen sample and 18 states for the adult sample.

         Birth rates are defined as births per 1000 women of the specific demographic group and are shown in

Table 3. For teens, we show birth rates for all teens and teens with one or more previous live births. Teen

birth rates fall in absolute and relative terms over the period but the decline among teens of parity one or more

is particularly sharp and greater in states with a family cap (57 percent versus 40 percent).




marital status effectively characterize women at risk for public assistance; and second, women with a previous live birth
are at greater risk than women with no previous live births.
15
   Birth and abortion rates by race are shown in Figure A1 of the Appendix. The only notable difference is that the
abortion rate increases more among blacks after 1996 than among whites.
16
   We are able to present rates stratified by cap and non-cap states because we are not disaggregating by schooling and
marital status. Population by age and race are available from the census.
17
   We present rates for teens by race in Figures A2 and A3 of the Appendix. The pattern for whites and blacks is largely
similar. The one difference is that the black teen abortion rate is substantially greater in states without a family cap,
although trends in the two groups of states are similar.



                                                            17
          For less educated and unmarried adults, the lower half of Table 3 shows birth rates for all parities,

women of zero parity and women with one or more previous live births. We view women of zero parity as an

appropriate comparison group for women of parity 1 or more. Among adults, birth rates decline more among

higher parity women than women of zero parity in absolute terms, but the relative decline (DDs), –0.10 and –

0.12, is similar in states with and without family caps.

          We display similar changes for abortion rates in Table 4. As with births, we observe a general decline

in abortion rates of all teens but the decline among teens of parity one or more is greater in absolute terms but

roughly similar in relative terms. Again, the fall in abortion rates among teens with at least one previous live

birth is relatively greater in states with a family cap (57 versus 40 percent). The lower panel of Table 4 shows

the same estimates for adult women. In this case, abortion rates fall less for higher-parity women than for

zero-parity women in states with a family cap and abortion rates rise among higher parity women in states

without a family cap. The DD in relative terms is positive in states with family caps (0.286), but is also

positive in states without family caps (0.253).

          We also compute changes in pregnancy rates, which are displayed in Table A3 of the Appendix.

Changes in pregnancy rates are weighted sums of changes in birth and abortion rates. The DD estimates for the

adult pregnancy rates are essentially zero. Among teens of parity one or more, pregnancy rates decline over

the study period, and the decline is greater for teens in states with a family cap than in states without.

Pregnancy rates among adults in states with a family cap fall over the study period but the relative decline is

the same by parity. In states without family caps pregnancy rates rise slightly but there is no difference by

parity.

          The importance of analyzing both abortion and birth rates in states with and without a family cap is

underscored by results in Tables 3, 4 and A3. For adults, the within-state DDs for birth and abortion rates

within family-cap states are largely consistent with an effect of the family cap: a decrease in birth rates, a

relative increase in abortion rates, with no change in relative pregnancy rates. But the same pattern is observed

in states without a family cap. Taken together, changes in birth and abortion rates among adult women

exposed to the family cap is more consistent with general trends in reproductive choices among lesser-skilled


                                                           18
women, than a specific response to the family cap. The results for teens were similar in that there was a

general decline in birth and abortion rates among teens in states with and without a family cap.


Abortion Ratios

         We display abortion ratios by years of conception, cap and non-cap states, and parity, for teens and

unmarried adult women with 12 or fewer years of schooling in Table 5. The change in the abortion ratio can

be obtained from knowledge of the relative change in abortion and birth rates, which provides a consistency

check for the analysis. When the relative decline in the birth rate exceeds the relative decline in the abortion

rate, the abortion ratio rises. Thus, the abortion ratio among teens of parity one or more in states with a family

cap is unchanged between 1992-93 and 1998-99 (Table 5, top panel), since the relative decline in birth and

abortion rates is the same over this period (Tables 3 and 4, top panel). However, the within-state DD for adult

abortion ratios in Table 5 is positive and large because the relative decline in birth rates greatly exceeds the fall

in abortion rates among women of zero parity. Thus, the simple DD for the adult abortion ratio is consistent

with a negative effect of the family cap on fertility. This interpretation, however, is again undermined by

similar changes in states without family caps. The simple DD for adults in non-cap states is also positive and

of equal magnitude to the DD in states with a family cap. Thus, welfare reform or other contemporaneous

influences, but not the family cap in particular, may have increased abortion more at higher parities.18

     The simple DDs in Tables 3 –5 describe changes in reproductive choices before and after the recent waves

of welfare reform and implementation of family cap provisions. To more accurately associate changes in

births and abortions with the timing of various policies we turn to the estimation of equation (1). An important

advantage of the abortion ratio is that we have counts of births and abortions in our sample states and are able

to construct a panel by state, year, age, schooling, marital status, parity and race. Consequently, we obtain

estimates of the association between changes in the abortion ratio and the implementation of welfare reform



18
  This might be expected if welfare reform, for example, reduced desired family size among high-risk women, but did
not affect the timing of first births. We explore the more general effects of welfare reform in a companion paper that does
not look explicitly at the family cap (Joyce et al. 2003).



                                                            19
and the family cap adjusted for other covariates as well as state and year fixed effects. We also present

estimates based on regressions of log abortions and log births adjusted for aggregate population totals as

proxies for regressions of abortion and birth rates, respectively.



Regression Adjusted Estimates

           Estimates of equation (1) by age and race are displayed in Table 6. There are three outcomes: the

natural logarithm of abortions, the natural logarithm of births and the abortion ratio. For adults we present

three estimates: the DD in states with family caps (DDcap), the DDD; and the cross-state DD (DDcross-state). The

latter is obtained by comparing changes among women of parity one or more in states with a family cap to

changes among similar women in states without a family cap. For teens we show only the cross-state DD. For

adults we find statistically significant evidence consistent with an effect of the family cap if we examine only

states with a family cap. Log abortions rise 29 percent in regressions for whites and blacks combined; log

births are unchanged or rise modestly, which results in a statistically significant increase in the abortion ratio

of approximately 16 percent for blacks and whites combined evaluated at the mean (top panel).19 The DDDs,

however, generally reduce the magnitude of the effect, and none of the estimates are statistically significant,

although the standard errors for abortion are rather large. In addition, the cross-state DD for abortion is

essentially zero, which combined with the rise in births, causes the abortion ratio to decline. Separate

estimates for whites and blacks follow a similar pattern. Results for teens are in the lower third of Table 6. We

show only the cross-state DD for teens since we do not consider teens of zero parity an appropriate comparison

group for higher parity teens.20 Inferences for teens are similar to those of adults. The increase in abortions is

offset by the rise in births leaving the abortion ratio unchanged. From this we infer that trends in birth and

abortion rates among women at risk for public assistance differ importantly by parity, but neither the trends

nor the differences in the trends appear related to the family cap.



19
     The change in the abortion ratio relative to the mean is approximately .040/.250 or 16 percent.
20
     Our conclusions do not change if we use teens of zero parity as a comparison group.



                                                              20
        Regression-adjusted estimates for the abortion ratio are very similar to those from the simple DDs and

DDDs in Table 5. There is less agreement between the regression results in Table 6 and the simple DD

estimates for birth and abortion rates in Tables 3 and 4, especially among teens. DD estimates for adults in

Table 3 indicate that birth rates fell between 1992/93 and 1998/99 in family cap states whereas in Table 6

similar changes in log births adjusted for the aggregate population suggest that this proxy for birth rates

increased after implementation of the family cap. Otherwise, results pertaining to adults in Tables 3, 4 and 6

are consistent. For teens, the DD estimates in Tables 3 and 4 indicate that birth and abortion rates fell between

1992/3 and 1998/99. But in Table 6, changes in adjusted log births and log abortions imply an increase in

births and abortion rates before and after implementation of family cap policies. This disagreement may be

related to the different specification of year and policy effects, or to the measurement error associated with

population. We suspect that our inability to adequately adjust for population in the log birth regressions is the

most plausible explanation. First, the DDs and DDDs for the abortion ratio in Table 5 and the regression-

adjusted estimates in Table 6 are almost identical, which suggests that the more refined timing of the policy

measures in the regressions does not alter the estimates. Second, we computed simple DDs and DDDs as in

Tables 3 and 4 with the natural log of births and abortions as the outcome (results not shown). They were also

very similar to the adjusted estimates in Table 6. In other words, the inclusion of the log of the state

population by age and race on the right-hand-side of equation (1) had little effect on our estimates. Third,

other researchers have obtained similar results. Kearney (forthcoming), Joyce, Kaestner and Korenman

(forthcoming) and Levine (2002) have also found that the family cap is positively related to log births in

selected samples of low-educated, unmarried women. The counter-intuitive result is generally statistically

insignificant, but the sign and magnitude of the coefficient is similar to the estimates that we report in Table 6.

        The lack of detailed population data for the relevant subgroups by state and year is a key motivation

for including the abortion ratio as an outcome. Although we cannot make inferences about changes in

pregnancies associated with the family cap with the abortion ratio, it is relatively well-measured among

women and teens who are likely exposed to welfare reform. Moreover, the change in the abortion ratio,

conditional on pregnancy is relevant for many poor women, and especially teens, given the prevalence of


                                                        21
unintended pregnancy. In addition, changes in the abortion ratios reflect relative changes in birth and abortion

rates. Since the DDDs for the abortion ratios are small and statistically insignificant, and since the simple

DDDs of birth and abortion rates are also inconsistent with an effect of the family cap, we conclude that the

family cap has not affected decisions regarding pregnancy or how pregnancies are resolved.



Conclusion

        Some of the architects of welfare reform were concerned that reductions in non-marital childbearing

might be accompanied by an increase in abortion. An experimental analysis of New Jersey’s family cap

implemented in 1992 indicated that these fears were well-founded, as births fell and abortions rose in response

to the policy change (Jagannathan and Camasso 2003). On the other hand, several non-experimental studies

have found no effect of the family cap. In this study we use individual birth and abortion records from 24

states to obtain estimates of the association between implementation of a family cap and changes in birth and

abortion rates among women and teens at risk for public assistance. We found that, although birth rates have

fallen among teen and adult mothers most affected by the family cap, they also fell among comparable mothers

who lived in states without family caps. We observed a similar pattern with abortions: a relative increase

among women of higher parity in states with and without a family cap. We speculate that a decline in

pregnancy rates at higher parities may be related to welfare reform more generally or other contemporaneous

influences, but that these trends are not a specific response to the family cap.

        A contribution of our study is the addition of abortions as an outcome. Except for the evaluation of

New Jersey’s family cap, all previous non-experimental studies have been limited to an analysis of births.

Abortion data contribute to our analysis in two ways. First, abortion data can provide confirmatory evidence

of a possible association of fertility behaviors with the family cap. Birth rates of teens at higher parities, for

instance, fell relatively more in states with compared to states without a family cap. However, the relative

decline of abortion rates among teens of higher parity was also greater in states with a family cap, which is

inconsistent with an effect of the family cap. A second advantage of data on abortion is that they allow

multivariate analysis of the abortion ratio for women of lower economic status. We would have preferred to


                                                         22
analyze both birth and abortion rates with multivariate methods, but population data are not available in

sufficient detail. Importantly, multivariate estimates of the association between the family cap and the

abortion ratio were very similar to the simple DDs and consistent with the simple DDs of the birth and

abortion rates.

        A limitation of the abortion ratio as an outcome is that it provides no information on changes in

contraception and sexual activity associated with the family cap. However, unintended pregnancy is quite

prevalent among women on public assistance, which suggests that pregnancy resolution (abortion ratios) may

be sensitive to changes in fertility intentions (timing or completed fertility). For instance, the abortion rate

among women with income less than 100 percent of the federal poverty level is two to three times the

abortion rate of women with incomes above 300 percent of poverty (Jones, Darroch and Henshaw 2002).

Welfare recipients often report that their births are the result of unintended pregnancies. In an evaluation of

Delaware’s waiver program, A Better Chance (ABC), 82 percent of the welfare participants that had a baby

during the trial reported that the pregnancy was unintended (Fein 1999). In short, the high prevalence of

unintended pregnancy among women of lower socioeconomic status leads us to expect that a substantial

decline in births associated with the family cap should be accompanied by an increase in the abortion ratio.

        A limitation of vital statistics is the inability to precisely identify women on or at risk for public

assistance. As a result, we may have had insufficient power to detect small but statistically significant changes

in reproductive choices associated with the family cap. The advantage of our approach as opposed to an

analysis of women on welfare is that we are able to capture changes among those at risk for public assistance

provided the response is sufficiently large to be detected. Our results suggest that there have been no major

reproductive responses to the family cap.




                                                         23
                                             Acknowledgements

        This research was supported by grant R01 HD40834-03 from the National Institute of Child Health

and Human Development (NICHD), National Institutes of Health to the National Bureau of Economic

Research (NBER). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of Baruch

College, the NBER, NICHD or the Alan Guttmacher Institute. We thank Jeffery Grogger ,participants at the

AGI seminar and two anonymous referees for helpful comments . Silvie Colman and Danielle Ferry provided

excellent research assistance. All errors are ours. This paper is forthcoming in a special issue of Population

Research and Policy Review.




                                                      24
                                                  References

Acs, G. (1996). The impact of welfare on young mother’s subsequent childbearing
        Decisions. Journal of Human Resources. 31(4): 898-915.

Argys, L. M., Averett, S. L. & Rees, D. I. (2000). Welfare generosity, pregnancies and abortions among
        unmarried AFDC recipients. Journal of Population Economics 13:569-594

Bertrand, M., Duflo, E. & Mullainathan, S. (2002). How much should we trust differences-in-differences
        estimates? National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. Working Paper 8841.

Blank, R. (2002). Evaluating welfare reform in the United States. Journal of Economic Literature Vol.XL(4):
        1105-1166.

Blank, R. M., George, C. C., & London, R. A. (1996). State abortion rates: The impact of policies, providers,
        politics, demographics, and economic environment. Journal of Health Economics 15, pp. 513-553.

Camasso, M. J., Jagannathan, R., Harvey, C. and M. Killingsworth. (2003). The use of client surveys to gauge
      the threat of contamination in welfare reform experiments. Journal of Policy Analysis and
      Management. 22(2):207-223.

Camasso, M. J., Harvey, C., Killingsworth, M., & Jagannathan, R. (1999). New Jersey’s family cap
      and family size decisions: Some findings from a five-year evaluation. Unpublished
      manuscript, Rutgers University.

Camasso, M. J., Harvey, C., Jagannathan, R.,and M. Killingsworth (1998a). A final report on the impact of
      New Jersey’s family development Program: results from a pre-post analysis of AFDC case heads from
      1990-1996. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Camasso, M. J., Harvey, C., Jagannathan, R.,and M. Killingsworth (1998b). A final report on the impact of
      New Jersey’s family development program. State of New Jersey Department of Human Services.

Center for Disease Control and Prevention. (1999). Vital statistics of the United States: Natality, 1997.
        Technical Appendix.

Cook, P.J., Parnell, A., Moore, M. and D. Pagnini (1999). The effect of short-term variation in abortion
       funding on pregnancy outcomes. Journal of Health Economics 18(2):241-258.

Council of Economic Advisors. (1997). Technical Report: Explaining the decline in welfare receipt, 1993-
       1996.

Dye, J. L. & Presser, H. B. (1999). The state bonus to reward a decrease in ‘illegitimacy’: Flawed methods and
        questionable effects. Family Planning Perspectives 31(3): 142-147.

Dyer, W. & Fairlie, R. (2001). Do family caps reduce out-of-wedlock births? Evidence from Arkansas,
       Georgia, Indiana, New Jersey and Virginia. Manuscript. University of California at Santa Cruz,
       Department of Economics.

Fairlie, R. W. & London, R. A. (1997). The effect of incremental benefit levels on births to AFDC recipients.
        Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 16(4): 575-597.



                                                       25
Fein, D. J. (1999). Will welfare reform influence marriage and fertility? Evidence from the ABC
        demonstration. Abt Associates Inc.

Grogger, J. (2002). The behavioral effect of welfare time limits. American Economic Review 92(2):385-389.

Grogger, J. (2003). Welfare transitions in the 1990s: The economy, welfare policy, and the EITC. National
       Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper 9472.

Grogger, J. & Bronars, S. G. (2001). The effect of welfare payments on the marriage and fertility behavior of
       unwed mothers: Results from a twins experiment. Journal of Political Economy 109(3).

Grogger, J., Karoly, L., & Klerman, A. (2002). Consequences of welfare reform: A research synthesis (DRU-
       2676-DHHS). RAND: Santa Monica, CA.

Hechman, J. & Smith, J. (1995). Assessing the case for social experiments. Journal of Economic Perspectives
      9(2):85-110.

Henshaw, S. (1998). Unintended pregnancy in the United States. Family Planning Perspectives
      30(1):24-29 & 46.

Henshaw, S. (2000). Birth and abortion data. http://www.welfareacademy.org/pubs/dataneeds/dataneeds-
        henshaw.pdf

Henshaw, S. & Kost, K. (1996). Abortion Patients in 1994-1995: Characteristics and contraceptive use.
      Family Planning Perspectives 28(4):140-147.

Horvath-Rose, A. E. & Peters, E. H. (2001). Welfare waivers and nonmarital childbearing. For better and
       worse. Welfare Reform and the Well-Being of Children and Families. Russell Sage Foundation, New
       York

Jagannathan, R. & Camasso, M. J. Forthcoming. (2003). Family Cap and Nonmarital Fertility: The
       Racial Conditioning of Policy Effects. Journal of Marriage and the Family 65(1):52-71.

Jagannathan, R., Camasso, M. J., & Killingsworth, M. Forthcoming. New Jersey’s Family Cap Experiment:
       Do Fertility Impacts Differ by Racial Density? Journal of Labor Economics.

Jones, R. K., Darroch, J. E. & Henshaw, S. (2002). Patterns in the socioeconomic characteristics of women
        obtaining abortions in 2000-2001. Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health 34(5): 226-235.

Joyce, T, Kaestner, R. & Korenman, S. (2002). Welfare reform and non-marital fertility in the 1990s:
        evidence from birth records. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. Working Paper 9406.

Joyce, T., Kaestner, R., Korenman, S. & Henshaw, S. (2003). Changes in births and abortions following
        welfare reform. Presented at the annual meeting of Population Association of American, Minneapolis,
        MN, May 1, 2003.

Kaushal, N. & Kaestner, R. (2001). From welfare to work: Has welfare reform worked? Journal of Policy
       Analysis and Management 20(4):699-719.

Kearney, M. Forthcoming. Is there an effect of incremental welfare benefits on
       fertility behavior? A look at the family cap. Journal of Human Resources.


                                                      26
Klerman, J. (1998). Welfare reform and abortion. In Robert Moffitt, editor, Welfare, The family, and
       reproductive behavior: Research perspectives. Washington, DC : National Academy Press. p. 97-133.

Koonin L. M. et al. (1999). Abortion surveillance--United States, 1996. In: CDC surveillance
       summaries (July 30). MMWR 48(No. SS4).

Levine, P. (2002). The impact of social policy and economic activity throughout the fertility decision tree.
        National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9021.

Levine, P. & Staiger, D. (2002). Abortion as insurance. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
        Paper 8813.

Loury, G. (2000). Preventing subsequent births to welfare recipients.
        http://www.welfareacademy.org/eval/loury.html

Lundberg, S. & Plotnick, R. (1995). Adolescent premarital childbearing: Do economic incentives matter?
       Journal of Labor Economics 13:177-201.

Mach, T. (2001). Measuring the impact of family caps on childbearing decisions. Manuscript. State University
       of New York at Albany, Department of Economics.

Matthews, S. et al. (1997). The effects of economic conditions and access to reproductive health services on
       state abortion rates and birthrates. Family Planning Perspectives 29(2), 52-60.

Mills, G., Kornfeld, R., Porcari, D. and D. Laliberty (2001). Evaluation of the Arizona EMPOWER Welfare
        Reform Demonstration. Final Report to the Arizona Department of Economic Security. Abt
        Associates Inc.

Moffitt, R. A. (1998). The effect of welfare on marriage and fertility. In Robert Moffitt, editor, Welfare, The
         Family, and Reproductive Behavior: Research Perspectives. Washington, DC : National Academy
         Press. p. 50-97.

Moffitt, R. A. (2003a). The temporary assistance for needy families program. In Robert A. Moffitt editor.
         Means-tested Transfer Programs in the United States. Chicago: NBER/Chicago University Press. Pp.

Moffitt, R.A. (2003b). The role of randomized field trials in social science research: A perspective from
         evaluations of reforms of social welfare programs. DP 1264-03, IRP, University of Wisconsin. June.

New York City Department of Health. (1999). Summary of Vital Statistics 1998: The City of New York.

O’Neill, J. E., & Hill, M. A. (2001). Gaining ground? Measuring the impact of welfare reform on welfare and
        work. The Manhattan Institute. No. 17.

Rector, R. & Youssef, S. (1999). The determinants of welfare caseload decline. Center for Data Analysis
        Report #99-04. Washington, D.C: Heritage Foundation.

Rossi, P. (2000). New Jersey’s family development program: An overview and critique of the
        rutgers evaluation. http://www.welfareacademy.org/eval/toc.cfm




                                                       27
Schoeni, R. F. & Blank, R. M. (2000). What has welfare reform accomplished? Impacts on welfare
       participation, employment, income, poverty and family structure. NBER Working Paper 7627, March.

Ventura, S. J. & Bachrach, Ch.A. (2000). Nonmarital childbearing in the United States, 1940-99. National
       Vital Statistics Report, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.




                                                    28
                                              Table 1.
Total Abortions by State of Occurrence as Reported by the Alan Guttmacher Institute and State Health
                                         Departments, 1996

State:                           AGI             State Health Department       Percent Difference

Alabama                         15150                     13826                       -8.7
Arizona                         19310                     11016                      -43.0
Arkansas                         6200                      5882                       -5.1
Hawaii                           6930                      4916                      -29.1
Idaho                            1600                      1022                      -36.1
Kansas                          10630                     10683                        0.5
Maine                            2700                      2602                       -3.6
Minnesota                       14660                     14193                       -3.2
Mississippi                      4490                      4206                       -6.3
Missouri                        10810                     11629                        7.6
Montana                          2900                      2763                       -4.7
Nevada                          15450                      6965                      -54.9
New York*                      167600                    145519                      -13.2
North Carolina                  33550                     33554                        0.0
North Dakota                     1290                      1292                        0.2
Ohio                            42870                     36426                      -15.0
Oregon                          15050                     13767                       -8.5
Rhode Island                     5420                      5432                        0.2
South Carolina                   9940                      9326                       -6.2
Tennessee                       17990                     16153                      -10.2
Texas                           91270                     91470                        0.2
Utah                             3700                      3637                       -1.7
Virginia                        29940                     25770                      -13.9
West Virginia                    2610                      2470                       -5.4

* includes NYC




                                                29
                                                                      Table 2.
                          Total Abortions and Percent with Missing data by Characteristics of Women in 26 States, 1992-2000
                                                                  % Unknown in Following Fields:
   State of Occurrence        Number of Total Education              Age           Race        Marital        Parity       % of Total         Number of Abortions
                                Abortions                                                      Status                        Lost                Remaining
Alabama                           123,999            12.04          1.32          1.05          1.51          0.93           15.44                   104,848
Arizona                           111,722            29.65          6.01          0.00         28.87          0.00            6.01a                  105,012
Arkansas                           51,458             5.53          2.06          1.15          2.76          4.85           14.47                    44,012
Hawaii                             45,047            25.58          0.90          8.83        100.00          1.45           10.82a                   40,172
Idaho                               9,197             4.13          0.83          0.33          0.18          0.12            5.23                     8,716
Kansas                            100,643             0.88          1.16          0.69          0.30          0.31            3.04                    97,579
Maine                              24,951             8.48          1.63          2.73         12.85         10.12           29.73                    17,532
Minnesota                         129,591            80.93          1.35          1.94          2.96          0.10            5.72b                  122,176
Mississippi                        41,221            14.67          1.54          0.16          0.36          0.06           16.25                    34,522
Missouri                           95,929             2.67          1.06          0.40          1.34          0.06            5.25                    90,893
Montana                            24,034            10.14          0.77          7.23          7.49          0.05           15.22                    20,377
Nevada                             60,825             4.68          2.63         12.14          3.15          0.65           17.80                    49,999
Upstate New York                  376,553            24.53          1.24         15.48        100.00          2.26           29.24 c                 266,455
New York City                     933,324             8.49          1.08          4.34          2.81          0.87           15.35                   790,089
North Carolina                    295,645            20.34          3.19          2.17         10.82          1.86           25.81                   219,350
North Dakota                       11,971             1.54          0.58          0.17          0.40          0.04            2.53                    11,668
Ohio                              328,735             5.37          1.64          6.52          3.24         11.45           23.41                   251,765
Oregon                            124,179             2.65          1.26          1.48          3.66          0.80            7.45                   114,932
Rhode Island                       50,982            15.99          0.58          1.88          7.18          0.02           18.58                    41,508
South Carolina                     86,078             0.21          0.98          0.02          0.04          0.02            1.25                    85,006
Tennessee                         146,702            22.65          0.22          0.49          0.69          0.28            1.56b                  144,420
Texas                             773,334           100.00          1.46          4.12          5.11          0.26            9.01b                  703,644
Utah                               32,624             1.23          1.01          4.98          0.36          0.13            7.14                    30,294
Virginia                          242,924            13.10          1.16          1.49         12.58          1.68           22.05                   189,371
West Virginia $                    23,221             4.48          0.91          0.08          0.24          0.07            5.54                    21,935
*Total (18 states + NYC):       2,661,940             8.91          1.46          3.36          4.50           2.38           16.44                2,224,396
         Total (24 states):     4,244,889            10.85          1.51          4.40          4.42           1.77            7.31**              3,934,536
* Excluded states: AZ, HI, MN, NY, TN, TX. **% lost based on age, race and parity.
a
  not including education and marital status; b not including education; c not including marital status.
$
  1993 is missing for Indiana and 1992 for West Virginia. We use 1992 abortion for 1993 in Indiana and 1993 for 1992 abortion in West Virginia to create balanced
panels.
                                                                                       30
                                                 Table 3.
 Birth Rates for Teens and Unmarried Women Ages 20-34 with 12 or Fewer Years of Schooling by Year of
                  Conception, Race and States with and without Family Caps, 1992-1999*
                                                     First Difference        Difference-in-differences
                  1992-1993      1998-1999       Absolute        Relative    Absolute         Relative
                      (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)          (5)              (6)
TEENS:
                                                 States with a Family Cap Provision:

    All parities         67               61               -6            -0.103

    Parity: 1+          202              114              -88            -0.572

                                               States without a Family Cap Provision:

    All parities         64               45              -14            -0.271

    Parity: 1+          162              109              -53            -0.396            -35             -0.176

ADULTS:
                                                 States with a Family Cap Provision:

    All parities        112              107               -5            -0.050

    Parity: 0            91               92               1             0.012

    Parity: 1+          126              116              -11            -0.090            -12             -0.101

                                               States without a Family Cap Provision:

    All parities        101              104               3             0.027

    Parity: 0            77               85               8             0.096

    Parity: 1+          119              116               -2            -0.021            -10             -0.117

*The teen birth rate is defined as births per 1000 teens of designated parity. The adult birth rate is births per 1000
unmarried women with 12 or fewer years of schooling of the indicated parity. Population estimates are from the
June CPS Fertility Module in 1992, 1994, 1998 and 2000. We use population estimates in 1992 and 1994 for the
years 1992-93 and the June CPS in 1998 and 2000 for the years 1998-99. The adult sample includes 18 states: AL,
AR, ID, KS, ME, MS, MO, MT, NV, NC, ND, OH, OR, RI, SC, UT, VA, and WV. The teen sample includes 6
additional states: AZ, HI, MN, NY, TN and TX. Family caps were enforced in Arizona (11/95), Arkansas (7/94),
Idaho (7/97), Mississippi (10/95), North Carolina (7/96), North Dakota (7/97), South Carolina (10/96), Tennessee
(9/96), and Virginia (7/95). Relative changes are approximated by the difference in logs. The difference-in-
differences (DDs) for teens is the change in birth rates among teens of parity one or more in states without family
caps subtracted from the change among teens in states with family caps. The DDs for adults within family cap
states between women of zero parity and women of higher parity. The DDs in non-cap states are the same.



                                                          31
                                              Table 4.
  Abortion Rates for Teens and Unmarried Women Ages 20-34 with 12 or Fewer Years of Schooling by
                  Year of Conception, Race and States with and without Family Caps,
                                             1992-1999*

                                                       First Difference            Difference-in-differences
                   1992-1993     1998-1999         Absolute       Relative          Absolute      Relative
                      (1)           (2)              (3)            (4)               (5)           (6)
TEENS:
                                             States with a Family Cap Provision:

    All parities       22            15                -7          -0.354

    Parity: 1+         47            27               -21          -0.569

                                           States without a Family Cap Provision:

    All parities       27            19                -7          -0.369

    Parity: 1+         65            44               -22          -0.404               1          -0.165

ADULTS:
                                             States with a Family Cap Provision:

    All parities       43            32               -11          -0.298

    Parity: 0          38            23               -15          -0.505

    Parity: 1+         47            37                -9          -0.220               6          0.286

                                           States without a Family Cap Provision:

    All parities       38            40                2            0.040

    Parity: 0          28            24                -4          -0.158

    Parity: 1+         46            50                5            0.095               9          0.253

The abortion rate is defined as abortions per 1000 women or teens of the relevant demographic groups. See
notes to Table 3.




                                                     32
                                               Table 5.
 Abortion Ratio for White and Black Teens and Unmarried Women Ages 20-34 with 12 or Fewer Years of
         Schooling by Year of Conception, and States with and without Family Caps, 1992-1999*

                                                           First Differences             Difference-in-difference
                     1992-1993       1998-1999         Absolute         Relative        Absolute         Relative
                        (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)
TEENS:
                                                 States with a Family Cap Provision:

    All parities       0.243             0.2            -0.043           -0.195

    Parity: 1+          0.19             0.19            0.001            0.003

                                                States without a Family Cap Provision:

    All parities       0.295            0.275           -0.019           -0.068

    Parity: 1+         0.287            0.285           -0.002           -0.005           0.003            0.008

ADULTS:
                                                 States with a Family Cap Provision:

    All parities       0.279            0.231           -0.047           -0.186

    Parity: 0          0.296            0.201           -0.096           -0.390

    Parity: 1+         0.270            0.245           -0.025           -0.097           0.071            0.293

                                                States without a Family Cap Provision:

    All parities       0.275            0.278            0.003            0.009

    Parity: 0          0.267            0.221           -0.047           -0.193

    Parity: 1+         0.279            0.302            0.024            0.082           0.071            0.274


Abortion ratio is the fraction of pregnancies (induced abortions + births) that end in abortion. See notes to Table 3.




                                                          33
                                                             Table 6.
Adjusted Difference-in-differences (DD) Associated with the Family Cap for the Log of Abortions, the Log of Births, and the Ratio
of Abortions to Pregnancies (Abortions plus Births) to Teens and Unmarried Adult Women with 12 or Fewer Years of Schooling by
                                                 Years of Conception, 1992-1999


                          Whites and Blacks:                               Whites:                                  Blacks:
                      Ln         Ln                            Ln            Ln                          Ln           Ln
                   abortions    births      A/(A+B)         abortions       births     A/(A+B)        abortions      births     A/(A+B)
                      (1)        (2)           (3)             (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)          (8)          (9)

ADULTS:

   DDcap             0.294       0.048        0.043           0.245          0.086       0.030          0.269        0.064        0.033
                   (0.029)**   (0.014)**    (0.012)**       (0.030)**      (0.023)**   (0.010)**      (0.035)**    (0.018)**     (0.012)*

   DDD              0.145        0.055        0.012           0.080         0.030       0.008           0.083        0.077        -0.010
                   (0.078)*     (0.032)      (0.015)         (0.063)       (0.030)     (0.015)         (0.077)      (0.055)      (0.013)

   DDcross-state     0.002       0.073       -0.025          -0.081         0.150       -0.051         -0.005        0.097        -0.030
                    (0.122)    (0.027)**     (0.028)         (0.136)       (0.064)*    (0.025)*        (0.133)     (0.030)**     (0.030)

   R-squared         0.958       0.989        0.753           0.952         0.991       0.733           0.962        0.992        0.858
   N                  288         288          288             288           288         288             216          216          216

TEENS:

   DDcross-state     0.113       0.062        0.012           0.069         0.069       0.001           0.115        0.077        0.007
                    (0.077)    (0.029)**     (0.014)         (0.069)       (0.037)     (0.010)         (0.086)      (0.033)      (0.019)

   R-squared         0.986       0.994        0.941           0.986         0.995       0.938           0.981        0.985        0.949
   N                  384         384          384             384           384         384             304          304          304

Note: DD cap refers to difference-in-differences within family cap states. The DDD subtracts the DD in non-cap states from the DD in cap
states. The DD cross-states refers to difference-in-differences among births of parity 1 or higher between cap and non-cap states. All
regressions include state and year fixed effects. Standard errors have been corrected for clustering within states. + significant at 10%; *
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%


                                                                      34
     Figure 1. Abortions per 1000 women of ages 15-44 nationally and for selected states by source,
                                             1992-2000
27
      26

25
       24


23

                                                                                                       21
21    20                                                            AGI, National Rates
                                                                                                       20

19                                                                           AGI, 24 States



17                                                                                                     16
                                                           State Health Departments, 24 States


15
     1992        1993        1994       1995        1996           1997      1998         1999        2000




                                                              35
                         Figure 2. Abortion and birth rates for white and black unmarried, low-ed women aged 20-34,
                                                in 18 states*, by years of conception, 1992-99

                 120

                             Birth rate
                 100


                 80
Per 1000 women




                 60

                              Abortion rate
                 40


                 20


                   0
                          1992            1993          1994           1995          1996     1997       1998         1999

                  * AL, AR, ID, KS, ME, MS, MO, MT, NV, NC, ND, OH, OR, RI, SC, UT, VA, WV.
                  Population estimates are from the CPS Outgoing Rotation Files.




                                                                                     36
                      Figure 3. Abortion and birth rates for white and black teens aged 15-19 in 24 states*, by
                                        family cap state and years of conception, 1992-1999

                 80

                 70
                                                                                          Birth rate, famcap
                 60

                 50
Per 1000 women




                                                                                                  Birth rate, no famcap
                 40

                 30       Abortion rate, no famcap


                 20
                                          Abortion rate, famcap
                 10

                  0
                        1992          1993           1994          1995            1996          1997          1998         1999
                      * AL, AZ, AR, HI, ID, KS, ME, MN, MS, MO, MT, NV,NY, NC, ND, OH, OR, RI, SC, TN, TX, UT, VA, WV. Population
                      estimates are from the U.S. Census Bureau.




                                                                              37
                                                              Appendix Table 1.
                               Availability of Micro-level Induced Termination of Pregnancy Files, 1992-2000


States that Contributed Data -- Maternal Characteristics and Years Available:                      Non-Contributing States – Reasons:

Abortions by age, race,   Abortions by age and race but       Abortions by age but missing race   Abortions unavailable due to statutory
marital status, parity    missing marital status (mr) or      (r) or marital status (ms) or       restrictions (sr) or inadequate data
schooling, 1992-2000      schooling (ed), parity or years     schooling (ed) or years (1992-00)   collection and or storage (idc)
Alabama                   Arizona (only 2 categories of ed)   Delaware (92-96)                    Alaska (idc)
Arkansas                  Colorado (parity)                   Georgia (92-93, 00)                 California (idc)
Idaho                     Indiana (parity)                    Michigan (ed, r, 92-95)             Connecticut (idc)
Kansas                    Hawaii (ms)                         Oklahoma (92-99)                    Florida (idc)
Maine                     New Jersey (ed, select counties)                                        Illinois (sr)
Mississippi               New York (excluding NYC) (ms)                                           Iowa (sr)
Missouri                  Tennessee (1999-2000, ed)                                               Kentucky (idc)
Montana                   Texas (ed)                                                              Louisiana (sr)
Nevada                    Minnesota (ed, 92-98)                                                   Maryland (idc)
New York City                                                                                     Massachusetts (idc)
North Carolina                                                                                    Nebraska (idc)
North Dakota                                                                                      New Hampshire (idc)
Ohio                                                                                              New Mexico (idc)
Oregon                                                                                            Pennsylvania (sr)
Rhode Island                                                                                      South Dakota (sr)
South Carolina                                                                                    Vermont (sr)
Utah                                                                                              Washington (idc)
Virginia                                                                                          Washington D.C. (idc)
West Virginia (1992)                                                                              Wisconsin (sr)
                                                                                                  Wyoming (sr)




                                                                    38
                                                 Appendix Table 2.

      Proportion of Women 20 to 34 years of Age Whose Birth or Abortion Was Financed by
                    Medicaid in 1994 By Education, Marital Status and Parity
                                                                       Percent of abortions Percent of Births
                                                                          to Women on        to Women on
Demographic Group:                                                         Medicaid *         Medicaid **

No previous live births:
Less than 12 years of schooling – Not Married                                25.2% (103)                   85.2
12 years of schooling—Not Married                                           21.8% (441)                    71.8
12 or more years of schooling—Not Married                                   10.2% (1631)                   58.9
12 or more years of schooling--Married                                       8.9% (180)                    17.9

One or more previous live births:
Less than 12 years of schooling – Not Married                                42.0% (500)                   93.1
12 years of schooling—Not Married                                           36.5% (1296)                   80.6
12 or more years of schooling—Not Married                                   24.2% (1583)                   67.8
12 or more years of schooling--Married                                      14.3% (792)                    20.8
* Authors’ tabulations of 1994 survey of abortion patients (Henshaw and 1996). Only states that finance abortions for
women on Medicaid are included.
**1994 10 States in PRAMS




                                                           39
                                              Table A3.

     Pregnancy Rates for Teens and Unmarried Women Ages 20-34 with 12 or Fewer Years of
   Schooling by Year of Conception, Race and States with and without Family Caps, 1992-1999*

                                                  First Difference          Difference-in-differences
                 1992-1993     1998-1999       Absolute      Relative        Absolute      Relative
                    (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
TEENS:
                   States with a Family Cap Provision
All parities         89            76           -13            -0.159

Parity: 0            75             67             -8          -0.112

Parity: 1+          249            141           -109          -0.572

                 States without a Family Cap Provision
All parities        91             67           -24            -0.302

Parity: 0            77             58            -19          -0.285

Parity: 1+          228            153            -75          -0.398           -34          -0.173

ADULTS:
                   States with a Family Cap Provision
All parities        156            139          -17            -0.113

Parity: 0           129            115            -14          -0.116

Parity: 1+          173            153            -20          -0.123           -6           -0.007

                 States without a Family Cap Provision
All parities        139            143           4              0.031

Parity: 0           105            109             4            0.034

Parity: 1+          164            167             2            0.013           -2           -0.021


*The teen pregnancy rate is defined as pregnancies per 1000 teens of designated parity. The adult
pregnancy rate is pregnancies per 1000 unmarried women with 12 or fewer years of schooling of the
indicated parity. Population estimates are from the June CPS Fertility Module in 1992, 1994, 1998 and
2000. We use population estimates in 1992 and 1994 for the years 1992-93 and the June CPS in 1998
and 2000 for the years 1998-99. The adult sample includes 18 states: AL, AR, ID, KS, ME, MS, MO,
MT, NV, NC, ND, OH, OR, RI, SC, UT, VA, and WV. The teen sample includes 6 additional states:
AZ, HI, MN, NY, TN and TX. Family caps were enforced in Arizona (11/95), Arkansas (7/94), Idaho
(7/97), Mississippi (10/95), North Carolina (7/96), North Dakota (7/97), South Carolina (10/96),
Tennessee (9/96), and Virginia (7/95). Relative changes are approximated by the difference in logs. The
difference-in-differences (DDs) for teens is the change in pregnancy rates among teens of parity one or
more in states with and without family caps.




                                                   40
                          Figure A1. Abortion and birth rates for unmarried, low-ed women aged 20-34 by race, 18
                                                states* and years of conception, 1992-1999


                 160

                 140

                 120                                          Birth rate (black)
Per 1000 women




                 100

                  80           Birth rate (white)
                  60
                                                                                                                    Abortion rate (black)
                  40
                                                                                                                Abortion rate (white)
                  20

                   0
                            1992               1993               1994              1995               1996               1997              1998                  1999


                       * AL, AR, ID, KS, ME, MS, MO, MT, NV, NC, ND, OH, OR, RI, SC, UT, VA, WV. Population estimates are from the CPS Outgoing Rotation Files.




                                                                                             41
                      Figure A2. Abortion and birth rates for white teens aged 15-19 in 24 states*, by family cap
                                             state and years of conception, 1992-1999


                 70


                 60
                                                                                               Birth rate, famcap
                 50
                                                                   Birth rate, no famcap
Per 1000 women




                 40


                 30
                               Abortion rate, no famcap
                 20


                 10                                Abortion rate, famcap


                  0
                        1992           1993          1994          1995           1996          1997          1998      1999

                      * AL, AZ, AR, HI, ID, KS, ME, MN, MS, MO, MT, NV,NY, NC, ND, OH, OR, RI, SC, TN, TX, UT, VA, WV




                                                                             42
      Figure A3. Abortion and birth rates for black teens aged 15-19 in 24 states*, by family cap
                             state and years of conception, 1992-1999


120


100                                                Birth rate, famcap


 80

                                                                              Birth rate, no famcap
 60                             Abortion rate, no famcap


 40


 20     Abortion rate, famcap



  0
       1992         1993           1994          1995          1996          1997          1998           1999


        * AL, AZ, AR, HI, ID, KS, ME, MN, MS, MO, MT, NV,NY, NC, ND, OH, OR, RI, SC, TN, TX, UT, VA, WV




                                                        43
