                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          ROBUST AGGREGATE IMPLICATIONS
                     OF STOCHASTIC DISCOUNT FACTOR VOLATILITY

                                           Casey B. Mulligan

                                         Working Paper 10210
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10210


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




I appreciate the comments of Fernando Alvarez, Lars Hansen, Hanno Lustig, Angelo Melino, seminar
participants at the University of Chicago, and the research assistance of Constan Hevia. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Robust Aggregate Implications of Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 10210
January 2004
JEL No. E21, G12

                                            ABSTRACT

The stochastic discount factor seems volatile, but is this observation of any consequence for
aggregate analysis of consumption, capital accumulation, output, etc.? I amend the standard
frictionless model of aggregate consumption and capital accumulation with time-varying subjective
probability adjustments, and obtain four implications for aggregate economic analysis. First,
subjective probability adjustments add volatility to the stochastic discount factor, and can rationalize
any pattern of asset prices satisfying no-arbitrage, even while capital accumulation is efficient.
Second, despite its flexibility in pricing assets, the model implies that, in expected value, the
intertemporal marginal rate of transformation is equal to the intertemporal marginal rate of
substitution, and there is a simple, stable, and familiar relation between consumption growth and
capital's return. Third, the expected returns on assets in small net aggregate supply are weakly (and
sometimes negatively) correlated with capital's expected return, and are thereby poor predictors of
aggregate consumption growth. Fourth, when it comes to assets in small net aggregate supply,
capital gains reflect time varying risk premia, and returns can predict aggregate consumption growth
better when the capital gain component of those returns is ignored. All four implications are
consistent with empirical results reported here, and in the previous literature documenting stochastic
discount factor volatility. Several recent theories of stochastic discount factor volatility can, from
the aggregate point of view, be interpreted as special cases of subjective probability adjusted
CCAPM.

Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street, #506
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu
                                                                     Table of Contents

I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

II. SPACCAPM: Adding Subjective Probability Adjustments to the Consumption CAPM . . . . 3
           The Stochastic Discount Factor Can be Volatile, Conditionally or Unconditionally . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
           IMRT = IMRS, and There is a Stable Relation Between Consumption Growth and Capital’s Return . . . . . . . . 8
           Assets in Small Net Aggregate Supply have Expected Returns Weakly Correlated with Capital’s . . . . . . . . . 11
           For Assets in Small Aggregate Net Supply, Capital Gains Reflect Time-Varying “Risk Premia” . . . . . . . . . . 13

III. Empirical Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
           Calibrating the Importance of “Subjective Probability Adjustments” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                               16
           Adjusting for Capital Taxes, IMRS = IMRT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                   17
           Capital’s Expected Return Forecasts Consumption Growth Better Than Other Returns
                      ...............................................................................                                                                       20
           Financial Returns Predict Consumption Growth Better When Capital Gains are Deemphasized . . . . . . . . . . .                                                    23

IV. Models for Which Subjective Probability Adjustments is a Reduced Form . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
           Many Consumers are Not Traders (at the Margin) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
           Robust Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
           Financial Intermediation Distortions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

V. Summary and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

VI. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
I. Introduction
       Asset prices seem to fluctuate over time in ways that are not readily explained in terms of
fluctuations in the expectations of asset payoffs, or in terms of general changes in the required rate
of return on savings (Campbell and Shiller 1988). Modern finance refers to this phenomenon as
(conditional) “stochastic discount factor volatility” because (a) the stochastic discount factor
determines the prices of state-contingent claims (it is “stochastic” because there is a separate
discount factor for every state of nature), (b) this year’s price of a contingent claim can be very
different from next year’s price of a very similar claim, and (c) macroeconomic models seem to have
sharp implications for the stochastic discount factor. Is stochastic discount factor volatility of any
consequence for aggregate analysis of consumption, capital accumulation, output, etc.? How?
       Attempts to answer these questions can be partitioned in two categories. One category
includes He and Modest (1995), and others, who suggest that stochastic discount factor volatility
indicates the importance of borrowing constraints and other asset market frictions, which probably
implies (among other things) that aggregate capital accumulation is inefficient. Some work in this
category, such as Mankiw and Zeldes (1991), Alvarez and Jermann (2001), and Lustig (2003),
attempts to explain more precisely the source of asset market frictions, and develop some
implications for the wealth distribution, asset price differentials, and other disaggregate
observations. A second category of explanations, like those of Constantinides (1990) and Campbell
and Cochrane (1999), are based on frictionless market models of more complicated preferences.1
These models have more volatile stochastic discount factors even when capital accumulation is
efficient, imply a more complicated relation between capital accumulation and the time series
behavior of consumption, and have specific implications for asset-price differentials. But when
models from either category fail to fit some of the disaggregate observations, there still remains the


       1
        Cochrane and Hansen (1992) give an overview of both categories of explanations of
stochastic discount factor volatility, and of empirical calculations of its magnitude.
                                                           Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 2


question of whether other preference modifications or market frictions are creating the stochastic
discount factor volatility, and whether the macroeconomic implications would be the same under
these alternative environments.
       The purpose of this paper is to explore in a more robust way the aggregate implications of
stochastic discount factor volatility. Namely, what can be said about aggregate consumption and
capital accumulation without saying anything more about the wealth distribution, asset-price
differentials, and other disaggregate behavior? Section II obtains four such results, merely by
amending the standard frictionless representative agent model of aggregate consumption and capital
accumulation with time-varying subjective probability adjustments. First, subjective probability
adjustments add volatility to the stochastic discount factor, and can rationalize any pattern of asset
prices satisfying no-arbitrage, even while capital accumulation is efficient. Second, despite its
flexibility in pricing assets, the model implies that, in expected value, the intertemporal marginal
rate of transformation is equal to the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution, and there is a
simple, stable, and familiar relation between consumption growth and capital’s return. Third, the
expected returns on assets in small net aggregate supply are weakly (and sometimes negatively)
correlated with capital’s expected return, and are thereby poor predictors of aggregate consumption
growth. Fourth, when it comes to assets in small net aggregate supply, capital gains reflect time
varying “risk premia,” and returns can predict aggregate consumption growth better when the capital
gain component of those returns is ignored. Section III presents some empirical results confirming
these predictions, and reconciles them with previous calculations of stochastic discount factor
volatility. Of particular importance is that capital’s return is very weakly correlated with bond
returns, and forecasts aggregate consumption growth well.
       My use of subjective probability adjustments may give the appearance that there are no
market frictions, and that all stochastic discount factor volatility derives from complicated
preferences. More work needs to be done reconciling subjective probability adjustments with
models of asset market frictions, but Section IV recalls the theorems of Harrison and Kreps (1979)
and Hansen and Richard (1987), describing the conditions under which assets can be priced by a
suitable change in “probability measure” or “adjustment” of the stochastic discount factors. My
model might be interpreted as permitting a wide variety of stochastic discount factor adjustments,
and hence encompassing many of the special cases satisfying the Harrison-Kreps or Hansen-Richard
conditions – including special cases featuring market frictions. Section IV reviews four models from
                                                                               Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 3


the recent asset pricing literature, and shows how they implies some combination of subjective
probability adjustments and time preference adjustments, while it is mainly the latter affecting
macroeconomic behavior. Section V concludes.


II. SPACCAPM: Adding Subjective Probability Adjustments to the Consumption CAPM
        Consider a dynamic economy with only a single asset in positive net supply – “capital.”
Capital earns a time-varying and stochastic return. In each period, there are S possibilities for
capital’s return, which I index s = 1, ..., S. A dollar of investment in year t-1 yields state s gross
          s       m s% µ t
return Mt / e                in year t, which I decompose into a deterministic component µt and a stochastic
component ms. The states are ordered so that the stochastic component (weakly) rises with s: m1 #
m2 # m2 # ... # mS. In order to highlight the main issues, I assume for simplicity that, from the point
of view of year t-1 (and earlier), the probability of state s’s occurring in year t is πs > 0. I let Et-1(@)
denote mathematical expectations with respect to this probability distribution. I normalize the state-
specific returns so that Et-1(m) = 0, and Et-1(ln Mt) = µt.
        The representative consumer owns the capital, and it is his only source of income. He
consumes at each point in time, in the amount ct in year t. His preferences are defined over
consumption processes {ct}, and are recursive over time. In order to characterize his optimal
consumption plan, I use the following Bellman equation:

                                                (σ&1)/σ         & ρt&1         1& γ              (σ&1)/[(1& γ)σ] σ / (σ&1)
              vt&1(kt&1 Mt&1) ' max ct&1                  % e            Ft&1[vt      (kt Mt)]
                                   ct&1, k t


                                               s.t.     kt ' kt&1 Mt&1 & ct&1                                                (1)

                                                      Ft&1(x) / ' αt&1 x s
                                                                          s

                                                                     s




By using the Bellman equation (1) to characterize optimal consumption plans, I assume that the
representative agent’s preferences are of the recursive variety studied by Epstein and Zin (1989),
with constant intertemporal elasticity of substitution σ > 0, constant coefficient of relative risk
aversion γ $ 0, and (time-varying) rate of time preference ρ. The Bellman equation (1) represents
the piece of the optimal plan where the consumer chooses current consumption ct-1, and the amount
of capital kt to carry into the next period, without knowledge of the capital returns to be realized
                                                                        Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 4


years t and later, but knowing the capital returns realized in the current year t-1 and knowing the
entire time sequences of the preference parameters.
       Three economic ideas are separately embodied in the Bellman equation (1). The first two
are “risk aversion” and “intertemporal substitution,” which are also emphasized in the work by Hall
(1988) and Epstein-Zin (1989). Epstein and Zin point out that equation (1) has “expected utility”
as a special case in the limit as the IES (σ) approaches the inverse of the coefficient of relative risk
aversion (1/γ). Some readers may prefer to think about the expected utility case, or the risk
neutrality special case,2 because all of my results could be derived there. I have only two purposes
for distinguishing σ from 1/γ, or for having risk aversion (γ > 0) at all: (a) to illustrate exactly how
previous models are special cases, and (b) to offer a potentially better understanding of the
theoretical results, in particular the degree to which they derive from behaviors motivated by
intertemporal substitution rather than risk aversion.
       The third, and less familiar, economic idea embodied in (1) is the use of “subjective” rather
than objective probabilities. Notice how the “expectation” Ft-1(@) is defined as Ft&1(x) / ' αt&1 x s ,
                                                                                                                   s

                                                                                                               s
where strictly positive the parameters {αs} sum to one across states, but vary over time and are not
necessarily the same as the mathematical probabilities {πs}. These properties of the α parameters
suggest calling them “subjective probabilities,” although this term does not have to be taken literally,
and can be perfectly consistent with rationality. Kogan et al (2003, p. 5) have a model with
essentially the same α parameters and call it “state dependent utility.”3 The α parameters can also


       2
        For γ = 1/σ, we have:
                                               (σ&1)/σ         & ρt&1         (σ&1)/σ              σ / (σ&1)
                 vt&1(kt&1 Mt&1) ' max ct&1              % e            Ft&1[vt         (kt Mt)]
                                   ct&1, k t


                                       s.t.    kt ' kt&1 Mt&1 & ct&1



To study the risk neutral case, take the Bellman equation above and move the (σ-1)/σ exponent
from the vt term outside the square brackets.
       3
        For some other applications of state-dependent utility, see Karni (1985) and Bergstrom
(1986). “State dependent utility” has also referred to slightly different preferences, such as
Gordon and St-Amour’s (2000) where just the risk aversion coefficient varies across states of
nature (and is thereby unknown for decision-making purposes). Another example is Melino and
Yang’s (2003), where the risk aversion coefficient is known for decision-making purposes, but
                                                             Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 5


be interpreted as state-specific household production parameters,4 or attempts to explicitly model
specification errors.5 The terminology is not important for my purposes (and, along the lines of
Gordon and St-Amour 2000, my section IV offers additional interpretations of the α’s), but perhaps
“subjective probability adjustment” reminds readers of Harrison and Krep’s (1979) theorem, which
I discuss further below. The α parameters appear infrequently in the asset pricing literature – and
are embraced here – because they put fewer restrictions on the prices of contingent claims. My
purpose is to explore some aggregate implications of departures from the relationships implied by
the CCAPM developed by Lucas (1978) and Breeden (1979), and extended by Epstein and Zin
(1989), without actually explaining the reasons for those departures.
        For some purposes it is useful to consider a constant rate of time preference when apply the
model to macroeconomic questions, just as it has been for previous applications of the more familiar
CCAPM. For now, the Bellman equation (1) features a variable rate of time preference ρ, so we can
partition the effects of various asset pricing theories into effects on state preferences {αs} and effects
on time preference ρ.


II.A. The Stochastic Discount Factor Can be Volatile, Conditionally or Unconditionally
        In order to demonstrate the asset pricing implications of the model, I follow the standard
practice of allowing the (representative) agents in the model to trade contingent claims in frictionless


evolves over time because it depends on a Markov state vector.
        4
        In this case, interpret the program (1) as a reduced form of a model with objective
probabilities, and time- and state-specific household production functions. For example, in the
two-period case with σ=γ=1, a household’s utility would be ln z1 % β j πs ln z2 , where z1 is
                                                                             N
                                                                                       s

                                                                            s'1
household production in period 1, and z1s household production in period 2 and state s.
Household goods are produced from market purchases according to the state-dependent function
  s     s s s
z2 ' (c2 )α / π .

        5
        A number of macroeconomists, including Parkin (1988), Hall (1997), Mulligan (2002a),
and Chari et al (2003), advocate including something like flexible preference parameters in a
macro model in order to assess the effect of specifications errors in one market on theoretical
implications for other markets, although so far these authors have considered only productivity,
time preference, and labor preference shocks. My result is also different than theirs: I find that
specification errors in the model’s asset markets has essentially no effect on the rest of the
model.
                                                                     Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 6


markets. Other than the representative capital good, the contingent claims are in zero net supply.
Note that capital returns are assumed to be i.i.d., which means the most general asset pricing
implications are only for single-period state contingent claims. This matters for distinguishing
capital gains on multi-period securities that were anticipated from those deriving from the revelation
of information about payoffs in the distant future, but not for illustrating the four aggregate
implications of adding subjective probability adjustments to the consumption CAPM.
        A strictly positive stochastic discount factor qt-1 can be calculated in the usual way from the
equilibrium marginal rates of substitution in the model, and used to price any contingent claim for
sale in period t-1 and paying off in period t:6

                                          s          σ ρt&1   s             1 /(1&σ)
                                s        αt&1   (e         ct / ct&1)1& γ
                              qt&1   '                                                                     (2)
                                         πs                   s
                                                       (Mt )1& γ σ




The stochastic discount factor’s first term is the ratio of the “subjective” probability αt-1s to the
objective probability πs. I refer to the first term, which would be a Radon-Nikodym derivative if
capital’s return had a continuous distribution, as the “subjective probability adjustment.” In the case
studied by Epstein and Zin, the first term is constant over time (and equal to one), so that
consumption growth and the return to capital by themselves can be used to price any contingent
claim. But in my model the stochastic discount factor has a preference component too, and
consumption growth and capital’s return cannot be used by themselves to price contingent claims.
        The model has enough free parameters that it can price any collection of assets, as long as
it satisfies no arbitrage (i.e., that each asset can be priced as a portfolio of primitive state-contingent
claims, merely by summing the prices of the components). This result is closely related to those of
Harrison and Kreps (1979) and Hansen and Richard (1987). Harrison and Kreps (1979) show how,
assuming no arbitrage, assets can be priced (relative to the risk free asset) with risk neutral
preferences and appropriate subjective probability adjustments. My model implies that assets can



        6
        The reader may be interested in two special cases: relative risk aversion γ equal to one
and equal to 1/σ. In the first (second) case, consumption growth (capital’s return) is not part of
the stochastic discount factor, respectively.
                                                                                  Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 7


be priced with CCAPM preferences and appropriate subjective probability adjustments. Or, to put
it another way, equation (2) is a decomposition of Harrison-Kreps’ subjective probability
adjustments (or Hansen and Richard’s stochastic discount factor) into a CCAPM term (the term in
parentheses) and a residual which itself looks like a subjective probability adjustment. This
decomposition is unimportant for asset pricing, but important for macroeconomics.
        First, use the state-specific version of equation (4, see below) to eliminate the endogenous
consumption variables from the stochastic discount factor expression (2). Second, set the model’s
stochastic discount factor equal to the Hansen-Richard stochastic discount factor and invert to solve
for the α’s. Third, adjust the rates of time preference so that α’s sum to one for each t. The third
step is important,7 because it separates an asset pricing theory’s implications for the subjective
probabilities from its implications for time discounting. The time discounting implications will be
much more important for macroeconomic questions.
        By logging (2), we can express the variability over time of the stochastic discount factor as
a sum of “subjective probability adjustment” and “other” factors:

                                                          var (ln qt&1) '
            s               1& γ        ct
                                             s
                                                     1& γ σ           s                 s          1& γ        ct
                                                                                                                    s
                                                                                                                            1& γ σ           s   (3)
var (ln[αt&1 / πs]) % var          ln            &            ln Mt       % 2 cov ln[αt&1 / πs],          ln            &            ln Mt
                            1&σ         ct&1         1&σ                                           1&σ         ct&1         1&σ




In the (probability unadjusted) Epstein-Zin case, αts = πs for all t, the last two terms in (3) are zero,
and the stochastic discount factor is only as volatile as capital’s return and consumption growth (as
combined according to the risk aversion and intertemporal substitution coefficients). But in general
equation (3) shows that the stochastic discount factor can vary a lot more, for example, when the
deviation between “subjective” and “objective” probabilities are uncorrelated with consumption
growth and capital’s return.
        The subjective probability adjustments may, or may not, be related to capital’s return.
Indeed, some theories of asset pricing (eg., Cagetti et al 2002, more on this below) suggest that
subjective probabilities should exceed objective probabilities for poor return states, which could add
even more volatility through the covariance term. Interestingly, the many of the implications of the


        7
         See section IV for some illustrations.
                                                               Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 8


covariance term for macroeconomics will be subtle, or even nil, because the subjective probability
adjustments have two offsetting effects on macroeconomic behavior (see below).
         As shown by Cochrane and Hansen (1992, equation 2.18), stochastic discount factor
volatility can be decomposed into conditional volatility and volatility in the discount factor’s
conditional expectation. My model can be calibrated so that either component dominates. At one
extreme is the special case where capital’s returns are i.i.d., and the preference parameters {αs} are
constant over time, so that consumption growth is i.i.d. and the stochastic discount factor has the
same conditional and unconditional means. At the other extreme, capital’s returns and the
preference parameters {αs} are deterministic and time-varying, so that all of the stochastic discount
factor’s time variability derives from variability in the conditional mean.


II.B. IMRT = IMRS, and There is a Stable Relation Between Consumption Growth and Capital’s
Return
         The intertemporal marginal rates of substitution and transformation depend on the state s.
Roughly speaking, they are equal in expectation at the time savings decisions are made. More
precisely:

                                          Et&1[ qt&1 Mt] ' 1




where Mt is the intertemporal marginal rate of transformation. Because (under one interpretation)
there are no market frictions, the stochastic discount factor qt-1 is the inverse of the intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution.
         Because this is a consumption-based asset pricing model, consumption growth is a
determinant of the stochastic discount factor. A simple expression for expected consumption growth
can be derived from (1):8

         8
        Equation (4) can be derived by first guessing that each of the value functions vt(x) takes
                                                                                        s s     4
the form ntx, where nt is a constant that depends only on the time sequences {µi, ρi, {αi }s'1 }i't ,
as described recursively below:
                              σ&1          & σ ρt&1             1& γ                σ&1
                            φt&1 ' 1 % e              φt (Ft&1[Mt      ])1/(1& γ)
                                                                         Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 9


                              ct                                                  ln Ft&1(e (1& γ) m)
                   Et&1 ln          ' σ Et&1(ln Mt) & σ ρt&1 % (σ & 1)                                         (4)
                             ct&1                                                       1& γ




where Mt is the year t gross return on capital accumulated in year t-1. The elasticity of expected
consumption growth to capital’s expected return is, holding constant the probabilities and the
preference parameters, the constant intertemporal elasticity of substitution σ. Equation (4) says that
expected consumption growth and capital’s expected return move closely together, to the extent that
σ is close to one and the rate of time preference is constant over time. This is an empirically
refutable implication of the SPACCAPM, despite its flexibility in pricing assets, and hence would
not be derived from many alternative models of consumption. The purpose of this paper is to see
whether and how the core macroeconomic implications of CCAPM might be consistent with asset
pricing data.
       The consumption growth result can also be understood in terms of the J-statistics (roughly
speaking, “fit”) of the consumption Euler equations found in the literature. Consider the following
conditional moment:

                                                                  &1/σ
                                                 & ρ̃t&1    ct                i
                                        Et&1 e                           Rt                                    (5)
                                                           ct&1




where Ri is the gross return on some asset i. In the usual power utility (probability unadjusted)
CCAPM, this moment is exactly equal to one for any asset, at least if we interpret ρ̃ as the rate of
time preference. In my model, with a minor adjustment to its rate of time preference, this moment




Second, the first order conditions can be used to calculate cts/ct-1. Third, sum across states
weighting by the objective probabilities.
       At first glance, my equation (4) relating consumption growth to the return on capital is
the same as calculated by Epstein and Zin (1991, equation 13). However, the third term is new,
and becomes constant over time as σ 6 1 or we approach the state independent case (αts 6 πs)
studied by Epstein and Zin. The bigger consequence of subjective probability adjustments is
how assets other than capital are priced.
                                                                Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 10


is exactly equal to one only for the capital stock. The time preference adjustment is:

                                                              σ&1
                       ρ̃t&1 / ρt&1 % ln E [e (σ&1) m/σ ] &          ln Ft&1[e (1&γ) m ]
                                                              σ& σ γ




which is hardly any adjustment as σ 6 1.
       Now suppose that asset i is a contingent claim paying only in state i at time t. Unless this
asset i is identical to the capital stock, the conditional moment (5) is not equal to one, and varies
over time according to the preference parameter for state i.9 To summarize, the state independent
power utility Euler equation fits well (and fits perfectly as σ 6 1) when the return in question is the
capital stock. The Euler equation fits worse (and imperfectly even as σ 6 1) when the asset in
question is
in small net aggregate supply.
       The subjective probabilities {αs} appear in equation (4)’s last term. An important result for
macroeconomics is that, under some reasonable and testable conditions, the last term is pretty
constant over time so that the subjective probabilities {αs} are not affecting consumption growth or
the relation between consumption and capital returns. Equation (4)’s last term is constant when the
preference shocks are uncorrelated with the stochastic component of capital’s return. Another
reason the last term can be constant (and zero) is σ = 1. σ = 1 is critical because the subject
probabilities, to the extent they affect the “subjective return” on capital (namely, the return featured
in equation (1)), have opposing wealth and substitution effects which exactly offset at σ = 1. With
a lower subjective return, consumers cannot afford the old utility level, which is a wealth effect that
by itself reduces current consumption and increases capital accumulation. On the other hand,
lowering future marginal utility is more costly in terms of foregone current consumption, which
creates a substitution effect lowering capital accumulation.


       9
        The conditional moment is:
                                                   (1&γ) m
                                        πi Ft&1[e          ] (γ & 1/σ) m i
                                                             e
                                        i        (σ&1) m/σ
                                       αt&1 E [e           ]
                                                              Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 11


II.C. Assets in Small Net Aggregate Supply have Expected Returns Weakly Correlated with
Capital’s
         Although capital’s expected return forecasts consumption growth well, the model’s
subjective probability adjustments imply that capital’s expected return will not forecast other asset
returns well, and that the other asset prices will not forecast consumption growth well. This can be
illustrated by considering the expected returns on contingent claims, or on the risk-free asset. The
expected net return from time t-1 to time t on a contingent claim paying only in state s at time t is
-ln(qst-1):10
                                                                                     s
                             s                                                      αt&1
                       & ln(qt&1) ' Et&1(ln Mt) % γ m s % ln Ft&1 e (1& γ) m & ln                    (6)
                                                                                    πs




The first term on the right hand side is capital’s expected return. The last three terms are a
combination of risk aversion and subjective probability adjustments, and might therefore be
interpreted as a “time varying risk premium.” Notice how the subject probabilities, and the risk
aversion coefficient, appear in equation (6) but might not appear in Equation (4). These parameters
have a lot more to do with asset pricing than with consumption and capital accumulation.
         If there were no subjective probability adjustments, as in the standard CCAPM, the “risk
premium” represented by the last three terms would be constant over time. It follows that this
asset’s expected return would be perfectly correlated with capital’s expected return, and thereby a
good predictor of consumption growth.11 Since any asset can be interpreted as a portfolio of assets
like the one above, it follows that any asset’s expected return should be a good predictor of
consumption growth. Perhaps this is the reason why previous studies of consumption, like Summers
(1982) and Hall (1988), paid little attention to the choice of asset whose return would be used to

         10
              Throughout the paper, “net return” refers to the log of the gross return.
         11
          The standard CCAPM can generate an imperfect time series correlation between
expected returns on capital and contingent claims by having time-varying consumption risk
properties of the capital stock (which for simplicity I have ruled out by not indexing m’s by
time). However, unlike the model with subjective probability adjustments, the risk adjustments
needed in this case to explain the times series of the excess expected return of capital over other
assets is just a function of consumption behavior, as summarized by the consumption Euler
equation.
                                                             Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 12


forecast consumption growth.
        But the point of this paper is to explore the implications of the subjective probability
adjustments needed to match observed stochastic discount factor volatility. Since the contingent
claim expected return is just the log of the inverse of the stochastic discount factor, whatever
subjective probability adjustments contribute to the volatility of the stochastic discount factor, they
contribute to the volatility of expected contingent claim returns in the same amount. Much of the
variation over time in an asset’s expected return may be attributed to subjective probability
adjustments rather than capital’s expected return, and hence have little to do with consumption
growth, unless that asset’s payoffs closely match capital’s payoffs state-by-state. Some asset prices
will predict consumption growth better than others; the assets whose prices are poorer predictors will
have payoffs not closely matching capital’s state-by-state, and thereby be in small net aggregate
supply.12
        Even thought the risk free asset has state-independent payoffs, its expected return will be
weakly – and even negatively correlated – with capital’s unless capital also happens to be a risk free
asset. The price of the risk free asset is just the expected value of the stochastic discount factor. If
we denote the risk free asset’s gross return as Lt, we have:

                     ln Lt ' Et&1 (ln Mt) & ln Ft&1(e & γ m ) % ln Ft&1(e (1& γ) m )                (7)




In words, the risk free rate promised in year t-1 for maturity in t depends on (a) capital’s one-period
                                                                               s   S
expected return Et-1(ln Mt), (b) the current subjective probabilities {αt&1}s'1 (remember that F is
defined with respect to the α’s), (c) the coefficient of relative risk aversion γ, and (d) the riskiness
of capital {ms}. If utility were had no subjective probability adjustments, F would be constant over
time and the expected return to capital would move in parallel with the risk free rate.
       But with time-varying subjective probability adjustments the last two “risk premium” terms
in (7) vary over time, and the risk free rate is a poor proxy for capital’s expected return. Indeed, the
subjective probability adjustments can lead to a negative correlation between consumption growth


        12
         Hereafter, I refer to an asset whose payoffs do not closely match capital’s payoffs state-
by-state as “an asset in small net aggregate supply.”
                                                            Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 13


and the risk-free rate. To see this, first use the model with γ=1 to calculate the coefficient σL of a
time-series regression of consumption growth on the risk free rate:

                                          σL ' θ σ % λ (σ & 1)




The weights θ and λ are complicated functions of time series variances and covariances. I leave it
                                                                s s
to the reader to show that, when the time-series {µt, ρt, {αt }s'1 } are mutually independent, both
weights are in the interval [0,1], and do not necessarily have to sum to one. Furthermore θ=1 and
λ=0 only in the special case that there are no taste fluctuations.
        A negative correlation between consumption growth and the risk free rate can occur because
subjective probability adjustments have opposing wealth and substitution effects on consumption
growth. An increased preference for the bad states (modeled, for example, as dα1=-dαS>0) drives
down the risk free rate. This preference change also reduces the “subjective return” on capital
(namely, the return featured in equation (1)) without affecting the actual return on capital. The
wealth effect of the subjective return reduction dominates with σ < 1 and the intertemporal
substitution effect dominates with σ > 1.


II.D. For Assets in Small Aggregate Net Supply, Capital Gains Reflect Time-Varying “Risk Premia”
        As shown by equation (6), the expected return on any asset can be decomposed into a sum
of capital’s expected return and a “risk premium.” Because the risk premium drives a wedge
between the asset’s expected return and capital’s expected return, it is a nuisance when it comes to
forecasting capital’s return or consumption growth. For a similar reason, capital gains may also be
the same kind of nuisance.
        To illustrate this, we now consider a multiperiod security i which is purchased at time t-1 for
price pi,t-1, pays (possibly) state-contingent “profits” dit in year t, and has (possibly) state contingent
payoffs in the years t+1, t+2, etc.13 These securities have a one period expected net return that is


        13
         As noted above, capital shocks in the model are i.i.d., so the model does not offer fully
general pricing of multi-period securities. Nevertheless, we can explore some of the
implications of state dependence (as opposed to state independence) for such pricing.
       dit is sometimes called a “dividend,” but I avoid that term in order to emphasize the link
                                                             Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 14


also a sum of capital’s expected net return and a risk premium. Furthermore, the same expected net
return can be decomposed into expected “profit” and an expected capital gain:

                                one period expected net return '
             Et&1(ln Mt) % (risk premium)t&1 ' Et&1[ln (dit /pi,t % 1)] % Et&1(ln pi,t /pi,t&1)




If the expected profit rate were closely correlated with capital’s expected return, then the expected
capital gain would be closely correlated with the risk premium and thereby be a nuisance when it
comes to forecasting capital’s return or consumption growth. This exaggerates matters a bit
because, while it seems plausible that profits might be determined by the marginal product of capital
and have little to do with risk premia,14 the price pi,t used to deflate the profits reflects a risk
premium.15 Nevertheless, a close relation between the profits dit and capital’s return means that the
expected capital gain has hardly anything to do with capital’s return and a lot to do with time
varying risk premia.
        Consider a concrete example. Let pδ,t-1 denote the time t-1 value of a firm whose only asset
is one unit of the capital stock and whose only liability is one period risk free debt whose principal
and interest add to the amount δ < 1. Clearly this firm will be worth 1 (the price of the capital stock
at each point in time) at time t once its debt is paid off and its year t profits have been distributed,
and is worth 1-δLt-1 at time t-1. Now consider two measures of the expected net return to owning
this firm between times t-1 and t. The first measure rδ,t-1 is simply the log of the ratio of the time t
value of the firm (inclusive of the profits earned at time t, and net of the principal and interest δ paid
to bondholders) to the time t-1 value of the firm pδ,t-1. The second measure r̂δ,t&1 takes the first

measure and subtracts the capital gain ln(1/pδ,t-1):



between the marginal product of capital and the income flows from securities.
        14
          Remember that we have “macroeconomic” applications in mind. This rules out, for
example, high frequency applications like ex-dividend day pricing (obviously day-to-day
fluctuations in dividend payments have nothing to do with capital’s marginal product).
        15
         Security i may even give the most information about capital’s return if we ignore the
capital gain and deflate the earnings by a moving time-average of pi,t – (in finance jargon)
something like the ratio of (earnings+interest) to book value!
                                                             Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 15


                                                                         &1
                                rδ,t&1 ' Et&1[ln (Mt & δ)] % ln (1 & δ Lt )
                                                        &1
                            r̂δ,t&1 ' rδ,t&1 & ln (1 & δ Lt ) ' Et&1[ln (Mt & δ)]


The first expected return measure rδ,t-1 is usually preferred in finance, because it is the mathematical
expectation of the actual return, including both capital gains and cash flows at time t. The second
return measure r̂δ,t&1 ignores the capital gains anticipated by the owners of the firm, due to the fact

that some time t profits will be used to pay off debt. But the formula above shows how the second
return is preferable for aggregate time series analysis because it is independent of the state-
preference shocks! The actual expected return on a firm like this depends on the nature of
preferences in the year it was acquired, and hence would vary from year to year according to
variation in state-preferences. This taste variation is not helpful for forecasting consumption growth
or the return on capital.16 The second expected return r̂δ,t&1 is high (low) during the years when

capital’s expected return is high (low), regardless of what might be happening to the state-preference
parameters.




III. Empirical Findings
       Above are four or five empirical implications of stochastic discount factor volatility, in the
sense that they can be derived from the consumption CAPM only if it is amended with time varying
subjective probability adjustments or something similar (see Section IV). How well do the
implications match observations of the U.S. economy and financial markets? In order that at least
part of my answer be quantitative, I begin by calibrating the variability of the subjective probability
adjustments so that they match Hansen and Jagannathan’s (1991) calculation of stochastic discount
factor volatility, and Cochrane and Hansen’s (1992) calculation of conditional stochastic discount
factor volatility. In this sense, my first calculation is an abbreviated version of Campbell and


       16
            Interestingly, the second return measure r̂1,t&1 systematically understates the return to
capital, even while it better approximates its fluctuations over time. Hence expected capital
gains are needed to obtained the best estimate of the time series average return to capital, at least
when they are systematically different from zero as in my example.
                                                          Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 16


Cochrane (1999), Alvarez and Jermann (2001), Lustig’s (2003) who have quantitatively modeled
the economy in more detail (including, for example, more information on the dynamics of
consumption, or who participates in financial markets) – which effectively implies that the
representative agent has variability of the subjective probability adjustments – and showing that their
model’s stochastic discount factor may be as volatile as observed.
       My paper has a different purpose: to assume that stochastic discount factor volatility has
been (or someday will be) explained and derive implications for aggregate consumption, capital, etc.
Hence, my next step is to obtain measures of capital returns from the U.S. economy (see Mulligan
2002b) and verify whether those returns comove with financial returns and aggregate consumption
as predicted by the calibrated SPACCAPM.


III.A. Calibrating the Importance of “Subjective Probability Adjustments”
       How much state preference variability needs to be added to the consumption CAPM in order
to mimic observed volatility? The answer depends in part on assumed values of the risk aversion
and intertemporal substitution coefficients (γ and σ, respectively).17 With γ =1 (and any σ > 0),
state-independent stochastic discount factor volatility (measured as a standard deviation) is about
one third of (the lower bound) of that observed from financial market data. More volatility is
possible without subjective probability adjustments when there is more risk aversion, but based on
the γ =1 case it seems that the model needs enough time varying subjective probability adjustments
to double the standard deviation (quadruple the variance) of the stochastic discount factor.18 From
the equation (2) for the stochastic discount factor, we see that quadrupling the variance means
having the state-preference parameter contribute 75% of the variance. Since the expected net return
from time t-1 to time t on a contingent claim paying only in state s at time t is just -ln(qst-1), this
implies that 75% of the variance of expected contingent claim returns is due to state preference


       17
          Another part of the answer depends on how one measures stochastic discount factor
volatility. Hansen and Jagannathan calculate a lower bound on volatilty; actual volatility may be
significantly higher than the lower bound.
       18
          See Cochrane and Hansen (1992, Figure 3.2), although note that several of the points
they plot are inconsistent with convex Epstein-Zin preferences. It seems from their graph that γ
= σ = 2 would attain the volatility bound, although that is just the bound and not the actual
volatility.
                                                           Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 17


shocks.
          Now consider the annual time series regression of consumption growth on the expected net
return on asset i. For the special case γ = 1, ρ constant, and the subjective probability adjustments
uncorrelated with capital’s return, it is easy to calculate the (plim of) the regression coefficient:

                                             var Et&1[ln Mt]
                                         σ
                                                           i
                                             var Et&1[ln Rt ]




Note that the intertemporal substitution elasticity σ is the coefficient that would be obtained if
capital’s expected return were used as independent variable instead. Furthermore, as the sum of
capital’s expected return and a time-varying risk premium, any asset’s expected return must vary
more over time than capital’s expected return. So the empirical question is exactly how much more
expected asset returns vary than capital’s. Mulligan (2003) the annual time series standard deviation
of capital’s expected return to be no more than 0.0067. If we take asset i to be commercial paper,
and forecast the real commercial paper return using the promised nominal yield and lags of inflation,
Et-1[ln Rti] has postwar standard deviation at least 0.026. This values imply a ratio of 0.066! In
words: stochastic discount factor volatility implies that consumption growth is one or two orders of
magnitude less elastic to expected commercial paper returns than to capital’s return!


III.B. Adjusting for Capital Taxes, IMRS = IMRT
          Although we do not expect it to fit perfectly, the power utility CCAPM (ie, with no
subjective probability adjustments, and constant rate of time preference) Euler equation should fit
well only when the return in question is the capital stock. The empirical failures of the CCAPM
Euler equation for stock and bond returns is well known (Hansen and Singleton 1983). But consider
using annual data 1947-96 on nondurable consumption expenditure and capital’s rental rate (see
Mulligan 2002b) to obtain GMM estimates of the CCAPM Euler equation for capital’s return, using
lagged consumption growth and capital rental as instruments. The intertemporal substitution
elasticity (σ) point estimate is 1.35, and we cannot reject the hypothesis that σ = 1.
          The same data are consistent with a constant rate of time preference, because the Euler
equation seems to fit very well. The p-value for the GMM J-statistic is 0.56. With σ near 1 (so that
                                                         Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 18


the α terms drop from the consumption growth equation (4)) and a well-fitting Euler equation (so
that the rate of time preference seems constant), we cannot reject the hypothesis that consumption
growth is independent of the degree of stochastic discount factor volatility.
       In order to show graphically the CCAPM Euler equation’s good fit, consider again the
conditional moment (5), where asset i is either the capital stock, commercial paper, or the S&P 500.
The conditional moment can be estimated for each i and each t by using time series regressions –
one for each asset i – using as regressors the lagged term (5)’s in square brackets, asset i’s lagged
return, the lagged promised nominal yield on commercial paper, lagged inflation, and the lagged
IMRS. The fitted values for the regression, graphed in Figure 1, are estimates of the time t
conditional moment.19




       19
          For the purposes of the Figure, σ = 1.4, and each asset has its own rate of time
preference set so that the time series average of the conditional moment equals 1. σ = 1.4 is the
elasticity estimated below, although the Euler equation fits better for the capital stock for a wide
variety of σ’s.
         The regressions predicting equation (5)’s term in square brackets fit well; the p-values for
the regression F-statistic are 0.001 or smaller for each of the three assets.
                                                         Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 19




                   Figure 1 Capital Income Tax Rates: Simulated and Actual


       According to the CAPM (with constant time preference rate), the conditional moment is one
for all i and all t. According to the SPACCAPM (with constant time preference rate), the conditional
moment is generally varies over time according to the subjective probability adjustments, except for
the capital stock. Figure 1 seems to support the SPACCAPM conclusion. The time series standard
deviation of the conditional moment (5) is 0.005 for the capital return, 0.024 for the real commercial
paper return, and 0.075 for the S&P 500 return. The Euler equation fits so poorly for returns
measured from S&P 500, it is not even worth including it in Figure 1.
       Remember that, according to the SPACCAPM, the conditional moment (5) exceeds one
when in the years people least prefer the states in which that asset pays off well (relative to the
                                                              Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 20


capital stock). Hence, roughly speaking, the dash-dot series in Figure 1 shows us that people had
their strongest preference for commercial paper in the few years after WWII, and their weakest
preference in the 1980's.


III.C. Capital’s Expected Return Forecasts Consumption Growth Better Than Other Returns
        Equation (4) is an equation for expected consumption growth as a function of capital’s
expected return, which can be transformed into an equation for actual consumption growth as a
function of capital’s actual return by adding and subtracting the usual forecast errors:

                                              ct
                                        ln          ' σ r t % gt                                     (8)
                                             ct&1



When derived from my model’s equation (4), equation (8)’s r should be interpreted as the net return
on capital, and gt includes the rate of time preference, and (to the extent σ differs from one) the
preference shocks represented in the last term in equation (4). When derived from the standard
CCAPM (eg., Hall’s 1988 equation 1; Attanasio and Weber’s 1993 equation 1), equation (8)’s r is
the net return on any financial asset, and gt includes the rate of time preference but no other
preference shock. Under both interpretations, gt includes forecast errors so that, if estimated as a
regression equation, rt needs to be instrumented with lagged values of economic variables that might
be correlated with Et-1(rt).
        Estimates of equation (8) look very different depending on the return measure, and capital’s
expected return is easily the best predictor of consumption growth. Table 1 reports estimates of the
elasticity of consumption growth with respect to an asset return, using 51 postwar annual
observations. The specifications differ in two dimensions: the asset for which the return is
measured, and the instruments used. Specification (1) is a regression of consumption growth on the
real commercial paper return (namely, the nominal yield promised in year t-1 minus inflation
between t-1 and t), instrumenting using the lagged real commercial paper return. As Hall (1988)
found for as similar regression, the return coefficient is economically and statistically insignificant.
Although not shown in the table, we cannot reject the hypothesis that consumption growth is
uncorrelated with either the current or lagged real commercial paper return. Specification (2) shows
how the situation does not change if we add the nominal commercial paper yield, the gap between
                                                           Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 21


the yields on BAA and AAA bonds, and the lagged inflation rate as instruments. Results do not
change significantly if we exchange the commercial paper return for another financial asset return
(specifications (3) and (4) do so using the S & P 500 return). Results are dramatically different if
capital’s after-tax return is used, as shown in the last two specifications. The elasticity of
consumption growth with respect to the return is greater than one, with a 95% confidence interval
(specification (6)) of 0.6 to 2.2. The Durbin-Watson statistics suggest that there may be a little first-
order serial correlation in the residuals, but I show elsewhere (Mulligan 2002b) that various
corrections for serial correlation and time aggregation do not change the results.20
        As I explain above, the SPACCAPM implies not only that consumption’s return elasticity
is largest when the return measured is capital but, based on Cochrane and Hansen’s estimate of
stochastic discount factor volatility, also that the consumption return elasticity could be one or two
orders of magnitude smaller when a particular financial asset return is used. Table 1 easily shows
that there is a one order of magnitude difference between the elasticities reported in specifications
(1)-(4) and those reported in (5)-(6), and the difference could be two orders of magnitude.
        Specification (6)’s first stage equation (not shown in the Table), which has an adjusted R2
of 0.65, is interesting. The lagged after-tax return, nominal paper yield, and BAA premium have
coefficients of 0.87, -0.07, and 0.57 (s.e.=.11, .03, and .22, respectively). Notice in particular that
high promised nominal paper yields precede declines in capital’s rental rate. This is consistent with
my thesis that bond yields are not good indicators of the state of demand for capital.




        20
          It is fairly obvious that time-aggregation corrections should not affect the capital return
results, because capital’s return series has a fair bit of persistence (it is correlated 0.79 with its
lag).
                                                          Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 22


                                              Table 1: Asset Returns and Consumption Growtha
                                                                 (1947-97)
                                         specification:     (1)          (2)           (3)               (4)     (5)                (6)
                                                            0.12         0.02          0.31             0.05     1.30               1.37
independent variable: asset return rt
                                                           (0.10)       (0.08)        (0.34)           (0.03)   (0.41)             (0.39)
asset                                                      commercial paper                  S & P 500                   capital
                    lagged return rt-1                       y            y             y                y        y                 y

instrumental        nominal comm’l paper yieldc              n            y             n                y        n                 y
variablesb          BAA-AAA yieldc                           n            y             n                y        n                 y
                    lagged inflation rated                   n            y             n                y        n                 y
                                                adj-R2       .00          .00           .00              .00      .17                .17
                           Durbin-Watson statistic         1.50          1.48         1.54             1.48     1.83               1.77
Notes: aDependent variable is ln(ct/ct-1), with ct as year t nondurables consumption expenditure per capita. coefficient standard
errors in parenthesis. constant terms are estimated, but not reported in the table.
b
  Variables used in the first stage of TSLS model.
c
 Promised in year t-1 for maturity in year t
d
  log difference of year t-1 and t-2 GDP deflators.
                                                          Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 23




III.D.    Financial Returns Predict Consumption Growth Better When Capital Gains are
Deemphasized
         Risk premia, and their variation over time, cause the return on a particular asset, especially
the capital gain portion of that return, to depart capital’s expected return. Hence it should be easier
to predict consumption growth if the idiosyncratic capital gains component of an asset’s return were
deemphasized. One way to do this is to consider returns of larger and larger portfolios. Tables 2
explores this implication. Each row reports coefficient estimates from two consumption growth
regressions: one measuring consumption as nondurables and the second measuring consumption as
nondurables plus services. The independent variable in each case is the return on the asset in
question (which varies by row). TSLS is used, as with Table 1. The first three rows feature the
smaller portfolios: “commericial paper,” “AAA bonds,” and the “S&P 500.”                   Measuring
consumption as the sum of nondurables and services, we see coefficients of 0.13 using the paper
return, 0.25 using the AAA bond return, 0.23 using the S&P composite stock return, and 0.11 using
housing returns.
                                                             Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 24


                 Table 2: Aggregating Portfolios of Financial and Housing Assets
                                           (1947-99)


                                                             TSLSa IES estimate (s.e.)
             return measure                                c = nondur            c = nondur+sv
             real commerical paper return                 -0.03 (0.08)             0.13 (0.06)
             real AAA bond returnb                         0.22 (0.09)             0.25 (0.06)
             real S&P composite stock returnc              0.27 (0.22)             0.23 (0.16)
             real housing returnd                          0.28 (0.15)             0.11 (0.09)
             avg of paper & S&P returns                    0.34 (0.19)             0.32 (0.14)
             avg of paper & S&P & AAA                      0.32 (0.15)             0.32 (0.10)
             avg of housing & S&P returns                  0.56 (0.42)             0.41 (0.27)
             avg of all four returns                       0.54 (0.25)             0.48 (0.17)
             a
             lagged return used as instrumental variable
             b
             the one period return, between years t-1 and t, on a 5 year bond
                                                    rt&1           & rt 4
             maturing in year t+4, is rt&1 &   1&            1&e            , where rt (rt-1) is
                                                     rt

             the yield-to-maturity as of year t (t-1), respectively. rt is measured as
             Moody’s AAA corporate bond yield-to-maturity
             c
              for each month, it is measured as the sum of S&P 500 dividends and
             earnings for the past 12 months, expressed as a fraction of the S&P 500
             price index 12 months ago, and then averaged for the calendar year.
             The three monthly series are from Shiller (2000).
             d
               Calculated by Lustig and Nieuwerburgh (2003).



       The next four rows in the Table simply average various return measures, and use the result
as a new measure of the return in a consumption growth regression. We see, by comparing the first
four rows with the last four, how estimated coefficients on the averages exceed the coefficients on
any one of the components. This suggests that portfolio aggregation eliminates the component of
the expected return that is idiosyncratic to each asset.
       Similar results can be found by looking at the relation between consumption growth and
individual stock returns, small portfolios of stocks, and larger portfolio of stocks. Table 9 reports
some results for the years 1964-99 (years for which individual stock returns are reported by
                                                           Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 25


finance.yahoo.com) using GM’s stock return, Disney’s stock return, and a portfolio of the two. It
shows a similar pattern. For example, nondurable consumption growth is more elastic (0.30) to the
expected return on a portfolio of GM and Disney stock than to either component’s expected return.
Nondurable consumption is even more elastic to the full S&P 500's expected return.


                              Table 3: Aggregating Portfolios of Stocks
                                             (1964-99)


                                                          TSLSa IES estimate (s.e.)
             return measure                             c = nondur        c = nondur+sv
             real GM stock return                       0.20 (0.15)         0.19 (0.12)
             real Disney stock return                   0.28 (0.92)         0.32 (0.98)
             real GM & Disney stock return              0.30 (0.43)         0.31 (0.40)
             real S&P composite stock returnb           0.32 (0.30)         0.29 (0.24)
             a
              lagged return used as instrumental variable
             b
              for each month, it is measured as the sum of S&P 500 dividends and
             earnings for the past 12 months, expressed as a fraction of the S&P 500
             price index 12 months ago, and then averaged for the calendar year.
             The three monthly series are from Shiller (2000).




IV. Models for Which Subjective Probability Adjustments is a Reduced Form
        The model has enough free parameters that it can price any collection of assets, as long as
they satisfy no arbitrage (i.e., that each asset can be priced as a portfolio of state-contingent claims,
merely by summing the prices of the components). Under this condition, Hansen and Richard
(1987) show that for each period there exists a nonnegative stochastic discount factor that prices all
of the assets. In order to calculate the preference parameters {αs} needed to price assets, follow
three steps. First, use the state-specific version of equation (4) to eliminate the endogenous
consumption variables from the stochastic discount factor expression (2). Second, set the model’s
stochastic discount factor equal to the Hansen-Richard stochastic discount factor and invert to solve
for the α’s. Third, adjust the rates of time preference so that α’s sum to one for each t. This section
                                                                   Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 26


illustrates these three steps by example, and shows how the degree to which the rates of time
preference have to be adjusted can be related to the magnitude of capital market frictions. Two of
the examples also illustrate how “subjective probability adjustments” do not have to be interpreted
literally as state-specific preferences at the microeconomic level.21


IV.A. Many Consumers are Not Traders (at the Margin)
       A previous literature, including Heaton and Lucas (2000), Alvarez and Jermann (2001), and
Lustig (2003), has added various market frictions to the consumption-based asset pricing in order
to generate stochastic discount factor volatility. My purpose here is to show how, from the
aggregate point of view, these are essentially models of SPACCAPM’s subjective probability
adjustments. Hence, the aggregate implications derived from state dependent utility apply in those
models. Conversely, although superficially “frictionless,” my state dependent utility model is
consistent with a variety of market frictions, as long as they do not drive a wedge between aggregate
consumption growth and the return on a representative piece of capital.
       Suppose that the CCAPM model (i.e., the model (1) with state independent utility αts = πs)
applied to each of several types of consumers (indexed i), who are identical in every way except the
type of capital good they accumulate. Consumer type i’s capital return has the same distribution as
all other types, just that the realizations differ.22 In other words, when the time t state is s, some
consumers enjoy a high return on capital, and others a low return. There is trade in contingent
claims, but only among consumers of the same type. Only the trades of the type i=1 consumers take
place in the usual financial markets (and thereby observed by the econometrician); these are called
the “traders.” The stochastic discount factor that prices observed contingent claims is like (2),
except that consumption can capital’s return must be indexed by i, and αts = πs:

                                                σ ρt&1   s                  1 /(1&σ)
                                  s        (e        c1, t / c1, t&1)1& γ
                                qt&1   '
                                                         s
                                                   (M1, t)1& γ σ


       21
         Other examples may include Constantinides (1990) and Campbell and Cochrane (1999).
Gordon and St-Amour (2000) argue that habit and other complicated preferences may be
interpreted as special cases of state dependent utility.
       22
       Hence, in this section I discard the assumption that the realizations of the stochastic
component of capital’s return rises with s.
                                                                        Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 27




where the 1 subscripts indicate consumption or capital return by the type 1 consumers.
       The stochastic discount factor above can be used to calculate the subjective probabilities for
the SPACCAPM analogue (remember that the SPACCAPM model has stochastic discount factor
(2) which depends on subjective probabilities, aggregate consumption, and aggregate capital
returns). Those subjective probabilities are:

                                                                s       s
                                      s            πs (M̄t / M1, t )γ
                                     αt&1
                                                  ' πi (M̄t / M1, t )γ
                                            '                                                                  (9)
                                                                    i       i

                                                   i




where M̄t / 'i ki, t Mi, t / 'i ki, t is time t state s aggregate capital income per dollar of aggregate
            s           s



capital, and aggregate quantities include both traders and nontraders. To the extent that equation
(9)’s denominator is different from one, the SPACCAPM analogue also has different rates of time
preference.
       The time preference adjustments needed for SPACCAPM to mimic aggregate behavior in
the traders-nontraders model vary over time to the degree that the expected ratio (shown in the
denominator of equation (9)) between the average capital return and the trader’s capital return varies
over time.23 We show above how SPACCAPM’s consumption growth depends much more on the
rate of time preference than the subjective probability adjustments, so it is important to know what
particular asset pricing theories have to say about the rate of time preference adjustment versus the
subjective probability adjustments. Furthermore, the aggregate U.S. data seem inconsistent with
much time variation in the rate of time preference, which suggests that the more accurate asset


       23
         If ρt-1 is the rate of time preference between periods t-1 and t, the SPACCAPM has rate
of time preference below

                                                       ln ' πi (M̄t / M1, t )γ
                                            σ&1                                 i   i
                                  ρt&1 &
                                            σ&σγ            i




In the expected utility case, the SPACCAPM rate of time preference is just reduced by the
amount of equation (9)’s denominator.
                                                          Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 28


pricing theories will have little time variation in their implied adjustments to the SPACCAPM’s rate
of time preference.
       Alvarez and Jermann (2001) have a related model in which the identities of the traders
change over time. Hence, the subjective probabilities (9) for the Alvarez-Jermann analogue
potentially reflect a different consumer type every period. Alvarez and Jermann show that the
movement of consumer types in and out of the market may by itself generate enough stochastic
discount factor volatility (even with moderate amounts of risk aversion) to match the Hansen-
Jagannathan empirical estimates.
       Lustig’s (2003) model has a continuum of agents, a time-varying fraction of which face a
binding solvency constraint.      As a result the stochastic discount factor has an additional
multiplicative term reflecting wealth distribution changes. This adds volatility to stochastic discount
factor, although maybe not enough (Lustig needs to assume a coefficient of relative risk aversion
equal to seven). The SPACCAPM analogue to his model therefore has subjective probability
adjustments according to changes in the wealth distribution.


IV.B. Robust Control
       Cagetti et al (2002) explain how a savers who are concerned with model misspecification
may act as if they overweight the bad states of nature, and predict exactly how much the bad states
will appear overweighted. In this regard, robust control theory produces a special case of state
dependent utility. My finding that subjective probability adjustments do not have implications for
aggregate analysis, aside from the links between asset prices and aggregate behavior, is in this sense
a generalization of their finding that “robustness cannot be detected from macroeconomic quantities
alone (p. 366).”


IV.C. Financial Intermediation Distortions
       Suppose that contingent claims – including claims on the capital stock – are traded in
financial markets, and that their prices satisfy no arbitrage. However, only financial intermediaries,
and not consumers, trade in the financial markets. Consumers own the liabilities of the financial
intermediaries, which we can call “deposits.” Deposits acquired at date t-1 have one period return
Dts in date t state s. There are distortions in the intermediation process – perhaps because of
monopoly in the market for deposits, regulatory requirements, taxes, etc., so the depositor return is
                                                             Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 29


(1-τts) times the return on the intermediary’s portfolio.
       Because consumers have the usual CCAPM utility functions, the stochastic discount factor
in this economy is:24
                                              s                             s
                                s        1 & τt        s          πs (1 & τt )
                                                  Y
                                                                 ' πi (1 & τt)
                              qt&1   '                αt&1   '
                                         IMRSt                                  i

                                                                 i




where IMRS is the consumer’s intertemporal marginal rate of substitution, without any subjective
probability adjustments. Notice how assets can be priced in the same way by the SPACCAPM if
the subjective probability adjustments were interpreted as financial intermediary distortions, and the
rate of time preference interpreted in part as the expected distortion.




V. Summary and Conclusions
       Cochrane and Hansen (1992) caution that the degree to which macroeconomic models fit
asset pricing data may also be related to their capability to reliably forecast the macroeconomic
consequences of productivity shocks, fiscal policies, etc. They (and before them Hansen and
Jagannathan 1991) explain that current macroeconomic models poorly fit the asset pricing data, and
that the poor fit can be summarized in part as stochastic discount factor volatility. My analysis
reinforces their warning in one sense, and neutralizes it in another.
       As reinforcement of their warning, I emphasize that many macroeconomic models feature
limited frictions, and have state independent utility, which implies that all assets are on an equal
footing when it comes to forecasting consumption growth, or measuring the marginal product of
capital. This implication has many important and practical macroeconomic implications. For
example, a weak correlation between consumption growth and the returns on various financial assets
might, with the appropriate econometric adjustments for endogeneity, be interpreted as strong
evidence of little intertemporal substitution behavior (Hall 1988). Or that the degree of correlation



       24
         Note that deposits prices do not satisfy no-arbitrage, and cannot be priced with the same
stochastic discount factor. Deposit are priced with stochastic discount factor 1/IMRSt.
                                                           Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 30


between various financial asset returns and the quantity of government debt is an important indicator
of how much government debt crowds out investment. Perhaps as predicted by Cochrane and
Hansen,25 important conclusions like these change dramatically when a macroeconomic model is
amended to account for stochastic discount factor volatility. Namely, when the volatility is
generated by time-varying subjective probability adjustments, particular financial asset prices
provide very little information about intertemporal marginal rates of substitution and transformation.
Interestingly, many of the financial economic theories of stochastic discount factor volatility
developed at and since the time of Cochrane and Hansen’s writing, are from an aggregate point of
view special cases of time-varying subjective probability adjustments.
        However, once application of macroeconomic models has been adjusted to avoid sloppy use
of the term “interest rate” – namely that the interest rate in aggregate theory is not the promised yield
on a Treasury Bill or Bond, but rather the expected return on a representative piece of capital – many
of the implications of macroeconomic models may survive the ultimate resolution of asset pricing
puzzles. For example, the marginal product of capital may closely follow the intertemporal marginal
rate of substitution, and be an important predictor of aggregate consumption growth, regardless of
how financial assets are priced. I find strong support for these implications in the 20th century U.S.
data. Of course, these are just examples, and more research is needed to determine exactly which
kinds of capital market frictions, or exactly which kinds of preference complications, are needed to
have an empirically successful asset pricing theory, and what that theory might change about
macroeconomics.




VI. References


Alvarez, Fernando, and Urban J. Jermann. “Quantitative Asset Pricing Implications of Endogenous
        Solvency Constraints.” Review of Financial Studies. 14(4), Winter 2001: 1117-51.


        25
          Although note that, at times, they suggest retaining the particular idea that all assets are
on an equal footing when it comes to forecasting consumption growth, or measuring the
marginal product of capital: “asset prices provide information about intertemporal marginal rates
of substitution and transformation” (p. 115).
                                                       Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 31


Bergstrom, Theodore. “Soldiers of Fortune?” in Walter P. Heller, Ross M. Starr, David A. Starrett,
       eds. Essays in honor of Kenneth J. Arrow. Volume 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University
       Press, 1986: 57-80.
Cagetti, Marco, Lars Peter Hansen, Thomas Sargent, and Noah Williams. “Robustness and Pricing
       with Uncertain Growth.” Review of Financial Studies. 15(2), 2002: 363-404.
Campbell, John Y., John H. Cochrane. “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation of
       Aggregate Stock Market Behavior.” Journal of Political Economy. 107(2), April 1999:
       205-51.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller. “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future
       Dividends and Discount Factors.” Review of Financial Studies. 1(3), Autumn, 1988;
       195-228.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller. “Stock Prices, Earnings, and Expected Dividends.”
       Journal of Finance. 43(3), July 1988: 661-76.
Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. “Business Cycle Accounting.” Federal
       Reserve Bank of Minneapolis working paper 625, July 2003.
Cochrane, John and Lars Peter Hansen. “Asset Pricing Explorations for Macroeconomics.” NBER
       Working Paper #4088, June 1992.
Cochrane, John H., and Lars Peter Hansen. “Asset Pricing Explorations for Macroeconomics.”
       NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1992. 1992: 115-65.
Constantinides, George M. “Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium Puzzle.”
       Journal of Political Economy. 98(3), June 1990: 519-43
Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin. “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of
       Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy.
       99(2), April 1991: 263-86.
Gordon, Stephen, and Pascal St-Amour. “A Preference Regime Model of Bull and Bear Markets.”
       American Economic Review. 90(4), September 2000: 1019-33.
Hall, Robert E. “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption.” Journal of Political Economy. 96(2),
       April 1988: 339-57.
Hall, Robert E. “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time.” Journal of Labor
       Economics. 15(1), Part 2 January 1997: S223-50.
Hansen, Lars Peter and Ravi Jagannathan. “Implications of Security Market Data for Models of
                                                     Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 32


       Dynamic Economies.” Journal of Political Economy. 99(2), April 1991: 225-262.
Hansen, Lars Peter and Scott F. Richard. “The Role of Conditioning Information in Deducing
       Testable Restrictions Implied by Dynamic Asset Pricing Models.” Econometrica. 55(3),
       May 1987: 587-613.
Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth J. Singleton. “Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion, and the
       Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns.” Journal of Political Economy. 91(2), April 1983:
       249-65.
Harrison, J. Michael and David M. Kreps. “Martingales and Arbitrage in Multiperiod Securities
       Markets.” Journal of Economic Theory. 2(3), June 1979: 381-408.
He, Hua and David M. Modest. “Market Frictions and Consumption-Based Asset Pricing.” Journal
       of Political Economy. 103(1), February 1995: 94-117.
Heaton, John, and Deborah Lucas. “Stock Prices and Fundamentals.” in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio
       J. Rotemberg, eds. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1999. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2000:
       213-42.
Karni, Edi. Decision Making Under Uncertainty: The Case of State-Dependent Preferences.
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1985.
Kogan, Leonid, Stephen Ross, Jiang Wang, and Mark Westerfield. “The Price Impact and Survival
       of Irrational Traders.” NBER Working Paper #9434, January 2003.
Lustig, Hanno. “The Market Price of Aggregate Risk and the Wealth Distribution.” manuscript,
       University of Chicago, July 2003.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Stephen P. Zeldes.          “The Consumption of Stockholders and
       Nonstockholders.” Journal of Financial Economics. 29(1), March 1991: 97-112.
Melino, Angelo, and Alan X. Yang. “State Dependent Preferences can Explain the Equity Premium
       Puzzle.” Review of Economic Dynamics. 6(4), October 2003: 806-30.
Mulligan, Casey B. “A Dual Method of Empirically Evaluating Dynamic Competitive Equilibrium
       Models with Market Distortions, Applied to the Great Depression and World War II.”
       NBER working paper #8775, February 2002a.
Mulligan, Casey B. “Capital, Interest, and Aggregate Intertemporal Substitution.” NBER Working
       Paper #9373, December 2002b.
Mulligan, Casey B. “Capital Tax Incidence: Fisherian Impressions from the Time Series.” NBER
       Working Paper #9916, August 2003.
                                                   Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility – 33


Parkin, Michael. “A Method for Determining Whether Parameters in Aggregative Models are
      Structural.” in Karl Brunner and Bennett T. McCallum, eds. Money, Cycles, and Exchange
      Rates: Essays in Honor of Allan H. Meltzer. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
      Public Policy, 29, Autumn 1988: 215-52.
Summers, Lawrence H. “Tax Policy, the Rate of Return, and Savings.” NBER working paper no.
      995, September 1982.
