NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST AS A
YOUNG OR OLD INNOVATOR:
MEASURING THE CAREERS OF MODERN NOVELISTS
David W. Galenson
Working Paper 10213
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10213
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by David W. Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Portrait of the Artist as a Young or Old Innovator: Measuring the Careers of Modern Novelists
David W. Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 10213
January 2004
JEL No. J0, J4
ABSTRACT
Some important novelists have written a great novel early in their careers and have produced lesser
works thereafter, whereas others have improved their work gradually over long periods and have
made their major contributions late in their lives. Which of these patterns a novelist follows appears
to be systematically related to the nature of his work. Conceptual writers typically have specific
goals for their books, and produce novels that emphasize plot; experimental writers’ intentions are
often uncertain, and their novels more often stress characterization. By examining the careers of
twelve important modern novelists, this paper demonstrates that conceptual novelists - including
Herman Melville, F. Scott Fitzgerald, and Ernest Hemingway - are generally those who have
declined after writing landmark early novels, while in contrast experimental novelists - including
Charles Dickens, Mark Twain, Virginia Woolf - have typically arrived at their most important work
later in their careers. As is the case for modern painting and poetry, the ranks of great modern
novelists have included both conceptual young geniuses and experimental old masters.
David W. Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
sogrodow@midway.uchicago.edu

3
William Faulkner believed that “there’s a period in a writer’s life when he is ... for lack
of any other word, fertile, and he just produces... [T]here’s a time in his life, one matchless
time... The speed, and the power and the talent, they’re all there and then... he’s ‘hot’ - which of
course can’t last forever.”1 When he was asked whether this period came early or late in a
writer’s life, Faulkner responded “that’s something you can’t say. Some write best when they are
young, write themselves out. Some never reach their top speed until late in life. That’s - you just
can’t say.”2
Faulkner was right: in the careers of important writers, there is generally one matchless
time, which can occur early or late in the writer’s career. But whereas Faulkner believed it was
impossible to predict which of these patterns a writer would follow, at the end of his life F. Scott
Fitzgerald knew better: “The talent that matures early is usually of the poetic, which mine was in
large part. The prose talent depends on other factors - assimilation of material and careful
selection of it, or more bluntly: having something to say and an interesting, highly developed
way of saying it.”3
This paper will show that there are two very different types of writer, and that they arrive
at their most important contributions at very different stages of the life cycle. The paper will
consider twelve important modern novelists. After providing a general characterization of the
two types of writer, we will survey critical commentary on each writer’s attitudes and products
that will allow us to determine their type. Quantitative evidence will then be used to measure the
relative quality of each writer’s work over the course of his career, and this will allow an
examination of the relationship between a writer’s approach to art and when the writer produced
his or her best work. Using quantitative measurements, this paper will show that Faulkner was

4
right in arguing that there is a peak period in each writer’s life, and that Fitzgerald was right in
believing that the timing of that period is systematically related to the nature of the writer’s
talent.
The Artists
The goal in choosing the writers to be studied was to select a dozen important British and
American novelists of the past two centuries. Living novelists were excluded because their
careers are incomplete, and recently deceased writers were excluded because critical evaluations
of their entire careers, which will serve as the basis for quantitative measurements, are relatively
scarce. The twelve novelists listed in Table 1 were born between 1812 and 1899, and each is the
subject of a total of at least 130 lines of text in the Cambridge Guide to Literature in English and
the Oxford Companion to English Literature.4 Although this group of twelve is not necessarily
intended to represent the most important writers of the modern period, these writers were all
among the most important novelists of their time.
Seekers and Finders
I tell you I have written a great book.
D. H. Lawrence to Edward Garnett, about Sons and
Lovers, November 14, 1912.5
I wonder if this time I have achieved something?
Virginia Woolf, diary entry about Mrs. Dalloway,
April 8, 1925.6
Earlier studies of modern painters and poets have revealed two very different types of
innovator in each of these disciplines.7 The two types differ in their goals, methods, and the
nature of their contributions. A similar division, between experimental and conceptual
innovators, appears to exist for novelists, and provides a basis for understanding differences in

5
their life cycles.
Experimental innovators are seekers. Their most basic characteristic is persistent
uncertainty about their methods and goals: they are typically dissatisfied with their current work,
but have only vague ideas about how to improve it. Their dissatisfaction impels them to
experiment, and their uncertainty means that they change their work by trial and error, moving
tentatively toward their imperfectly perceived objectives. No matter how great their progress,
their uncertainty rarely allows them to consider any of their works a complete success.
In contrast, conceptual innovators are finders. Their basic characteristic is certainty about
some aspect of their work - their method, their goals, or both. Their certainty often allows them
to work methodically, according to some system, toward their goals. Their clarity of intent and
confidence in their ability often allow them to feel that they have fully realized their objectives in
a particular work.
These differences in temperament and procedure can be manifested in a variety of ways,
in both practices and products. Consequently, there is no single criterion or test that invariably
allows us to distinguish experimental from conceptual innovators. Instead there are vectors of
attributes, of both practices and products, that serve as indicators. Although no single variable
will necessarily be applicable to any particular author, the presence of a number of
characteristics of one of the two types will nearly always point clearly to an author’s
categorization.
Conceptual writers often begin from general ideas or principles. This makes them more
likely to produce symbolic works, whereas experimental writers are more likely to deal with
particularized cases in a documentary fashion. Conceptual authors may base their work on

6
theoretical ideas and portray exaggerated emotions; their characters may seem oversimplified or
one-dimensional. Experimental authors will more often stress careful observation and
description of lifelike people and situations. The language of conceptual authors is often formal
or artificial, that of experimental authors informal or vernacular. The books of conceptual writers
will more often be resolved, with closed endings, whereas experimental authors will often leave
their plots unresolved, their conclusions ambiguous or open.
Conceptual writers are more likely to base their novels on library research, and to strive
for precise factual accuracy, while experimental writers more typically rely on their own
perceptions and intuitions. Conceptual authors may construct complex plots, often planned
carefully in advance, whereas experimental writers more often invent their plots as they write,
and are more likely to make major changes in their developing plots throughout the process of
composition. Whether or not they have fully planned their plots, conceptual writers are more
likely to follow some system in composing, perhaps involving stylistic devices. For experimental
writers, plots are often developed to serve the purposes of characterization and creation of
atmospheric effects, whereas for conceptual writers characters and settings are often used to
achieve an overarching structure or concept; in this sense, the totality or coherence of the plot
may be less important to experimental than to conceptual authors. Experimental authors often
believe that the essence of creativity lies in the process of writing, and that their most important
discoveries are made while their books are being composed, whereas conceptual authors more
often value ideas they formulated before beginning to draft their books. The clarity of conceptual
authors’ goals often allows them to be satisfied that a book is complete and has achieved a
specific purpose, but experimental writers’ lack of precise goals generally leaves them

7
dissatisfied with their work. Many experimental writers consequently have trouble considering
their books finished, revise their manuscripts repeatedly, and sometimes even return to
previously published works to revise them further.
Critical judgments about the strengths and weaknesses of experimental and conceptual
writers typically differ. Conceptual innovators are often praised for their brilliance and genius,
experimental innovators for their craft and wisdom. Conceptual writers are often compared to
poets for the lyric quality of their prose; experimental writers are often compared to painters, for
their use of prose to create visual images. Conceptual authors are often criticized as superficial,
privileging style over substance. Experimental authors are often criticized as uninspired plodders
or journeymen, lacking in flair or imagination.
The life cycles of experimental and conceptual writers tend to differ sharply.
Experimental writers’ achievements usually depend on gradual improvements in their
understanding of their subjects and in their mastery of their craft. Their major contributions
consequently emerge only after many years of writing, often late in their careers. Conceptual
innovations, which depend on the formulation of new ideas, are made more quickly, and can
occur at any age. Yet the most radical conceptual innovations depend on the ability to perceive
and appreciate extreme deviations from existing conventions and methods, and this ability tends
to decline with experience, as an author’s habits of thought become more firmly entrenched. The
most important conceptual innovations therefore typically occur early in a writer’s career.
Because experimental writers innovate incrementally, and arrive at their innovations
piecemeal over time, their major contributions may be divided among a series of works rather
than appearing in one great masterpiece. In contrast, because conceptual writers arrive suddenly

8
at their discoveries, their careers are often dominated by an individual novel, which differs
clearly not only from other writers’ work, but also from the author’s own previous work. The
careers of experimental writers are thus normally marked by a series of important works as the
writer works progressively toward a single goal, whereas the careers of conceptual writers are
often marked by discontinuities, as the writer tackles different problems.
Portraits of 12 Artists as Conceptual or Experimental Writers
Charles Dickens’ strengths and weaknesses are those of an experimental author. Virginia
Woolf remarked on the visual quality of his characterizations: “As a creator of character his
peculiarity is that he creates wherever his eyes rest - he has the visualizing power in the extreme.
His people are branded upon our eyeballs before we hear them speak, by what he sees them
doing, and it seems as if it were the sight that sets his thought in action.”8 Earlier Anthony
Trollope had also emphasized his success in characterization: “no other writer of English
language except Shakespeare has left so many types of character as Dickens has done characters which are known by their names familiarly as household words.”9
Generations of critics have praised Dickens’ powers of description. In 1840 William
Makepeace Thackeray observed that the Pickwick Papers “gives us a better idea of the state and
ways of the people than one could gather from any more pompous or authentic histories.”10 In
1856 George Eliot declared that “We have one great novelist who is gifted with the utmost
power of rendering the external traits of a town population.”11 A century later Angus Wilson,
reflecting on “the intense haunting of my imagination by scenes and characters from Dickens’
novels,” explained that “their obsessive power does not derive from their total statements; it
seems to come impressionistically from atmosphere and scene which are always determinedly

9
fragmentary.”12
As Wilson implied, Dickens’ plots are not considered a strength. Virginia Woolf
commented that “Dickens made his books blaze up, not by tightening the plot... but by throwing
another handful of people upon the fire,” which made his novels “apt to become a bunch of
separate characters loosely held together.”13 More bluntly, a recent critic noted that “It is
generally agreed that the plots of Dickens’ novels are their weakest feature.”14 Nearly all of
Dickens’ novels were initially published in installments. Dickens developed a practice in which
he typically wrote each installment separately, and in a number of instances he made significant
changes in a book’s plot after some episodes had already been published. So for example after
sales of the first four monthly numbers of Martin Chuzzlewit were disappointing, Dickens
decided to send Martin to the United States in the hope that the controversy caused by a comic
attack on Americans would increase circulation.15 That Dickens made major decisions about his
plots throughout the process of writing his books, and that he often made these under the
pressure of deadlines imposed by serial publication, led one scholar to suggest that “last-minute
decision-making in the midst of composition acted as a stimulus to the creative process.”16
Dickens worked at improving his organization and plotting, as later in his career he tried to plan
his plots more carefully, but most critics never considered this to be a strength of his work.17
Dickens’ craft developed in a number of ways over the course of his career. He excelled
in capturing the speech of his many characters, and particularly the colorful vernacular of the
working class: “From the beginning, Dickens was ... greatly assisted by his knowledge of the
speech forms of lower-class Londoners.” A linguistic study has shown that his use of this
knowledge grew more sophisticated over the course of his career, as over time he gave larger

10
numbers of characters in each novel personalized habits and patterns of speech, or idiolects. This
produced a greater richness in the later works. Whereas in the early novels the relatively small
number of characters with distinct idiolects “dominate the stage as if they were performing a
solo act, ... in the works of the final period it was no longer a question of a group of leading
figures with pronounced idiolects being supported by a cast of typified ‘also-rans’, but one of a
world in which each separate character is the possessor of a sharply-delineated speech idiom
which cannot be ignored.” Robert Golding consequently perceived “a stylistic development
which took in Dickens’ fictional writing as a whole, one which finally succeeded in merging all
the elements involved - including the idiolects - into a finely balanced whole.”18
In the summer of 1850, Herman Melville was well along on a draft of a new book on
whaling when his move from New York to western Massachusetts occasioned a meeting with the
distinguished older novelist Nathaniel Hawthorne. Meeting Hawthorne, and reading his work,
electrified Melville: in an essay written almost immediately thereafter, he declared that
“Hawthorne has dropped germinous seeds into my soul.” Raising his sights for his own work, in
the same essay Melville stated his belief that “if Shakespeare has not been equalled, he is sure to
be surpassed, and surpassed by an American born now or yet to be born.”19
The reference to Shakespeare was not accidental, for Melville had recently bought a
complete edition of Shakespeare’s works, and in reading it had decided that he was a “dolt &
ass” for not having made acquaintance earlier with “the divine William.”20 The inspiration of his
new friendship with Hawthorne prompted Melville to begin a complete revision of his
manuscript on whaling, and inspired him to use the language and tragic grandeur he found in
Shakespeare. F. O. Matthiessen observed that “the most important effect of Shakespeare’s use of

11
language was to give Melville a range of vocabulary for expressing passion far beyond any that
he had previously possessed.”21 The revised version of Moby-Dick consequently had an
emotional intensity that was new to Melville’s work: as D. H. Lawrence later wrote, “There is
something really overwhelming in these whale-hunts, almost superhuman or inhuman, bigger
than life, more terrific than human activity.”22
In Moby-Dick Melville continued his earlier practice of borrowing extensively from other
scholarly and narrative books. Scholars have traced these borrowings in detail, and have
concluded that Melville relied heavily on five books for information on whaling.23 One
biographer commented on Melville’s “extraordinary dependence on the writings of other men,”
not only for literary means but for the very substance of his books. Yet the biographer noted that
Melville “was almost incapable of leaving any piece of information in its raw state of unresonant
factuality,” and that in his prose the bare facts of earlier authorities were systematically
converted into metaphors and symbols: “one can never predict when some piece of pedestrian
exposition will furnish him with the germ of a great dramatic scene.”24
When Moby-Dick was published in 1851, a reviewer described it as an unlikely but
successful allegory: “Who would have looked for philosophy in whales, or for poetry in blubber.
Yet few books which professedly deal in metaphysics, or claim the parentage of the muses,
contain as much true philosophy and as much genuine poetry as the tale of the Pequod’s whaling
expedition.”25 Seventy years later, D. H. Lawrence called it “one of the strangest and most
wonderful books in the world ... an epic of the sea such as no man has equalled ... It moves awe
in the soul.”26 Alfred Kazin later explained that “Moby-Dick is the most memorable
confrontation we have had in America between Nature - as it was in the beginning, without man,

12
God’s world alone - and man, forever and uselessly dashing himself against it.”27
Moby-Dick was published when Melville was just 32 years old. In retrospect, the book
clearly stands far above not only Melville’s earlier work but also that of his later years.
Curiously, Melville seems to have sensed that this would be the case. In the spring of 1851, in
writing to tell Hawthorne that he hoped to finish Moby-Dick soon, Melville looked back at his
development as a writer, with his rapid growth during the preceding five years, then added: “But
I feel that I am now come to the inmost leaf of the bulb, and that shortly the flower must fall to
the mould.”28 In spite of generations of reappraisals of Melville’s later fiction and poetry, there
remains widespread agreement with the observation of an admirer of Melville’s who wrote even
during the latter’s lifetime that “It may seem strange that so vigorous a genius, from which
stronger and stronger work might reasonably have been expected, should have reached its limit
at so early a date.”29 Melville’s sudden maturation as a writer, his production at just 32 of a great
masterpiece that stands as a peak not only in his career, but in American literature, and his
subsequent decline as a writer are all consequences of his conceptual approach to his art, as are
the allegorical nature and florid style of his greatest work.
Bernard De Voto observed that “there is a type of mind, and the lovers of Huckleberry
Finn belong to it, which prefers experience to metaphysical abstractions and the thing to its
symbol. Such minds think of Huckleberry Finn as the greatest work of nineteenth century fiction
in America precisely because it is not a voyage in pursuit of a white whale but ... because Huck
never encounters a symbol but always some actual human being working out an actual
destiny.”30 Alfred Kazin agreed that Mark Twain’s “genius was always ... for the circumstantial,
never the abstract formula ... Mark Twain’s world was all personal, disjointed, accidental.”31

13
Twain is celebrated for his ability to use vernacular speech. Lionel Trilling declared that
“Out of his knowledge of the actual speech of America Mark Twain forged a classic prose.”32
Kazin compared Twain’s instinct for the rhythm and emphasis of speech to that of a great
experimental poet: “A sentence in Mark Twain, as in Frost, is above all a right sound.”33 The
prefatory note Twain inserted in Adventures of Huckleberry Finn gently shows his pride in
capturing a wide range of distinct dialects: “The shadings have not been done in a hap-hazard
fashion, or by guess-work; but pains-takingly, and with the trustworthy guidance and support of
personal familiarity with these several forms of speech.”34
Several scholars have studied Twain’s methods of composition, and their accounts
clearly reveal the procedures of an experimental author. Franklin Rogers concluded that “Twain
was aware of implicit form and sought to discover it by a sort of trial-and-error method. His
routine procedure seems to have been to start a novel with some structural plan which ordinarily
soon proved defective, whereupon he would cast about for a new plot which would overcome the
difficulty, rewrite what he had already written, and then push on until some new defect forced
him to repeat the process once again.”35 Sydney Krause determined that “Twain learned to
consider his subject, not before, but as, he wrote.”36 Victor Doyno examined the composition of
Huckleberry Finn: “Twain discovered his pliable plot as he went along, writing without a
definite resolution or plan in mind. His real interests were elsewhere - in writing memorable
episodes and frequently in doubling the incidents or repeating the basic situation in varied forms.
It is, accordingly, a supreme misreading of the novel to read for plot as plot.”37 Twain himself
explained that his focus often changed as a novel grew: “As the short tale grows into the long
tale, the original intention (or motif) is apt to get abolished and find itself superseded by a quite

14
different one.”38
Twain’s lack of plans for his plots often resulted in substantial discontinuities in the
process of writing his novels. Scholars have long been aware, for example, that Twain worked
on Huckleberry Finn over an elapsed time of nine years, and have now determined that it was
written in at least three separate periods of work.39 The interruptions appear to have occurred
when Twain reached an impasse in the story and temporarily lost interest in it.40 Twain claimed
that he not only was not dismayed by having to put aside an unfinished novel, but that he
actually came to expect that he would have to: “It was by accident that I found out that a book is
pretty sure to get tired along about the middle and refuse to go on with its work until its powers
and its interest should have been refreshed by a rest... Ever since then, when I have been writing
a book I have pigeon-holed it without misgivings when its tank ran dry, well knowing that it
would fill up again without any of my help within the next two or three years, and that then the
work of completing it would be simple and easy.”41
Yet in fact Twain did not always find it easy to finish his books, and his endings were not
always strong. Thus a biographer observed that “His method of composition rested heavily on
the unpredictable nature of inspiration... As a consequence, many novels and stories remained
unfinished, and some that were finished, such as Tom Sawyer, Huckleberry Finn, and A
Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court, have endings that are unsatisfactory to many
readers.”42 The endings of Twain’s books were often not final even in his own mind, since he
routinely wrote sequels to his novels. Even his greatest book ended on an uncertain note. Thus
Philip Young observed that “Adventures of Huckleberry Finn has no definite article in its title,
though one is usually put there... Huck ends his book with anticipations (never fulfilled) of

15
further goings-on in the West. For this reason, very likely, Twain hesitated to call the job he had
done definitive.”43
Although he had earlier established a reputation with his short stories and travel
narratives, Mark Twain was a latecomer to writing novels, and when he did begin he was a slow
starter. His first novel, The Gilded Age, published when he was 38, was co-authored with a
friend, Charles Dudley Warner. The plan of having the two authors take turns writing resulted in
a book that failed to cohere, as Twain recognized that the “ingredients refused to mix... spite of
all we could do to make the contents blend.”44 Their curious enterprise indicates that Twain did
not initially approach the writing of novels with high artistic goals. Yet not long thereafter Twain
hit on the idea of drawing on his early experiences on the Mississippi River, and began a process
in the course of which he would gradually improve his craft as a writer and raise his aspirations.
Henry Nash Smith described Twain’s development as “a dialectic interplay in which the reach of
his imagination imposed a constant strain on his technical resources, and innovations of method
in turn opened up new vistas before his imagination.” This continued over an extended period,
and “after twenty years of trial and error, from the 1860s to the 1880s, the development of both
technique and meaning in Mark Twain’s work reaches a climax in Adventures of Huckleberry
Finn.”45 Lionel Trilling considered Huckleberry Finn “one of the world’s great books and one of
the central documents of American culture,” for holding “the truth of moral passion” and
establishing “for written prose the virtues of American colloquial speech.”46
Bernard De Voto explained that Twain’s maturation was responsible for his masterpiece:
“The prime difference between Huckleberry Finn and Tom Sawyer [published nine years earlier]
is that in the later book he brings mature judgment to this society. Society is passed through the

16
mind of a boy, as before, but this time there is a man of fifty speaking.”47 Ralph Ellison
emphasized the central importance of the moral content of the book: “Huckleberry Finn
projected the truth about slavery,” while in contrast Twain had avoided the subject in Tom
Sawyer.48 It is not surprising that a writer who worked experimentally, developing his craft over
the course of his career as he composed individual books by a process of trial and error, would
not arrive at his greatest contribution until the age of 50. What is surprising, however, is that an
experimental author would produce such a great individual work.
In this regard, it might be noted that Huckleberry Finn could almost be regarded as an
accidental masterpiece. Twain never appears to have intended it to be a major work, as even
eight years after he began writing it, he still regarded it as “a kind of companion to Tom
Sawyer,” and he didn’t bother to eliminate a number of plot inconsistencies that had arisen in the
course of its interrupted composition.49 Nor did Twain give the book his undivided attention
even in the final period of composition, engaging in diversions that a biographer describes as “a
frightening demonstration of how the pressures on him... caused him to resist and almost to
betray his genius.”50 Twain may never have appreciated his achievement in Huckleberry Finn;
late in his life he considered Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc, a historical book that is not
highly regarded today, both his favorite and his best book.51
At the age of 50, Henry James published a story, “The Middle Years,” which gave a
detailed portrayal of an experimental novelist in old age: “His development had been abnormally
slow, almost grotesquely gradual. He had been hindered and retarded by experience, he had for
long periods only groped his way. It had taken too much of his life to produce too little of his
art.” The ailing Dencombe revised even the published text of his final novel, for he was “a

17
passionate corrector... the last thing he ever arrived at was a final form for himself.” When an
admirer remarked that Dencombe must be pleased with his achievement he demurred, objecting
that “he had ripened too late and was so clumsily constituted that he had had to teach himself by
mistakes.” On his death bed, however, Dencombe admitted that he had in fact accomplished
“something or other,” and recognized that uncertainty was inevitable: “We work in the dark - we
do what we can - we give what we have. Our doubt is our passion and our passion is our task.”52
In the same year James wrote a review of an exhibition of paintings by John Singer
Sargent, who was then 37 years old, in which he gave a penetrating analysis of the career of a
conceptual artist. James praised Sargent for his clarity of purpose and confident execution: “It is
difficult to imagine a young painter less in the dark about his own ideal... In an altogether
exceptional degree does he give us the sense that the intention and the art of carrying it out are
for him one and the same thing.” James noted, however, that Sargent’s recent work did not
demonstrate development: “As he saw and ‘rendered’ ten years ago, so he sees and renders
today; and I may add that there is no present symptom of his passing into another manner.”
James found Sargent’s precocity disturbing, and found himself “murmuring, ‘Yes, but what is
left?’ and even wondering whether it be an advantage to an artist to obtain early in life such
possession of his means that his struggle with them, discipline, tâtonnement, cease to exist for
him.” James praised Sargent’s technical skill, but closed by observing that “the highest result is
achieved when to this element of quick perception a certain faculty of brooding reflection is
added... I mean the quality in the light of which the artist sees deep into his subject, undergoes it,
absorbs it, discovers in it new things that were not on the surface, becomes patient with it, and
almost reverent, and, in short, enlarges and humanizes the technical problem.”53

18
James’ sympathetic portrayal of Dencombe and his troubled analysis of Sargent together
make it clear that his sympathy lay with experimental approaches to art. For James, the process
of making art was central: “The execution of a work of art is a part of its very essence.”54 He
described the aims of the novelist in visual terms - “try and catch the color of life itself” - and he
believed that the real purposes of fiction and painting were the same: “The only reason for the
existence of a novel is that it does attempt to represent life...the same attempt that we see on the
canvas of the painter.”55
In 1906, when a publisher proposed to issue a collection of James’ novels, the 63-yearold author not only wrote a new preface for each volume, but also made significant revisions in
texts that had originally been published as much as three decades earlier. James’ behavior has
attracted considerable scholarly attention, much of it aimed at understanding his unwillingness to
consider his works finished. Thus one scholar observed that “James seems less concerned with
closing in on a formal, definitive analysis of a completed text than with opening up new
readings,” while another commented that James’ revisions for the New York Edition were “signs
of what his further ‘experience’ has revealed to him about the meaning of his original writing.”56
James’ discomfort with definitive versions of his texts appears to have been of a piece with the
lack of resolution of many of his books. As early as 1882, a reviewer commented that “Mr.
James’s reluctance, or rather his positive refusal, to complete a book in the ordinary sense of the
word is a curious trait.”57 In 1905, Joseph Conrad defended James’ rejection of finality, arguing
that his lack of closure mirrored reality: “One is never set at rest by Mr. Henry James’s novels.
His books end as an episode in life ends... with the sense of life still going on... It is eminently
satisfying, but it is not final.”58

19
James’ experimental art developed gradually. Even before he had reached the age of 40, a
reviewer noted that “Mr. James is not a writer who advances by bounds or strides. His literary
career has been throughout a steadily progressive one, but it has been a quiet progression,
consisting in refinement and selection.”59 Surveying James’ career after his death, Virginia
Woolf agreed that his persistent experimentation was the source of his growth: “A spectator,
alert, aloof, endlessly interested, endlessly observant, Henry James undoubtedly was; but as
obviously, though not so simply, the long-drawn process of adjustment and preparation was from
first to last controlled and manipulated by a purpose which, as the years went by, only dealt more
powerfully and completely with the treasures of a more complex sensibility.”60
Early in Thomas Hardy’s career, finding no existing English county sufficient for his
fictional purposes, he invented a modern region that he called Wessex, where he proceeded to set
a series of novels. Nearly four decades later, Hardy was amused to find that “Since then the
appellation which I had thought to reserve to the horizons and landscapes of a partly real, partly
dream-country, has become more and more popular as a practical provincial definition; and the
dream-country has, by degrees, solidified into a utilitarian region which people can go to, take a
house in, and write to the papers from.”61 In a review of the first of the Wessex novels, Henry
James observed that “Mr. Hardy describes nature with a great deal of felicity, and is evidently
very much at home among rural phenomena. The most genuine thing in his book, to our sense, is
a certain aroma of the meadows and lanes.”62 Hardy became the preeminent novelist of rural
England, as J. M. Barrie remarked in 1889 that “Among English novelists of today he is the only
realist to be considered, so far as life in country parts is concerned.”63
A biographer concluded that a central characteristic of Hardy’s writing was “a reluctance

20
to adopt absolute or even firm positions, a willingness to see virtue in all sides of a question,
insistence upon the provisionality of his opinions and the need to register them rather as a series
of tentative impressions than as the systematic formulations of a philosopher.”64 In an essay
written after Hardy’s death, Virginia Woolf recognized the uncertainty of an experimental artist:
“Nor was Hardy any exception to the rule that the mind which is most capable of receiving
impressions is very often the least capable of drawing conclusions... Hardy himself was aware of
this. A novel ‘is an impression, not an argument’, he has warned us.”65
Hardy did not plan his novels carefully in advance, and his characters and plots might
change as he wrote, causing inconsistencies which apparently did not bother him.66 Virginia
Woolf likened him to Dickens as what she called an “unconscious” writer, carried along by his
own prose: “His own word, ‘moments of vision’, exactly describes those passages of astonishing
beauty and force which are to be found in every book that he wrote. With a sudden quickening of
power which we cannot foretell, nor he, it seems, control, a single scene breaks off from the
rest.”67
Hardy revised his works at every opportunity. “One of the problems faced by editors of
Hardy’s prose and verse is which of a number of different texts is to be preferred: manuscript,
serial, first edition or subsequent editions in volume form?”68 When Hardy was in his 50s, his
publisher produced the first uniform edition of his works, and Hardy took the occasion to do a
thorough revision of 12 novels and three books of short stories that he had initially published
over the course of the preceding three decades.69
As a novelist Hardy started late and developed slowly. Virginia Woolf observed that
when Hardy had published his first novel, at 31, “he was by no means an assured craftsman. He

21
‘was feeling his way to a method’, he said to himself; as if he were conscious that he possessed
all sorts of gifts, yet did not know their nature, or how to use them to advantage.” Yet Hardy
persisted in his efforts to portray the lives of men and women in rural England, and Woolf
celebrated the consequences: “Hardy’s genius was uncertain in development, uneven in
accomplishment, but, when the moment came, magnificent in achievement.”70
Joseph Conrad has long been praised for creating visual images. F. R. Leavis declared
that “there is no novelist of whom it can more fitly be said that his figures and situations are
seen.”71 Virginia Woolf was more expansive: “Picture after picture he painted thus upon the dark
background; ships first and foremost, ships at anchor, ships flying before the storm, ships in
harbor; he painted sunsets and dawns; he painted the night; he painted the sea in every aspect; he
painted the gaudy brilliance of Eastern ports, and men and women, their houses and their
attitudes. He was an accurate and unflinching observer.”72 In the preface to one of his novels,
Conrad told his readers that “My task which I am trying to achieve is, by the power of the
written word to make you hear, to make you feel - it is, before all, to make you see.”73 Conrad’s
commitment to authenticity was such that when a publisher asked him for a preface to a new
edition of Herman Melville’s works he declined, saying of Moby-Dick that he had found “not a
single sincere line in the 3 vols. of it.”74 A friend explained that “Conrad was a realist, who
disapproved altogether of the type of symbolism represented by ... Moby Dick, a book which he
detested.”75
Conrad worked on his novels with little planning: “Once the general idea has been
decided it is necessary to let yourself be guided by the inspiration of the moment.”76 John Gordan
observed that Conrad was never sure when a short story would grow into a novel: “The classic

22
example was Lord Jim, which he intended to treat in twenty thousand words and which
developed into some hundred and twenty thousand.”77 Conrad described the pervasive
uncertainty with which he worked: “I write in doubt over every line.”78
Conrad was excited not by the prospect of finding, but by the process of seeking: “To me,
attempt is much more fascinating than the achievement because of boundless possibilities; and in
the world of ideas attempt or experiment is the dawn of evolution.”79 Arnold Kettle recognized
that for Conrad “It was in the creation of the work of art that the discovery was made. This
seems to me very important. The very act of artistic creation, that molding into significant form
of some thing or part of life, is in itself a discovery about the nature of life and ultimately its
value will lie in the value of that discovery.”80 As Conrad wrote in Under Western Eyes, some
kind of “moral discovery... should be the object of every tale.”81 Pinning down these moral
discoveries is difficult: E. M. Forster observed of Conrad that “What is so elusive ... is that he is
always promising to make some general philosophic statement about the universe, and then
refraining with a gruff disclaimer... No creed, in fact.”82 Kettle agreed: “That seems to get him:
no creed, but an unflinching respect for facts, the facts of the world he lived in. The moral
discoveries are always based on facts.”83
Conrad revised his manuscripts continually, and hated to turn them over to the publisher.
He explained that as long as “I have [the manuscript] by me a lucky idea occurs and is set down
in its place; whereas when the MS is not there it is lost because my brain has no storage room.”84
He also revised his published works, and a friend observed that “some of it is extant in at least
six different states - the manuscript, the corrected typescript, the serial form, the American book
form, the English book form, and the collected edition book form.”85 Conrad’s revisions served

23
to sharpen his prose, by condensing his material, and to clarify his portraits of characters and
their actions as his perception of them developed in the course of composition.
John Gordan’s evaluation of Conrad’s early struggle provides a neat portrayal of an
experimental artist: “He experienced all the disadvantages and advantages of the instinctive
artist: inability to grasp the whole, want of confidence, waste motion in contrast to individual
rhythm and the power to create vivid pictures and living characterizations.”86 Over time,
Conrad’s confidence grew. In 1908, when Conrad was past the age of 50, John Galsworthy
declared that he had “laid up a strange store of thought, tradition, life, and language, and on his
manner of production this has stamped itself. As in a fine carpet, with lapse of time, the colors
grow more subtle, more austere, so in the carpet of this writer’s weaving the bewildering
richness of his earlier books is sobered to the clearer, cooler colors of the later.”87 Arnold Kettle
argued that among English writers of his era, “only Conrad looked at imperialism honestly
enough to become a great artist,” and that his understanding grew over time, so that “as he grew
older the moral discoveries he drew from his art became rather more fully rationalized.”88
When James Joyce died in 1941, an obituarist described him as “the great research
scientist of letters, handling words with the same freedom and originality that Einstein handles
mathematical symbols. The sound, patterns, roots and connotations of words interested him
much more than their definite meanings. One might say that he invented a non-Euclidean
geometry of language; and that he worked over it with doggedness and devotion as if in a
laboratory far removed from the noises of the street... [E]ven the strongest of his characters seem
dwarfed by the great apparatus of learning that he brings to bear on them.”89Joyce was a
conceptual innovator who worked at his art methodically and systematically. His landmark

24
contribution, Ulysses, was the product, by his own estimate, of 20,000 hours of work over a
period of eight years; he told a friend that the preparatory and research notes for the book “filled
a small valise.”90 Ulysses was a dramatic conceptual innovation: T. S. Eliot declared that it
“destroyed the whole of the nineteenth century.”91 As Lionel Trilling explained, Eliot meant that
“Joyce by his radical innovations of style had made obsolete the styles of the earlier time, and
also that ... the concerns and sentiments to which the old styles were appropriate had lost their
interest and authority.”92
Edmund Wilson observed that “Ulysses has been logically thought out and accurately
documented to the last detail ... Yet when we are admitted to the mind of any [character], we are
in a world as complex and special, a world sometimes as fantastic or obscure, as that of a
Symbolist poet - and a world rendered by similar devices of language.”93 Joyce’s attention to
detail was almost beyond comprehension, as one biographer observed that he was “obsessed
with the need for his ‘encyclopedia’ to be accurate, even in the most mundane details.”94 So for
example during the final year of composition of Ulysses, Joyce wrote to his aunt in Dublin to ask
“Is it possible for an ordinary person to climb over the area railings of no 7 Eccles street, either
from the path or the steps, lower himself down from the lowest part of the railings till his feet are
within 2 feet or 3 of the ground and drop unhurt.”95 Her response led to a sentence in “Ithaca,”
the book’s 17th episode, when Leopold Bloom returned home without his latchkey: “Resting his
feet on the dwarf wall, he climbed over the area railings, compressed his hat on his head, grasped
two points at the lower union of rails and stiles, lowered his body gradually by its length of five
feet nine inches and a half to within two feet ten inches of the area pavement and allowed his
body to move freely in space by separating himself from the railings and crouching in

25
preparation for the impact of the fall.”96
Joyce outlined Ulysses as a whole before beginning to write the book, and as a result did
not have to produce the episodes in the order in which they were published: “he attempted to
visualize the general design of the work before completing individual episodes and the process
of composition did not correspond with the final order of the chapters; instead, he programmed
his writing as his interests or the need for clarification dictated... Many of the later episodes were
planned and drafted early in the course of composition... Joyce labored to a predetermined
pattern; each fragment of material he gathered was marked for a specific place in the novel’s
general design.”97 A scholar remarked that “the mechanical nature of this process emphasizes the
mechanical nature of those ordering principles which give Ulysses its superficial unity.”98
Ulysses was organized around a system of what Joyce called correspondences: “To each chapter
he gave a title, a scene, an hour, an organ [of the human body], an art, a color, and a
technique.”99 One scholar remarked that the styles Joyce assigned to the chapters of Ulysses are
“so variable that the eighteen episodes could really be described as eighteen novels between the
one cover.”100 Interestingly, the great diversity and surprising juxtapositions of styles in Ulysses
led the French critic Pierre Courthion to compare Joyce to the most protean of conceptual
innovators in modern painting, Pablo Picasso.101
Joyce does not seem to have been concerned that no reader could ever recognize or
appreciate all the book’s allusions, for he was “aware that his was a mind which needed more
patterns and frames of reference than his readers could ever utilize.”102 A scholar emphasized
that the form of Ulysses “is not organic, but constructed.”103 A close friend of Joyce’s who wrote
a book about the making of Ulysses observed similarly that “If there is a correspondence for

26
Joyce’s writing in the pictorial arts it is the mosaic artists of Rome and Ravenna who would
supply it. No nervous impulses created for them or disturbed their handiwork. They built up with
inexhaustible patience their figures of saints and angels out of tiny pieces of colored stone.”104
Ulysses was the work of Joyce’s thirties; it was published on his 40th birthday. Most of
the remaining years of his life were devoted to an even more complex work, Finnegans Wake,
that similarly reflected his conceptual approach. The book is cyclic: it begins in the middle of a
sentence and ends with the beginning of that sentence. Its structure is based on the cyclic theory
of history of the 18th-century Italian philosopher Giambattista Vico, as Finnegans Wake is
divided into four books that correspond to Vico’s four stages of history.105
In 1926, at the age of 44, Virginia Woolf reflected in a diary entry that although she
enjoyed her life and her work, she always felt somewhat unsettled: “I have some restless
searcher in me. Why is there not a discovery in life? Something one can lay hands on & say
‘This is it?’”106 John Mepham argued that Woolf never settled on a single form that she could use
consistently in her novels because she “never settled on one statement about the way life is. I
think she constantly held in mind different ways of thinking about what life is, and needed ever
new techniques in order to give voice to them all.”107 Woolf recognized this, as in 1928 she
recorded her suspicion that she would never consistently use a single style or subject: “for after
all, that is my temperament, I think: to be very little persuaded of the truth of anything - what I
say, what people say.”108 After her death, Stephen Spender observed that for Woolf life had no
fixed vantage points: “she held life like a crystal which she turned over in her hands and looked
at from another point of view. But a crystal is too static an image; for, of course, she knew that
the crystal flowed.”109

27
Woolf’s uncertainty was that of an experimental artist. Consistent with this, a succession
of critics remarked on the visual nature of her prose. Thus for example in 1922 Rebecca West
observed that “She can write supremely well only of what can be painted;” in 1924 Clive Bell
judged that “This pure, this almost painterlike vision is Virginia Woolf’s peculiarity;” and in
1926 E. M. Forster declared that “visual sensitiveness... becomes in her a productive force. How
beautifully she sees!”110
A biographer observed of Woolf that “Even more than other novelists who have recorded
the birth and growth of their works, she appears to begin without any detailed knowledge of how
she will proceed... Each book seems to evolve rather than to be planned and then made.”111
Woolf testified that this was the case, as in the Introduction to Mrs. Dalloway she wrote that:
the idea started as the oyster starts or the snail to secrete a house
for itself. And this it did without any conscious direction. The little
note book in which an attempt was made to forecast a plan was
soon abandoned, and the book grew day by day, week by week,
without any plan at all, except that which was dictated each
morning in the act of writing. The other way, to make a house and
then inhabit it, to develop a theory and then apply it, as
Wordsworth did and Coleridge, is, it need not be said, equally
good and much more philosophic. But in the present case it was
necessary to write the book first and to invent a theory
afterwards.112
There is also more private evidence that attests to this same process. Woolf began to write To the
Lighthouse early in 1926. On September 5 of that year, she wrote in her diary that “At this
moment I’m casting about for an end... I am feathering about with various ideas... [W]hat
becomes [of] Lily & her picture?”113 She finished the novel just 11 days later; in the end, Lily
finished her painting.
Woolf allowed her plots to grow organically because of her belief that writing should be

28
a process of discovery. In a memoir written late in her life, she explained that she derived her
greatest satisfaction in the process of composing her novels:
Perhaps this is the strongest pleasure known to me. It is the rapture
I get when I seem to be discovering what belongs to what; making
a scene come right; making a character come together. From this I
reach what I might call a philosophy; at any rate it is a constant
idea of mine; that behind the cotton wool is hidden a pattern.114
When Woolf caught a glimpse of “some real thing behind appearances,” she could capture it
only by writing: “I make it real by putting it into words. It is only by putting it into words that I
make it whole.”115
For Woolf everything was provisional, including the endings of her novels. John
Mepham explained that “Her fictions have neither characters nor endings, in the traditional
senses of these things. This is because the point of her writing was not to resolve contradictions
but to contain them and display them. Her integrity as an artist can be seen in her adoption of
inconclusiveness as a principle.”116 Her own attitudes toward her novels were no less provisional
or uncertain. After the publication of Jacob’s Room, she noted in her diary: “My sensations? as
usual - mixed. I shall never write a book that is an entire success.”117 Three years later, after the
publication of Mrs. Dalloway, her confidence had grown, but she remained cautious in
expressing her optimism: “ I wonder if this time I have achieved something?,” before
immediately discounting it: “Well, nothing anyhow compared with Proust.”118
In 1926, Edwin Muir contrasted Woolf’s fiction with that of James Joyce by focusing on
a key difference between their experimental and conceptual approaches: “Mr. Joyce has
objectified magnificently his personal world, but it is not a world in which we could live, and to
him that is, indeed, a matter of no concern... The world [Woolf] shows us is not of such vast

29
dimensions as Mr. Joyce’s, but it is on a perfect scale; there are all the elements in it that there
are in any of the worlds we actually live in.”119 The following year, T. S. Eliot praised Woolf’s
“remarkable gift for description,” as well as her control of that gift: “She does not let herself go
into ecstasies over a momentary perception as Mr. Lawrence does.” After noting this difference
between Woolf and the exaggerations of the conceptual D. H. Lawrence, Eliot remarked on her
similarity to another experimental author: “Of all contemporary authors Mrs. Woolf is the one
who reminds me most of Joseph Conrad... Mrs. Woolf should be praised for having
accomplished at Kew and on English beaches what Conrad has accomplished in the Tropics and
the South Seas.”120
In her diary, Woolf often pondered the course of her development as an artist. In 1922,
the completion of Jacob’s Room convinced her that she had made progress: “There’s no doubt in
my mind that I have found out how to begin (at 40) to say something in my own voice.”121 In
1927, she recorded a judgment about her latest novel that many later critics would share: “With
The Lighthouse I may just have climbed to the top of my hill.”122 In 1929, Raymond Mortimer
declared that Woolf had what he called a Midas touch: “every object she touches becomes
iridescent, every word she uses is alive and pulling like a trout on the line.” He explained that
this skill had developed gradually: “the style is the result of years of experience. We can see it
developing as we follow the chronological order of her works. But this long apprenticeship has
left her a complete mistress of her medium. Her line, like a great painter’s, is now spontaneously
artful.”123
In 1916, when D. H. Lawrence completed Women in Love, he wrote to one friend that “I
love it, and love it passionately,” and to another that it was “in fact, a masterpiece.”124 John

30
Middleton Murry opened his review of the book by declaring that “Mr. Lawrence is set apart
from the novelists who are his contemporaries by the vehemence of his passions.” Murry
lamented that Lawrence’s earlier promise had been destroyed by the excessive force of his
emotions: “It was not his deliberate choice that he sacrificed his gifts, his vision, his delicacy,
and his eloquence. If ever a writer was driven, it is he.” Murry stressed Lawrence’s certainty:
“At the end we know one thing and one thing alone: that Mr. Lawrence believes, with all his
heart and soul, that he is revealing to us the profound and naked reality of life.”125
Many later critics disagreed with Murry’s negative judgment of Lawrence’s achievement;
thus for example F. R. Leavis later argued that Women in Love proved Lawrence to be “the
greatest kind of artist.”126 Yet whether favorable or not, few critics disagreed that Lawrence’s art
was characterized by extreme vividness and emotional intensity born of great sureness. The
certainty that Lawrence derived from his passion marks him clearly as a conceptual author. T. S.
Eliot’s certainty was of intellectual rather than emotional origin, and he had little sympathy for
Lawrence, whom he characterized as “a demoniac, a natural and unsophisticated demoniac with
a gospel.”127 Characteristically, Virginia Woolf’s analysis was more measured, but she
nonetheless made it clear that Lawrence’s work was a product of exaggeration: “some hand,
some eye of astonishing penetration and force, has swiftly arranged the whole scene, so that we
feel it is more exciting, more moving, in some ways fuller of life than one had thought real life
could be.”128 J. C. Squire agreed: “All the novels have descriptive passages... which impress
one’s imagination more forcibly than the actual things described.”129
Lawrence believed that writing was therapeutic: “one sheds one’s sicknesses in books repeats and presents again one’s emotions, to be master of them.”130 Through a study of

31
Lawrence’s manuscripts, Keith Cushman concluded that even revision demanded the writer’s
total involvement: “The flow of true art could be produced only by a total immersion of self in
the experience of composition... His holographs... are further testimony to the speed and
spontaneity with which he wrote and revised.”131 Unlike James, Hardy, or Conrad, however,
Lawrence had no interest in revising his published works: “The moment... that the book was in
press, three-quarters of his interest in it was exhausted, and, by the time it was published, it was
far behind him.”132
Lawrence arrived at artistic maturity early and rapidly: Leavis declared that “Genius in
Lawrence manifests itself in an astonishing richness and rapidity of development” that was
manifested in The Rainbow and Women in Love.133 Keith Cushman compared Lawrence’s
dramatic progress in 1914, when he was 29, to the leap forward that Melville had made: “In The
Prussian Officer, The Rainbow, and Moby-Dick one can feel the writer reaching higher, daring
more, and achieving more than he ever had before.” Cushman attributed the sudden advance to
an intellectual decision: “Lawrence came into his own only when he decided that his writing
would be founded on the interplay of art and metaphysic, only when he realized that he wanted
to interpret the life around him in terms of a larger, even a cosmic vision of human
possibility.”134
In 1922, publication of The Waste Land prompted Edmund Wilson to object to what he
considered the excessively introspective approach not only of Eliot but also of other young
writers. Wilson quoted from The Waste Land, but then observed that “a quotation from a more
conventional author who has yet caught something of the spirit of the time puts it even more
clearly and briefly. ‘I know myself but that is all,’ cries one of Scott Fitzgerald’s heroes... And

32
that is precisely the point of view of the modern novelist or poet: ‘I know myself but that is
all.’”135 After Fitzgerald’s death, Lionel Trilling reflected that the significance of his landmark
work, The Great Gatsby, was a consequence of its “intellectual intensity.” Trilling observed that
the book’s characters and settings were used to serve the story’s central idea: “Thus, it will be
observed, the characters are not ‘developed’... [but] are treated, we might say, as if they were
ideographs, a method of economy that is reinforced by the ideographic use that is made of the
Washington Heights flat, the terrible ‘valley of ashes’ seen from the Long Island Railroad,
Gatsby’s incoherent parties, and the huge sordid eyes of the oculist’s advertising sign.” Trilling
added parenthetically: “It is a technique which gives the novel an affinity with The Waste
Land.”136 T. S. Eliot apparently noticed the parallels between his own poetry and Fitzgerald’s
prose, for in 1925 he wrote to tell Fitzgerald that Gatsby “excited me more than any new novel I
have seen, either English or American, for a number of years,” and that he considered it “the first
step that American fiction has taken since Henry James.”137
Wilson and Trilling recognized the conceptual basis of Fitzgerald’s fiction, which used
lyrical prose, simplified figures, and symbolic stage props and settings in the service of
allegorical plots. Thus in one recent survey Gatsby was described as “a symbolist tragedy” told
with “a symbolist mode of writing that informs everything - Gatsby’s dreams, parties, even his
shirts - with an enchanted glow.”138 Harold Bloom observed that “The American Dream tended
to be our characteristic myth in the twentieth century, and Scott Fitzgerald was both the prime
celebrant and the great satirist of the dream-turned-nightmare.”139
Fitzgerald was famously precocious, at just 24 publishing a best-selling novel that was
reviewed by H. L. Mencken as “a truly amazing first novel - original in structure, extremely

33
sophisticated in manner, and adorned with a brilliancy that is ... rare in American writing.”140 Yet
his real arrival at artistic maturity came at the age of 29, with the publication of The Great
Gatsby. Fitzgerald recognized this, for when he completed the novel he wrote to his editor “I
think my novel is about the best American novel ever written... I am grown at last.”141 Over time,
as recognition of the magnitude of Fitzgerald’s achievement in Gatsby increased, the
discontinuity it represented in his career became clear. Thus in 1966 a scholar observed that
“One of the most difficult problems in Fitzgerald scholarship in the nineteen-fifties and sixties
has been the attempt to explain the sudden maturing of Fitzgerald in 1925, with the publication
of The Great Gatsby. Nothing in Fitzgerald’s earlier writing prepares for the authority and the
aesthetic control over material that is so impressive in his third novel.”142 Perhaps equally widely
studied has been Fitzgerald’s subsequent failure to match the quality of Gatsby. Thus John
Berryman observed that “Suddenly he was able, not yet thirty, to lay out and execute a
masterpiece. He was happily married, widely admired, and had made money. One might have
expected such a career of production as American artists rarely have achieved. What happened
then?” Berryman believed that during most of his remaining years “he could not use his gift
because he no longer had it.”143 Fitzgerald had earlier expressed the same belief. Thus in 1929 he
wrote to his friend Ernest Hemingway of his fear that the great amount of writing he had done
during 1919-24 had “taken all I had to say too early.”144 Fitzgerald had often been praised for the
poetic quality of his prose, and like many conceptual poets he spent the last years of his life
wondering where his gift had gone. His awareness of the nature of his talent, and of its loss, may
be reflected in the verb tenses he used in 1934, at the age of 38, in the introduction to a new
edition of The Great Gatsby: “The present writer has always been a ‘natural’ for his profession

34
in so much that he can think of nothing he could have done as efficiently as to have lived deeply
in the world of imagination.”145
On a map he drew of Yoknapatawpha County, Mississippi, William Faulkner signed
himself “sole owner and proprietor.”146 After inventing the fictitious rural county in 1929,
Faulkner set most of his novels and stories there for the rest of his life. Robert Penn Warren
remarked that “no land in all fiction is more painstakingly analyzed from the sociological
standpoint.”147 This was because of the descriptive nature of Faulkner’s writing, for as Malcolm
Cowley observed, “He can and does give us the exact tone of Mississippi voices, the feel of a
Mississippi landscape, the look of an old plantation house rotting among sedge-grown fields.”148
Faulkner once explained that he had never expressly gone out to study his subject:
I don’t go out with a notebook, but I like these people, that is, I
like to listen to them, the way they talk or the things they talk
about. I spent a lot of time with my uncle, he was a politician, and
he would have to run every four years to be elected judge again.
And I would go around with him and sit on the front galleries of
country stores and listen to the talk that would go on, with no
notebook, no intention to put it down, I just - it was interesting and
I remembered most of it and I have known them in farming and in
dealing with horses and hunting, things like that, but without
carrying a notebook at all, just to remember.149
It is not surprising that Cowley would note that “Faulkner’s novels have the quality of being
lived, absorbed, remembered rather than merely observed.”150
Faulkner’s descriptive, expansive approach to writing fiction made him an archetypal
experimental author. Whereas Malcolm Cowley praised the multiple viewpoints he employed in
his novels as “sculptural, as if you could walk round them for different views of the same solid
object,” F. R. Leavis had little patience for them, concluding that “Faulkner is seldom for long
sure of the point of view he is writing from and will alter his focus and his notation casually, it

35
would seem, and almost without knowing it.”151 But Leavis nonetheless correctly diagnosed the
source of the technique: “This pervasive uncertainty of method goes down to a central and
radical uncertainty.”152
This basic uncertainty was reflected in a series of characteristics of Faulkner’s work. He
did not plan the plots of his novels: “Some people are orderly, they lay out a plot or synopsis
first, they make notes, which is valid and satisfactory to them but not to me, I would be
completely lost.”153 Faulkner’s typical response to questions about his intentions for a work was
“I didn’t know where this story was going, I just wrote it. I was as surprised as anybody else to
find where it was going.”154 Faulkner learned about his characters in the process of writing about
them: “the writer is learning all the time he writes and he learns from his own people, once he
has conceived them truthfully and has stuck to the verities of human conduct, human behavior,
human aspirations, then he learns - yes, they teach him, they surprise him, they teach him things
that he didn’t know, they do things and suddenly he says to himself, why yes, that is true, that is
so.”155 Faulkner could not anticipate the length of his works: asked about The Sound and the
Fury, he responded that “It was, I thought, a short story, something that could be done in about
two pages, a thousand words. I found out it couldn’t.”156 Faulkner explained that he kept writing
books because he was never satisfied with the last one: “I think that one is never satisfied with
the book, the poem, he has just finished, which is the reason he writes another one. And I believe
as long as he or I live I will still try to write the good book which up to now I have never quite
done.”157 In fact, however, he knew he would never be satisfied: “none of it is perfection, ... and
anything less than perfection is failure.”158 Faulkner believed that there was only one path to
artistic achievement: “There is no mechanical way to get the writing done, no short cut... Teach

36
yourself by your own mistakes; people learn only by error.”159
Critics have long been aware of the consequences of Faulkner’s uncertainty. In a study of
Faulkner’s work that he titled Quest for Failure, Walter Slatoff observed that
It is no accident that every one of Faulkner’s experiments with
form and style - his rapidly shifting points of view, his use of more
or less incoherent narrators, ... his disordered time sequences, his
juxtapositions of largely independent stories, his unsyntactical
marathon sentences, his whole method, as Conrad Aiken puts it,
“of deliberately withheld meaning, of progressive and partial and
delayed disclosure” - is a movement away from order and
coherence. It is no accident that every one of Faulkner’s novels
involves one or more of these experiments and that in most of the
novels we find them all.160
Slatoff also remarked on Faulkner’s open endings: “the endings of all his novels not only fail to
resolve many of the tensions and meanings provided in the novels but also seem carefully
designed to prevent such resolution... To read a Faulkner novel is to struggle to integrate and
resolve a bewildering number and variety of impressions and suggestions. It is, and it is meant to
be, a struggle without end.”161 Hugh Kenner observed that the novels were all loosely
interdependent: “as no Faulkner incident can yield its significance until it has entangled
circumambient lives and circumstances even to the third and fourth generations, so no Faulkner
novel really cuts off at its boundaries. Characters pass from one to another, a story illuminates
the early history of a family we will later meet in a novel, people in a new book serve as
analogues and reflectors for other people the author conceived years previously.”162 And Wallace
Stegner perceived a basic message: “What Faulkner is actually saying, as explicitly if not as
simply as it has ever been said, is that no man, novelist or otherwise, can know another except in
the trivial superficies of his life; that the mind and emotions of another are mysteries as deep as
the hereafter; that we arrive at our knowledge - or, rather, our surmises - of other people through

37
these approximations, these dribbles of information from six or 600 sources, each driblet colored
by the prejudices and emotions of the observer.”163
Faulkner recognized the distinction between experimental and conceptual artists. Thus he
noted that “there were sculptors, there were few painters, there were few musicians, like Mozart,
that knew exactly what they were doing, that used their music like the mathematician uses his
formula.” Having identified Mozart, a textbook case of a conceptual young genius, as the
prototype of the artist who worked with deductive certainty, Faulkner then coupled his own
contemporary Hemingway with the composer, pointing out that not all artists have “whatever the
quality that Mozart, Hemingway had.”164 Faulkner explained that whereas Hemingway had early
learned a method that he consistently used thereafter, other authors, including Thomas Wolfe and
himself, had not, because “we didn’t have the instinct, or the preceptors, or whatever it was...
That’s why it’s clumsy and hard to read. It’s not that we deliberately tried to make it clumsy, we
just couldn’t help it.”165 Hemingway’s work was the most consistent of his cohort: “Hemingway
had sense enough to find a method which he could control and didn’t need or didn’t have to,
wasn’t driven by his private demon to waste himself in trying to do more than that. So, he has
done consistently probably the most solid work of all of us.” Yet Faulkner valued aspiration over
achievement, so in the final assessment he ranked Wolfe first among his contemporaries: “he
failed the best because he had tried the hardest, he had taken the longest gambles, taken the
longest shots.”166 In contrast, Faulkner ranked Hemingway not only below Wolfe, but also below
Erskine Caldwell, John Dos Passos, and Faulkner himself, because Hemingway had stuck to his
early method “without splashing around to try to experiment.” Not surprisingly for an
experimental writer whose favorite book was Don Quixote, Faulkner judged artists by the

38
nobility of their quest for the impossible dream: “It was simply on the degree of the attempt to
reach the unattainable dream, to accomplish more than any flesh and blood man could
accomplish, could touch.”167
One of Ernest Hemingway’s most distinctive innovations was in his writing of dialogue.
In 1926, Conrad Aiken declared in a review of The Sun Also Rises that “The dialogue is
brilliant,” and described it as “alive with the rhythms and idioms, the pauses and suspensions and
innuendoes and shorthands, of living speech.”168 In fact, however, Philip Young later explained
that “for all the impression of authenticity Hemingway’s dialogue gives, it was no simple
reproduction of actual human talking... Hemingway’s dialogue strips speech down to the
essentials which are typical of the speaker. He built a pattern of mannerisms and responses
which give an illusion of reality that, in its completeness, reality itself does not give.”169
Hemingway’s distinctive dialogue is one of a number of conceptual devices that he
developed early in his career and that became celebrated as his trademark techniques. He arrived
at these devices not through years of trial and error, but rapidly, largely through the study of
earlier writers, including Mark Twain, Sherwood Anderson, and Gertrude Stein. Together these
devices allowed Hemingway, in his early work, to create “a world of his own more brilliant than
life, but he was not writing about people living in a real world.”170
Another of Hemingway’s devices was his theory of omission - “my new theory that you
could omit anything if you knew that you omitted it and the omitted part would strengthen the
story and make people feel something more than they understood.”171 Hemingway used
organizing symbols: “What is new in A Farewell to Arms is the consistent use of rain as a signal
of disaster.”172 Hugh Kenner drew an interesting comparison between the conceptual early poetry

39
of T. S. Eliot and the fiction of two conceptual novelists of the same era: “Eliot’s verse of the
twenties... reads like a compendium of a decade’s symbols; no other twentieth-century decade
has yielded in that way to being summed up by images. To encounter comparable images,
comparable expressive mannerisms, in the fictions of Fitzgerald and Hemingway is to be
reminded to what extent these two expatriates were engaged in an enterprise like the expatriate
poet’s.” Kenner further observed that when Hemingway said that what he was trying to write
down in the 1920s was “the real thing, the sequence of motion and fact which made the emotion
and which would be as valid in a year or ten years or, with luck and if you stated it purely
enough, always,” the words, and idea, appear to be based on Eliot’s definition of 1919 of what he
called the “‘objective correlative’; in other words, a set of objects, a situation, a chain of events,
which shall be the formula of that particular emotion; such that when the external facts, which
must terminate in a sensory experience, are given, the emotion is immediately evoked.”173
Hemingway’s early practices reveal a conceptual writer at work. One of Hemingway’s
earliest publications, in 1926, was a satire titled The Torrents of Spring. Jeffrey Meyers observed
that “Hemingway’s ability to parody [Sherwood] Anderson reveals how well he had learned and
then rejected the lesson of the master,” and Hemingway’s clarity of purpose was also evident to
Allen Tate, who noted in a review of Torrents that “He knows what he wishes to do; he usually
does it.”174 William Balassi studied the composition of Hemingway’s first novel, The Sun Also
Rises, and found that he had worked on it methodically: “Each day he chose a method or a theme
to wrestle with... For instance, on four successive days... he based each day’s composition on a
metaphor associated with one of the main characters: afición for Jake, bankruptcy for Mike, the
gored and segregated steer for Gerald, and the Circe myth for Duff.” The reference to mythology

40
was not by chance, for Hemingway’s composition paid tribute to James Joyce and to the
Odyssey, in turn, on the two following days.175 Hemingway’s second novel, A Farewell to Arms,
published when he was 30 years old, was tightly plotted, “carefully planned in an orderly, logical
method that is exceptional in the American novel.”176 Recent research has revealed that
Hemingway used military histories and newspaper stories as the basis for battle scenes he
described in A Farewell to Arms.177 Hemingway was fond of declaring that novelists should
write from personal experience, and he was sufficiently defensive about the revelation that he
did not always follow this practice that he devised what a biographer has called a “theory of
inventing from knowledge,” which held that “an author must have some actual experience
though not necessarily the precise experience of what he writes about.”178
Late in his life, Hemingway denied that a writer’s work had to deteriorate as he grew
older: “People who know what they are doing should last as long as their heads last.”179 His
critics, however, generally believed that his work had declined from an early age. In 1943, James
Farrell called The Sun Also Rises Hemingway’s best novel, and declared that his contribution
was essentially complete by the age of 30: “He said pretty much what he had to say with his first
stories and his first two novels.”180 Even earlier, in 1939, Edmund Wilson observed that
Hemingway’s famed prose had deteriorated with self-indulgence by the time he wrote Death in
the Afternoon, in 1932: “The master of that precise and clean style now indulges in purple
patches which go on spreading for pages on end.”181 The judgments of Farrell and Wilson
became a general consensus over time. After Hemingway’s death Stanley Kauffman wrote of
“one of the epochal moments in 20th century literature: Hemingway’s forging of his prose,”
noting that that early time had been the high point of his life and work. Kauffman concluded that

41
“His career, at its height, was very short - less than 15 years.”182 Irving Howe wrote in an
obituary that “Most of the late work was bad, Papa gone soft.” For Howe, the true Hemingway
“was always a young writer... He published his best novel The Sun Also Rises in his midtwenties.”183 Perhaps most bluntly, Alberto Moravia declared that throughout his life
Hemingway had remained in an “infantile and precocious state of arrested development.”
Identifying Hemingway’s best novels and stories as those of the 1920s, Moravia concluded that
“he was incapable of developing or adding anything of value to his early, naïve nihilism.”184 In
more moderate terms Philip Young agreed, observing that “Nowhere in this writer can you find
the mature, brooding intelligence, the sense of the past, the grown-up relationships of adult
people, and many of the other things we normally ask of a first-rate novelist.”185
Measuring Careers
The preceding section established that seven of the novelists studied here - Dickens,
Twain, James, Hardy, Conrad, Woolf, and Faulkner - were experimental innovators, and that five
- Melville, Joyce, Lawrence, Fitzgerald, and Hemingway - were conceptual. The primary
quantitative issue to be addressed here concerns the prediction of the analysis presented above
for the life cycle: did the conceptual authors generally make their greatest contributions at
younger ages than did the experimental authors?
Measurement of the relative importance of an author’s work over the course of his career
is based on scholarly critical studies of the author’s novels. For each author, at least ten critical
monographs were selected, each of which treats the author’s entire career.186 For each of these
monographs, a count was made of the number of pages on which each of the author’s novels was
discussed.187 The absolute numbers of pages devoted to each of an author’s novels in a particular

42
critical study were then converted into a percentage distribution: for each monograph, this
distribution describes the relative amount of space devoted to each novel. Finally, these
percentage distributions for each monograph were averaged over all the monographs used for
each author; the result is a percentage distribution, for each author, which reveals the average
amount of space devoted to each novel in the monographs studied.
An example of this procedure is presented in Tables 2 and 3, which provide the data for
Virginia Woolf. Table 2 shows the number of pages on which each of her novels was discussed
in the ten critical monographs surveyed; thus for example To the Lighthouse is discussed on 37
pages of Book 9, which the appendix identifies as John Mepham’s Virginia Woolf: A Literary
Life. In Table 3, the frequency distribution for each book is converted into a percentage
distribution: since To the Lighthouse is discussed on 37 pages of Mepham’s book, of a total of
217 pages on which references to Woolf’s novels appear, the entry for To the Lighthouse for
Book 9 in Table 3 is 17.1%. That entry is then averaged with the other nine entries for To the
Lighthouse in Table 3, producing the result in the final column of the table that on average the 10
monographs analyzed for Woolf discuss To the Lighthouse on 17.2% of the pages on which they
discuss any of her novels. This places To the Lighthouse slightly above Mrs. Dalloway (14.6%)
and The Waves (13.4%) as a subject of study, and well above The Years (7.0%) and Night and
Day (7.5%). The inference drawn here is that scholars generally consider To the Lighthouse,
Mrs. Dalloway, and The Waves to be Woolf’s three most important novels, in descending order,
and Night and Day and The Years her least important novels.
These measurements are effectively intended to survey the judgments of literary scholars
on the relative importance of each author’s novels, under the assumption that the amount of

43
space a scholar devotes to discussion of a novel implicitly reflects his or her judgment of that
novel’s importance relative to the author’s other novels. The use of at least 10 monographs for
each novelist is dictated by the fact that scholars’ opinions on which novels are most important
or most interesting can differ. Thus for example To the Lighthouse ranks first among Woolf’s
novels in six of the 10 monographs analyzed, and second in two others. This suggests that Woolf
scholars do generally consider it her most important book, but not unanimously. As will be seen,
there is considerably greater agreement on the most important individual novels of several other
authors.
Based on these measurements, for each author Table 4 lists the three novels judged most
important by the critical monographs, and Table 5 displays the authors’ ages when these books
were published. Considering first the authors’ ages when they wrote their single most important
novel, there is a considerable range. Thus Fitzgerald was just 29 when he wrote The Great
Gatsby, while Hardy was more than two decades older, at age 51, when he wrote Tess of the
d’Urbervilles. The ages of the authors do clearly differ by category: whereas four of the five
conceptual authors were 35 or younger when they wrote their best book, none of the
experimental writers produced their best work that early. Only two experimental writers
published their best novel in their late 30s, while five published theirs when they were over 40,
with two at 50 or above.
One way to use the data produced here to approximate what Faulkner might have referred
to as a writer’s matchless time is to consider the years spanned by publication of their three best
novels. By this definition, Table 5 shows that a distinct difference again appears between the two
categories of writers. Three of the conceptual writers entered this period in their 20s, and the

44
other two in their 30s. In contrast, no experimental writer entered this period as early as his 20s;
three began it in their 30s, and four in their 40s. Three conceptual writers finished this best
period in their 30s, one in his 40s, and one in his 50s. In contrast, only one experimental writer
ended his best period in his 30s, two ended theirs in their 40s, three ended theirs in their 50s, and
one finished his in his 60s. The most common pattern for the conceptual writers was to publish
the earliest of their three best books in their 20s and the latest in their 30s, whereas the most
common pattern for the experimental writers was to enter their best period in their 40s and to end
it in their 50s. The difference in timing is considerable: four of the five conceptual writers had
published all three of their best books by the age of 41, an age at which a majority of the
experimental writers were either just beginning or had yet to begin their best periods.
If we take a writer’s matchless time to span the period of his best three novels, and
consider the date of his best novel to be the peak of that period, the typical life cycles of the two
groups of conceptual and experimental writers studied here differ sharply. Thus the conceptual
writers began their best period at a median age of 28, reached their peak at a median of 32, and
concluded their best period at a median age of 38. In contrast, the experimental writers began
their best period at a median age of 41, reached their peak at a median of 45, and concluded their
best period at a median of 53. The timing of these typical careers is roughly parallel, as the
conceptual writers began their best period 13 years earlier than the experimental writers, reached
their peak 13 years earlier, and ended their best period 15 years earlier. Thus the matchless time
for these writers, whether conceptual or experimental, typically lasted about a decade. What is
perhaps most striking about the comparison of the two life cycles, however, is that the median
age at which the conceptual writers completed their best period - 38 - is three years younger than

45
the median age - 41 - at which the experimental writers began theirs.
The quantitative evidence bears on another prediction of the analysis presented above.
Specifically, the sudden and complete appearance of conceptual innovations means that they can
often be embodied in a single master work, whereas the gradual and incremental production of
experimental innovations means that they are instead more often divided among a number of
works. One implication of this is that the careers of conceptual writers should more often be
marked by the appearance of one novel that stands clearly above the others in importance. To
consider this prediction, Table 6 presents the average percentage of the monographs’ discussions
of each novelist devoted to that novelist’s single most important book.
Ulysses has the highest share in the table, accounting on average for nearly two-fifths of
the total discussion of Joyce’s novels. Among the other high entries, it is also not surprising to
find that The Great Gatsby, Huckleberry Finn, and Moby-Dick are particularly prominent in
critical analyses of their authors’ careers. What is interesting is the systematic difference
between the entries for the two types of writer: with the single exception of Twain, the entries for
the other six experimental writers are all lower than the entries for the five conceptual writers.
This supports the prediction that prominent individual master works are more likely to be
produced by conceptual than by experimental novelists.
The evidence of the monographs can be used not only to measure the degree of
dominance of a single novel within an author’s oeuvre, but also to examine the relative
importance of a number of an author’s novels. One significant dimension of this is how many of
an author’s novels are close in quality to his best novel. This can be measured by considering
how many novels are candidates to be judged the author’s most important. Table 7 presents the

46
number of different novels by each author that received the most space in at least one of the ten
critical monographs analyzed for that author.188 The table shows that there were only two such
novels for Joyce and Melville: nine of the ten monographs on Melville in fact devoted the most
space to Moby-Dick, and one gave the most to Mardi, while nine of the ten studies of Joyce
devoted the most space to Ulysses, and one gave equal space to Ulysses and A Portrait of the
Artist as a Young Man. In contrast, for Conrad, Faulkner, James, and Woolf, no less than six
different novels received the most space in at least one of the ten critical monographs analyzed
for the appropriate writer. Thus for example Table 2 shows that To the Lighthouse received the
most space in six monographs, Jacob’s Room and The Waves each received the most in two, and
The Voyage Out, Mrs. Dalloway, and Between the Acts each received the most space in one
monograph.
Table 7 shows clear differences between conceptual and experimental authors. Four of
the five authors for whom only two or three novels are ranked first by at least one critical study
are conceptual innovators, whereas six of the seven authors for whom four or more novels are
ranked first by at least one monograph are experimental writers. The table therefore suggests that
experimental authors tend to produce a relatively large number of works that are candidates for
consideration as their most important. This supports an implication of the analysis of the
differences between the two types of writer, that the important contributions of experimental
novelists are less concentrated than those of their conceptual counterparts, because their
incremental procedures tend to distribute their innovations more evenly over a larger number of
works.
The Psychology of Writing

47
Several psychologists have studied the relationship between age and creativity for
important writers, and have concluded that poets reach their creative peaks younger than do
novelists. Thus Harvey Lehman found that lyric poets were at their best at ages 26-31, and
novelists at ages 40-44, Howard Gardner concluded that “Poets who achieve breakthroughs in
middle age or later... are more exceptional than their peers in novel writing,” and Dean Keith
Simonton declared that “the curve [of productivity by age] for novels peaks much later than that
for poetry writing.”189 Simonton offered an explanation: “Fast ideation and elaboration are
characteristic of lyric poetry, whereas writing novels requires more time both for isolating an
original chance configuration and for transforming it into a polished communication
configuration.”190
Simonton appears to assume that poets are conceptual innovators, and that novelists are
experimental innovators. The present study, together with an earlier study of modern poets,
demonstrate this assumption to be false. Such great conceptual novelists as Fitzgerald,
Hemingway, Lawrence, and Melville all produced their greatest novels by the age of 35, just as
such major experimental poets as Robert Frost, Robert Lowell, Wallace Stevens, and William
Carlos Williams all produced their greatest poems at the age of 40 or later.191
Lehman, Gardner, and Simonton appear to have committed an error of aggregation, by
assuming that all, or nearly all, important poets were of one type of innovator, and all novelists
were of another type. My research reveals that important novelists and poets can be either
conceptual or experimental innovators. It might be added that in this respect they resemble
important painters and economists, and probably important innovators in all intellectual
disciplines.192

48
Conclusion
Most novelists and literary scholars would doubtless agree with William Faulkner’s
belief that there is no way to predict whether a writer will produce his best work early or late in
his career. The results of this study, however, suggest that Faulkner was wrong. As is the case
for painters and poets, there appear to be two distinct life cycles for novelists, and which a writer
follows is systematically related to the nature of the individual writer’s work. Thus conceptual
writers tend to produce their most important work considerably earlier in their careers than
experimental writers. Although Faulkner understood the differences in approach between
conceptual and experimental writers, he did not recognize the difference in the life cycles of the
two types. Scott Fitzgerald did. Perhaps this is no accident, for the precipitous rise and equally
precipitous fall in the quality of Fitzgerald’s work over the course of his career may have caused
the conceptual author late in his life to think deeply about the relationship between an author’s
age and the quality of his work.

49
Footnotes
I thank Laura Demanski and Joshua Kotin for discussions, Janice Dantes for research assistance,
and the National Science Foundation for financial support.
1.

Jelliffe 1956, 109.

2.

Gwynn and Blotner 1995, 103.

3.

Bruccoli 1994, 455.

4.

Ousby 1988; Drabble 1998. The total of 130 lines per author refers only to each author’s
main entry in each book.

5.

Moore 1962, Vol. 1; 161.

6.

Bell 1980, Vol. 3; 7.

7.

Galenson 2001, 2003a.

8.

Woolf 1925, Vol. 1; 194.

9.

Collins 1971, 324.

10.

Collins 1971, 38.

11.

Collins 1971, 343.

12.

Ford and Lane 1972, 376.

13.

Woolf 1925, Vol. 1; 194.

14.

Ford and Lane 1972, 259.

15.

Ackroyd 1990, 393-95.

16.

Smith 1996, 36.

17.

Harry Stone argues that the plots of Dickens’ early novels were not planned in advance,
but that his later novels were planned more carefully; 1987, Introduction. Stone’s book
reproduces the notes for a number of Dickens’ novels. John Butt and Kathleen Tillotson
observed, however, that although Dickens’ notes for chapters were sometimes made prior
to writing, in other cases they were made after he had composed the chapters, to refresh
his memory of previous numbers before he wrote later ones; 1968, 27. Stone also
recognizes that even in his later novels Dickens continued to make major plot changes
well into the process of composition e.g. see 1987, 267.

50
18.

Golding 1985, 214, 219, 228.

19.

Melville 2002, 55, 59.

20.

Parker 1996, 616.

21.

Matthiessen 1941, 425.

22.

Lawrence 1956, 387.

23.

Vincent 1949, 126-35; Sealts 1988, 68-9.

24.

Arvin 1972, 144-45, 148-49.

25.

Branch 1974, 255.

26.

Lawrence 1956, 390.

27.

Kazin 1984, 144.

28.

Melville 2002, 41.

29.

Branch 1974, 415-16.

30.

De Voto 1942, 100.

31.

Kazin 1984, 183, 189.

32.

Trilling 1951, 117.

33.

Kazin 1984, 191. On Frost as an experimental poet, see Galenson 2003.

34.

Hearn 2001, 5.

35.

Rogers 1968, 5.

36.

Rogers 1968, 6.

37.

Doyno 1991, 102.

38.

Rogers 1968, 7.

39.

Emerson 2000, 142-48.

40.

De Voto 1942, 53-55.

41.

Neider 1959, 265.

51
42.

Emerson 2000, 128.

43.

Young 1966, 212.

44.

Emerson 2000, 83.

45.

Smith 1962, vii, 113.

46.

Trilling 1951, 106, 116.

47.

De Voto 1942, 89.

48.

Ellison 1986, 316.

49.

Emerson 2000, 147-48.

50.

Emerson 2000, 159.

51.

Emerson 2000, 213.

52.

James 1937; Vol. 16, 82, 90, 95, 105-06.

53.

James 1989, 216-17, 223,228. On Sargent as a conceptual painter, see Galenson 2002.

54.

Miller 1972, 171.

55.

Miller 1972, 30, 44.

56.

McWhirter 1995, 9, 109.

57.

Garda 1968, 118-19.

58.

Edel 1963, 17; McWhirter 1995, 47.

59.

Gard 1968, 118.

60.

Woolf 1925; Vol. 1; 280.

61.

Orel 1966, 9.

62.

Cox 1970, 30.

63.

Cox 1970, 158.

64.

Gibson 1996, 86.

65.

Woolf 1925; Vol. 1; 263.

52
66.

Guerard 1964, 71.

67.

Woolf 1925; Vol. 1; 258.

68.

Gibson 1996, 119.

69.

Gibson 1996, 134-35.

70.

Woolf 1925; Vol. 1; 258-59.

71.

Leavis 1969, 30.

72.

Woolf 1925; Vol. 1; 305.

73.

Conrad 1914, 14.

74.

Karl 1979, 615.

75.

Mudrick 1966, 4.

76.

Gordan 1963, 105.

77.

Gordan 1963, 107-08.

78.

Gordan 1963, 111.

79.

Garnett 1962, 31.

80.

Kettle 1953, 63.

81.

Conrad 1958, 67; Kettle 1953, 63.

82.

Kettle 1953, 63-64.

83.

Kettle 1953, 64.

84.

Gordan 1963, 111.

85.

Gordan 1963, 112.

86.

Gordan 1963, 108.

87.

Sherry 1973, 206.

88.

Kettle 1953, 64-65.

89.

Deming 1970; Vol. 2; 747.

53
90.

Kenner 1962, 45; Litz 1961, 10.

91.

Woolf 1982, 49.

92.

Trilling 1979, 27.

93.

Wilson 1984, 205.

94.

Beja 1992, 64.

95.

Litz 1961, 23.

96.

Joyce 1986, 1461.

97.

Litz 1961, 4,7,9.

98.

Litz 1961, 27.

99.

O’Brien 1999, 97.

100.

O’Brien 1999, 97.

101.

Courthion 1942, 92-93. On Picasso as a conceptual painter, see Galenson 2001, Chapter
5.

102.

Litz 1972, 96.

103.

Litz 1972, 116.

104.

Budgen 1960, 174.

105.

Litz 1972, 102-03.

106.

Bell 1980, Vol. 3; 62.

107.

Mepham 1991, xiv.

108.

Bell 1980, Vol. 3; 203.

109.

Majumdar and McLaurin 1975, 427.

110.

Majumdar and McLaurin 1975, 101, 144, 175.

111.

Bennett 1964, 142, 148.

112.

Woolf 1928, vii-viii.

54
113.

Bell 1980, Vol. 3; 106.

114.

Woolf 1976, 72.

115.

Woolf 1976, 72.

116.

Mepham 1961, xvi.

117.

Woolf 1982, 52.

118.

Woolf 1982, 71.

119.

Majumdar and McLaurin 1975, 180.

120.

Majumdar and McLaurin 1975, 191-92.

121.

Bell 1980, Vol. 2; 186.

122.

Bell 1980, Vol. 3; 152.

123.

Majumdar and McLaurin 1975, 243.

124.

Moore 1962, Vol. 1; 477, 495.

125.

Draper 1970, 168-69.

126.

Leavis 1956, 7.

127.

Draper 1970, 276. On Eliot as a conceptual poet, see Galenson 2003a.

128.

Woolf 1925, Vol. 1; 353.

129.

Draper 1970, 333.

130.

Moore 1962, Vol. 1; 234.

131.

Cushman 1978, 5.

132.

Gregory 1933, 59.

133.

Leavis 1956, 108-09.

134.

Cushman 1978, 25, 192.

135.

Sklar 1967, 157.

136.

Trilling 1951, 252.

55
137.

Fitzgerald 1945, 310.

138.

Ruland and Bradbury 1991, 299-30.

139.

Bloom 2002, 41.

140.

Claridge 1991, Vol. 2; 48.

141.

Bruccoli 1994, 80.

142.

Claridge 1991, Vol. 2; 456.

143.

Claridge 1991, Vol. 4; 46.

144.

Bruccoli 1994, 169.

145.

Claridge 1991, Vol. 2; 149.

146.

Warren 1966, 34.

147.

Bassett 1975, 315.

148.

Bassett 1975, 205.

149.

Gwynn and Blotner 1995, 233.

150.

Warren 1966, 44.

151.

Bassett 1975, 302, 144.

152.

Bassett 1975, 144.

153.

Gwynn and Blotner 1995, 194.

154.

Gwynn and Blotner 1995, 176.

155.

Gwynn and Blotner 1995, 96.

156.

Gwynn and Blotner 1995, 32.

157.

Jellife 1956, 90.

158.

Jelliffe 1956, 161.

159.

Hoffman and Vickery 1960, 72.

160.

Slatoff 1960, 147.

56
161.

Slatoff 1960, 149.

162.

Kenner 1975, 206.

163.

Bassett 1975, 212.

164.

Jelliffe 1956, 53; Spender 1955, 48.

165.

Jelliffe 1956, 37.

166.

Gwynn and Blotner 1995, 206.

167.

Jelliffe 1956, 42; Gwynn and Blotner 1995, 207.

168.

Meyers 1982, 91.

169.

Young 1966, 205.

170.

Kazin 1942, 334-35.

171.

Young 1966, 284; Baker 1961, 34.

172.

Young 1966, 92.

173.

Kenner 1975, 120-23; Kermode 1975, 48.

174.

Meyers 1982, 14, 78.

175.

Barbour and Quirk 1990, 141-42.

176.

Young 1966, 93; Reynolds 1976, 238.

177.

Reynolds 1976, 12-13, Chapter 6.

178.

Meyers 1999, 216.

179.

Baker 1961, 33.

180.

Meyers 1982, 17.

181.

Meyers 1982, 303.

182.

Meyers 1982, 454-57.

183.

Meyers 1982, 430-31.

184.

Meyers 1982, 441.

57
185.

Young 1966, 245-46.

186.

The rules for selecting critical monographs were that they had to be published after 1960,
and all of an author’s novels had to be at risk to be discussed. Thus studies of a writer’s
early or late works were excluded, as were studies of particular themes in a writer’s
work. The monographs used for each author are listed in the appendix.

187.

These counts were done from each book’s index.

188.

Since more than 10 monographs were used for Hardy and Joyce, only the first 10 listed
for each were counted for Table 7.

189.

Lehman 1953, 325; Gardner 1993, 248; Simonton 1995, 185.

190.

Simonton 1988, 72.

191.

Galenson 2003a, Table 12.

192.

Galenson 2003b.

58
References
Ackroyd, Peter. 1990. Dickens. London: Sinclair-Stevenson.
Arvin, Newton. 1972. Herman Melville. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Baker, Carlos, editor. 1961. Hemingway and His Critics. New York: Hill and Wang.
Barbour, James, and Tom Quirk, editors. 1990. Writing the American Classics. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.
Bassett, John, editor. 1975. William Faulkner: The Critical Heritage. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
Beja, Morris. 1992. James Joyce. Columbus Ohio: State University Press.
Bell, Anne, editor. 1980. The Diary of Virginia Woolf. 5 volumes. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.
Bennett, Joan. 1064. Virginia Woolf. Second edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bloom, Harold. 2002. Genius. New York: Warner Books.
Branch, Watson, editor. 1974. Melville: The Critical Hertiage. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Bruccoli, Matthew, editor. 1994. F. Scott Fitzgerald: A Life in Letters. New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons.
Budgen, Frank. 1960. James Joyce and the Making of Ulysses. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press.
Butt, John, and Kathleen Tillotson. 1968. Dickens at Work. London: Methuen.
Claridge, Henry, editor. 1991. F. Scott Fitzgerald: Critical Assessments, 4 Volumes. Sussex:
Helm Information.
Collins, Philip, editor. 1971. Dickens: The Critical Heritage. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Conrad, Joseph. 1914. The Nigger of the Narcissus. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Conrad, Joseph. 1958. Under Western Eyes. New York: New Directions.

59
Courthion, Pierre. 1942. Le Visage de Matisse. Lausanne: Jean Marguerat.
Cox, R. G., editor. 1970. Thomas Hardy: The Critical Heritage. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Cushman, Keith. 1978. D. H. Lawrence at Work. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
Deming, Robert, editor. 1970. James Joyce: The Critical Heritage. Two volumes. New York:
Barnes and Noble.
De Voto, Bernard. 1942. Mark Twain at Work. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Doyno, Victor. 1991. Writing Huck Finn: Mark Twain’s Creative Process. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Drabble, Margaret, editor. 1998. The Oxford Companion to English Literature. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Draper, R. P., editor. 1970. D. H. Lawrence: The Critical Heritage. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
Edel, Leon, editor. 1963. Henry James. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Ellison, Ralph. 1986. Going to the Territory. New York: Random House.
Emerson, Victor. 2000. Mark Twain. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Fitzgerald, F. Scott. 1945. The Crack-Up. New York: New Directions.
Ford, George, and Lauriat Lane, editors. 1972. The Dickens Critics. Westport, Ct: Greenwood
Press.
Galenson, David. 2001. Painting outside the Lines. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Galenson, David. 2002. “The Methods and Careers of Leading American Painters in the Late
Nineteenth Century.” Unpublished paper, University of Chicago.
Galenson, David. 2003a. “Literary Life Cycles: The Careers of Modern American Poets.” NBER
Working Paper 9856.
Galenson, David. 2003b. “The Life Cycles of Modern Artists: Theory, Measurement, and
Implications.” NBER Working Paper 9539.
Gard, Roger, editor. 1968. Henry James: The Critical Heritage. London: Routledge and Kegan

60
Paul.
Gardner, Howard. 1993. Creating Minds. New York: Basic Books.
Garnett, Edward, editor. 1962. Letters from Joseph Conrad, 1895-1924. Indianapolis: Charter
Books.
Gibson, James. 1996. Thomas Hardy. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Golding, Robert. 1985. Idiolects in Dickens. New York: Saint Martin’s Press.
Gordan, John. 1963. Joseph Conrad. New York: Russell and Russell.
Gregory, Horace. 1933. Pilgrim of the Apocalypse. New York: Viking Press.
Guerard, Albert. 1964. Thomas Hardy. Norfolk, CT: New Directions.
Gwynn, Frederick, and Joseph Blottner, editors. 1995. Faulkner in the University.
Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
Hearn, Michael, editor. 2001. The Annotated Huckleberry Finn. New York: W. W. Norton.
Hoffman, Frederick, and Olga Vickery, editors. 1960. William Faulkner. East Lansing: Michigan
State University Press.
James, Henry. 1937. The Novels and Tales of Henry James: New York Edition. New York:
Charles Scribner’s Sons.
James, Henry. 1989. The Painter’s Eye. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Jelliffe, Robert, editor. 1956. Faulkner at Nagano. Tokyo: Kenkyusha Ltd.
Joyce, James. 1986. Ulysses: A Critical and Synoptic Edition, Volume 3. New York: Garland.
Karl, Frederick. 1979. Joseph Conrad. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Kazin, Alfred. 1942. On Native Grounds, New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.
Kazin, Alfred. 1984. An American Procession. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Kenner, Hugh. 1962. Dublin’s Joyce. Boston: Beacon Press.
Kenner, Hugh. 1975. A Homemade World. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

61
Kermode, Frank, editor. 1975. Selected Prose of T. S. Eliot. New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux.
Kettle, Arnold. 1953. An Introduction to the English Novel, Volume 2. London: Hutchinson
University Library.
Lawrence, D. H. 1956. Selected Literary Criticism. New York: Viking Press.
Leavis, F. R. 1956. D. H. Lawrence. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Leavis, F. R. 1969. The Great Tradition. New York: New York University Press.
Lehman, Harvey. 1953. Age and Achievement. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Litz, A. Walton. 1961. The Art of James Joyce. London: Oxford University Press.
Litz, A. Walton. 1972. James Joyce, Revised edition. New York: Hippocrene Books..
Majumdar, Robin, and Allen McLaurin, editors. 1975. Virginia Woolf: The Critical Heritage.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Matthiessen, F. O. 1941. American Renaissance. London: Oxford University Press.
McWhirter, David, editor. 1995. Henry James’s New York Edition. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.
Melville, Herman. 2002. Tales, Poems, and Other Writings. New York: Modern Library.
Mepham, John. 1991. Virginia Woolf: A Literary Life. London: Macmillan.
Meyers, Jeffrey, editor. 1982. Hemingway: The Critical Heritage. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Meyers, Jeffrey. 1999. Hemingway. New York: Da Capo Press.
Miller, James. 1972. Theory of Fiction: Henry James. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Moore, Harry, editor. 1962. The Collected Letters of D. H. Lawrence. 2 volumes. New York:
Viking Press.
Mudrick, Marvin, editor. 1966. Conrad. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Neider, Charles, editor. 1959. The Autobiography of Mark Twain. New York: Harper and Row.

62
O’Brien, Edna. 1999. James Joyce. New York: Penguin.
Orel, Harold, editor. 1966. Thomas Hardy’s Personal Writings. Lawrence: University of Kansas
Press.
Ousby, Ian, editor. 1988. The Cambridge Guide to Literature in English. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Parker, Hershel. 1996. Herman Melville. Volume 1. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Reynolds, Michael. 1976. Hemingway’s First War. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Rogers, Franklin, editor. 1968. Mark Twain’s Satires and Burlesques. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Ruland, Richard, and Malcolm Bradbury. 1991. From Puritanism to Postmodernism. New York:
Viking.
Sealts, Merton. 1988. Melville’s Reading. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press.
Sherry, Norman, editor. 1973. Conrad: The Critical Heritage. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Simonton, Dean Keith. 1988. Scientific Genius. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Simonton, Dean Keith. 1994. Greatness. New York: Guilford Press.
Sklar, Robert. 1967. F. Scott Fitzgerald. New York: Oxford University Press.
Slatoff, Walter. 1960. Quest for Failure. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Smith, Grahame. 1996. Charles Dickens. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Smith, Henry Nash. 1962. Mark Twain. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Spender, Stephen. 1955. The Making of a Poem. London: Hamish Hamilton.
Stone, Harry, editor. 1987. Dickens’ Working Notes for His Novels. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Trilling, Lionel. 1951. The Liberal Imagination. New York: Viking Press.
Trilling, Lionel. 1979. The Last Decade. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

63
Vincent, Howard. 1949. The Trying-Out of Moby-Dick. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Warren, Robert Penn, editor. 1966. Faulkner. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Wilson, Edmund. 1984. Axel’s Castle. New York: W. W. Norton.
Woolf, Leonard, editor. 1982. A Writer’s Diary. San Diego: Harcourt Brace.
Woolf, Virginia. 1925. Collected Essays. 4 volumes. New York: Harcourt Brace and World.
Woolf, Virginia. 1928. Mrs. Dalloway. New York: Modern Library.
Woolf, Virginia. 1976. Moments of Being. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Young, Philip. 1966. Ernest Hemingway: A Reconsideration. University Park: Pennsylvania
State University Press.

1
Appendix:

For each author, this appendix lists the critical monographs that were used as the
basis for measurement of the relative importance of the author’s novels. See the
text for a description of how the measurement was done.

Joseph Conrad
Baines, Jocelyn. Joseph Conrad: A Critical Biography. New York: McGraw-Hill Book
Company, 1960.
Batchelor, John. The Life of Joseph Conrad: A Critical Biography. Oxford: Blackwell, 1994.
Hampson, Robert. Joseph Conrad: Betrayal and Identity. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1992.
Karl, Frederick R. A Reader’s Guide to Joseph Conrad. New York: A Noonday Press, 1960.
Lothe, Jakob. Conrad’s Narrative Method. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989.
Najder, Zdzistaw. Joseph Conrad: A Chronicle. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press,
1983.
Page, Norman. A Conrad Companion. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1986.
Spittles, Brian. Joseph Conrad: Text and Context. Houndmills: The Macmillan Press, 1992.
Tucker, Martin. Joseph Conrad. New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing Co., 1976.
Watts, Cedric. Joseph Conrad: A Literary Life. New York: St. Martin’s Press
Charles Dickens
Daldry, Graham. Charles Dickens and the Form of the Novel: Fiction and Narrative in Dickens’
Work. New Jersey: Barnes and Noble Books, 1987.
Flint, Kate. Dickens. New Jersey: Humanities Press International, 1986.
Gissing, George. Charles Dickens: A Critical Study. New York: Haskell House Publishers,
1974.
Golding, Robert. Idiolects in Dickens: The Major Techniques and Chronological Development.
London: The Macmillan Press, 1985.
Higbie, Robert. Dickens and Imagination. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 1998.
Horton, Susan R. The Reader in the Dickens World: Style and Response. Pittsburgh: University

2
of Pittsburgh Press, 1981.
Kucich, John. Excess and Restraint in the Novels of Charles Dickens. Athens: The University
of Georgia Press, 1981.
Mengham, Rod. Charles Dickens. Devon: Northcote House Publishers, 2001.
Nelson, Harland S. Charles Dickens. Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1981.
Newsom, Robert. Charles Dickens Revisited. New York: Twayne Publishers, 2000.
William Faulkner
Brodsky, Louis Daniel. William Faulkner, Life Glimpses. Austin: University of Texas Press,
1990.
Dowling David. William Faulkner. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1989.
Friedman, Alan Warren. William Faulkner. New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing Co., 1984.
Hlavsa, Virginia V. James. Faulkner and the Thoroughly Modern Novel. Charlottesville:
University Press of Virginia, 1991.
Howe, Irving. William Faulkner: A Critical Study. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975.
Millgate, Michael. Faulkner’s Place. Athens: The University of Georgia Press, 1997.
Minter, David. William Faulkner: His Life and Work. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1980.
Parker, Robert Dale. Faulkner and the Novelistic Imagination. Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 1985.
Vickery, Olga W. The Novels of William Faulkner: A Critical Interpretation. Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press, 1964.
Watson, James G. William Faulkner: Self Presentation and Performance. Austin: University of
Texas Press, 2000.
F. Scott Fitzgerald
Eble, Kenneth. F. Scott Fitzgerald. Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1963.
Fahey, William A. F. Scott Fitzgerald and the American Dream. New York: Thomas Y.

3
Cromwell Company, 1973.
Gallo, Rose Adrienne. F. Scott Fitzgerald. New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing, 1978.
Hook, Andrew. F. Scott Fitzgerald: A Literary Life. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.
Lehan, Richard D. F. Scott Fitzgerald and the Craft of Fiction. Carbondale: Southern Illinois
University Press, 1966.
Pelzer, Linda C. Student Companion to F. Scott Fitzgerald. Westport: Greenwood Press, 2000.
Piper, Henry Dan. F. Scott Fitzgerald: A Critical Portrait. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1965.
Sklar, Robert. F. Scott Fitzgerald: The Last Laocoön. New York: Oxford University Press,
1967.
Stavola, Thomas J. Scott Fitzgerald: Crisis in an American Identity. New York: Barnes &
Noble, 1979.
Way, Brian. F. Scott Fitzgerald and the Art of Social Fiction. New York: St. Martin’s Press,
1980.
Thomas Hardy
Casagrande, Peter J. Unity in Hardy’s Novels: ‘Repetitive Symmetries’. Lawrence: The Regents
Press of Kansas, 1982.
Chapman, Raymond. The Language of Thomas Hardy. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1990.
Gibson, James. Thomas Hardy: A Literary Life. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1996.
Hands, Timothy. Writers in their Time: Thomas Hardy. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1995.
Hasan, Noorul. Thomas Hardy: The Sociological Imagination. London: The Macmillan Press,
1982.
Ingham, Patricia. Thomas Hardy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Millgate, Michael. Thomas Hardy: His Career as a Novelist. New York: Random House, 1971.
Pinion, F. B. Hardy the Writer. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1990.
Stewart, J. I. M. Thomas Hardy: A Critical Biography. London: Longman, 1971.

4
Turner, Paul. The Life of Thomas Hardy: A Critical Biography. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers,
1998.
Vigar, Penelope. The Novels of Thomas Hardy: Illusion and Reality. London: Athlone Press,
1974.
Widdowson, Peter. Thomas Hardy. Plymouth: Northcote House, 1996.
Williams, Merryn. A Preface to Hardy. London: Longman, 1976.
Ernest Hemingway
Benson, Jackson J. Hemingway: The Writer’s Art of Self-Defense. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota, 1969.
Gurko, Leo. Ernest Hemingway and the Pursuit of Heroism. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell
Company, 1968.
Messent, Peter. Ernest Hemingway. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1992.
Raeburn, John. Fame Became of Him: Hemingway as Public Writer. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1984.
Rovit, Earl and Gerry Brenner. Ernest Hemingway. Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1986.
Shaw, Samuel. Ernest Hemingway. New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing Co., 1973.
Tyler, Lisa. Student Companion to Ernest Hemingway. Westport: Greenwood Press, 2001.
Waldhorn, Arthur. A Reader’s Guide to Ernest Hemingway. New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 1972.
Wylder, Delbert E. Hemingway’s Heroes. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press,
1969.
Young, Philip. Ernest Hemingway: A Reconsideration. University Park: The Pennsylvania
State University Press, 1966.
D. H. Lawrence
Becker, George J. D. H. Lawrence. New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing Co., 1980.
Dervin, Daniel. A “Strange Sapience”: The Creative Imagination of D. H. Lawrence. Amherst:
The University of Massachusetts Press, 1984.

5
Draper, Ronald P. D. H. Lawrence. New York: Twayne Publishers, 1964.
Fernihough, Anne. D. H. Lawrence: Aesthetics and Ideology. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993.
Howe, Marguerite Beede. The Art of the Self in D. H. Lawrence. Athens: Ohio University
Press, 1977.
Ingram, Allan. The Language of D. H. Lawrence. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1990.
Sagar, Keith. The Art of D. H. Lawrence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1966.
Schneider, Daniel J. The Consciousness of D. H. Lawrence: An Intellectual Biography.
Lawrence: University of Kansas, 1986.
Tedlock Jr., E. W. D. H. Lawrence: Artist & Rebel. Albuquerque: The University of New
Mexico Press, 1963.
Worthen, John. D. H. Lawrence and the Idea of the Novel. Totowa: Rowman and Littlefield,
1979.
Herman Melville
Duban, James. Melville’s Major Fiction: Politics, Theology, and Imagination. Dekalb:
Northern Illinois University Press, 1983.
Hillway, Tyrus. Herman Melville. Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1979.
Kirby, David. Herman Melville. New York: Continuum, 1993.
Lebowitz, Alan. Progress into Silence: A Study of Melville’s Heroes. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1970.
McCarthy, Paul. The Twisted Mind: Madness in Herman Melville’s Fiction. Iowa City:
University of Iowa Press, 1990.
Miller, James E. A Reader’s Guide to Herman Melville. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
1962.
Mushabac, Jane. Melville’s Humor: A Critical Study. Hamden: Archon Books, 1981.
Rosenberry, Edward H. Melville. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1979.
Seelye, John. Melville: The Ironic Diagram. Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1970.

6
Wenke, John. Melville’s Muse: Literary Creation & the Forms of Philosophical Fiction. Kent:
The Kent State University Press, 1995.
Henry James
Auchincloss, Louis. Reading Henry James. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1975.
Bellringer, Alan W. Modern Novelists: Henry James. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1988.
Berland, Alwyn. Culture and Conduct in the Novels of Henry James. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1981.
Cargill, Oscar. The Novels of Henry James. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1961.
Poole, Adrian. Henry James. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1991.
Putt, S. Gorley. Henry James: A Reader’s Guide. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1966.
Smith, Virginia Llewellyn. Henry James and the Real Thing: A Modern Reader’s Guide. New
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1994.
Tambling, Jeremy. Critical Issues: Henry James. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2000.
Teahan, Sheila. The Rhetorical Logic of Henry James. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University
Press, 1995.
Wagenknecht, Edward. The Novels of Henry James. New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing
Co., 1983.
James Joyce
Davies, Stan Gebler. James Joyce: A Portrait of the Artist. New York: Stein and Day, 1975.
Halper, Nathan. Studies in Joyce. Ann Arbor: UMI Research Press, 1983.
Hodgart, Matthew. James Joyce: A Student’s Guide. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1978.
Litz, A. Walton. James Joyce. New York: Twayne Publishers, 1966.
Mahaffey, Vicki. Reauthorizing Joyce. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Manganiello, Dominic. Joyce’s Politics. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980.
O’Brien, Darcy. The Conscience of James Joyce. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1968.

7
Parrinder, Patrick. James Joyce. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984.
Peterson, Richard F. James Joyce Revisited. New York: Maxwell Macmillan International,
1992.
Riquelme, John Paul. Teller and Tale in Joyce’s Fiction. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1983.
Scott, Bonnie Kime. James Joyce. Sussex: The Harvester Press, 1987.
Wright, David G. Characters of Joyce. New Jersey: Barnes & Noble Books, 1983.
Mark Twain
Gerber, John C. Mark Twain. Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1988.
Gibson, William M. The Art of Mark Twain. New York: Oxford University Press, 1976.
Griffith, Clark. Achilles and the Tortoise: Mark Twain’s Fictions. Tuscaloosa: The University
of Alabama Press, 1998.
Howe, Lawrence. Mark Twain and the Novel: The Double-Cross of Authority. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Krauth, Leland. Proper Mark Twain. Athens: The University of Georgia Press, 1999.
Lauber, John. The Inventions of Mark Twain. New York: Hill and Wang, 1990.
Messent, Peter. Mark Twain. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1997.
Regan, Robert. Unpromising Heroes: Mark Twain and His Characters. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1966.
Sloane, David E. E. Student Companion to Mark Twain. Westport: Greenwood Press, 2001.
Wiggins, Robert A. Mark Twain: Jackleg Novelist. Seattle: University of Washington Press,
1964.
Virginia Woolf
Batchelor, John. Virginia Woolf: The Major Novels. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1991.
DiBattista, Maria. Virginia Woolf’s Major Novels: The Fables of Anon. New Haven: Yale

8
University Press, 1980.
Dick, Susan. Virginia Woolf. London: Routledge, 1989.
Fleishman, Avrom. Virginia Woolf: A Critical Reading. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1975.
Gorsky, Susan Rubinow. Virginia Woolf. Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1978.
Lee, Hermione. The Novels of Virginia Woolf. London: Methuen & Co Ltd, 1977.
Marcus, Laura. Virginia Woolf. Plymouth: Northcote House, 1997.
McNichol, Stella. Virginia Woolf and the Poetry of Fiction. London: Routledge, 1990.
Mepham, John. Virginia Woolf: A Literary Life. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1991.
Peach, Linden. Virginia Woolf: Critical Perspectives. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2000.

Table 1: Novelists Included in this Study
Novelist

Year of birth

Year of death

Conrad, Joseph

1857

1924

Dickens, Charles

1812

1870

Faulkner, William

1897

1962

Fitzgerald, F. Scott

1896

1940

Hardy, Thomas

1840

1928

Hemingway, Ernest

1899

1961

James, Henry

1843

1916

Joyce, James

1882

1941

Lawrence, D. H.

1885

1930

Melville, Herman

1819

1891

Twain, Mark

1835

1910

Woolf, Virginia

1882

1941

Source: see text.

Table 2: Frequency Distributions of Numbers of Pages on which Virginia Woolf’s Novels are Discussed in Ten Critical Monographs
Year Book 1
The Voyage Out
Night and Day
Jacob's Room
Mrs. Dalloway
To the Lighthouse
Orlando
The Waves
The Years
Between the Acts
Total

1915
1919
1922
1925
1927
1927
1931
1937
1941

Source: see text and appendix

17
9
47
49
67
20
40
14
26
289

Book 2

Book 3

Book 4

Book 5

Book 6

Book 7

Book 8

Book 9

Book 10

4
1
7
47
62
38
55
4
47
265

12
10
12
11
10
2
4
4
2
67

4
2
6
8
7
6
8
2
8
51

18
17
19
16
27
16
34
19
20
186

33
33
36
48
64
30
46
35
43
368

15
12
34
27
43
33
15
22
20
221

21
26
28
36
38
0
29
5
7
190

22
22
29
25
37
19
26
19
18
217

35
16
57
49
28
33
42
40
26
326

Table 3: Percentage Distributions of Numbers of Pages on which Virginia Woolf’s Novels are Discussed in Ten Critical Monographs
Year Book 1

Book 2

Book 3

Book 4

Book 5

Book 6

Book 7

Book 8

Book 9

Book 10

Total

The Voyage Out

1915

5.9%

1.5%

17.9%

7.8%

9.7%

9.0%

6.8%

11.1%

10.1%

10.7%

9.1%

Night and Day

1919

3.1%

0.4%

14.9%

3.9%

9.1%

9.0%

5.4%

13.7%

10.1%

4.9%

7.5%

Jacob's Room
Mrs. Dalloway

1922
1925

16.3%
17.0%

2.6%
17.7%

17.9%
16.4%

11.8%
15.7%

10.2%
8.6%

9.8%
13.0%

15.4%
12.2%

14.7%
18.9%

13.4%
11.5%

17.5%
15.0%

13.0%
14.6%

To the Lighthouse 1927

23.2%

23.4%

14.9%

13.7%

14.5%

17.4%

19.5%

20.0%

17.1%

8.6%

17.2%

Orlando

1927

6.9%

14.3%

3.0%

11.8%

8.6%

8.2%

14.9%

0.0%

8.8%

10.1%

8.7%

The Waves

1931

13.8%

20.8%

6.0%

15.7%

18.3%

12.5%

6.8%

15.3%

12.0%

12.9%

13.4%

The Years

1937

4.8%

1.5%

6.0%

3.9%

10.2%

9.5%

10.0%

2.6%

8.8%

12.3%

7.0%

Between the Acts

1941

9.0%

17.7%

3.0%

15.7%

10.8%

11.7%

9.0%

3.7%

8.3%

8.0%

9.7%

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

Total

Source: see text and appendix.

Table 4: Most Important Novels by Each Author
Author

Book 1

Experimental Authors
Conrad
Nostromo, 1904
Dickens
Bleak House, 1853
Faulkner
Hardy
James
Twain
Woolf

Absalom, Absalom!, 1936
Tess of the D'Urbervilles, 1891
The Portrait of a Lady, 1881
Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,
1885
To the Lighthouse, 1927

Conceptual Authors
Fitzgerald
The Great Gatsby, 1925
Hemingway
Joyce

A Farewell to Arms, 1929
Ulysses, 1922

Lawrence
Melville

Women in Love, 1920
Moby-Dick, 1851

Source: see text and appendix.

Book 2

Book 3

Lord Jim, 1900
David Copperfield, 1850

Under Western Eyes, 1910
Little Dorrit, 1857

The Sound and the Fury, 1929
Jude the Obscure, 1895
The Golden Bowl, 1904
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer,
1876
Mrs. Dalloway, 1925

Light in August, 1932
The Mayor of Casterbridge, 1886
The Wings of the Dove, 1902
Pudd'nhead Wilson and Those
Extraordinary Twins, 1894
The Waves, 1931

Tender is the Night, 1934

This Side of Paradise, 1920

The Sun Also Rises, 1926
A Portrait of the Artist as a Young
Man, 1916
The Rainbow, 1915
Mardi, 1849

For Whom the Bell Tolls, 1940
Finnegan's Wake, 1939
Sons and Lovers, 1913
Pierre, 1852

Table 5: Ages at Which Authors Published Most Important Novels

Author

Book 1

Book 2

Book 3

Experimental Authors
Conrad
Dickens
Faulkner
Hardy
James
Twain
Woolf

47
41
39
51
38
50
45

43
38
32
55
61
41
43

53
45
35
46
59
59
49

Conceptual Authors
Fitzgerald
Hemingway
Joyce
Lawrence
Melville

29
30
40
35
32

38
27
34
30
30

24
41
57
28
33

Source: Table 4.

Table 6:

Average Percentage of Critical Monographs’ Discussions Devoted to Each Author’s Single Most Important
Novel.

Author, Title
Joyce, Ulysses

Percentage
38.5

Twain, Adventures of Huckleberry Finn

30.6

Fitzgerald, The Great Gatsby

30.2

Melville, Moby-Dick

23.4

Hemingway, A Farewell to Arms

22.8

Lawrence, Women in Love

18.0

Woolf, To the Lighthouse

17.2

Hardy, Tess of the D’Urbervilles

15.7

Conrad, Nostromo

13.5

Faulkner, Absalom, Absalom!

12.3

Dickens, Bleak House

12.0

James, Portrait of a Lady

11.4

Source: see text and appendix

Table 7:

Number of Different Novels that Recived the Most
Space in at Least One Critical Monograph, by
Author

Author

n

Joyce

2

Melville

2

Fitzgerald

3

Lawrence

3

Twain

3

Hardy

4

Hemingway

4

Dickens

5

Conrad

6

Faulkner

6

James

6

Woolf

6

Source: see text and appendix. Two or more novels tied for the
most space in a monograph were all counted as ranked first.

