NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS DEBT RELIEF EFFICIENT?
Serkan Arslanalp
Peter Blair Henry
Working Paper 10217
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10217
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004

We thank Jeremy Bulow, Steve Buser, Sandy Darity, Darrell Duffie, Nick Hope, Willene Johnson, Paul
Romer, Jim Van Horne, Jeff Zwiebel and seminar participants at the AEA Pipeline Project, Columbia, The
IMF, Stanford, and The US Department of State for helpful comments. Rania A. Eltom provided excellent
research assistance. Henry gratefully acknowledges financial support from an NSF CAREER Award, the
Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR), and the Stanford Center for International
Development (SCID). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Serkan Arslanalp and Peter Blair Henry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Is Debt Relief Efficient?
Serkan Arslanalp and Peter Blair Henry
NBER Working Paper No. 10217
January 2004
JEL No. F3, F4, E6
ABSTRACT
When Less Developed Countries (LDCs) announce debt relief agreements under the Brady Plan,
their stock markets appreciate by an average of 60 percent in real dollar terms – a $42 billion
increase in shareholder value. In contrast, there is no significant stock market increase for a control
group of LDCs that do not sign Brady agreements. The results persist after controlling for IMF
programs, trade liberalizations, capital account liberalizations, and privatization programs. The stock
market appreciations successfully forecast higher future net resource transfers, investment and
growth. Creditors also benefit from the Brady Plan. Controlling for other factors, stock prices of US
commercial banks with significant LDC loan exposure rise by 35 percent – a $13 billion increase
in shareholder value. The results suggest that debt relief can generate large efficiency gains when
the borrower suffers from debt overhang.
Serkan Arslanalp
Stanford University
Department of Economics
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
serkan@stanford.edu
Peter Blair Henry
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
Littlefield 277
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
pbhenry@stanford.edu

Introduction
Bono and Jesse Helms want debt relief for the world’s less-developed countries (LDCs).
The Pope and 17 million people are behind them. At a June 1999 meeting of G8 leaders in
Cologne, Germany the lead singer of the rock band U2 presented Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder
with 17 million signatures in support of the Jubilee 2000 Debt Relief Initiative. In November
1998, Pope John Paul II issued a Papal Bull calling on the wealthy nations to relieve the debts of
developing nations in order to “remove the shadow of death.”
Opponents of debt relief occupy less hallowed ground but are no less zealous about their
cause, citing at least two reasons why the debt relief campaign is misguided. First, debt relief
alone cannot solve the problem of third-world debt. Even if all debt were forgiven, it will
accumulate again if income does not grow faster than expenditure (O’Neill, 2002). Second, debt
relief can create perverse incentives for debtor countries. By relaxing budget constraints, debt
relief may permit governments to prolong wasteful economic policies (Easterly, 2001a).
Do the benefits of debt relief outweigh the costs? Or is it a welfare-reducing market
intervention? The stock market provides a natural place to search for answers. Changes in stock
prices reflect both revised expectations about future corporate profits and the discount rate at
which those profits are capitalized.

Consequently, the stock market response to the

announcement of a debt relief program collapses the entire expected future stream of debt relief
costs and benefits into a single summary statistic: the expected net benefit (current and future) of
the program.
The effect of debt relief on the stock market depends on the model of sovereign lending
to which one subscribes. Models emphasizing costs suggest three channels through which debt
relief may adversely affect the recipient country’s stock market. First, if debt relief allows a

1

government to persist with wasteful policies, economic growth and corporate profits may be
reduced impacting stock prices adversely. Second, countries that do not honor their debts may
incur costs in the form of trade sanctions, which may also hurt growth and profits (Bulow and
Rogoff, 1989a). Third, debt relief may damage the debtor’s reputation for repayment and raise
its future cost of borrowing in international capital markets (Eaton and Gersovitz, 1981).
But, the reputation argument is valid only under assumptions that may not be plausible
for LDCs (Bulow and Rogoff, 1989b). Furthermore, both borrower and lenders can benefit from
debt relief when the borrower suffers from debt overhang. If each creditor would agree to
forgive some of its claims, then the debtor would be better able to service the debt owed to each
creditor. Consequently, the expected value of all creditors’ claims would rise (Krugman, 1988;
Sachs, 1989).

Forgiveness will not happen without coordination, however, because any

individual creditor would prefer to have a free ride, maintaining the full value of its claims while
others write off some debt.
By forcing all creditors to accept some losses, debt relief can solve the collective action
problem and pave the way for profitable new lending (Cline, 1995).

By relaxing the

intertemporal budget constraint, the new capital inflow may reduce the discount rate in the
debtor country. To the extent that the country suffers from a “debt overhang” caused by the
collective action problem, debt relief increases the incentive to undertake efficient investments.
In turn, these investments may raise expected future growth rates and cash flows (Froot,
Scharfstein, and Stein, 1989; Krugman, 1989; Myers, 1977; Sachs, 1989).
On March 10, 1989, the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States, Nicholas F.
Brady, called for LDC debt relief. Between 1989 and 1995, sixteen LDCs reached debt relief
agreements under the Brady Plan. Figure 1 shows what happened. In the 12-month period

2

preceding the official announcement of its Brady deal, the average country’s stock market
appreciated by 60 percent in anticipation of the event. Stated in dollar terms, the market
capitalization of debtor country stock markets rose by a total of 42 billion dollars.
Nor were the wealth gains from debt relief simply a wealth transfer to the debtor nations
from western commercial banks. Figure 2 shows that the stock prices of the 11 major U.S.
commercial banks with large LDC loan exposure increased by an average of 35 percent—a 13.3
billion dollar increase in market capitalization. Adding the LDCs’ wealth increase to that of the
banks gives a rough sense of the Brady Plan’s net benefit to society: 55.3 billion dollars.
To be sure, changes in stock market capitalization measure efficiency gains in a very
narrow sense. The stock market welfare metric tells us only whether the benefits to shareholders
outstrip any costs involved. In that narrow sense, the results suggest that debt relief may
generate ex-post efficiency gains. Of course, debt relief may also induce ex-ante contracting
inefficiencies (Shleifer, 2003).1 Our analysis provides no evidence on the size of any such costs,
but it is nevertheless important to understand whether debt relief generates ex-post efficiency
gains. To the extent that debt restructurings induce ex-ante efficiency losses, the existence of
some ex-post efficiency gains is a necessary condition for debt relief to be welfare improving.
In addition to the narrowness of our welfare metric, there are many other reasons to be
concerned about using the stock market to evaluate debt relief. One should not look at debtorcountry stock market responses in isolation. If the Brady Plan coincides with a positive global
economic shock that is unrelated to debt relief, then debtor-country stock markets will rise in
concert with stock markets in countries that do not sign debt relief agreements.
In order to distinguish the effect of debt relief from that of a common shock, we compare

1

There is, however, an alternative view. The ex-ante knowledge that debts may have to be restructured could raise
efficiency by forcing lenders to be more careful (Darity and Horn, 1988; Fischer, 1987; Bolton and Skeel, 2003).

3

the stock market response of the Brady countries with the market response of a similar group of
countries that did not sign Brady deals. Figure 1 shows that a control group of non-signing
LDCs does not experience a significant increase in stock prices. Similarly, Figure 2 shows that
the price increase for U.S. commercial banks is not driven by a common shock; there is no
significant price increase for a control group of U.S. commercial banks that did not have
significant LDC exposure.
Perhaps a greater concern is that anticipated economic reforms drive the price increase in
Figure 1. Countries receive Brady deals in return for committing to World-Bank-IMF-supported
reforms that are designed to increase openness and raise productivity. So, it is possible that stock
prices go up because debt relief signals future reforms. We attempt to distinguish the effects of
debt relief from those of reform by making use of a key historical fact. On October 8, 1985, the
Secretary of the Treasury of the United States, James A. Baker III, announced a plan for dealing
with the Third World Debt Crisis. The Baker Plan called on the debtor countries to undertake
extensive economic reforms—stabilization, trade liberalization, privatization, and greater
openness to foreign direct investment—but deliberately excluded any plans for debt relief. In
contrast, the Brady Plan explicitly called for debt relief in addition to the continuation of the
reforms begun under the Baker Plan four years earlier.
The difference in focus of the two plans implies that the “news” in the Baker
announcement was the official U.S. push for economic reforms while the “news” in the Brady
announcement was the official U.S. push for debt relief. In other words, because economic
reforms were enacted under the Baker Plan, their effects should already have been incorporated
into stock prices when the subsequent Brady Plan was announced. If markets are efficient, then
the market reaction to the Brady Plan should principally reflect the anticipated effect of debt

4

relief.
The Baker Plan notwithstanding, it is still important to confirm that markets were not
surprised by the economic reforms enacted around the time of the Brady Plan. Sections IV and
V do just that, and address other concerns about the robustness of our results as well. There,
instead of simply inferring that the Brady agreement did not signal any new information about
economic reforms, we confront the issue directly. We do so by documenting the dates on which
major reforms occurred and testing empirically whether the reforms had any effect on stock
prices. While our tests are not definitive, the stock market increase associated with debt relief
remains economically large and statistically significant in all regression specifications that
include the economic reform variables.
After grappling with concerns about robustness, Section V turns to more primitive issues
of interpretation: Why do stock prices rise? Is this a spurious result? Or, does the stock market
rationally forecast future changes in the fundamentals? If market values rise because debt relief
paves the way for profitable new lending, then the stock market responses should have some
predictive power for future changes in net resource transfers (NRTs). Similarly, if the Brady
Plan alleviated debt overhang we should see more investment and growth. The descriptive
evidence we provide is not definitive, but the stock market responses do help to predict changes
in the NRT, investment, and GDP growth for up to five years following the agreements.

I. The Debt Crisis and The Brady Plan
Commercial bank lending to the LDCs surged in the early 1970s. There is no simple way
to tell when the loans became non-performing, but a few salient events sent important signals
that the quality of the loans was deteriorating. The Mexican default on August 12, 1982
5

triggered the beginning of the Third-World Debt Crisis. The next five years were marked by
frequent debt restructurings and new-money packages that tried, but failed to resolve the crisis
(James, 1996, Chapter 12).
A second critical point was reached in February of 1987, when Brazil declared a debt
moratorium and suspended all interest payments to its creditors. In response to the Brazilian
moratorium, Citicorp announced a $2.5 billion increase in its loan-loss reserves on May 20,
1987. Shortly after Citicorp’s decision, a number of other banks made similar announcements
and increased their loan-loss reserves as well (Boehmer and Megginson, 1990).

From an

accounting perspective, then, May of 1987 appears to be the date when the banks officially
recognized that a significant fraction of their LDC loans were non-performing.
Table I provides a brief summary of the debt restructuring history of the countries that
eventually received a Brady Plan: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Costa Rica, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Jordan, Mexico, Nigeria, Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Poland,
Uruguay, and Venezuela. Column 2 shows that a large number of restructurings took place in
each country between 1982 and the time of its Brady deal. The sheer number of restructurings
lends credence to the view that these countries were suffering from debt overhang. Column 3
indicates that a number of countries began to restructure their debt prior to Citicorp’s increase in
loan-loss reserves, suggesting that LDC loans may, in fact, have become non-performing prior to
May of 1987. Column 4 gives the date of the last debt restructuring that took place before the
announcement of a country’s Brady deal; only 4 countries did not restructure their debt after
May of 1987.
Finally, Column 5 of Table I lists the announcement date of each country’s Brady Plan.
The principal source of announcement dates is International Debt Reexamined (Cline, 1995,

6

Table 5.3, p. 234). However, the book does not provide announcement dates for Bolivia,
Nigeria, Panama, Peru and the Philippines2. For these five countries we retrieved announcement
dates using the Lexis-Nexis Academic Universe (http://web.lexis-nexis.com/universe).3

We

verified the accuracy of the search by matching the dates obtained from Lexis-Nexis with those
in the Quarterly Economic Reports of the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU).
IA. What Was Restructured?
The goal of the Brady Plan was to restructure the commercial banks’ loans in such a way
that interest payments would be reduced, principal forgiven and maturities lengthened. The plan
restructured both the public and publicly guaranteed debt claims of the commercial banks.4 The
public debt consisted of commercial banks’ loans to the central government. The publiclyguaranteed debt consisted of loans that were guaranteed by the central government: trade credit;
project finance; and bank loans to regional governments and state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
Table II shows that the majority of the loans were denominated in dollars, reflecting that most of
the debt was held by U.S. Money-Center banks.
Under the Brady Plan, the commercial banks were presented with four options for
restructuring the debt:

(1) Discount Bonds: Issue bonds with the total face value of the debt reduced by
30 to 35 percent and an interest rate of LIBOR plus 13/16; a “bullet” single
payment maturity of 30 years with US Treasury zero-coupon bond collateral on
principal and a rolling guarantee of 12 to 18 months of interest.

2

Cline (1995) provides only the year of the announcement for the Philippines and only the implementation date for
Nigeria and Bolivia. It does not provide any dates for Panama and Peru because these countries were still
negotiating their debt relief agreements at the time of the book’s publication.
3
A data appendix containing the complete list of articles that were uncovered by the Lexis Nexis search is available
upon request.
4
It is possible that minor amounts of market issues such as bonds or notes were also restructured, but we could not
find any evidence on such restructurings.

7

(2) Par Bonds: Issue bonds worth the full face value of the debt with an interest
rate of 6 percent and similar maturity and collateralization as the discount bonds.
(3) New Money: Retain the full value of the debt, but issue new loans in the
amount of 25 percent of current exposure over the next three years with at least
half of the new money coming within the first year.
(4) Cash Buybacks: Repurchase of the debt at a specific price.
The options chosen by the banks varied by country. In countries that were lightly indebted,
banks favored the new money option, whereas in heavily indebted countries there was very little
new money. Cash buybacks were limited to small, low-income countries with little bank debt
such as Costa Rica. The discount bond was designed for banks concerned about limiting the risk
of interest rate fluctuations. The par bond was intended for banks located in countries where
regulatory and tax considerations made maintaining full face value preferable (Cline, 1995).
In return for accepting the four-point restructuring menu, the banks received 25 billion
dollars of enhancements—collateral for principal and a rolling fund to cover several interest
payments—in the form of U.S. Treasury Bonds (Cline, 1995, Chapter 5). The debtor countries
paid for the Treasury securities with loans from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the
World Bank. Although they needed a member-country-financed capital injection to make these
loans, it is important to remember that the Fund and the Bank "…lent at rates that reflect at least
opportunity cost of Treasury bonds...so that the public sector is not providing concessional
financing. The short answer, then, is that the public-sector enhancements did not cost anything."
(Cline, 1995, p. 265). Of course there may have been transaction costs, but they were probably
nothing more than rounding error relative to the overall sums of money involved.5
Table III demonstrates that roughly 202.8 billion dollars worth of debt was restructured,

5

The Treasury, the IMF and the Bank can be seen as the agents that were necessary for overcoming the transaction
costs that stood in the way of the commercial banks negotiating a Coasian (1960) solution to the debt problem.

8

resulting in 64.7 billion dollars of debt relief. The average spread fell from 17/16 over LIBOR
on the loans before the Brady Plan to 13/16 over LIBOR on the discount bonds after the
restructuring.6

Similarly, debt prices rose.

In the year prior to restructuring, the average

country’s debt was trading at 32 cents on the dollar in the secondary market. In the month of the
Brady Deal, the average price rose to 42 cents on the dollar. Finally, the average maturity of the
debt increased from 15 to 30 years.

II. Data and Descriptive Findings
The principal source of stock market data is the IFC’s Emerging Markets Data Base
(EMDB).7 Stock price indices for individual countries are the dividend-inclusive, U.S. dollardenominated and local currency-denominated IFC Global Indices. For most countries, EMDB’s
coverage begins in December 1975, but for others coverage begins in December 1984. Each
country’s U.S. dollar-denominated stock price index is deflated by the U.S. consumer price index
(CPI), which comes from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics (IFS). The local currencydenominated index is deflated by the local consumer price index for each country, which is also
obtained from the IFS. Returns and inflation are calculated as the first difference of the natural
logarithm of the real stock price and CPI, respectively. All of the data are monthly.
Reliable stock market data exist for only 10 of the Brady countries: Argentina, Brazil,
Ecuador, Jordan, Mexico, Nigeria, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, and Venezuela. We bring
Bolivia, Bulgaria, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Panama, and Uruguay back into the picture
in Section VI where the focus of analysis moves from financial to real data.

6
7

For an early analysis of LDC loan spreads see Edwards (1984).
For Ecuador, the source of stock market data is the Global Financial Data Base.

9

IIA. Selection of the Control group
The control group consists of all developing countries that: (1) Did not receive a Brady
plan; and (2) Have stock market data in the International Finance Corporation (IFC) Emerging
Market Data Base. There are 16 such countries: Chile, China, Colombia, the Czech Republic,
Greece, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Turkey, and Zimbabwe.
It is important to ask whether the selection of the control group introduces statistical bias.
The purpose of the control group is to determine whether the stock price increase in the debtor
countries was driven by a global economic shock unrelated to debt relief. Therefore, it is crucial
that the control group not consist of countries in such an abject state of development that their
stock markets would not respond to a positive external shock, no matter how favorable. We
address this concern by examining the characteristics of the Brady and control groups in some
detail.
The Brady countries and the control group display similar geographical dispersion. Both
groups contain countries from Latin America, Asia, Africa, and Eastern Europe. One significant
difference is that Latin American countries comprise the largest fraction of the Brady countries
while the control group primarily consists of countries in Asia.

History suggests that the

relatively heavier weighting of Asian countries in the control group will make that group the
stronger economic performer. We confirm this suspicion by comparing the Brady countries and
the control group using two standard measures of economic performance, growth and inflation.
The control group outperforms the Brady countries on both measures. Between 1980 and
1999 the median growth rate of per capita GDP for the control group was 3 percent. The Brady
group grew by only 1 percent per year during the same time period. GDP growth was also less

10

volatile in the control group. The standard error of GDP growth for the control group was 1
percent, as compared to 2 percent for the Brady group. Finally, the control group has a lower
and less volatile rate of inflation: a median of 11 percent and a standard deviation of 3 percent.
The corresponding numbers for the Brady countries are 27 and 18.
To summarize, the median country in the control group has faster and less volatile growth
together with lower and less volatile inflation than its Brady group counterpart. To the extent
that superior long-run economic performance is positively correlated with better-managed
economies, we would expect stock markets in the median control-group country to be more
responsive to any auspicious common shock.
Finally, analyzing the universe of countries that received Brady Deals does not introduce
any obvious selection bias. True, the countries that enter into Brady Deals are probably the ones
that are most likely to benefit from debt relief. But that is precisely the point. We are not trying
to estimate the average effect of debt relief on a randomly selected country. Just as it does not
make sense to try to measure the effect of a medical treatment on a healthy individual, neither is
it sensible to estimate the effect of debt relief on a country where debt overhang is not an issue.

IIB. Descriptive Findings
This subsection presents descriptive evidence on how the stock market responds to news
of a future debt relief agreement. For each Brady country we calculate the average monthly
stock return over the entire sample. The average monthly return is a proxy for the expected
monthly return.

Subtracting a country’s expected return from its actual return gives the

abnormal return.8

8

Alternative measures of abnormal returns are considered in Section III.

11

Let month [0] be the month in which a Brady debt relief announcement takes place for a
given country. Similarly, let [-12] denote the 12th month before the debt relief announcement, so
that [-12, 0] denotes the one-year window preceding the announcement.

The cumulative

abnormal return for a country is defined as the sum of its abnormal returns from month –12 to
month 0.
Figure 1 plots the average cumulative abnormal return across all ten Brady countries in
event time. The average Brady country stock market experiences cumulative abnormal returns
of 60 percent in real dollar terms. In other words, the real dollar value of the stock market
increases by 60 percent more than it does in a typical year. Now look at the graph for the control
group. If a common shock caused stock prices to go up in the Brady countries, then we should
also see an increase in the stock prices of the control group. This is not the case. The average
cumulative abnormal return for the control group is close to 0.9 The preliminary conclusion is
that the stock price increase in the debtor countries is not due exclusively to a common shock
that has favorable effects on all emerging stock markets.
Since there are only ten countries in the Brady stock market group, one country may
dominate the results. To explore this possibility we conduct median tests in the following way.
For each of the ten countries we compute the median annual stock return. The stock return in the
12-month period preceding the Brady announcement exceeds the median, annual return for every
country except Peru. We also conducted median tests in local currency, and the results were the

9

For a given Brady country, the control group abnormal returns are calculated as follows. Fix the announcement
date [0] for the country in question. Next, for each of the 16 countries in the control group, calculate the abnormal
returns for [-12, 0]. This calculation gives 16 sets of abnormal returns for the fixed Brady-country date. Next,
calculate the average of these 16 sets of abnormal returns and you have the single series of abnormal returns for the
control group associated with the first country. Now repeat the procedure for the other 9 Brady countries. Doing so
yields 10 series of average abnormal returns for the months [-12, 0]. Finally, taking the average across all 10 series
gives the average abnormal return for the entire Control group.

12

same. Peru is the only country whose stock return during the 12-month announcement window
was less than its median 12-month return.
Another concern is that the results may be sensitive to whether real returns are measured
in dollars or the local currency. To address this concern, we replicated Figure 1 using real local
currency returns instead of real dollar returns. The resulting graph was virtually identical to
Figure 1. Since the choice of currency makes little difference, the formal empirical analysis in
Section IV focuses on the dollar-denominated returns.
By constructing a control group of relatively strong economic performers, we are able to
distinguish the effect of the Brady Plan from that of a common shock. But constructing the
control group in this way raises the question of whether we have properly addressed the
counterfactual: Would stock prices have gone up in the Brady Countries had they not received
debt relief?
Addressing the counterfactual requires constructing a control group that bears a greater
resemblance to the Brady countries.

To do so, we replicated our experiment using two

alternative control groups. The first consisted of the highly or moderately indebted countries of
the original control group: Indonesia, Pakistan, Colombia, Malaysia, and Turkey; the second
consisted of all the Brady countries that were still waiting to receive their Brady deals. The
graphs were almost identical to Figure 1.10

There was no significant increase in the stock

market in either of the two alternative control groups in the 12-month period preceding debt
relief announcements.

IIC. Why Use A 12-Month Event Window?

10

These graphs are not shown but are available on request.

13

Using a 12-month window provides a reasonable characterization of the data, because the
announcement of a debt relief agreement is less a discrete occurrence than it is a series of events
during which the public gradually learns the details of the government’s negotiations to reduce
its external debt burden.

Table IV illustrates the point for three representative countries:

Argentina, Nigeria and Venezuela.
Argentina had a 9-month window of negotiations with its external creditors, extending
from July of 1991 to the official announcement of an agreement in April of 1992. In July of
1991, the Economist Intelligence Unit reported, “The International Monetary Fund approves a 1
billion dollar stand-by loan.” On September 20 of 1991, the Financial Times reported “Domingo
Cavallo, comes to Washington to jump-start negotiations on the country's $61bn debt.” On
March 31, 1992 the Financial Times reported, “Argentina secures a $3.15bn extended facility
fund loan from the IMF. Approval of the loan is important for securing a restructuring with the
creditor banks.”
Nigeria had a 10-month window of negotiations with its external creditors, extending
from May of 1990 to its official announcement in March of 1991. The window of public
negotiations began with a Financial Times story on October 3, 1990, “The resolution of the fivemonth deadlock over rescheduling terms for Nigeria's $5.5bn commercial bank debt appears
likely.” The reference to a 5-month deadlock suggests that the sequence of public events may
actually have begun as early as May of 1990. Between October 1990 and March of 1991, the
Financial Times ran at least two more stories about Nigeria’s negotiations with its creditors.
Finally, Venezuela had an 11-month window of negotiations that began with the
Washington Post’s declaration on July 25, 1989: “the Mexican deal will set a pattern for dealing
with the debt problems of other nations. Brady puts the Philippines, Venezuela and Costa Rica

14

at the head of the list.” On March 21, 1990 the New York Times reported “Venezuela and its
creditor banks reach an agreement on the basic terms of a deal.”
The average length of the window in these three countries is 10 months. This estimate is
based on the earliest reported news headlines that we could find through Lexis-Nexis. Even if
these are, in fact, the earliest public releases of information, the possibility remains that the news
was “leaked” to the markets prior to the news dates that we collected. Admittedly, constructing
the event window is at least as much art as it is science, but all things considered, a 12-month
window does no obvious harm to the data. Furthermore, Section IV estimates results using 12month, 9-month, 6-month and 3-month windows—the effect of debt relief on the stock market is
positive and significant in all specifications.
Of course, a long event window raises the specter of reverse causality. Instead of debt
relief generating a stock market boom, maybe rising stock markets and improved economic
prospects cause countries to write-down their debts? In thinking about this question, it is
important to remember that countries cannot simply decide that they want debt relief and make it
so. This is because debt relief requires a mutual agreement between parties: The debtor requests
a write down and the creditor agrees to forgive some of the debt. Reaching such agreements can
take a long time because both the debtor country and the creditor banks want to exercise their
bargaining power (Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein, 1989). Consequently, negotiations might reach
a deadlock, which could take many months to resolve, as illustrated by the case of Nigeria in
October 1990 (Table IV). Given the length of time and the number of parties involved in
sovereign debt restructurings, it is difficult to believe that a debtor country would be able to push

15

through a debt relief agreement as a swift policy response to a rising stock market and improving
economic prospects. 11
Four central facts emerge from this section: (1) Stock markets in debtor countries rise by
60 percent in real dollar terms in response to news of debt relief; (2) The response is uniformly
positive across debtor countries; (3) The effect is not an artifact of the currency in which the
revaluation is measured; (4) The control group never experiences a revaluation of greater than 10
percentage points.

Having eliminated outliers, currency concerns, and common shocks as

explanations for our result, there is another, much trickier, issue to address before proceeding to
formal statistical estimation.

III. Are the Revaluations Driven by Debt Relief or Reforms?
Countries receive debt relief in return for committing to economic reforms (Cline, 1995).
These reforms take four principal forms—inflation stabilization, privatization, trade
liberalization, capital account liberalization—and there is evidence that the stock market
responds favorably to each one of them (Megginson and Netter, 2001; Perotti and Van Oijen,
2001; Henry, 2000a, 2002, 2003). Therefore, a central issue is whether debt relief or economic
reforms drive the debtor-country stock price increases. To address the issue we conducted a
search to pinpoint the dates on which the reforms occur. The results are outlined in Table V.
The stabilization dates come from the International Monetary Fund’s Annual Reports and
Henry (2002).

We use the Economist Intelligence Unit’s Quarterly Economic Reports to

identify trade liberalization dates. We check the EIU dates against the trade liberalization dates

11

Negotiations during the debt crisis were made less unwieldy by proceeding in two steps. First, a select committee
of the largest lenders and the debtor country agreed on the choice of menu options. Second, all of the banks then
decided on the term sheet. Although, the two-step process made the negotiations less cumbersome, it also increased
the time to reach a final agreement because it required meetings on two separate dates.

16

in the World Bank publication, Trends in Developing Economies (1994) and those in Sachs and
Warner (1995). The privatization dates come from the World Bank Privatization Transaction
Database, which contains the names and dollar amounts of all privatizations occurring between
1988 and 1999. We use the privatization database to identify the first year in which there were
recorded sales of state-owned enterprises. Once we know the year of the first sale, we search the
EIU’s Quarterly Economic Reports for the month in which the start of the privatization program
was announced. We also check the EIU to make sure that there were no privatizations preceding
the starting date of the database. Finally, the capital account liberalization dates come from
Henry (2003).
A close examination of Table V illustrates the point of the exercise. All of the debtor
countries began implementing major economic reforms before the Brady deal and continued to
do so after the deal was announced. For example, Column 3 of Table V shows that an official
agreement with the IMF immediately precedes, or follows on the heels of every Brady deal.
Since IMF programs follow all of the Brady agreements, Brady agreements may drive up stock
prices because they signal future IMF agreements. Just as debt relief agreements may signal
future IMF agreements, IMF agreements may in turn signal countries’ commitment to future
economic reforms (Williamson, 1994; Collins, 1990; Bruno and Easterly, 1996). If debt relief
agreements are a signal of future productivity-enhancing reforms, then Figure 1 may erroneously
suggest that debt relief drives up valuations when, in fact, the anticipation of future economic
reforms is instead responsible.

IIIA. The Baker Plan Versus the Brady Plan
We use the Baker Plan and the Brady Plan to help distinguish the response of the stock

17

market to reforms from the response of the stock market to debt relief. Our identification
strategy hangs on a key historical fact.

The Baker Plan called on countries to undertake

extensive reforms but deliberately excluded any plans for debt relief.12 In contrast, the Brady
Plan called for the continuation of reforms begun under the Baker Plan in 1985, but also made an
explicit call for debt relief.
The difference in focus of the two plans implies that the “news” in Baker was the official
U.S. push for economic reforms while the “news” in Brady was the official U.S. push for debt
relief. In other words, because economic reforms were enacted under the Baker Plan, their
effects should already have been incorporated into stock prices when the Brady Plan was
announced four years later. If markets are efficient, then the stock price reaction to the Brady
Plan should principally reflect the anticipated effect of debt relief.
On October 8, 1985 the Secretary of the United States Treasury, James A. Baker III,
unveiled his plan for dealing with the third-world debt crisis at the Annual International
Monetary Fund World Bank Meeting in Seoul, Korea. Secretary Baker begins by stressing the
importance of macroeconomic stabilization:
If the debt problem is going to be solved there must be a “Program for
Sustained Growth”, incorporating… First and foremost, the adoption by
principal debtor countries of comprehensive macroeconomic and
structural policies, supported by the international financial institutions, to
promote growth and balance of payments adjustment, and to reduce
inflation (Baker, 1986, p. 308).
After spelling out the need for stabilization Baker called for structural reforms:
For those countries which have implemented reforms to address the
imbalances in their economies, a more comprehensive set of policies can
now be put in place…We believe that such institutional and structural
policies should include: increased reliance on the private sector, and less
12

There were 17 countries included in the Baker Plan: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cote
d’ Ivoire, Ecuador, Jamaica, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Peru, Philippines, Uruguay, Venezuela, and Yugoslavia.
The 16 countries included in the Brady Plan are listed in Table 1.

18

reliance on government;…tax reform, labor market reform and development
of financial markets;…market opening measures to encourage foreign direct
investment and capital inflows, as well as to liberalize trade (Baker, 1986,
p. 310).
The enumeration of desired reforms in Secretary Baker’s speech displays an attention to detail
that underscores the importance of what he does not mention: debt relief. Baker uses or alludes
to the word “reform” more than 25 times during the course of his speech. But the phrases “debt
relief” and “debt reduction” do not appear.
While testifying before the House Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs,
two weeks later, Secretary Baker erased any doubt that the absence of the phrase “debt relief”
from his speech was an error of omission. Witness the interchange between Secretary Baker and
Representative Bill McCollum of Florida.
McCollum: “Do you anticipate that there might have to be some
forgiveness or moratorium on interest payments to some of these
countries in the process by the commercial lending institutions in this
country?”
Baker: “No, sir; I don’t contemplate that and I think that would be the
wrong road for us to start down. . .I don’t think there should be any
moratorium; I don’t think there should be any capitalization of interest
proposals or anything like that…” (Baker, 1985, p. 26).
Roughly four years later, on March 10, 1989, Baker’s successor, Nicholas F. Brady
revealed his plan for dealing with the debt crisis to the Brookings Institution and the Bretton
Woods Committee Conference on Third World Debt. In no uncertain terms, Secretary Brady
stated that the U.S. government was going to continue pushing the reforms that began under the
Baker Plan:
In 1985 we paused and took stock of our progress in addressing the
problem. As a result of that review, together we brought forth a new
strategy, centered on economic growth. This still makes sense…The

19

experience of the past four years demonstrates that the fundamental
principles of the current strategy remain sound: Growth is essential to the
resolution of debt problems. Debtor nations will not achieve sufficient
levels of growth without reform (Brady, 1989, p. 116).
But in addition to the reforms, Secretary Brady explicitly called for debt relief. In sharp contrast
to the words of his predecessor in Seoul four years earlier, Brady explicitly used the phrase “debt
reduction” or “debt service reduction” eighteen times in his speech. For example:
Let me reiterate that we believe that the fundamental principles of the
current [Baker] strategy remain valid. However, we believe that the time
has come for all members of the international community to consider…
debt and debt service reduction on a voluntary basis…The path toward
greater creditworthiness and a return to the markets for many debtor
countries needs to involve debt reduction (Brady, 1989, pp. 117-118).
In a rare moment of consensus, U.S. politicians, the international banking fraternity, officials in
debtor countries, and academics all agreed that the Brady Plan represented a continuation of the
Baker Plan’s commitment to reforms, with the important change that debt relief now had the
official support of the United States Treasury.13 James D. Robinson III, Chairman and CEO of
American Express best summarizes the consensus in his response to Brady’s speech:
In the next few days we will encounter statements to the effect that the
Brady Plan means the death of the Baker Plan. My advice is to ignore these
statements. The focus of both plans is on growth in the debtor countries.
The principles of the Baker Plan have not been abandoned. They will have
to be embodied in the Brady Plan as it is carried forward. What is new, of
course, is the explicit recognition of debt reduction as an essential element
in the search for solutions (Robinson, 1989, p. 101).
The historical record leaves little ambiguity about the fundamental similarity—reforms—
and the key difference—debt relief—between the Baker Plan and the Brady Plan. Nevertheless,
there are several potential concerns with our identification strategy. We will enumerate and

13

For example, see the reactions of democratic senators Bill Bradley (1989) and Paul Sarbanes (1989); Former
Mexican Finance Minister, Jesús Silva Herzog (1989), and Stanley Fischer (1989)

20

attempt to address these concerns in Section IV. But, first things first. Before we can interpret
the results, we need to know what they are. This is the topic to which we now turn.

IV. Formal Empirical Results
We evaluate the statistical significance of the relationships apparent in Figure 1 by
estimating the following regression:
Rit = α i + γ 1BRADYit + γ 2CONTROLit + ε it ,

(1)

Where Rit is the real return in dollars on country i ’s stock market index in month t, BRADYit is
a dummy variable that is equal to one in [-12, 0]. CONTROL is a dummy variable that is equal
to one in all of the control countries in Brady-Announcement months [-12, 0]. We also estimate
BRADY and CONTROL using nine-month [-9, 0], six-month [-6, 0], and three-month [-3, 0]
windows. The country-specific intercepts allow for the possibility that average expected returns
may differ across countries due to imperfect capital market integration.
Equation (1) constrains the coefficients on BRADY to be the same across all months,
which means that the parameter γ 1 measures the average monthly stock market response to all
Brady Plan Announcements. Since the dummy variable for the event window is twelve months
long, the total stock market response to debt relief for the Brady countries is given by twelve
times the parameter estimate.
A different estimation technique would be to use a seemingly unrelated regression
(SUR). This approach would have the advantage of providing a unique coefficient estimate for
each country for each event. However, there are also disadvantages to this approach. The low
power of hypothesis tests in unconstrained systems severely weakens the ability of the event
study methodology to detect the impact of the event. Second, SUR requires a balanced panel.

21

Due to the limited time series availability of stock market data, creating a balanced panel would
result in discarding some of the 10 debt relief events. Given data limitations, the pooled crosssection time series framework seems appropriate.
With an unbalanced panel, it is not possible to relax the assumption of no
contemporaneous correlation of the error term across countries. Therefore, we will take indirect
precautions. Specifically, three of the alternative regression specifications to equation (1) will
estimate abnormal returns relative to the World stock market index, US stock market index, and
finally IFC’s emerging stock market index. Since all of the sample countries are emerging
markets, the inclusion of a composite emerging market index as a right-hand-side variable will
partially control for contemporaneously correlated disturbance terms. Including the emerging
market index does not change the results.

IVA. Basic Results
The first row of Table VI (Panel A)—labeled ‘Country-Specific Mean’—gives the results
from the baseline specification in equation (1).

White standard errors are reported in

parentheses. Column (1a) shows that the coefficient on BRADY for the 12-month window [-12,
0] is 0.05 and is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. Multiplying the coefficient by 12
gives the total effect, a 60-percent increase in the real dollar value of the stock market. Column
(1b) gives the coefficient estimate for the CONTROL dummy. In contrast to the estimate for the
BRADY countries, the revaluation effect associated with the control group is economically
weak, 0.005, and statistically insignificant. Column (1c) provides the p-value from a two-sided
F-test of the hypothesis that the coefficient estimate on BRADY is equal to the coefficient
estimate on CONTROL. The p-value for this test is 0.001. The difference between the BRADY

22

estimate and the CONTROL estimate is statistically significant. In other words, the stock market
in BRADY countries rises by roughly 60 percentage points more than it does in the CONTROL
group.
The results using 9-month, 6-month, and 3-month windows are all consistent with the 12month estimates.

The coefficient estimate of BRADY ranges from 0.048 to 0.052 and is

statistically significant in every specification. Furthermore, the BRADY estimate is always
significantly larger than the estimate of CONTROL (except for the 3-month window). Row 2 of
Table VI (Panel A)—labeled, ‘Constant Mean’—presents estimates of equation (1) using a
constant intercept term, α , instead of country-specific intercept terms. The results are almost
identical to those in Row 1.

IVB. Controlling for World Stock Markets
Equation (1) provides a parsimonious baseline specification of abnormal returns, but it
does not allow for the influence of world stock markets on local returns. In order to do so, we
follow Kho, Lee and Stulz (2000) and use the international capital asset pricing model (ICAPM)
to measure the expected return on each country’s stock market index. Specifically, we now
estimate:
Rit = α i + β RtW + γ 1BRADYit + γ 2CONTROL + ε it ,

(2)

Where RtW is the real return in dollars on the Morgan Stanley Capital Market Index (MSCI) in
month t. While barriers to the international movement of capital may raise questions about the
economic assumption of an ICAPM, as a purely statistical matter, returns on world stock market
indices do have some predictive power for stock returns in the countries under consideration

23

(Henry 2000a).14
Row 3 of Table VI (Panel A) presents estimates of BRADY and CONTROL using
equation (2). Row 4 presents estimates that use real U.S. stock returns, RtUS , in place of RtW .
Row 5 presents estimates that use the real dollar return on the IFC Emerging Market index,

RtLDC , in place of RtW . Row 6 presents estimates that use all three sets of world stock returns
simultaneously. The results in Rows 3 through 6 perfectly mirror those under the benchmark
specification in Rows 1 and 2. The coefficient on BRADY is statistically significant under all
four ICAPM specifications. The point estimate ranges from 4.9 to 3.9 percent per month, and
the estimate of BRADY is significantly larger than the estimate of CONTROL in all but the 3month window estimates.

IVC. Other Robustness Checks
The estimates in Panel A of Table VI adjust for cross-country heteroscedasticity and
cross-country correlation, but they do not account for potential serial correlation in the error
terms. Hence, White standard errors may not be sufficient to ensure the reliability of the
estimates in Panel A. To address this concern, Panel B of Table VI re-estimates all of the
specifications in Panel A using Feasible Generalized Least Squares (FGLS). FGLS allows for
the possibility of serial correlation, in addition to correcting for cross-country heteroscedasticity.
The estimations using FGLS in Panel B yield the same conclusions as the OLS estimates
in Panel A. Every FGLS point estimate of BRADY in Panel B of Table VI is statistically
significant. The FGLS monthly point estimates of BRADY are smaller than those obtained

14

For conceptual discussions of the international capital asset pricing model see Frankel (1994); Stulz (1999a);
Tesar (1999); Tesar and Werner (1995); and Tesar and Werner (1998). For empirical evidence on the real effects of
increased capital market integration, see Henry (2000b).

24

using OLS, but they are still large.

The smallest point estimate for the 12-month window is

0.034— a total revaluation of greater than 40 percent. Furthermore, the coefficient on BRADY
remains significantly larger than the coefficient on CONTROL in all of the specifications except
for some of those that use 3-month windows.

V. Alternative Explanations
Section IV establishes the statistical robustness of the central result: In anticipation of the
announcement of debt relief agreements, there is an economically large and statistically
significant increase in the stock market. There are, however, many possible interpretations of
this fact. Section III argues that since markets are forward looking, stock prices in the debtor
countries should have priced in the effect of economic reforms at the time of the Baker Plan. If
the only “news” in the Brady Plan was the information about debt relief then debt relief may
plausibly be viewed as the proximate cause of the revaluation.
Plausibility, however, hangs on the validity of three key assumptions: (1) The market
believed that the Baker Plan would lead to reforms; (2) The depth and scope of reforms under
Brady were the same as those under Baker; and (3) The reforms went through as expected.
Figure 3 leaves little doubt that market participants in debtor countries viewed the Baker Plan as
a signal of future economic reforms—stock market values increased by an average of 22 percent
in real dollar terms over the 12-month period preceding the Baker Plan.15 So, the two key
questions are: Were the depth and scope of the reforms the same under Baker and Brady? And
did the reforms go through as anticipated? We now address each of these questions in turn.

15

The countries represented in Figure 3 match the countries represented in Figure 1 almost perfectly. Jordan is the
only country represented in Figure 1 that is not represented in Figure 3. This is because Jordan was not a Baker
country.

25

VA. Do Differences in Depth And Scope of Reforms Drive the Results?
If the Brady Plan called for structural changes that were not a part of the Baker Plan, then
the Brady Plan could contain important new information about reforms. Therefore, the estimates
in Section IV may be interpreted as the marginal effect of debt relief only if the reforms
implemented under Baker were not be radically different from those that continued under Brady.
Consistent with the earlier quote by American Express CEO James D. Robinson III (see
Section IIIA), a careful reading of both Baker and Brady’s speeches reveals no significant
differences between the reforms advocated under each plan.16 In fact, the reforms called for by
the two plans were so similar that they came to be summarized as the “Washington Consensus”
by John Williamson (1990)17. An exhaustive summary of the Washington Consensus is beyond
the scope of this paper—see Williamson’s paper for details—but again, the central idea was that
countries should stabilize inflation, privatize state-owned enterprises, liberalize trade, and permit
greater foreign direct investment.

VB. Did the Reforms Go Through As Anticipated?
There may have been a consensus about the desired set of reforms, but the very need for a
Brady Plan in addition to the Baker Plan suggests that at least some of the expected reforms did
not go through as planned.18 If the countries did not actually undertake the reforms they agreed
to implement under the Baker Plan, then signing a Brady agreement could signal to the markets a

16

See also the remarks by Stanley Fischer (Fischer, 1989 and 1990).
See also Fischer’s comments on Williamson’s paper (Fischer, 1990).
18
This is a complicated issue. The Baker Plan called for three things: reforms, financial support from the
International Financial Institutions (IFIs), and new money from the commercial banks. The Baker Plan assumed
that the banks would be willing to lend new money as long as countries implemented reforms. This assumption
turned out to be wrong. In spite of substantial—if not complete—reforms on the part of the debtors, the banks were
unwilling to extend new loans. There is a widely held view that the banks were unwilling to do so because of the
existing debt overhang (Cline, 1995).
17

26

new commitment to reform. Accordingly, the stock price increase in that case would reflect the
expected effects of both reforms and debt relief.
If the Brady Plan contained new information about reforms, then a more accurate
measure of the effect of debt relief might be the difference between the stock market reaction to
the Brady Plan and the reaction to the Baker Plan. The reaction to the Brady Plan measures the
effect of debt relief and reforms; the stock market reaction to the Baker Plan measures the effect
of reforms only. Thus, in principle, the difference between the Baker revaluation depicted in
Figure 3 (22 percentage points) and the Brady revaluation (60 percentage points) yields the
marginal effect of debt relief: 38 percentage points.
But viewing the difference in the market’s response to Baker and Brady as the marginal
effect of debt relief is also not without problems. The expected effect of reform on the stock
market is given by the benefit of reform conditional on success times the probability of success.
Even assuming that the conditional benefit of a successful reform was the same under Baker and
Brady, there may have been differing probabilities of success. For example, some argue that
debt relief gave governments the capital they needed to push through further reforms with a
populace that had grown weary with austerity measures and structural adjustment.19 If this is the
case, then the difference between the stock market response to Baker and Brady reflects both the
effect of debt relief and the higher probability of successful reforms under Brady.

VC. Direct Controls for the Effect of Economic Reforms
We deal directly with the concern that economic reforms implemented around the time of
the Brady Plan may still have contained some “news” by including dummy variables for reforms

19

See the remarks by Herzog (1989) and Sarbanes (1989).

27

in all of our earlier regressions. There is sufficient heterogeneity in the timing of the economic
reforms (Table V) to allow us to control directly for their effect on stock prices. To do so, we
construct a series of reform dummies for each country: TRADE; PRIVATIZE; LIBERALIZE.
These variables take on the value 1 during the month a reform is announced and in each of the
preceding 11 months. We then estimate the following regression:
Rit = α i + β RtW + γ 1BRADYit + γ 2CONTROLit + γ 3TRADEit + γ 4 PRIVATEit + γ 5 LIBERALIZEit + ε it
(3).

Table VII presents the results. The coefficient on BRADY is significant at the 1 percent
or 5 percent level for every window, and is significantly different from the coefficient on

CONTROL in every specification. The results are also consistent with the view that stock prices
incorporated the effect of economic reforms long before the Brady Plan was announced.
Stock market liberalizations are the only economic reform implemented around the time
of the Brady Plan that have any effect on the markets. It is no coincidence that stock market
liberalizations are also the only reform in our regression that was not a part of the Washington
Consensus.

The Baker Plan called for the liberalization of foreign direct investment;

liberalization of portfolio equity investment is not directly mentioned. In other words, stock
market liberalizations were a surprise. Consistent with a number of papers, the stock market
liberalization dummy is significant for the [-6, 0] and [-3, -1] windows (Henry, 2000a, b, 2003).
Because every debt relief agreement closely coincides with an IMF agreement, we cannot
disentangle the debt relief effect by inserting into equation (3) a dummy variable for IMF
programs that coincide with debt relief announcements. An IMF dummy constructed in that way
would be collinear with the BRADY dummy and present the attendant econometric problems.
Therefore, we adopt a different tack. We examine whether the stock market responds to IMF
agreements that are not accompanied by debt relief.
28

We do so by constructing for each country a list of all IMF programs that did not occur
within a year (before or after) of the announcement of its Brady agreement. We then create a
dummy variable, IMFPROGRAM, which takes on the value one for all such programs, and
estimate the following regression:
Rit = α + β RtW + γ 1IMFPROGRAM it + ε it .

(4)

Following the earlier specifications, we estimate 12-month, 9-month, 6-month, and 3-month
windows. If the stock market responds positively to IMF agreements that are not accompanied
by debt relief, then the estimate of γ 1 should be positive and significant.
There is no evidence that the stock market responds positively to IMF agreements that are
not associated with a Brady debt relief agreement. The coefficient estimate of IMFPROGRAM
is negative and statistically insignificant in every specification. The estimate for the 12-month
window is –0.016; the estimate for the 9-month window is -0.011; the estimate for the 6-month
window is -0.004; the estimate for the 3-month window is -0.027.20

VI. Why Do Market Values Rise?
Do the debtor country stock price increases reflect an irrational exuberance about the
efficacy of debt relief? Or, do they rationally forecast important subsequent changes in the
countries’ economic fundamentals? Theory points to three pieces of data that can help answer
the question: the net resource transfer (NRT), investment, and growth.
The NRT is the net flow of real resources into a country. In theory, LDCs should
experience positive NRTs, as the rate of return in these countries should be higher than in rich

20

The insignificance of the IMFPROGRAM variable is consistent with evidence that the market responds positively
to IMF agreements, only when they are announced in the midst of high inflation (Henry, 2002).

29

countries. However, the NRT may suddenly turn negative if adverse shocks or poor economic
management: (1) drive creditors to call in existing loans; and (2) make potential new creditors
unwilling to lend.
Because the government pays its external debt by taxing domestic firms and households,
the private sector’s expected future tax burden increases sharply when the country’s NRT
suddenly turns negative. The higher future tax burden discourages investment and results in
creditors being able to recover less than they would if some of the debt was forgiven. By
reducing the implicit marginal tax rate on expected future cash flows, debt relief can remove the
debt overhang, thereby restoring positive NRTs, investment, and growth (Krugman, 1989; Sachs,
1989).

VIA. Is There a Change in NRT, Investment, and Growth?
Table VIII reveals a clear association between the Brady debt restructuring and changes
in the sign of the NRT. In every one of the years from [-18, -9] the median NRT to the Brady
countries is positive. At the onset of the Debt Crisis (roughly year –7), the NRT turns negative
and remains so until the Brady Plan (year 0). After the Brady Plan, the NRT turns positive and
remains so for the rest of the sample. The table also shows that the change in the sign of the
NRT occurs uniformly across almost all Brady countries.21
Figure 4 shows that there was also an investment boom in the aftermath of the Brady
Plan. In the five years prior to debt relief, the average growth rate of the capital stock in the
Brady countries was 1.6 percent per year. In the five years following debt relief, the capital
stock grew at a rate of 3.5 percent per year. The difference between the two growth rates—1.9

21

In Poland, the NRT turned positive in 1991—before its debt relief plan was unveiled. However, following
Poland’s plan, there was a three-fold increase in the level of NRT.

30

percentage points—is not small. Assuming a standard production function in which capital
accounts for about one-third of output, a 1.9 percentage point increase in the capital stock raises
growth by almost one percentage point per year—0.63 percentage points, to be exact (one-third
times 1.9).
Growth rates also increased. Figure 5 plots the average deviation of the growth rate of
per capita GDP from its country-specific mean in event time for all 16 Brady countries versus
that of the control group. The message is clear. The Brady countries experience abnormally
high growth rates in each of the five years following the Brady plan. There is no significant
change in the average growth rate of the control group.

VIB. Does the Stock Market Rationally Forecast the Changes?
We also examine whether the stock market predicts the change in NRT and growth.
Table IX demonstrates a strong correlation between the sign of the cumulative abnormal return
on a country’s stock market and the change in the sign of the NRT. In 9 of 10 countries, the sign
of the cumulative abnormal return matches the change in the sign of the NRT.
Table IX also shows a strong correlation between the sign of a country’s cumulative
abnormal return on a country’s stock market and the sign of its growth deviation. In 9 of 10
countries, the sign of the cumulative abnormal return matches the sign of abnormal GDP growth
in the year following the Brady Plan. In 9 of 10 countries, the sign of the cumulative abnormal
return matches the sign of the cumulative abnormal GDP growth for the period [0, +2] and
similarly in 8 of the 10 countries for the period [0, +5].
VIC. What Happens in the Long Run?

31

Ongoing commitment to economic reforms is essential for the long-run effectiveness of
debt restructuring agreements. Figure 6 illustrates the point. In the three countries in which
reforms stalled temporarily—Jordan, Nigeria, and the Philippines—the initial rise in stock
market valuations disappears within a year.
More generally, it is interesting to ask how stock markets in the Brady countries perform
relative to the control group in the years subsequent to the Brady Plan. Table X shows that the
average three-year and five-year return on the stock market in the Brady countries exceeds that
of the control group. Statistical inference about stock returns over long horizons in volatile
markets is a thorny task. Accordingly, we make no attempt to do so. Nonetheless, it is worth
noting that the overall pattern in Table X is not inconsistent with the investment and growth
profiles of the Brady countries relative to their control group counterpart (Figures 4 and 5).

VII. Do the Results Reflect a Wealth Transfer to the Countries from the Banks?
The results suggest that debt relief generates large wealth gains for the debtor countries,
but it is important to ask whether these gains came at the expense of the western commercial
banks and their shareholders. Figure 2 suggests that debt relief is not a zero sum game, but we
now examine the result more thoroughly.
Since Figure 2 is based on numbers from only 11 commercial banks, we begin by
checking whether a large stock price increase for one or two banks drives the result. Table X
lists the name of each exposed bank, its loan exposure as a fraction of bank capital, its stock
price increase during the 12 months leading up to March 1989, and its median 12-month stock
price increase from 1980 to 1995. All 11 commercial banks experienced stock price increases
that were larger than their median 12-month stock price increase. The probability of this

32

randomly occurring is 0.0005 percent.22
We also checked the result by running a series of panel regressions. The specifications
are identical to those used in Tables VI and VII with two important differences. First, instead of
debtor country stock returns on the left-hand side, we now have a panel of monthly stock returns
of 20 US commercial banks: 11 that have significant LDC loan exposure and 9 that do not
(Demirguc-Kunt and Huizinga, 1993). Second, the two dummy variables are now EXPOSED
and NONEXPOSED. For each of the 11 US commercial banks with heavy LDC loan exposure,
the variable EXPOSED takes on the value 1 during the 12-month window preceding the official
Brady announcement in March of 1989 and is 0 otherwise. The variable NONEXPOSED is
analogously defined for the 9 banks without LDC loan exposure.
All regressions were estimated using robust standard errors. The results confirm the
picture. The coefficient on EXPOSED—the monthly abnormal return associated with the Brady
Plan—ranges from 0.025 to 0.027 in alternative specifications and is significant at the 1-percent
confidence level. Multplying the coefficient estimate of 0.025 by 12 gives a total abnormal
return of 30 percent, which is consistent with the magnitude in Figure 2. The coefficient on

NONEXPOSED is statistically and economically insignificant in almost every specification.
Having confirmed the statistical significance of Figure 2, it is useful to consider the total net
wealth effect of the Brady Plan—the sum of the benefits to shareholders less any costs of
implementing the plan.
The costs of the restructuring were small (Section I, page 8). On the benefit side, the
total market capitalization of debtor country stock markets rose by a total of 42 billion dollars.
Importantly, 42 billion represents only the wealth effect on the publicly traded corporate sector,

22

See Demirguc-Kunt and Huizinga, (1993) for a detailed analysis of the commercial banks stock price reaction to
the Brady Deal.

33

which constitutes a relatively small fraction of economic activity in these countries. Since debt
relief seems to have positive effects on the rest of the economy (Section VI) 42 billion dollars
probably underestimates the total benefit to the debtor countries. Similarly, because we do not
have data on the Japanese, German, and British banks that had significant LDC exposure, the
13.3 billion dollar increase in the market capitalization of US banks probably understates the
total wealth gains to developed country shareholders. Hence, a conservative estimate suggests
that the Brady Plan generated a 55.3 billion dollar wealth increase of which 42 billion accrued to
shareholders in the debtor countries and 13.3 billion went to the creditors.

VIII. Conclusion
Understanding why the Brady Plan produced rising asset prices, increased investment and
faster growth is pivotal to understanding the circumstances under which debt restructuring can be
expected to yield efficiency gains.

The Brady Plan worked because debt relief was the

appropriate policy response for a group of middle-income LDCs where debt overhang genuinely
stood in the way of profitable new lending and investment. Hence, the key questions for the
current debate over collective action clauses and sovereign debt restructuring would seem to be
the following: (1) How to determine if a country suffers from debt overhang; and (2) Will
allowing a debtor country to unilaterally invoke a restructuring procedure yield the same kinds of
efficiency gains that were achieved under the multilateral framework of the Brady Plan?
While the evidence suggests that that there can be large efficiency gains to debt
restructuring in middle-income LDCs, it is not clear that the results can be used to evaluate the
prospects for debt relief in the world’s poorest countries. For instance, debt relief may not yield
efficiency gains for the world’s highly indebted poor countries (HIPCs), because it is not obvious

34

that they suffer from debt overhang. Instead, the more conspicuous obstacle to investment and
growth in the HIPCs seems to be weak economic institutions and infrastructure (Arslanalp and
Henry 2004).

35

References
Arslanalp, Serkan, and Peter Blair Henry. 2004. “The World’s Poorest Countries: Aid or Debt
Relief.” in Chris Jochnick and Fraser A. Preston, eds. Sovereign Debt at the Crossroads.
Oxford University Press, Forthcoming.
Baker, James A. III. 1985. “U.S. Proposal on International Debt Crisis,” Hearing Before the
Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs, House of Representatives, 99th
Congress, 1st Session, October 22, 1985, Serial No. 99-39 (Washington: U.S.
Government Printing Office)
Baker, James A. III. 1986. “Statement of the Honorable James A. Baker III, Secretary of the
Treasury of the United States Before the Joint Annual Meeting of the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, October 8, 1995, Seoul, Korea” in Aliquo, Nancy
A. Treasury Secretary James Baker’s "Program for Sustained Growth for the
International Debt Crisis: Three Steps towards Global Financial Security," Dickinson
Journal of International Law 4.2 (Spring 1986): 275-315.
Boehmer, Ekkehart and William L. Megginson (1990). “Determinants of Secondary Market
Prices for Developing Country Syndicated Loans” Journal of Finance, Vol. 45, No. 5,
pp. 1517-1540.
Bolton, Patrick and David A. Skeel, Jr. 2003. "Inside the Black Box: How Should a Sovereign
Bankruptcy Framework be Structured?" mimeo, Princeton University,
www.princeton.edu/~pbolton/InsidetheBlack.pdf
Brady, Nicholas F (1989). Remarks to the Brookings Institution and the Bretton Woods
Committee Conference on Third World Debt in Third World Debt: The Next Phase
Edward R. Fried and Philip H. Trezise editors, Brookings Dialogues on Public Policy.
The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.
Bruno, Michael, and William Easterly. 1996. Inflation’s children: Tales of crises that
beget reforms. American Economic Review, 86 (2), 213-217.
Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff (1989a). "A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign
Debt,” The Journal of Political Economy, 97, 155-178.
Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff (1989b). "Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?”
American Economic Review, 79, 43-50.
Cline, William. 1995. International Debt Reexamined. Washington, DC: Institute for
International Economics.
Coase, Ronald, 1960, "The Problem of Social Cost" , Journal of Law and
Economics, 3(1): 1-44.

36

Collins, Susan M. 1990. Lessons from Korean economic growth. American
Economic Review, 80, (2), 104-107.
Darity, William, Jr. and Bobbie L. Horn. 1988. The Loan Pushers: The Role of Commercial
Banks in the International Debt Crisis. Cambridge: Ballinger Publications.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Harry Huizinga. 1993. “Official Credits to Developing Countries:
Implicit Transfers to the Banks,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 25, No. 3,
Part 1. (Aug., 1993), pp. 430-444.
Easterly, William. 2001a. The Elusive Quest for Growth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz (1981). “Debt With Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and
Empirical Analysis.” Review of Economic Studies, No. 48, pp. 289-309.
Edwards, Sebastian (1984). “LDC Foreign Borrowing and Default Risk: An Empirical
Investigation, 1976-80” The American Economic Review, Vol. 74, No. 4., pp. 726-734.
Fischer, Stanley. 1987. "Sharing the Burden of the International Debt Crisis" American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 1987, 165-170
Fischer, Stanley (1989). “The Key Question is the Bargaining” in Alternative Solutions
to Developing-Country Debt Problems. Rudi Dornbusch, John H. Makin and
David Zlowe eds. American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research,
Washington, D.C.
Fischer, Stanley. 1990. Comments on “What Washington Means by Policy Reform,” chapter 2 in
John Williamson, ed., Latin American Adjustment: How Much has Happened, Institute
for International Economics, Washington, April 1990, pages 25-28.
Frankel, Jeffrey. 1994. Introduction, in Jeffrey A. Frankel, ed.: The Internationalization of
Equity Markets, (University of Chicago Press: Chicago and London), 231-71.
Froot, Kenneth A., Scharfstein, David S. and Jeremy C. Stein. 1989. LDC Debt: Forgiveness,
Indexation, and Investment Incentives." The Journal of Finance,Vol. 44 (5), 1335-1350.
Henry, Peter Blair 2000a. Stock market liberalization, economic reform, and emerging
market equity prices, Journal of Finance, 55, 529-64.
Henry, Peter Blair 2000b. Do stock market liberalizations cause investment booms? Journal of
Financial Economics, 58, 301-34.
Henry, Peter Blair 2002. Is Disinflation Good for the Stock Market? Journal of Finance, 57,
1617-48.
Henry, Peter Blair 2003. Capital Account Liberalization, The Cost of Capital, and Economic

37

Growth. American Economic Review, May.
Herzog, Jesús Silva. 1989. “Concluding Impressions” in Third World Debt: The Next Phase
Edward R. Fried and Philip H. Trezise editors, Brookings Dialogues on Public Policy.
The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. page 97-99
James, Harold (1996). International Monetary Cooperation Since Bretton Woods, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Jubilee2000. 1999. Hand-over of 17 million signatures to Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder
in Cologne. http://www.jubilee2000uk.org/jubilee2000/news/petition2306.html.
(June).
Kho, Bong-Chan, Dong Lee and René M. Stulz. 2000. U.S. banks, crises, and
bailouts: From Mexico to LTCM. American Economic Review, 90 (2),28-31.
Krugman, Paul. 1988. Financing Versus Forgiving a Debt Overhang. Journal of
Development Economics 29 (November): 253-268.
Krugman, Paul. (1989). “Market-Based Debt Reduction Schemes.” In
Analytical Issues in Debt. edited by Jacob Frenkel, Michael Dooley, and
P. Wickham. Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Megginson, William L. and Jeffrey Netter (2001). “From State to Market: A Survey of Empirical
Studies on Privatization,” Journal of Economic Literature Vol. 39, pp. 321-389.
Myers, Stewart C. 1977. “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing,” Journal of Financial
Economics, Volume 5, Issue 2, November 1977, Pages 147-175
Obstfeld, Maurice and Ken Rogoff (1996). Foundations of International
Macroeconomics. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
O’Neill, Paul. 2002. “Caring Greatly and Succeeding Greatly: Producing Results in
Africa,” Remarks at Georgetown University in Washington, DC. June 5 2002.
http://www.foreignpolicy.com/issue_julyaug_2002/oneill.html
Perotti, Enrico and P. Van Oijen (2001). "Privatization, Market Development and Political Risk
in Emerging Economies," Journal of International Money and Finance,20 (1), p. 43-69.
Robinson, James D. 1989. “Concluding Impressions” in Third World Debt: The Next Phase
Edward R. Fried and Philip H. Trezise editors, Brookings Dialogues on Public Policy.
The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. page 101-103
Sachs, Jeffrey, and Andrew Warner. 1995. “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 1-95.

38

Sachs, Jeffrey. 1989. “The Debt Overhang of Developing Countries.” in Debt
Stabilization and Development, edited by Guillermo A. Calvo, Ronald Findlay,
Pentti Kouri, and Jorge Braga de Macedo. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Sarbanes, Paul S. 1989. “A Reexamination of the Debt Strategy” in Third World Debt: The Next
Phase Edward R. Fried and Philip H. Trezise editors, Brookings Dialogues on Public
Policy. The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. page 80-84
Shleifer, Andrei. 2003. "Will the Sovereign Debt Market Survive?" American Economic Review
May 2003.
Stulz, René M., 1999a, International portfolio flows and security markets, in Martin
Feldstein, ed.: International Capital Flows (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago).
Tesar, Linda L., 1999, The role of equity in international capital flows, in Martin
Feldstein, ed.: International Capital Flows (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).
Tesar, Linda L., and Ingrid M. Werner, 1998, The Internationalization of securities
markets since the 1987 crash, in Robert E. Litan and Anthony M. Santomero
Eds. Brookings Wharton Papers on Financial Services (Brookings Institution
Press, Washington).
Tesar, Linda L., and Ingrid M. Werner, 1995, U.S. equity investment in emerging
stock markets, World Bank Economic Review, 9, (4), 109-129.
The Vatican. 1998. Pope John Paul II’s statement on debt relief given in Rome, at Saint
Peter's, on 29 November 1998. Bull of Indiction of the Great Jubilee of the Year
2000 “Incarnationis Mysterium” (The Mystery of the Incarnation).
http://www.vatican.va/jubilee_2000/docs/documents/hf_jp-ii_doc_30111998_bollajubilee_en.html.
(November).
Williamson, John. 1990. "What Washington Means by Policy Reform,” chapter 2 in John
Williamson, ed., Latin American Adjustment: How Much has Happened, Institute for
International Economics, Washington, April 1990, pages 7-20.
Williamson, John. 1994. The Political Economy of Policy Reform. Institute for International
Economics. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 1994. Trends in Developing Economies. Washington: World Bank.

39

Figure 1. Debtor country stock prices rise in anticipation of debt relief.
0.7

Cumulative Change in Real Stock Prices

0.6

0.5

0.4

Brady Countries
Control Group

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
-13

-12

-11

-10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

-0.1
Month Relative to Announcement

Figure 1. Debtor country stock prices rise in anticipation of debt relief. The variable on the y-axis is the continuously compounded abnormal percentage
change. 0 is the month in which the debt relief plan was announced. The solid line is a plot of the cumulative residuals from a panel regression of the real dollar
return from 10 Brady countries with stock market data available on a constant and 9 country-specific dummies. The dashed line is a plot of the cumulative
residuals from a panel regression of the real dollar return from 16 control group countries on a constant and 15 country-specific dummies.

Figure 2. Stock prices of banks with LDC loan exposure rise in anticipation of debt relief.

0.4

Cumulative Percentage Change in Real Stock Prices

0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15

Exposed Banks
Non-Exposed Banks

0.1
0.05
0
-13

-12

-11

-10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
Month Relative to Announcement

Figure 2. Stock prices of banks with LDC loan exposure rise in anticipation of debt relief. The variable on the y-axis is the continuously compounded
abnormal percentage change. 0 is the month (March of 1989) in which the Brady plan was announced. The solid line is a plot of the cumulative residuals from a
panel regression of the real dollar return from 11 banks with high LDC loan exposure on a constant and 10 bank-specific dummies. The dashed line is a plot of
the cumulative residuals from a panel regression of the real dollar return from 9 control group banks with no LDC loan exposure on a constant and 8 bankspecific dummies.

41

Figure 3. Debtor country stock prices rise in anticipation of reforms under the Baker Plan.
0.3

Cumulative Percentage Change in Real Stock Prices

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1
Baker Countries
0.05

0
-13

-12

-11

-10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

-0.05

-0.1

-0.15
Month Relative to Announcement

Figure 3. Debtor country stock prices rise in anticipation of reforms under the Baker Plan. The variable on the y-axis is the continuously compounded
abnormal percentage change. 0 is the month in which the Baker Plan was announced. The series in bold color is a plot of the cumulative residuals from a panel
regression of the real local currency return on a constant and 10 country-specific dummies (for the 11 Baker countries that later became Brady countries).

42

Figure 4. Investment in the Debtor Countries surges following the Brady Plan.
0.09

0.04

0.085
0.035
0.08

Percentage Change

0.03
0.075

0.07

0.025

0.065
0.02
0.06
0.015
0.055

0.01

0.05
-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

Year Relative to Announcement

2

3

4

5

Brady (LHS)
Control (RHS)

Figure 4. Investment in debtor countries surges following the Brady Plan. The variable on the y-axis is the percentage change in capital stock. 0 is the year
in which the debt relief plan was announced. The series in bold color is a plot of the residuals from a panel regression of the capital stock growth rate from all 16
Brady countries on a constant and 15 country-specific dummies. The series in light color is a plot of the residuals from a panel regression of the capital stock
growth rate from 16 control group countries on a constant and 15 country-specific dummies.

43

Figure 5. GDP growth in the debtor countries increases following debt relief.
0.035

Percentage Point Deviation From Trend Growth Rate

0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015
Brady Countries
Control Group
0.01

0.005

0
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

-0.005

-0.01
Year Relative to Announcement

Figure 5. GDP growth in the debtor countries increases following debt relief. The variable on the y-axis is the abnormal percentage deviation from the trend
growth rate. 0 is the year in which the debt relief plan was announced. The series in bold color is a plot of the residuals from a panel regression of the real GDP
growth rate from all 16 Brady countries on a constant and 15 country-specific dummies. The series in light color is a plot of the residuals from a panel regression
of the real GDP growth rate from 16 control group countries on a constant and 15 country-specific dummies.

44

Figure 6. The stock market gains evaporate in countries that do not stick to reforms.
0.8

0.7

Cumulative Change in Real Stock Prices

0.6

0.5

0.4
Brady Reformers
Brady Non-Reformers
0.3

0.2

0.1

0
-13 -12 -11 -10 -9

-8 -7

-6 -5

-4

-3 -2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12

-0.1
Month Relative to Announcement

Figure 6. The stock market gains evaporate in countries that do not stick to reforms. The variable on the y-axis is the continuously compounded abnormal
percentage change. 0 is the month in which the debt relief plan was announced. The series in bold color is a plot of the cumulative residuals from a panel
regression of the real dollar return from 7 reformer Brady countries with stock market data available (Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, Poland, and
Venezuela) on a constant and 6 country-specific dummies. The series in light color is a plot of the cumulative residuals from a panel regression of the real dollar
return from 3 non-reformer Brady countries with stock market data available (Jordan, Nigeria, and Philippines) on a constant and 2 country-specific dummies.

45

Table I. A Typical Country Restructures Its External Debt Several Times Between the 1982 Mexican Default and Its Own Brady Deal.
Number of Restructurings
First Restructuring Date
Last Restructuring Date
Brady Deal Announcement
From 1982 to Brady
After 1982
Before the Brady Deal
Date
Argentina
2
August 1985
August 1987
April 1992
Bolivia

1

July 1988

July 1988

March 1993

Brazil

4

February 1983

November 1988

August 1992

Bulgaria

0

N.A.

N.A.

November 1993

Costa Rica

2

September 1983

May 1985

November 1989

Dominican Republic

2

December 1983

February 1986

May 1993

Ecuador

3

October 1983

November 1987

May 1994

Jordan

1

September 1989

September 1989

June 1993

Mexico

5

August 1983

August 1987

September 1989

Nigeria

2

November 1987

March 1989

March 1991

Panama

1

October 1985

October 1985

May 1995

Peru

1

July 1983

July 1983

October 1995

Philippines

2

January 1986

December 1987

August 1989

Poland

6

April 1982

July 1988

March 1994

Uruguay

3

July 1983

March 1988

November 1990

Venezuela

2

February 1986

September 1988

June 1990

The first column lists all the countries that signed Brady deals. The second column lists the number of debt restructurings that took place in the country after Mexico’s default in
August of 1982 and before the country’s Brady agreement was announced. The sources for the information on country restructuring dates are: World Bank (1997) and Global
Development Finance. The last column lists the date on which each country’s Brady Deal was announced

Table II. The Largest Percentage of the Debt Restructured Under the Brady Plan Was Denominated in Dollars.
Dollar
Yen
Mark
Pound
Multiple
Argentina
56
7
9
1
21

Other
7

Bolivia

31

14

9

1

35

10

Brazil

62

8

7

2

11

10

Bulgaria

46

8

30

0

2

15

Costa Rica

67

2

2

0

26

4

Dominican Republic

73

4

1

0

21

1

Ecuador

54

10

3

1

28

5

Jordan

40

18

7

7

10

17

Mexico

59

11

4

4

15

8

Nigeria

36

9

15

12

10

18

Panama

71

10

0

0

14

4

Peru

42

15

4

1

13

25

Philippines

41

31

2

1

20

6

Poland

47

4

10

3

5

32

Uruguay

65

5

2

4

23

2

Venezuela

78

1

7

2

7

6

All

54

10

7

2

16

11

The first column lists all the countries that signed Brady deals. The second column lists the percentage of public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) debt that was denominated in
dollars at the time of the Brady Plan. The following columns list the percentages of debt that were denominated in yens, marks, pounds, multiple currencies, and other currencies.
The data on currency denominations of debt are obtained from World Bank’s Global Development Finance Data Base.

47

Table III. The Brady Deal Reduces Debt Burdens, Lowers Spreads, and Lengthens Maturities.
Average
Average
Quantity Forgiven
Average
Country
Quantity
Spread After Maturity
(Billions of $U.S.)
Spread
Restructured
Before
Before
(Billions of $U.S.)
Argentina
29.34
8.43
13/16
13/16
19

Average
Maturity After
30

Bolivia

0.18

0.14

NA

(debt buyback)

NA

(debt buyback)

Brazil

50.00

14.00

13/16

13/16

20

30

Bulgaria

6.80

3.40

n.a.

13/16

n.a.

30

Costa Rica

1.61

0.98

1 5/8

(debt buyback)

10

(debt buyback)

D. Republic

0.80

0.40

1 3/8

13/16

13

30

Ecuador

7.60

3.42

15/16

13/16

19

30

Jordan

0.80

0.26

13/16

13/16

11

30

Mexico

47.17

14.15

13/16

13/16

20

30

Nigeria

5.34

2.60

7/8

(debt buyback)

20

(debt buyback)

Panama

3.94

0.80

1 3/8

13/16

12

30

Peru

7.99

3.20

2 1/4

13/16

8

30

Philippines

6.60

2.38

7/8

(debt buyback)

17

(debt buyback)

Poland

14.00

6.30

15/16

13/16

15

30

Uruguay

1.60

0.50

7/8

(debt buyback)

17

(debt buyback)

Venezuela

19.01

3.76

7/8

13/16

13

30

Sample

202.78

64.72

17/16

13/16

15

30

The data are obtained from World Bank’s Global Development Finance Data Base, IMF’s International Capital Markets Report, and IMF’s Private Market Financing for
Developing Countries Report.

48

Table IV. News About Debt Relief Diffuses Slowly.
Argentina
July 23, 1991: The International Monetary Fund approves a 1 billion dollar stand-by loan (Economist
Intelligence Unit, QER).
September 20, 1991: Argentina's economy minister, Domingo Cavallo, comes to Washington to jump-start
negotiations on the country's $61bn debt (Financial Times, September 20, 1991). Argentina's main creditors
agree to a restructuring of $ 1.5 billion in debt (Washington Post).
March 31, 1992: Argentina secures a $3.15bn extended facility fund loan from the IMF. Approval of the loan is
important for securing a restructuring with the creditor banks. Some $900m of the funds can be set aside for use
as enhancements (Financial Times, April 1, 1992).
April 7, 1992: Argentina and its creditor banks reach an agreement. Banks will forgive about $8 billion of the
$23 billion they are owed and Argentina will repay its past-due interest and begin repayment of its remaining
debt (New York Times, April 8, 1992).
Nigeria
October 2, 1990: The resolution of the five-month deadlock over rescheduling terms for Nigeria's $5.5bn
commercial bank debt appears likely (Financial Times, October 3, 1990).
November 2, 1990: Nigeria and its creditor banks fail to agree on a rescheduling package after a three-day
meeting in London (Financial Times).
February 26, 1991: Talks between Nigeria and its creditor banks begin in London. The Nigerian military
government plans to restructure the country's estimated $35bn external debt before next October's return to
civilian rule (Financial Times, February 26, 1991).
March 2, 1991: Nigeria and its commercial bank creditors agree in principle on a rescheduling and buy-back
agreement covering $5.8bn of debt (Financial Times, March 4, 1991; EIU Country Report–No: 2 1991, pp 1, 12).
Venezuela
July 25, 1989: Nicholas Brady says that the Mexican deal will set a “pattern” for dealing with the debt problems
of other nations. Brady puts the Philippines, Venezuela and Costa Rica at the head of the list (July 25, 1989,
Washington Post).
March 21, 1990: Venezuela and its creditor banks reach an agreement on the basic terms of a deal. This is the
fourth such deal under the Brady Plan (New York Times).
June 29, 1990: Venezuela finalizes negotiations with its creditor banks. The deal includes more options than any
other Brady deal so far (Financial Times).

Table V. Brady Deals Are Preceded by a Number of Economic Reforms.
Stabilization (IMF
Country
Brady Plan
Program)
Trade Liberalization
Argentina
April 1992
March 1992 (EFF) April 1991

Privatization
February 1988

Capital Account
Liberalization
November 1989

1985

1992

NA

Bolivia

March 1993

Brazil

August 1992

January 1992 (SB)

April 1990

July 1990

March 1988

Bulgaria

November 1993

NA

NA

1991

NA

Costa Rica

November 1989

NA

1986

1988

NA

Dominican
Republic

May 1993

NA

Closed

1999

NA

Ecuador

May 1994

May 1994

January 1991

February 1993

January 1993

Jordan

June 1993

May 1994 (EFF)

1965

January 1995

January 1978

Mexico

September 1989

May 1989 (EFF)

July 1986

November 1988

May 1989

Nigeria

March 1991

January 1991 (SB)

Closed

July 1988

Closed

Panama

May 1995

NA

1990

NA

Peru

October 1995

March 1993 (EFF)

March 1991

March 1991

NA (Open Before 95)

Philippines

August 1989

May 1989 (EFF)

November 1988

June 1988

May 1986

Poland

March 1994

August 1994 (SB)

1990

1990*

1990

Uruguay

November 1990

1990

1990

NA

Venezuela

June 1990

May 1989**

April 1991

January 1990

June 1989 (EFF)

This table lists the announcement dates of major economic events for the Brady countries. The first column identifies these countries. The second column lists the
month and year of each country’s Brady Plan. These dates are obtained from Cline (1995), Lexis/Nexis, and various issues of the Economist Intelligence Unit. The
third column lists IMF plans that are announced shortly preceding or following Brady Plans. These dates are obtained from Henry (2002) and various issues of the IMF
Annual Reports. A Standby agreement with the IMF is noted as SB and an Extended Fund Facility agreement is noted as EFF. The next three columns list the dates of
the beginnings of major economic reforms. The trade liberalization dates are obtained from Sachs and Werner (1995). The privatization dates are obtained from the
Privatization Data Base maintained by the World Bank. The capital account liberalization dates are obtained from Henry (2003). *Poland switched to a market
economy in 1990, simultaneously setting up a stock market and opening up to foreign investment. **Venezuela reversed its trade liberalization reforms in 1993.

Table VI. Brady Countries Experience a Significant Increase in Market Valuation Before Debt Relief Announcements. The
Control Countries Do Not. Panel A: White-Corrected OLS Estimates.
12-Month Window
9-Month Window
6-Month Window
3-Month Window
(1a)
RightHand-Side
Variables

Brady

(1b)

(1c)

Brady>
Control Control?

(2a)
Brady

(2b)

(2c)

Brady>
Control Control?

(3a)

(3b)

(3c)

Brady

Control

Brady>
Control?

(4a)
Brady

(4b)

(4c)

Brady>
Control Control?

CountrySpecific
Mean

.050***
(.014)

.004
(.004)

0.001

.050***
(.015)

.010**
(.005)

0.011

.048***
(.016)

.014***
(.005)

0.041

.048*
(.026)

.009
(.007)

0.15

Constant
Mean

.049***
(.013)

.005
(.004)

0.001

.051***
(.015)

.009**
(.004)

0.005

.049***
(.016)

.013***
(.0045858)

0.022

.045*
(.025)

.006
(.007)

0.13

World

.047***
(.014)

.002
(.005)

0.002

.047***
(.016)

.009*
(.005)

0.023

.045***
(.016)

.014***
(.005)

0.080

.049*
(.025)

.004
(.007)

0.09

US

.046***
(.013)

-.000
(.005)

0.001

.046***
(.016)

.007
(.005)

0.018

.043***
(.016)

.014***
(.005)

0.076

.048*
(026)

.004
(.007)

0.10

LDC

.046***
(.014)

-.008
(.006)

0.000

.043***
(.016)

.001
(.005)

0.011

.039**
(.016)

.005
(.005)

0.0480

.052**
(.024)

.010
(.007)

0.10

ALL

.047***
(.014)

-.007
(.006)

0.000

.044***
(.016)

.002
(.005)

0.011

.039**
(.016)

.005
(.005)

0.0451

.052**
(.025)

.009
(.007)

0.09

The estimation procedure used is Ordinary Least Squares. The stock market data are monthly from December 1979 to July 1999 for all the countries in the Brady and Control
groups. Stock market data are unavailable before December 1984 for Nigeria, Philippines, Venezuela, Columbia, Malaysia, Pakistan; before December 1986 for Turkey;
before December 1989 for Indonesia; before December 1992 for Peru, Poland, China, Hungary, South Africa, Sri Lanka; before September 1993 for Ecuador; and before
December 1993 for the Czech Republic. The left-hand-side variable is real, dollar-denominated stock returns. Brady is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for each
month during a particular event window preceding a Brady plan. Control is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for each country in the control group during the
months preceding Brady Plans. The column labeled ‘12-month Window’ presents estimates of Brady and Control using an event window that begins 12 months prior to the
announcement of the Brady Plan and ends with the announcement month. The analogous definition applies to the columns labeled ‘9-month Window,’ ‘6-Month Window’ and
‘3-Month Window.’ For each event window, six regression specifications are estimated. The first row presents estimates of Brady and Control using the benchmark
specification that allows for country-specific intercept terms. Row 2 presents estimates using an alternative specification that allows for only a single intercept term. Row 3
presents estimates using the ICAPM specification that introduces the World stock return index as an additional explanatory variable. Row 4 presents estimates using the US
stock return index instead of the World stock index. Row 5 presents estimates using the LDC stock return index instead. Finally, row 6 presents estimates that use all three sets
of indices simultaneously. The column labeled Brady>Control shows the p-value for a test that the coefficient on Brady is statistically larger than the coefficient on Control.
White-corrected standard errors are given in parenthesis. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels,
respectively.

51

Table VI. Brady Countries Experience a Significant Increase in Market Valuation Before Debt Relief Announcements. The Control Countries
Do Not. Panel B: FGLS Estimates.
12-Month Window
(1a)

9-Month Window

6-Month Window

3-Month Window

(1b)

(1c)

(2a)

(2b)

(2c)

(3a)

(3b)

(3c)

(4a)

(4b)

(4c)

Brady

Control

Brady>
Control?

Brady

Control

Brady>
Control?

Brady

Control

Brady>
Control?

Brady

Control

Brady>
Control?

CountrySpecific
Mean

.041***
(.010)

.007
(.004)

0.003

.046***
(.011)

.012**
(.005)

0.005

.051***
(.013)

.015***
(.005)

0.01

.040*
(.019)

.014**
(.006)

0.20

Constant
Mean

.038***
(.010)

.008*
(.004)

0.003

.044***
(.011)

.011***
(.004)

0.005

.049***
(.013)

.015***
(.006)

0.01

.039**
(.019)

.014**
(.006)

0.21

World

.033***
(.011)

.003
(.005)

0.015

.039***
(.013)

.009*
(.005)

0.026

.045***
(.015)

.013***
(.005)

0.04

.042**
(.022)

.012**
(.006)

0.17

US

.032***
(.011)

.002
(.005)

0.013

.038***
(.013)

.008
(.005)

0.023

.045***
(.015)

.013***
(.005)

0.03

.042**
(.022)

.010*
(.006)

0.14

LDC

.034***
(.012)

-.005
(.005)

0.002

.037***
(.013)

.001
(.005)

0.010

.043***
(.015)

.005
(.005)

0.01

.043**
(.021)

.007
(.006)

0.11

ALL

.034***
(.012)

-.005
(.005)

0.002

.036***
(.013)

.001
(.005)

0.011

.043***
(.015)

.005
(.005)

0.02

.042**
(.022)

.006
(.006)

0.10

RightHand-Side
Variables

The estimation procedure is Feasible Generalized Least Squares. The stock market data are monthly from December 1979 to July 1999 for all the countries in the Brady and
Control groups. Stock market data are unavailable before December 1984 for Nigeria, Philippines, Venezuela, Columbia, Malaysia, Pakistan; before December 1986 for Turkey;
before December 1989 for Indonesia; before December 1992 for Peru, Poland, China, Hungary, South Africa, Sri Lanka; before September 1993 for Ecuador; and before
December 1993 for the Czech Republic. The left-hand-side variable is real, dollar-denominated stock returns. Brady is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for each
month during a particular event window preceding a Brady plan. Control is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for each country in the control group during the months
preceding Brady Plans. The column labeled ‘12-month Window’ presents estimates of Brady and Control using an event window that begins 12 months prior to the announcement
of the Brady Plan and ends with the announcement month. The analogous definition applies to the columns labeled ‘9-month Window,’ ‘6-Month Window’ and ‘3-Month
Window.’ For each event window, six regression specifications are estimated. The first row presents estimates of Brady and Control using the benchmark specification that
allows for country-specific intercept terms. Row 2 presents estimates using an alternative specification that allows for only a single intercept term. Row 3 presents estimates using
the ICAPM specification that introduces the World stock return index as an additional explanatory variable. Row 4 presents estimates using the US stock return index instead of
the World stock index. Row 5 presents estimates using the LDC stock return index instead. Finally, row 6 presents estimates that use all three sets of indices simultaneously. The
column labeled Brady>Control shows the p-value for a test that the coefficient on Brady is statistically larger than the coefficient on Control. Standard errors are given in
parenthesis. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

52

Table VII. After Controlling for Other Reforms, Brady Countries Experience a Significant Increase in Market Valuation Before Debt Relief
Announcements. The Control Countries Do not. Panel A: White-Corrected OLS Estimates.
World-Return Model

9-Month
Window
.048***
(.013)

6-Month
Window
.046***
(.015)

3-Month
Window
.053**
(.022)

3-Month
Window
.054**
(.023)

12-Month
Window
.048***
(.012)

.009
(.008)

.005
(.005)

.009**
(.005)

0.03

0.07

0.000

0.004

0.040

0.070

.011
(.016)

.011
(.018)

.022
(.028)

.005
(.014)

.010
(.015)

.012
(.018)

.023
(.027)

-.013
(.016)

-.004
(.018)

-.006
(.022)

-.052
(.033)

-.011
(.016)

-.001
(.018)

-.002
(.021)

-.048
(.032)

.009
(.016)

.025
(.018)

.094***
(.033)

.013
(.016)

.029
(.018)

12-Month
Window
.048***
(.012)

9-Month
Window
.049***
(.013)

Control

.003
(.005)

.008
(.005)

P-Value of
Brady >
Control?

0.000

0.003

Privatize

.005
(.014)

Trade
Liberalize

Brady

Constant-Mean Return Model

6-Month
Window
.047***
(.016)
.012**
(.006)

.051**
(.021)

.013***
(.005)

.057***
(.021)

.010
(.007)

.101***
(.032)

The estimation procedure is Ordinary Least Squares; White-corrected standard errors are given in parenthesis. The stock market data are monthly from December 1979 to July 1999 for all
the countries in the Brady and Control groups. Stock market data are unavailable before December 1984 for Nigeria, Philippines, Venezuela, Columbia, Malaysia, Pakistan; before
December 1986 for Turkey; before December 1989 for Indonesia; before December 1992 for Peru, Poland, China, Hungary, South Africa, Sri Lanka; before September 1993 for Ecuador;
and before December 1993 for the Czech Republic. The left-hand-side variable is real, dollar-denominated stock returns. Brady is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for each
month during a particular event window preceding a Brady plan. Four different event windows are utilized. The column labeled ‘12-month Window’ presents estimates of Brady and
Control using an event window that begins 12 months prior to the announcement of the Brady Plan and ends with the announcement month. The analogous definition applies to the columns
labeled ‘9-month Window,’ ‘6-Month Window’ and ‘3-Month Window.’ Control is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for each country in the control group during the months
preceding Brady Plans. Privatize, Trade, and Liberalize are dummy variables that take on the value one during the event window preceding a privatization, trade liberalization and stock
market liberalization, respectively. For each event window, two regression specifications are estimated. The World column presents estimates of Brady, Control, Privatize, Trade, and
Liberalize using the ICAPM specification that introduces the World stock return index as an additional explanatory variable. The Constant Mean column presents estimates using the
specification that allows for only a single intercept term. The column labeled Brady>Control shows the p-value for a test that the coefficient on Brady is statistically larger than the
coefficient on Control. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

53

Table VII. After Controlling for Other Reforms, Brady Countries Experience a Significant Increase in Market Valuation Before Debt
Relief Announcements. The Control Countries Do Not. Panel B: FGLS Estimates.
World-Return Model

Constant-Mean Return Model
3-Month
Window
.045**
(.021)

12-Month
Window
.037***
(.010)

9-Month
Window
.042***
(.011)

6-Month
Window
.048***
(.013)

3-Month
Window
.039**
(.019)

.0127***
(.004)

.012**
(.006)

.008*
(.004)

.012***
(.004)

.015***
(.005)

.014**
(.006)

0.014

0.022

0.130

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.206

-.001
(.012)

-.002
(.014)

.002
(.016)

.002
(.024)

-.002
(.012)

-.003
(.013)

.001
(.016)

.002
(.023)

Trade

-.011
(.020)

-.001
(.022)

-.005
(.026)

-.068*
(.039)

-.005
(.020)

.006
(.023)

.002
(.027)

-.061
(.040)

Liberalize

.0138
(.020)

.021
(.022)

.040
(.026)

.078**
(.039)

.021
(.020)

.029
(.023)

.049*
(.027)

.089**
(.040)

12-Month
Window
.033***
(.011)

9-Month
Window
.039***
(.012)

Control

.004
(.004)

.009**
(.004)

Brady >
Control?

0.012

Privatize

Brady

6-Month
Window
.046***
(.014)

The estimation procedure used is Feasible Generalized Least Squares. . The stock market data are monthly from December 1979 to July 1999 for all the countries in the
Brady and Control groups. Stock market data are unavailable before December 1984 for Nigeria, Philippines, Venezuela, Columbia, Malaysia, Pakistan; before
December 1986 for Turkey; before December 1989 for Indonesia; before December 1992 for Peru, Poland, China, Hungary, South Africa, Sri Lanka; before September
1993 for Ecuador; and before December 1993 for the Czech Republic. The left-hand-side variable is real, dollar-denominated stock returns. Brady is a dummy variable
that takes on the value one for each month during a particular event window preceding a Brady plan. Four different event windows are utilized. The column labeled
‘12-month Window’ presents estimates of Brady and Control using an event window that begins twelve months prior to the announcement of the Brady Plan and ends
with the announcement month. The analogous definition applies to the columns labeled ‘9-month Window,’ ‘6-Month Window’ and ‘3-Month Window.’ Control is a
dummy variable that takes on the value one for each country in the control group during the months preceding Brady Plans. Privatize, Trade, and Liberalize are dummy
variables that take on the value one during the event window preceding a privatization, trade liberalization and stock market liberalization, respectively. For each event
window, two regression specifications are estimated. The World column presents estimates of Brady, Control, Privatize, Trade, and Liberalize using the ICAPM
specification that introduces the World stock return index as an additional explanatory variable. The Constant Mean column presents estimates using the specification
that allows for only a single intercept term. The column labeled Brady>Control shows the p-value for a test that the coefficient on Brady is statistically larger than the
coefficient on Control. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

54

Table VIII. The Brady Plan Reverses the Sign of the Net Resource Transfer (Millions of US$).
Year
Control
Brady
Median
Median
Arg
Brazil
Ecuador
Jordan
Mexico
Nigeria
-18
91
10
-86
5586
10
466
100
-725

Peru
211

Phil
-42

Poland
NA

Ven
-535

-17

143

123

-568

3968

484

471

132

-519

-328

123

NA

-1036

-16

116

382

613

4618

382

490

1188

-468

-406

-20

NA

-1760

-15

104

285

-358

4572

285

547

1747

-640

-580

295

NA

-527

-14

124

495

495

6869

349

1342

2418

-411

-479

510

NA

-428

-13

220

1371

3372

1858

704

1348

3112

1303

712

986

2346

1393

-12

100

1063

1593

-844

-905

1272

3285

830

854

807

1500

1442

-11

347

847

4436

1867

-432

1055

2433

-1354

440

639

213

2700

-10

505

297

3231

-410

-207

997

1136

758

-84

547

-546

47

-9

648

-43

-1197

-3614

-399

777

3043

1445

167

489

-324

-253

-8

594

146

-3454

-1074

28

687

7490

700

263

729

-317

-1475

-7

403

-419

-1330

-6550

85

867

542

-1426

153

561

-1437

-923

-6

330

-1679

-2971

-7100

-63

745

-5658

-2290

203

865

-1067

-2550

-5

529

-833

-2629

-7066

18

496

-8666

-514

243

72

-1152

-2486

-4

189

-229

-1729

-7229

-251

808

-9452

95

-206

224

-202

-3856

-3

84

-767

-1412

-8948

-354

853

-6443

-1180

228

-263

2753

-4276

-2

-71

-578

-2571

-3952

-377

410

-1485

1414

2155

-779

1163

-3483

-1

-10

-283

528

-496

231

-70

-7443

-1799

4460

-655

2180

-1927

0

187

-54

2917

5026

67

-222

-7553

-1473

3723

-175

2176

-2283

1

366

2372

11975

10913

144

39

5364

-2277

3946

51

6437

797

2

998

1216

7794

3469

278

333

4798

351

2080

-272

4804

206

3
4
5

1173
2675
2197

1125
2267
1422

6122
13205
12793

7217
18474
24250

555
-169
156

70
610
208

1699
13114
11235

631
-372
-691

1618
2160
550

-844
2374
2293

6169
7943
8317

-1280
-1836
-1811

2

Net resource transfers are equal to net resource flows minus interest payments on long-term loans and foreign direct investment profits. The first column lists the years
in event time. The number ‘0’ represents the year in which each country’s Brady Plan was announced. For Control group countries, 0 represents 1989. The next two
columns show the progression of net resource transfers in event time to the Control group and the Brady group. The next five columns show the progression of the net
resource transfers to individual Brady stock market countries in event time. The data on net resource transfers are obtained from World Bank’s Global Development
Finance Data Base.

55

Table IX. The Stock Market Forecasts Future Changes in the Net Resource Transfer and GDP Growth.
Cumulative Cumulative
Change in
Stock Market
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
the Net
Deviation
Deviation:
Deviation
Deviation:
Deviation:
Deviation:
Resource
Anticipating
Year [0, +2] Year [0, +5]
Year [+2]
Year [+1]
Year [0]
Transfer
Debt Relief
Argentina
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Brazil

+

+

-

+

+

+

+

Ecuador

+

+

+

+

+

+

-

Jordan

+

+

-

+

+

+

+

Mexico

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

Nigeria

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

Peru

-

No change
in sign

+

+

+

+

+

Philippines

+

+

+

+

-

+

+

Poland

+

No change
in sign*

+

+

+

+

+

Venezuela

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

This table presents the correlation between increases in market valuation before Brady Plan announcements and changes in net resource transfers and
GDP growth afterwards. The first column lists the Brady Stock market countries. The Brady Stock market countries are the countries in the Brady
group with available stock market data as displayed in Table I. The second column identifies the countries that experienced abnormal stock market
returns over the 12 months preceding their Brady Plan announcements. The third column identifies the countries that experienced changes from
negative NRT to positive NRT in the year preceding or during the two years following the announcement. The fourth column identifies the countries
that experienced abnormal GDP growth in the year of the announcement. The fifth and sixth columns identify those that experienced abnormal
growth in the first and second year after the announcement. Finally, the seventh and eight columns identify the countries that experienced abnormal
cumulative GDP growth during the two and five years following the announcement of the Brady Plan. The + sign denotes positive identification of a
country. * Following the Brady Plan in Poland there is no change in the sign of NRT, but the level of NRT almost triples.

56

Table X. Cumulative Stock Returns in Brady and Control Countries.
Country

1 Year After 3 Years After 5 Years After
Brady Plan
Brady Plan
Brady Plan

Argentina

-0.55

-0.39

0.06

Brazil

0.48

0.93

1.40

Ecuador

0.00

-0.53

-1.47

Jordan

-0.09

-0.22

0.05

Mexico

0.03

0.78

1.36

Nigeria

-0.36

0.40

0.46

Peru

0.11

-0.32

-0.15

Philippines

-0.50

-0.08

0.56

Poland

-0.89

-0.17

-0.58

Venezuela

1.16

0.89

0.35

Brady Average

-0.06

0.13

0.20

Control Group Average

0.05

0.07

0.09

The data on stock returns are obtained from IFC’s Emerging Markets Data Base.

57

Table XI. Stock Prices of U.S. Banks With LDC Exposure Rise in Anticipation of the Brady Plan

Bank

LDC Exposure As
a Fraction of
Total Bank
Capital

Stock Price Reaction to
Median 12-Month
The Brady Plan
Stock Price Increase
(12-Month Increase)

Stock Price Increase
Greater Than Median
Stock Price Increase?

Bank of America

173.1

77.0

-28.1

Yes

Bank of New York

55.7

29.0

0.4

Yes

Bankers Trust

81.4

27.5

12.2

Yes

Chase

145.4

36.2

-7.7

Yes

Chemical

142.0

47.6

-7.4

Yes

Citibank

101.5

39.3

10.6

Yes

Continental

136.0

35.9

-6.5

Yes

First Chicago

83.1

42.5

-1.6

Yes

First Pennsylvania

106.6

16.5

-24.6

Yes

JP Morgan

67.7

13.0

-10.0

Yes

Manufacturers Hanover

212.7

32.6

-5.0

Yes

Exposed Group Median

118.7

35.9

-6.5

Yes

Control Group Median

0.0

4.3

11.7

No

Table XI. Stock Prices of U.S. Banks With LDC Exposure Rise in Anticipation of the Brady Plan. The data on Bank’s LDC loan exposure are
obtained from Demirguc-Kunt and Huizinga (1993).

58

