NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMPI RICAL STUDI ES OF MACROECONOMIC INTERDEPENDENCE

John F. Helliwell
Tim Padmore

Working Paper No. 1021

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

November 1982

This paper has been prepared for P.B. Kenen and R.W. Jones, eds.,
Handbook of International Economics (North—Holland, Amsterdam),
forthcoming 1983. In preparing this paper, we have had invaluable
collaboration from the researchers whose work is surveyed. We also
wish to acknowledge the financial support of the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1021
November 1982

Empirical Studies of Macroeconomic Interdependence

ABSTRACT

In this paper we examine the structure and empirical
results from several groups of linked econometriá models. The
main focus of the paper is on the international transmission of
fiscal policies, monetary policies, and oil price shocks, under
both fixed and flexible exchange rates. The linkage models are
divided into four groups: projects based on available national
models; projects using structural models designed with monetary
and exchange rate linkages in mind; projects focussed mainly on
trade linkages; and projects using very small national models
with common structure. Each group comprises from two to four
projects. Comparable results on the transmission of fiscal
policy under fixed exchange rates are available for eight
projects, while four projects provide evidence on the domestic
and international effects of monetary policy and oil price
shocks.

John F. Helliwell
Department of Economics

Tim Padmore

Vancouver, B.C,

Vancouver, B.C.

University of British Columbia
Canada V6T1Y2

(604) 228—4953

Department of Economics

University of British Columbia
Canada V6T 1Y2

EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF MACROECONOMIC INTERDEPENDENCE
John F. Helliwell and Tim Padmore

1. Introduction

In this chapter we present and compare some empirical
results from studies of macroeconomic interdependence. We

concentrate on studies that involve linked macroeconometric
models of two or more countries. This restricts our attention to
about a dozen research projects, and means bypassing studies
based on partial models, general equilibrium trade models, and
single economy models. We have chosen to specialize in this way
so that we can focus in some detail on a few key issues. We have
been fortunate in having the collaboration of many of the
modellers in running and helping to interpret experiments that
expose some of the main channels of international transmission.

Since most of the models are continually changing, our survey
can be only a partial snapshot that is bound to be outdated
soon. This is a discouraging but inevitable feature of surveys
of empirical work. To keep the rate of obsolescence as low as
possible, we limit the amount of detail we present about
specific versions of the models, and concentrate the analysis on
broad questions of continuing importance, with special attention
to the role of exchange rates in international transmission. We
have also attempted, so far as possible, to collect results
relevant to the 1970s and 1980s rather than the 1950s and 1960s.
In the next section, we classify the main linkage projects,
paying special attention to those features of the models that
have important bearing on the international transmission of

2

disturbances under fixed and flexible exchange rates. In the
three subsequent sections we discuss the international
repercussions of fiscal policy, monetary policy, and changes in
world oil prices. After that, we provide some evaluation of the
empirical results available to us and make some conjectures
about the likely future course of research.

2. An Overview of Linkage Models
While not complete, our selection of models covers most of
the projects for which model specifications and simulation
results were published during the 1970s and early 1980s. We
In

limit our attention to linked rnacroeconometric models. (1)

this section we outline the main features of the models, with
special attention to those that provided the simulation results
assessed in subsequent sections.
Table 2.1 divides the models into four groups. The first
group includes Project LINK and the Eurolink Project, (2)

both

of which are based on national models that are regularly used
for independent forecasting within the national economies. In
the case of Project LINK, however, some of the newer models,
especially those of the Eastern European Comecon countries, have
been built and operated in international agencies, or at the
Project LINK central office. The national models vary greatly in
size, in theoretical conception, and especially in their

treatment of international financial linkages. Project LINK has
been producing world trade forecasts for more than ten years

but, until very recently, there has been no mechanism for
determining international capital flows and exchange rates.

3

(3)

In the more recent Eurolink, initial efforts have also

been directed to consistent explanation of bilateral trade
flows, with the modelling of exchange rates and capital flows
being developed subsequently.

Thus, for the purposes of our survey, the Project LINK and
Eurolink results illuminate trade and price linkages under the
assumptions of fixed exchange rates and full sterilization of
reserve flows. Since Project LINK, among all the linkage models,
contains the most detailed analysis of world trade, it is of

especial use in the analysis of world-level shocks, such as
changes in the world price of crude oil.

The second group comprises structural models designed with
monetary and exchange-rate linkages in mind, and therefore able
to cast light on the nature of international transmission under
alternative exchange rate systems. Although they all make use of
aggregate quarterly models of substantial scale, the three
projects are nevertheless quite different in scope.

The Japanese Economic Planning Agency (EPA) world
econometric model is the most comprehensive, as it includes nine
country models and six regional trade models. The U.S. Federal
Reserve Board's Multi—Country Model (MCM) contains five country
models, completed by trading links with the rest of the world.
The national models in both projects were constructed at the
research centres in Tokyo and Washington, respectively. The
Japanese group also made use of foreign country specialists
seconded to Tokyo to assist with particular national models.

Another notable feature of the EPA project is that it has
provided what appears to be the most methodical comparative test

4

of the various methods for consistent estimation of
international trade flows. (4)

The EPA researchers used

various alternative models to estimate relative price and

activity elasticities of the alternative linkage methods applied
to aggregate real exports of the fifteen EPA countries and
trading regions. Seven methods are compared, and, for six of
them, long-run price elasticities are calculated for each
country and region. Even though the elasticities are long run,

and are based on export prices, rather than on the less closely
linked national output prices, only seven of the 90 estimated
price elasticities are greater than 1.0 in absolute value. The

preferred Hickman-Lau approach gives price elasticities for
export shares of —0.38 for the U.S., —0.63 for Japan, and -0.59
for Germany, the three countries involved in the initial linkage

experiments. Long-term price elasticities for imports of goods
are -0.76 for the U.S., —0.40 for Germany, and —1.18 for Japan.

The lags are such that there are substantial 3—curve effects for
the United States and Germany, but not for Japan. A structural
approach is adopted for the explanation of exchange rates, with

exchange rates determined so as to equilibrate continually the
market for foreign exchange. A combination of official
intervention and exchange—rate--stabilizing private capital flows

provides exchange market stability.

The U.S.-based MCM model has bilateral trade flows and
endogenous international capital movements. The model explains
bilateral exchange rates between the U.S. and each of the other
four national currencies. As explained by Hooper et al. (1982),

early versions of several of the country models showed short—run

5

(and sometimes longer-term) 3—curve effects in response to
exchange rate changes. In conjunction with the directly
estimated capital account equations and the use of the marketclearing method for determining the exchange rates, -this gave

rise to unstable exchange rate movements in the German and

Japanese models. The MCM researchers found that these problems
could be eliminated by forcing foreign prices and exchange rates
to have symmetrical effects on the domestic economies, and
inverting portfolio capital account equations and estimating

them directly as exchange rate equations. The effect of the
latter change is to make the capital account an automatic buffer
for changes in the current account. In the presence of short-

term 3—curve effects, this is not only necessary for exchange
market stability but is justifiably based on speculative
arbitrage across the 3-curve. The MCM simulation results
analyzed in subsequent sections are based on a revised version
of the model with directly estimated exchange rate equations.
The third Group II project involves only Canada and the

United States. The two national models were built at about the
same time, but all of the linkage was established from the

Canadian side. The bilateral linkages were embedded in the
Canadian RDX2 model, making use of variables explained by the
U.S. MPS model. Both models were provided with trade linkages to
the rest of the world. In addition, RDX2 contains bilateral
capital account and migration linkages between the two countries
and between Canada and the rest of the world. The endogenous
exchange rate is the bilateral rate between Canada and the
United States, with the exchange rates between the U.S. and the

6

rest of the world treated as exogenous and the triangular
arbitrage condition used to determine the effective exchange
rate between Canada and all third countries.
Several exchange rate regimes have been used to. link RDX2

and MPS, including rigidly fixed rates, the Bretton Woods
pegged-rate system with behaviorally-estimated official
intervention within the 1% margins, a crawling peg, and a
floating exchange rate without official intervention. Even
though there were 3-curve effects in the current account
linkages between the two models, there were sufficient exchange
rate-stabilizing capital flows to ensure exchange market
stability. As noted earlier in connection with the MCM results,

this result may have to do with the fact that one of the capital
account portfolio equations was renormalized and directly
estimated as an exchange rate equation.

The projects in the third group all involve sets of country
models with a common structure. They are all linked by trade and
trade-price equations, with exogenous exchange rates and no
monetary or capital account linkages. The OECD INTERLINK model
started as a consistent explanation of trade flows, but has
since been expanded to include domestic activity and price

equations, and plans are underway to develop a more complete
modelling of aggregate supply and to endogenize eventually
capital movements and exchange rates. The COMET, DESMOS, and
METEOR models are all primarily models of the major E.E.C.
countries and the trade linkages between them.

Most of the group IV models use very small national models,
based on quarterly data, with primary emphasis on monetary and

7

exchange rate linkages. The Fair multicountry model contains 64
separate national models, many more than any other linkage

project. The model of the United States is large, but all of the
other national models contain estimated equations only for
imports, consumption, investment, output, GNP deflator, export

price index, demand for money, long-term interest rate, and
forward exchange rate, and estimated reaction functions for the
short—term interest rate and the exchange rate. As in most of
the linkage models in the first three groups, each national

model determines imports and the price of output, with a trade
share matrix being used to distribute world trade among
competing suppliers, and to determine import prices as functions
of exchange rates and suppliers' export prices. In some of the

reported results (Fair 1981b), the real export shares matrix is
treated as exogenous, while in subsequent work (Fair 1981c,
1982) it is made endogenous by direct estimation of the export

quantity shares as functions of relative export prices. In
subsequent unpublished work, Fair has moved to direct estimation
of export flows from each country to each other country. The
results confirm the relatively low price elasticities found by
the Japanese EPA researchers. Like the Fair model, the Japanese
EPA project uses data for aggregate exports and export prices,
although from a much smaller sample of countries. Fair (1981c,

p. ii) reports elasticities that in only one or two cases are
greater than 1.0 in absolute value, although they are negative
for all but three countries, and significantly different from

zero for more than three-quarters of the 64 countries. For the
seven largest OECD countries, the elasticities of export shares

8

range from —0.231 (for Germany) to -0.333 (for Canada), with an
average value of -0.29 and an average t—ratio of 6.0.

The elasticities of national imports with respect to import
prices are not constrained to be equal to the elasticities with
respect to output prices, and they are significantly negative
for only 6 of the 64 countries outside the U.S., and for none of
the larger OECD economies (Fair 1981a, p. 20). The import price
elasticities in the Fair model are substantially less than in
any of the linkage models described above, and his combination

of import and export price elasticities, along with the method
for determining of export prices, are such that the Marshall—
Lérner conditions' are not met for most country models even in

the long term. This means that the current account responses to
exchange rate changes are destabilizing even with export shares
endogenous. (Fair 1981c, pp. 18—19, shows this result for

depreciation of the DM and the pound Sterling.) Under these
circumstances, there would be little incentive for exchange—

rate-stabilizing private capital flows. Instead of invoking such
flows, Fair endogenizes the exchange rate by means of exchangerate reaction functions for 22 countries; these depend on the

lagged exchange rate and some subset of the following variables:
the DM/$ exchange rate, relative prices, relative interest
rates, demand pressure, and net foreign assets. Given this

officially-set exchange rate, the current account balance is
matched by some combination of private capital movements and
changes in official reserves. The latter combination is never
disentangled, since the private and government sectors are
aggregated in Fair's model, and net foreign assets are defined

9

by accumulating current account surpluses.
The second model in this group is the International

Transmission Model of Darby et al. (1982). The model is applied
to the seven major OECD countries plus the Netherlands. In
scale, the national models are about the size of Fair's non—U.S.
models, with an equation for the price level (based on an
inverted demand-for—money equation), an equation for the

unemployment rate, a policy-reation equation for the money
supply, a real interest rate equation intended to equilibrate
savings and investment, an import demand equation, an export

equation, an import price equation, a net capital outflows
equation, and an exchange—market intervention equation (for use
when the exchange rate is endogenous). Under floating exchange
rates, the import demand equation is renorrnalized (for

estimation as well as simulation) to make the exchange rate the
dependent variable. The renorrnalization has very significant

effects on the parameter estimates, and hence on the properties
of the resulting model.

The international linkages in the Darby model are not as
completely specified as in the other linkage models described
earlier. There are no consistency checks forcing world exports
to equal world imports, so the sum of the balances of payments
for the eight linked countries is assumed to be passively
financed by the rest of the world. The foreign real income and
price variables are weighted averages of the income and price
variables in the eight modelled countries.

The final project in this group is the Liverpool—based
multilateral model of Patrick Minford and associates. There are

10

nine country models (the OECD major seven plus Belgium and the
Netherlands) and trade equations for three other trading

regions. The special focus of the model is on the use of forward
simulations to generate expected future values of variables. The
structure and estimation of this model are still at a very

preliminary stage. The only estimated equations reported to date
(in Minford, loannidis, and Marwaha, 1981) are for stock demands
for fixed assets in eight countries, consumption functions for
five countries, portfolio demand—for-money equations for seven
countries, and trade equations for the three trading blocks.
All of the three models in the fourth group are at a more
experimental stage than the other linkage models, and their

parameter estimates and structure may be too preliminary to
permit useful empirical inferences about the nature of
international transmission. The Fair model is the most complete
and empirically informative of the three, and so it will get
correspondingly more attention in the subsequent sections.

3. Transmission of Fiscal Policy

What can be learned from a comparison of the various
estimates of the cross-country effects of fiscal policies?
Deardorff and Stern (1979) asked this question when they
reviewed various estimates of cross-country government
expenditure multipliers under fixed exchange rates. They began
by constructing a simple expenditure multiplier for each of
eight major OECD countries using marginal propensities to
consume and to import equal to historical averages. Then they

11

linked these country multipliers, using fixed bilateral trade
weights to spread each country's imports across supplying

countries. A fiscal shock in country i thus influences country j
according to the size of country i's multiplier, the size of

country i's marginal propensity to import from country j, and
the size of country j's multiplier in response to the induced
change in its exports.

Deardorff and Stern then computed static "elasticity

multipliers" defined as the percentage change in a country's GNP
or GDP resulting from a spending shock equal to

per cent of

GNP in the initiating country; for an own—country shock, the
elasticity multiplier is the conventional GNP multiplier. They
compared their "naive model" to values obtained from fiscal
simulations under fixed exchange rates from five linkage

projects: LINK, DESMOS, COMET, METEOR and RDX2—MPS. (See Table
3.1.) They found that their naive estimate often fell within the
range of results from the linked model simulations, and they

concluded that the information contributed by the linked models
was quite limited.

We think that divergence of linked model results from
simple linkage calculations is not a good guide to the
information content of the models. After all, there are some
reasons why the Deardorff/Stern multipliers are too small (for
example, they ignore induced investment and feedback effects
from the second country back to the first country) and there are
other reasons why they are too large (they ignore the

expenditure—reducing effects of induced inflation, induced
higher interest rates, and other forms of supply constraint).

12

Since there is, a priori, no way of deciding whether the "true"
dynamic multipliers, either on average or in any particular
year, should be above or below the simple static multipliers
calculated by Deardorff and Stern, it is not appropriate to use
the extent of divergence as a measure of the information
provided by the linkage projects.
Although the Deardorff and Stern calculations do not
provide grounds for telling whether anything can be learned from

the linked simulations, they do provide useful benchmark data on
the strength of bilateral trade linkages. Fair (1979) compares
fiscal multipliers for an overlapping but somewhat different set
of linkage projects. In both surveys, only the RDX2—MPS results
involve capital movements and alternative exchange rate systems,

and neither of the surveys deal with the importance of feedback
effects. We have attempted to supplement these earlier surveys

of linkage results. Our survey of expenditure linkages is based
on a larger set of linkage models, and it also attempts to show
the effects of linkage feedbacks, of fixed and flexible exchange

rates, and of the financing used for thegovernment
expenditures.

Table 3.1 shows the own-country and cross-country real
income effects of bond—financed government spending in each of

the seven major OECD countries. The models include all of those
surveyed by Deardorff and Stern (COMET, DESMOS, LINK, METEOR,
and RDX2-MPS) supplemented by results from a newer version of

LINK, the EPA World Econometric model, INTERLINK, the Fair
model, and the MCM model. The expenditure shock is generally a
bond—financed increase in government spending equal to 1% of

13

GNP, although there is an implicit combination of bond and money
finance employed in those cases where the interest rate is held
fixed.

Each of the seven panels of Table 3.1 shows the results for
all countries of an expenditure increase in one of the
countries. To find the own—country multipliers for, e.g.,

Germany, look in the GE column (where the effects on Germany are
shown) of the third panel (where the effects of the German
fiscal policy are shown). This method of presentation makes it

very easy to compare results from the different models. Anywhere
from one to three years of dynamic multipliers are reported for
each of the models.

The OECD results reflect accelerator effects but no changes
in prices, interest rates, or exchange rates. All of the other
models have endogenous prices, although the results reported in
the table are all (except for MCM) obtained from fixed-exchange--

rate versions of the respective models. In most of the models,

the assumed monetary policy is an unchanged interest rate. The
money supply is therefore altered by enough to keep the interest
rate constant, implying that the increase in government

expenditure (and any induced changes in the stock of foreign
exchange reserves) is financed by some mix of money, debt, and
induced taxes.

The assumed monetary policy differs from model to model in
Project LINK, but in general involves unchanged interest rates
(and hence some degree of monetary expansion) in response to
increases in government expenditure. In the Japanese EPA world
model, the official discount rate is the key monetary policy

14

variable in each model, and these interest rates are held
constant in the fiscal policy experiments.

The MCM results involve a flexible exchange rate and
generally fixed money supplies. The results for Canada and the
U.S. are therefore more comparable to the RDX2-MPS results in
the top panel of Table 3.5 than to the fixed-exchange-rate

results shown elsewhere in Table 3.1. The UK model used in MCM
has an interest—rate reaction function instead of a fixed money
supply. The UK interest rate rises with the Canadian rate, and
the resulting negative effects on GNP outweigh the positive
effects from the UK share of induced Canadian imports.
The EPA and INTERLINK results are useful for giving some
idea of the feedback effects running from the indirectly
affected countries back to the country initiating the policy.

The evidence on this is obtained by comparing own—country
multipliers from unlinked and fully linked fiscal policy
simulations. The INTERLINK model in its 1980 form is likely to
provide relatively high estimates of these feedbacks, since it
has a complete trade matrix, a fairly complete set of country
models, and has no monetary or price effects, no exchange rate
flexibility, and no supply constraints to limit the passing of
aggregate demand among the trading partners.

Table 3.2 shows the ratios of the linked to the unlinked
fiscal multipliers for both the OECD and EPA models. The ratio
rises with the size of the country, with the degree of its
openness to trade, and with the ratio of other—country to own—
country multipliers. The last factor is more likely to vary with
the structure of the country models. Both the OECD and the EPA

15

results show linked multipliers to be generally 5% to 15% higher
than the unlinked multipliers for the five largest OECD

economies. The linked and unlinked multipliers are almost the
same for Canada, reflecting its relatively small size. The EPA
results for Italy, and most of the other intercountry
differences reveal the importance of model structure in
determining the results. The very large effects of linkage on
the Italian multiplier and on the second—year U.K. multiplier in
the EPA results appear to be a consequence of a very low own—

country multiplier coupled with fairly high multipliers in the
EPA models of the main trading partners.

Tables 3.3 to 3.5 help to show the effects of alternative
exchange rate and monetary policies. Table 3.3 shows the effects
of exchange rate flexibility in the EPA model by reporting the
ratio of the flexible-exchange—rate to the fixed—exchange—rate
own-country and cross-country multipliers. With key interest
rates held fixed, as in the EPA simulations in Tables 3.3 and
3.4, and in one set of RDX2—MPS results in Table 3.5, an

expansion of government spending leads to an induced trade
deficit, a loss of foreign exchange reserves under fixed
exchange rates, and a depreciation of the currency under
flexible exchange rates. The depreciation of the domestic
currency typically increases the size of the own-country
multiplier and lowers cross—country multipliers. The domestic
price effects of the fiscal policy are greater under flexible
rates than under fixed exchange rates, given a monetary policy
that holds key interest rates constant. As shown by the EPA
results in Table 3.4, the effects on foreign inflation (still

16

assuming fixed interest rates) are substantially greater under
fixed than under flexible exchange rates.

The chief exception to these generalizations is provided by
the United States, but only in the current version of the EPA
model (Amano et al, eds., 1982). EPA model. In this case,
expansionary fiscal policy, even with unchanged US interest
rates, leads to a strengthening of the US dollar, which then
increases the expansionary effects on other countries. This
result was not evident in the earlier EPA trilateral linkage
results (Amano et al., eds., 1981); it appears to be a

consequence of an implausibly large induced devaluation of the
DM, which in turn appears to be due to an implausibly large
outflow of capital from Germany.

When countries hold their money supplies rather than their
interest rates fixed, the effect of exchange rate flexibility is
rather different, as shown by comparing the various cases in

Table 3.5. If the domestic balance of payments moves into
incipient surplus, leading to an appreciation of the domestic
currency, the domestic output effects of an expansive fiscal
policy will be smaller, and the foreign effects larger, under

flexible exchange rates. In terms of the familiar IS—LM diagram
with a balance—of-payments or exchange-rate equilibrium curve
added, this will happen if the BP curve is flatter than the LM
curve. The RDX2—MPS results shown in Table 3.5 reveal that this

condition is met in the Canadian—U.S. case, so that fiscal
contraction weakens (and fiscal expansion strengthens) the
domestic currency under flexible exchange rates. Thus exchange—
rate flexibility slightly reduces the domestic GNP effects, and

17

increases the foreign effects, of changes in bond—financed
government expenditure under flexible exchange rates. This
result is what follows if money supplies are held equal to their
control values in both countries, and reverses the effects of
exchange rate flexibility derived from the case where nominal
interest rates are pegged while the fiscal shock takes place.

Having emphasized that the international transmission of
fiscal shocks depends heavily on the nature of the accompanying
monetary and exchange market policies, we turn now to consider
the available evidence on the international effects of monetary
changes on their own.

4. Transmission of Monetary Policy
Many of the linkage models primarily emphasize trade
linkages and have not paid equivalent attention to the
mechanisms whereby monetary impulses are transmitted. The EPA
model is one that does, and Table 4.1 shows its own-country and
cross—country effects of separate increases in the official
discount rates of each of the seven major OECD countries. For
all of these countries except the United States, flexible
exchange rates lead to greater negative effects of the
contractionary monetary policy on own GNP, and lesser (and
frequently positive) effects on others' GNP, compared to the
situation with fixed exchange rates. Furthermore, the decrease
in own—country effects for the U.S. is very small. The increase
in own—country GNP effects among the other countries tends to be
greater for the more open economies, although the pattern is not

18

very clear. In all cases, the changes in the cross—country
effects are fairly small in absolute terms, but large relative
to their values under fixed exchange rates.

The RDX2-MPS results support the EPA finding that the
effects of exchange rate flexibility on the domestic impacts of
monetary policy are much greater for the more open economies.
For example, after two years of tighter monetary policy in

Canada, sufficient to appreciate the Canadian dollar by 3%, the
real output effects are two and a half times as great under
flexible exchange rates as under the Bretton Woods system
(Helliwell and Maxwell, 1974, p. 95). The effects of exchange
rate flexibility on the U.S. were not material in these
experiments, in part because all of the other U.S. bilateral
exchange rates were held constant.
The RDX2-MPS linkage experiments also indicated that

tighter U.S. monetary policy would lower Canadian GNP much less
under flexible than under fixed exchange rates (Helliwell and
Maxwell, 1974, p. 97), but lower it nonetheless. This
contradicts the well—known result from the Meade—Fleming--Mundell

model (e.g., Mundell, 1963) that tighter monetary policy should
lower GNP at home and raise it abroad. The Mundell result comes
about if capital flows are responsive only to interest—rate

differentials. In order to balance the capital account inflow to
the tight-money home country, there has to be an offsetting
current account deficit, induced by the higher value of the
domestic currency, leading to a higher demand for the real
output of the foreign country. The RDX2—MPS results for U.S.

monetary policy (but not for Canadian monetary policy) reversed

19

this result. The essential reason was that exchange-rate-

stabilizing capital flows broke the tight link between the
current account and the interest-induced capital flows,

permitting there to be simultaneously a strengthening of the
current account of the home country and interest-induced capital
inflows, with the sum of these two net inflows offset by

speculative outflows. The argument was made that the same
speculative capital movements that are
required to "look through" the widely prevalent J—curve effects

also permit international transmission of tight—money-induced
drops in GNP.
The EPA model shows some positive and some negative GNP
cross-effects in response to monetary policy under flexible
exchange rates. Amano, et al (1981) describes how the capital
flow equations of the EPA models are equipped with exchangerate—stabilizing features that would permit them, in principle,
to have positive cross-country GNP effects. In addition, the

exchange rate mechanism used in solving the models involves a
considerable amount of active official exchange market
intervention. This official intervention also raises the

Possibility of regaining the fixed—exchange—rate result, that
tighter monetary policy lowers GNP both at home and abroad. It
is interesting to note that even with private and official

stabilizing intervention, some of the EPA results show own—
country and cross—country income effects of Opposite sign. This
illustrates, as do the RDX2-MPS results, that the transmission

process need not be symmetric when counties of different size
and structure are linked together.

20

Tables 4.2 and 4.3 show the effects of coordinated and
uncoordinated monetary expansion

in the LINK and MCM models. For

the five countries that appear in both models, Table 4.2 shows
of initial 1%
the real income and price level consequences
reductions in the key interest rates in all of the countries.

and
The LINK and MCM results for real income are fairly similar,
increases in real income that are
both models show proportionate
increases in the price level for
greater than the proportionate
each of the first three years. However, LINK is more optimistic
with respect to prices; the US Wharton

model used in LINK even

suggests a lower domestic price level after four years of an
expansionary monetary policy starting in 1980.
Table 4.3 contrasts the effects of coordinated monetary
expansion with the consequences of isolated policies. The table
shows the amount of price increase per percentage point increase
in output for the fourth years of isolated and coordinated
with
monetary expansions. For Project LINK, which is operated
fixed exchange rates in these experimants, the coordination does
not make much difference. For the MCM models, however, with
coordination avoids the
their flexible exchange rates, the
inflation that
currency depreciation and resulting additional
would arise if a country were alone in adopting an expansionary

monetary policy. Thus the coordinated expansion provides a given
increase in real income with a smaller amount of induced
inflation, although the effect

differs substantially from one

country to another.

5. The Impact of Changes in World Oil Prices

21

One of the most interesting and as yet unsettled issues is
how changes in world oil prices influence real output, national
prices, and exchange rates throughout the world. It is an issue
that almost demands the use of international linkage models,

since the indirect effects coming through changes in the volume
and prices of non—oil world trade are often n'ore important, for

any individual country, than the direct effects of higher oil
prices. For example, simulations of the Bank of Japan model
reported by Yomo (1982) show that a 10% increase in the world
oil price lowers real GNP by .05% if other foreign variables are
unchanged, but lowers it by .28% if the real GNP of partner
countries is assumed to drop by .5% as a consequence of higher
oil prices. Thus most of the likely real GNP effects (but not
the price effects) flow from assumed effects on other countries.
In these circumstances, it is important to obtain more
information about the direct impacts on other countries, and on
the transmission mechanisms between countries.

Many of the established national and multinational
econometric models were designed before the price of oil changed
so dramatically as to force a re-thinking of the aggregation,

pricing, production, and factor utilization assumptions in
econometric models. Thus, many of the linkage models are not
ideally suited to depict the national effects of changes in
world energy prices. They are likely to feed imperfect
information back into the system of international prices, trade
flows, capital movements, and exchange rates. There is a further
complication at the national level, posed by the complex and
diverse taxing and pricing arrangements that link world oil

22

prices to the prices paid by final energy users in various
countries. Since the prices to final users, especially of
transportation fuels, are often several times as high as the

price of the crude oil content, and the proportionate changes in
crude oil and final energy prices are often very different, the
modelling of these margins becomes very important.

At the international level, it is clearly important to work
with a group of models large enough to encompass a substantial
share of the output of the trading world and to close the system
by realistic assumptions about the amount and nature of
increased OPEC spending, as well as the likely investment

pattern for OPEC current-account surpluses caused by the higher
oil prices. Hooper and Tryon (1982) have reported alternative
simulations of the MCM model showing that, even in their 5-

country-plus-OPEC model, raising OPEC's induced imports has
substantial impact on the real GNP effects of the 1979—80
increase in world oil prices. For example, they estimate that

raising OPEC imports by 50% (or US$ 50 billion) in 1982, and by
similar proportions in 1979, 1980 and 1981, would have

eliminated the loss of GNP in Japan due to the oil price shock
and would have turned the German loss into a gain. The figures:

Without the increased OPEC spending, the price shock reduces
Japanese GNP by 2.2 per cent; with the extra spending, GNP is
virtually unchanged. Without the spending, German GNP drops .5
per cent; with it, GNP rises by 1.6 per cent.

We have thus far been unable to develop easily comparable
oil price results from the various linkage projects, and the
models continue to differ importantly in coverage and in the

23

likely accuracy and completeness of their modelling of the
impacts of oil prices on the various national economies. We have
nevertheless tried to draw together in Table 5.1 some of the
estimates of the second-year real GNP and price effects of a
hypothetical 10% increase in world oil prices. Since we have
often had to scale results dowr1, and to draw approximate second-

year results from a longer and more complicated set of
responses, we also reproduce some of the primary material in
subsequent tables.

A rough summary of the results, putting greater weight on
the more complete models, is that a 10% increase in world oil

prices lowers real GNP in a typical industrial country by
between .5% and 1%, in the second year, and increases the
consumer price by somewhat more. The results pertaining to pre—
1979 increases need to be scaled up somewhat to apply to the

early 1980s, because the world oil price doubled between 1979
and 1981, and oil spending has become a larger share of total
costs, and because most models estimate the price elastIcity of
the demand for crude oil to be substantially less than 1.0 in
absolute value.

The Japanese EPA results in Tables 5.1 and 5.2 are
especially useful in showing how exchange rate flexibility
alters the nature of the transmission process (5)

.

In

the

Japanese case, the oil price increase triggers a substantial
depreciation of the yen, which reduces the real GDP losses but
induces much higher domestic inflation. Given the significant

export dependence of the German and Japanese economies and the
significant swings in their current accounts after the two oil

24

price shocks of the 1970s, it is not surprising that the EPA
linkage results for oil price increases were significantly
altered (and became more stagflationary on average) when the

original three-country system was expanded. Indeed, the GNP cuts
in Table 5.1 are .1 to .4 per cent deeper than those calculated

with the three—country version (Amano, et al., eds., 1981), and
the price impacts are slightly greater. The current EPA trade
linkage model for OPEC imports involves a .21 propensity to
import from current increases in export revenues plus a .52
propensity to spend the previous period's foreign exchange
reserves. Since the EPA model is quarterly, this implies a
substantial re—spending of OPEC oil revenues, although

apparently about one quarter of the incremental oil revenues are
invested abroad in some more permanent form. (6)

The two sets of Project LINK results reported in Table 5.3
suggest that model revisions between 1978 and 1980 have somewhat
increased the GNP responses of the system to world oil prices.
If we compare the 1980 responses from the 1979-85 simulation

with the 1979 responses from the 1978—79 simulation, we see GNP
and consumer price level responses that are about as large,
although the size of the shock is much smaller - a 12 per cent

oil price increase relative to control in the second year of the
1979—85 simulation, compared to a 28 per cent increase in the
second year of the 1978—79 simulation. In the earlier

simulation, despite the larger shock, eight of 13 countries had
relative GDP drops that were smaller than that for the 13 LINK

countries in the second year of the later simulation. If we make
a linearity assumption to standardize the shocks, the second—

25

year GDP response for the 13 countries in the later simulation
is 1.75 times as big as in the earlier one, and the response of

the consumption price deflator is 1.30 times as big. To better
understand the reasons for these disparities, it would be useful
to run comparable oil price shocks with successive versions of
the LINK system, as well as with alternative linkage systems.

In the linkage results reported in Table 5.1, the
stagflationary effects of higher oil prices tend to lead to
higher nominal and lower real interest rates in most countries.
Marion and Svensson (1982) emphasize that the lower real
interest rates are a natural counterpart of the higher OPEC
saving, and they act to partially offset the income effects of
the terms—of—trade loss for countries that are net debtors as
well as net oil importers.

6. Summary and Implications for Further Research

In this Section we summarize our preliminary conclusions
and suggest promising directions for further empirical research.
Our review of the effects of fiscal shocks shows that it is
very important to consider jointly the exchange—rate and
monetary linkages. The amount of evidence available on this
score is still fairly limited, as only the Japanese and RDX2—MPS
results compare the international effects of fiscal shocks under
fixed and flexible exchange rates, and only the latter do so
under alternative monetary policy assumptions. The experiments
suggest that if policy-set interest rates are held at their
control values and exchange rates are fixed, uncoordinated
increases in government spending will usually lead to current

26

account deficits for the initiating country. Under flexible
exchange rates, the induced current account deficits are
smaller, and hence the fiscal policy's effects on GNP in other
countries are likewise less. However, with exchange rates to
some extent policy—determined, as in the EPA model, the fixed

and flexible exchange rate results are not very different. The
RDX2-MPS results with fixed money supplies show even less
difference between fixed and flexible exchange rates; in the

Canadian case, the fiscal policy does not induce much change in
the balance of payments under fixed exchange rates, and hence
little change in the exchange rate under flexible exchange
rates. Other countries will differ to some extent, but in
general it would not be surprising if the short—term
international effects of fiscal policy turn out to be fairly
similar under fixed and flexible exchange rates. Much depends,

of course, on how exchange rates are modelled. The pervasiveness
of 3-curve effects among the linkage models, and the modest size
of estimated long-term elasticities of substitution among
exports from different countries, mean that either official
intervention or exchange—rate-stabilizing private capital
movements are a necessary condition for exchange market
stability.

Exchange rate flexibility becomes more important when one
considers the international effects of monetary policy. Even

with substantial amounts of exchange—rate smoothing by official
intervention or private sector capital flows, the reported
international effects of monetary policy are markedly different

under fixed and flexible exchange rates. This difference does

27

not show up, of course, in the models that concentrate on trade
linkage, but it does appear wherever there are capital account

and exchange rate linkages. The flexible exchange rate does
serve to increase the domestic income and price effects of
domestic monetary policy, and it reduces the foreign effects,

but oily sometimes does it produce the Mundell (1963) result in
which real income moves in opposite directions at home and
abroad.

The available evidence on the multinational effects of
changes in world oil prices is still fairly limited, and still
somewhat preliminary in nature. This is in part because the
induced OPEC spending and saving behavior are not well and
easily modelled, and in part because the supply sides of many of
the national models, especially the role of energy in the
production process, are still rather rudimentary. As the models
develop, they continue to show substantial stagflationary
effects from higher world oil prices. Conversely, substantial
drops in world oil prices can be expected to produce less
inflation and more growth, although relatively few tests have
been run of the symmetry of the responses of world trade,

output, and inflation with respect to fluctuations in the world
price of oil.

Our judgment is that many of the past and current empirical
studies of macroeconomic interdependence have produced useful

results. These studies have served to put likely signs on some
of the uncertain theoretical propositions, and to reduce
somewhat the range of uncertainty about the strength of key
linkages. However, despite the sometimes heroic efforts of the

28

researchers, and despite the assistance of a few interpretive
surveys, many linkage models still have too much the reputation

of black boxes. This reputation is largely unjustified for the
linkage models reported here, because they are models for which
the equation structures and parameter estimates are generally

available. To some extent, the reputation reflects the
unwillingness of those only peripherally interested in
quantitative results to make the required investment in
knowledge about macroeconomic facts and models. However, it is

also the case that the models themselves are seldom presented in
a way that makes it feasible, even for their operators, to
assess the relative quantitative importance of the various
channels of international linkage. Such information is in short
supply, even for national models, so it is not surprising that
still less is available for the linkage projects, most of which
are of fairly recent origin.
Empirical studies of macroeconomic interdependence have

been producing useful results for over a decade. The earliest
studies were mainly of two types: large multilateral projects
based mainly on linkage through trade flows and trade prices,

and bilateral or few-country models with a more complete and
consistent modelling of trade, capital, exchange rate, and,

occasionally, migration linkages. More recently, the
availability of better multi-country data sets has made possible
the construction of many-country models based on consistent
aggregate theoretical structures and emphasizing monetary and
exchange rate linkages. At the same time, forecasting models
such as Project LINK, the OECD INTERLINK, and the EEC Eurolink

29

models have moved some way towards a complete specification of
monetary and capital account linkages, and modellers have been
examining and ironing out unnecessary differences among the
structures of the individual country models.

The use of structural econometric models for policy
analysis has been criticized for not taking explicit account of
the possible effects of such policy actions on private sector
expectations. To the extent that this criticism is valid, it

applies as much to the international linkage models assessed
here as to national econometric models. The ability of the
linkage models to depict accurately the international

repercussions of national policy changes depends on the policies
being not much more or less predictable or exploitable than
previous ones. The sensitivity of model results to changes in
the formation of expectations is especially great under flexible
exchange rates. Increasing attention is likely to be paid to
these issues as flexible exchange rates become a more general
feature of linkage models.

There has arisen a distinction, emphasized in the linkage
context by Fair (1979), between small and large national models
as building blocks for empirical studies of macroeconomic
interdependence. From our survey of model structures and
results, we conclude that the actual size of the models in
question is much less important, from the point of view of the
user of results, than the ease with which the properties of the
models can be fully understood and described. Thus we have found
it easier to interpret and assess the reliability of results

from some of the larger models (e.g. those of the Japanese EPA

30

project) than from the constellation of smaller models in our
group Iv projects. Of course, this is partly because some of the
latter projects are at a very early stage of development and
hence not very well tested, corrected, and understood.

What is needed, in our view, for all of the models, are
clearer explanations of the comparative properties of the

component national models, as well as a clearer analytical and
empirical decomposition of the strength and nature of the links
between countries. Hickman and Filatov (1982), in their

decomposition of international trade multipliers, provide a
useful move in this direction, but there is much more in the way
of comparative macroeconomics that can usefully be done within
the context of linked econometric models. (7)

Indeed, this

comparative analysis is probably a necessary element in
understanding the reasons for many of the particular linkage
results and an important aid to the design of better empirical
models.

31

Footnotes

1. Hickman (1982) surveys a broad range of model types that were
presented at a 1980 conference, with an emphasis on models with
global coverage. Courbis (1981) surveys some of the
multinational econometric models and general equilibrium trade
models presented at a 1976 conference. Whalley and Shoven are in
the process of surveying the general equilibrium world trade
models.
2. The main strategy and results of Project LINK are recorded in
three North-Holland volumes, respectively edited by R.J. Ball
(1973), J.L. Waelbroeck (1976) and J.A. Sawyer (1979). The main
simulation results we shall refer to in this chapter are from
Hickman (1974), Johnson and Klein (1974), Hickman and Schleicher
(1978), Klein (1978), Filatov, Hickman and Klein (1982), and
Klein, Simes and Voisin (1981).

The Eurolink model, which is run by the Commission of the
European Communities in Brussels, joins quarterly models of the
United Kingdom, France, Italy, and Germany, with the system
being closed by a "Rest of the World" model. The trade linkages
are described in Ranuzzi (1981) and some alternative exchange
rate and capital market linkages by Ranuzzi and Anthemus (1981).
It is intended to add models for the other E.E.C. countries, for
Canada, and for the United States.
3. Hickman (1981) describes the current and planned treatment of
exchange rates within Project LINK.
4. Amano et al, 1981. In other work, Gana, Hickman, Lau and
Jacobson (1979) report a comparison of results from application
of the Klein-Van Peeterssen and the Hickman-Lau methods to a
four—commodity—class disaggregation of world trade. They find
the Hickman-Lau method better for imports of commodity group
SITC 5-9, and the Klein-Van Peeterssen method better for total
world trade, GDP, and total exports and trade balances of
individual countries. They also found that both methods
generally dominated the assumptions of constant export shares in
terms of either value or volume, although the latter provided
the best estimates of SITC 5-9 exports.
5. Table 5.1 also shows the exchange rate changes for the MCM
and Fair models. However, there are no comparable results run
under fixed exchange rates. McGuirk (1982) uses the
International Monetary Fund's multilateral exchange rate model
(MERM, Artus and McGuirk 1981) to estimate the real exchange
rate changes required to eliminate the trade imbalances caused
by the OPEC price increases. The summary discussion in that
volume contains an attempt to compare and reconcile the MCM and
MERM results.
6. Amano et al., eds. (1982), p. 376. While 21 per cent of oil
export revenues are spend on current imports, only 56 per cent
ultimately goes into foreign exchange reserves. This implies
that the remaining 23 per cent is invested abroad in some form
other than official foreign exchange reserves.
7. De Bever et al (1979) provide an example of the quantitative
decomposition and comparison of model properties that we think
could usefully be applied to whole sets of country models.

32

References

Amano, Akihiro (1982) "Exchange rate modelling in the EPA world
econometric model", prepared for International Workshop on
Exchange Rates in Multi- country Econometric Models, University
of Leuven, Belgium, 26-28 November, 1981.
Amano, Akihiro, Sadahiro Akira and Takahiro Sasaki (1981)
"Structure and application of the EPA world econometric model",
Discussion Paper No. 22, Economic Research Institute, Japan.

Amano, A., E. Kurihara and L. Samuelson (1980) "Trade Linkage
Sub-Models in the EPA World Economic Model", Economic Bulletin
No. 19, Economic Research Institute, Japan.
Amano, Akihiro, Akira Maruyama and Masura Yoshitomi, eds, (1981)
A three—country linkage model (Economic Planning Agency, Tokyo).
Amano, Akihiro, Akira Maruyama and Masura Yoshitomi, eds, (1982)
EPA world economic model, Volumes I and II (Economic Planning
Agency, Tokyo).

Artus, Jacques R. and Anne Kenny McGuirk (1981) "A revised
version of the Multilateral Exchange Rate Model", I.M.F. Staff
Papers , 28, 2, 275—309.
Ball, R.3., ed.,(1973) The international linkage of national
economic models (North-Holland, Amsterdam).

Barten, A.P., G. d'Alcantara, and G.J. Carrin (1976) "COMET: A
medium-term macroeconomic model for the European Economic
Community," European Economic Review, 7:63-115.
Barten, A.P. and C. d'Alcantara (1977) "Models of Bilateral
Trade Flows", in H. Albach, E. Helmstadter and R. Henn, eds.,
Quantitative Wirtschaftsforschung. Wilhelm Krelle zum 60.
Gebu,rtstag, (J.C.B.' Mohr, Tubingen), 43-57.
Corden, W,M. and J.P. Neary (1982) "Booming sector and deindustrialisation in a small open economy", Institute for
International Economic Studies Seminar Paper No. 195.
Courbis, Raymond, ed.,(1981) International trade and
multicountry models (Economica, Paris).
d'Alcantara, G. and A. Italianer (1981) Bilateral trade flows in
the COMET model, prepared for the LINK Conference, La Hulpe,
Belgium, 30 August - 4 September, 1981.
Darby, Michael R. (1980) "International transmission under
pegged and floating exchange rates: An empirical comparison",
N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 585.
Darby, Michael R., James R. Lothian, Arthur E. Gandolfi, Anna 3.
Schwartz, and Alan C. Stockman (1982) The international
transmission of inflation, Volume 1 (National Bureau of Economic

33

Research, Cambridge).
De Bever, L., D.K. Foot, J.F. Helliwell, G.V. Jump, T. Maxwell,
J.A. Sawyer, and H.E.L. Waslander (1979) "Dynamic properties of
four Canadian macroeconomic models: A collaborative research
project", Canadian Journal of Economics

Deardorff, A.V. and R.M. Stern (1978) "Modeling the effects of
foreign prices on domestic price determination: Some econometric
evidence and implications for theoretical analysis", Banca
Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review , 127:333-353.
Deardorff, A.V. and R.M. Stern (1979) "What have we learned from
linked econometric models? A comparison of fiscal-policy
simulations", Banca Nazionale del Lavoro , 130:415—432.
Dramais, A. (1981) "The DESMOS model", in Raymond Courbis, ed.,
International trade and multicountry models (Economica, Paris),
221—234.
Fair, R.C. (1979) "On modelling the economic linkages among
countries", in R. Dornbusch and S. Fischer, eds., International
economic policy, theory and evidence (The Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore and London), 209—245.
Fair, Ray C. (1981a) "A multicountry econometric model",
N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 414R.
Fair, Ray C. (1981b) "Estimated output, price, interest rate,
and exchange rate linkages among countries", N.B.E.R. Working
Paper No. 677. (NBER, Cambridge).

Fair, Ray C. (1981c) "Estimated effects of relative prices on
trade shares", N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 696.
Fair, Ray C. (1982) "Estimated output, price, interest rate, and
exchange rate linkages among countries", Journal of Political
Economy, 90:
Filatov, Victor, Bert G. Hickman, and Lawrence R. Klein (1982)
"Long—term simulations with the Project Link System, 1978—1985",
in B.G. Hickman, ed., Global international economic models
(Proceedings of the 8th IIASA Symposium on Global Modeling).

Hickman, Bert G. and L.J. Lau (1973) "Elasticities of
Substitution and Export Demands in a World Trade Model",
European Economic Review, Vol.4.
Gana, Jorge L., Bert G. Hickman, Lawrence J. Lau, and Laurence
R. Jacobson (1979) "Alternative approaches to the linkage of
national econometric models", in J. A. Sawyer, (Editor)
Modelling the international transmission mechanism. (North—
Holland, Amsterdam).
Helliwell, John F. (1974) "Trade capital flows, and migration as
channels for international transmission of stabilizing

34

policies", in International aspects of stabilization policies
(Federal Reserve Bank, Boston), 241-278.
Helliwell, John F. (1975) "Adjustment under fixed and flexible
exchange rates", in Peter B. Kenen, ed., International trade and
finance , (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge), 379—410.
Helliwell, John F. and Tom Maxwell (1974) "Monetary
interdependence of Canada and the United States under
alternative exchange rate systems", in R.Z. Aliber, ed.,
National monetary policies and the international system
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago), 82—108.

Helliwell, John F. and Robert McRae (1977) "The interdependence
of monetary, debt and fiscal policies in an international
setting", in Robert Z. Aliber ed., The political economy of
monetary reform (The Macmillan Press Ltd., London), 157—178.
Hickman, Bert G. (1974) "international transmission of economic
fluctuations and inflation", in Albert Ando, Richard Herring and
Richard Marston, eds., International aspects of stabilization
policies (Federal Reserve Bank, Boston), 201—231.
Hickman, Bert G. (1981) "Exchange rates in Project LINK",
prepared for the International Workshop on Exchange Rates in
Multicouritry Econometric Models, University of Leuven, Belgium,
26-28 November, 1981.

Hickman, Bert G. (1982) "A cross section of global international
economic models", in B.G. Hickman, ed., Global international
economic models (Proceedings of the 8th IIASA Symposium on
Global Modeling).
Hickman, Bert G. and Victor Filatov (1982) "on a decomposition
of international income multipliers", Center for Research in
Economic Growth, Stanford University, Research Memoranda Series
No. 250. To be published in Global econometrics, essays in honor
of Lawrence P. Klein, Bert Hickman and F.G. Adams, editors, (MIT
Press, Cambridge), 1983.
Hickman, Bert G. and S. Schleicher (1978) "The interdependence
of national economies and the synchronization of economic
fluctuations: Evidence from the LINK Project",
Welfwirtschaftliches Archly. 114:642—708.

Hooper, Peter, Richard D. Haas and Steven A. Symansky (1981)
"Revision of exchange rate determination in the MCM: A progress
report", prepared for the International Workshop on Exchange
Rates in Multicountry Models, University of Leuven, Belgium, 2628 November, 1981.
Hooper, Peter and Ralph Tryon (1982) "Macroeconomic and exchange
rate effects of an oil price shock under alternative OPEC
investment scenarios", In K. Clinton, ed., Proceedings of the
Fifth Pacific Basin Central Bank Economists' Conference: Supply
Side Shocks, the balance of Payments and Monetary Policy (Bank

35

of Canada, Ottawa).

Howe, Howard, Ernesto Hernandez—Cata, Guy Stevens, Richard
Berner, Peter Clark, and Sung Y. Kwack (1981) "Assessing
international interdependence with a multi-country model",
Journal of Econometrics 15:65—92.
Italianer, A. (1982) "An evaluation of the bilateral trade flows
in the COMET model", Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
Johnson, K.N. (1978) "Balance of Payments Equilibrium and
Equilibrating Exchange Rates in a World Econometric Model",
unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
Johnson, Keith N. and Lawrence R. Klein (1974) "Stability in the
international economy: The LINK experience", in Albert Ando,
Richard Herring and Richard Marston, eds., International aspects
of stabilization policies (Federal Reserve Bank, Boston), 147—
188.

Klein, Lawrence R. (1978) "Disturbances to the international
economy", in After the Phillips curve: Persistence of high
inflation and high unemployment , (Federal Reserve Bank,
Boston), 84—103.
Klein, Lawrence R. and A. Van Peetersson (1973) "Forecasting
World Trade within Project LINK", in R.J. Ball, ed., The
International Linkage of National Economic Models (North-Holland
Publishing Co., Amsterdam).
Klein, Lawrence P., Richard Simes, and Pascal Voisin (1981)
"Coordinated monetary policy and the world economy", Prevision
et Analyse economique 2:75-105.

McGuirk, Anne Kenny (1982) "The oil price increases and real
exchange rate changes among industrial countries", in K.
Clinton, ed., Proceedings of the Fifth Pacific Basin Central
Bank Economists' Conference: Supply Side Shocks, The Balance of
Payments and Monetary Policy (Bank of Canada, Ottawa)
Marion, Nancy Peregrim and Lars E.O. Svensson (1982) "Structural
differences and macroeconomic adjustment to oil price increases
in a three- country model", N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 839.
Kooyman, Jan (1982) "The METEOR model", in Raymond Courbis, ed.,
International trade and multicountry models (Economica, Paris),
235—242.
Minford, Patrick, C. Ioarinidis and S. Marwaha (1981) "Floating
exchange rates in a multilateral macro model", prepared for
International Workshop on Exchange Rates in Multi- country
Econometric Models, University of Leuven, Belgium, 26-28
November, 1981.

Moriguchi, C. (1973) "Forecasting and Simulation Analysis of the
World Economy", American Economic Review 63, No.2.

36

Mundell, Robert A. (1963) "Capital mobility and stabilization
policy under fixed and flexible exchange rates", Canadian
Journal of Economics and Political Science 29:475—485.
OECD (1979) "The OECD international linkage model. OECD Economic
Outlook, Occasional Studies (OECD, Paris).
OECD (1980) "Fiscal policy simulations with the OECD
international Linkage model: Incomes policy in theory and
practice" (OECD, Paris).
OECD (1982) OECD Interlink System: Structure and operation
Volume 1 (OECD, Paris).
Ranuzzi, P. (1981) "The experience of the E.E.C. Eurolink
Project in modeling bilateral trade linkage equations", 3.
Policy Modeling , 3:153—173.
Ranuzzi, Paolo and Paulette Anthemus (1981) "Eurolink model:
Monetary linkages", prepared for International Workshop on
Exchange Rates in Multi— country Econometric Models, University
of Leuven, Belgium, 26-28 November, 1981.

Sachs, Jeffrey (1980) "Energy and growth under flexible exchange
rates: A simulation study", N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 582.
Samuelson, L. and E. Kurihara (1980) "OECD Trade Linkage Methods
Applied to the EPA World Econometric Model", Economic Bulletin
No. 18, Economic Research Institute, Japan.
Sawyer, J.A., ed.,(1979) Modelling the international
transmission mechanism (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Shishido, Shuntaro, Masuo Aiso, Hironori Fujiwara and Takao
Fukuchi (1981) "Revised version of Tsukuba-Fais world
econometric model (T-FAIS V)"1 prepared for the LINK Conference,
La Hulpe, Belgium, 30 August - 4 September.
Stevens, Guy, Richard Berner, Peter Clark, Ernesto HernandezCata, Howard Howe, and Sung Kwack (1982) "The U.S. economy in an
interdependent world: A multi-currency model (Federal Reserve
Board, Washington).

Waelbroeck, Jean L., ed.,(1976) The models of Project LINK
(North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Waelbroeck, Jean, and A. Dramais (1974) "DESMOS: A model for the
coordination of economic policies in the EEC countries", in A.
Ando, R. Herring and R. Marston, eds., International aspects of
stabilization policies (Federal Reserve Bank, Boston), 285—347.
Yomo, Hiroshi (1982) "The macroeconomic impact of increased
energy prices for Japan", in K. Clinton, ed., Proceedings of the
Fifth Pacific Basic Central Bank Economists' Conference: Supply
Side Shocks, The Balance of Payments and Monetary Policy (Bank
of Canada, Ottawa).

Group

II:

(Ranuzzi

1981)

1979)

Eurolink

Sawyer.

Project LINK
(Ball 1973, Waelbroeck 1976,

MCM
(Howe et al 1981)

Econometric Model
(Amano et a! 1982)

EPA World

(OECD

(Barten et

1982)

INTERLINK

2. COMET

1.

al

1976)

Models with a common
structure, main focus
on trade linkages and
no monetary linkages.

Group III:

(Helllwell 1974)

3. ROX2-MPS

2.

I.

Linkage of structural
models built with
monetary and exchange
rate linkages in mind.

2.

1.

Linkage of available
national models.

I:

and reference

Group

Model

d Alcantara/Barten/
Ital ianer

Modif led
Samuel son/Kur hara

None

None

Interest rates and
portfolio balance

Bilateral

I

Multilateral service
account and direct
investment flows.

Incomes, assets.
and interest rates.

Total inflows set
by portfolio balance

1

but Only in short term
Si mu at ions

flows among
developed countries,

Capital

Monetary Linkage

Bilateral imports
determined by income,
and Importer, exporter
and competitor prices

Hi ckman/Lau

Bilateral imports
determined by total
imports and competing
export prices

Klein/Van Peeterssen

Trade Linkage

Table 2.1

F1

xed

Fixed

peg.

flexible and crawling

Fixed. Bretton Woods.

Fixed or flexible
with inverted capital
account portfol 10balance equation.

Fixed or managed
float with exchangerate bands and reserve
flow target.

approach.

Fixed or managed
float with structural
balance of payments

simulations. F bat ing
according to reaction
functions or PPP.

Fixed in long term

Exchange rates

Classification of linkage models.

Japan
Germany and ROW

Canada.

European countries,
Japan and 5
regions
U.S..

II

23 DECO countries
plus eight regions.

Canada and U.S.

U.S..
U.K..

regions.

Major seven OECD countries
plus Australia. S. Korea.
and six t-adlng

Germany. Italy. France
U.K and ROW.

18 OECD countries,
seven Comecon countries,
and four developing regions.

Country coverage

i

ed
i

Interest rates
and reserve flows

Indirect

Minfordet al(1981)

3.

See appendix for a detailed discussion of trade linkages.

Interest rates
and reserve flows

Indirect

Darby et al (1982)

2.

I

Capital flow equations
interest rate
reaction functions

Export share equations

Fair (1981a)

None

1.

Groupings of small
national models with
common structure focussed
on monetary and exchangerate linkages.

Group IV

f

Samuel son/Kur hara

i

Mod

1982)

METEOR

4.

(Kooyman,

None
Hickman/Lau with
income and capacity
utilization adjustments

DESMOS
(Waelbroeck and
Dramais, 1976,
and Dramais, 1981)

3.

countries plus U.S.,
arid 5

Real interest parity
condition on real
exchange rate.

Seven major OECD
plus Netherlands, Belgium
and three regions (with
trade links only).

Seven major
OECD countries
plus Netherlands.

Fixed and flexible
rates from inverted
import demand equation

64 countries plus ROW

regions

Japan. Canada

6 EEC

countries
and U.S. with trade
links to Japan and
three regions
8 EEC

Exchange rate
reaction functions

Fixed

Fixed

2
3

2

2
4

Any

INTERLINK
INTERLINK

EPA
EPA
EPA

METEOR
METEOR

RDX2-MPS
RDX2-MPS

Naive

MCM
MCM
MCM

Fair
Fair

LINK(a)

LINK(a)
LINK(a)

LINK(b)

LINK(b)

LINK(b)

INTERLINK
INTERLINK

EPA
EPA

US

US
US
US

US
US

US
US

US

US
US
US

US
US

1iA

JA
JA

JA

JA
JA

JA
JA

JA
JA

US

3

LINK(b)
LINK(b)
LINK(b)

US
US
US
1

2

3

2

2
3

2
3

I

2

2
3

1

1

2
3

2

0.02
0.02

0.04
0.08

0.03
0.04

0.02
0.04
0.06

1.43
1.39

1.98
1.90
1.43

2.24

2.03
0.93

2.46
2.86

0.04
0.11

1.45

0.05
0.13

0.04
0.06

0.02

0.01
0.01

0.05
0.19

0.16
0.32
0.38

0.07

0.43

0.19

0.37

0.09
0.25

0.20
0.43

0.33

0.21

0.13

0.04
0.08
0.14

0.11

0.02

0.04
0.10

0.02

0.01

0.01
0.01

0.00

0.01

0.03

0.03

0.12
0.30

0.07
0.27
0.44

0.34

0.16

0.07

0.05
0.06

0.02
0.04
0.06

0.05
0.15

0.06
0.13

0.02
0.03

0.02
0.04
0.06

0.07
0.21

0.10
0.16
0.08

0.10

0.19
0.45

0.22
0.56
0.70

0.21
0.39

0.08
0.12
0.13

0.08
0.21
0.35

Impact on income
in
GE
FR
UK

2.17

1.41
1.97

1.15
1.22

1.18
1.50
1.50

0.06
0.18

0.14
0.21
0.20

1.12

0.22
0.45

0.33
0.53

.

0.11

.59

0.18
0.34

0.13
0.20
0.22

0.13
0.27
0.40

JA

2.60
3 29

1

1.52
2.06

1.60
2.39
2.73

1.18
1.87
2.58

I

2
3

LINK(a)
LINK(a)
LINK(a)

US
US
US

Simulation
year 2
US

Model

in

Income
shock

I

0.02
0.08

0.04
0.13

0.04
0.05

0.02
0.03

0.01

0.04
0.19

0.07

0.15
0.34

0. 20
0. 34

0.06

0.19
0.39

0.26

0.21

0.14

0.31

0.17

0.08

IT

0.05
0.12

0.06
0.12

0.03
0.04

0.02
0.04
0.04

0.18
0.55

0.61

0.34
0.54

0.65

0.28

-0.15

0.65
1.29

0.46
0.83
1.41

0.59
0.93

0.63
0.63

0.53

0.56
0.86

0.31

CA

Table 3.1
Impacts of fiscal shocks with the LINK, OECD INTERLINK, EPA World Econometric
Model, mini-METEOR, DESMOS. Fair, COMET, RDX2-MPS, Deardorff-Stern Naive, and
MCM models.
Impacts are presented as percentage change in income for a shock of
one per cent of income in the initiating country.

Afly

2
3
2
3

2
3

8

Any
2
3

2

2
3
2
3

Naive

MCM
MCM

MCM

LINK(a)
LINK(a)
LINK(a)

LINK(b)
LINK(b)
LINK(b)

INTERLINK
INTERLINK

EPA
EPA
EPA

METEOR
METEOR

DESMOS
DESMOS

COMET
COMET

Naive

MCM

MCM
MCM

Fair
Fair

LINK(a)
LINK(a)
LINK(a)

LINK(b)
LINK(b)
LINK(b)

INTERLINK
INTEPLINK

JA

JA
JA
JA

GE
GE
GE

GE
GE
GE

GE
GE

GE
GE
GE

GE
GE

GE
GE

GE
GE

GE

GE
GE
GE

GE
GE

FR
FR
FR

FR
FR
FR

FR
FR

1.69
1.21
1.50
1.63

0.03
0.08

0.04
0.08

0.02
0.03
0.04

0.02
0.01

1

0.01

1

0.02
0.02

-0.03

0.06
0.07

0.02

0.05
0.13

0.02
-0.00

0.01

2
3

2
3

0.11

0.11

0.10
0.16

0.04
0.09

0.03
0.04
0.05

0.00

0.01
0.01

0.02
0.06

0.02
0.05
0.10

0.01

0.04
0.09

0.04
0.14
0.24

0.13

0.13

0.17

0.11

0.06

0.04

0.26

3

0.04
0.09
0.18

0.11

0.04

0.10
0.03

2.38

0.03

2

2
3

3

EPA

JA

.

.

0.19

.44

56

.25

.75
.06

.77

.45

.50

0.19
0.40

0.09
0.12
0.19

0.04
0.05
0.06

.

2 . 36
2 36

I .95
2.20

1

1

I .29
0.87

1

1

1

1.31
1.82

1.07
1.07
1.07

1.21
1.19
1.22

0.46

0.25

0.10

0.44

0.16

0.11

0.09

0.04

0.03

0.25

0.13

0.35

0.18

0.14

0.11

0.07
0.08

0.04
0.05

0.04
0.06

0.20
0.48

0.13

0. 40

0.24

0.16

0.08

0.17
0.27

0. 14
0.42
0. 56

0.46
0.46

0.12
0.17

0.16

0.10

0.04

0.03

0.24

0.08

0.08

0.04

0.20

0.08
0.14

0.09

0.29

0.12
0.34
0.33

0.34
0.34

0.52

0.35

0.28

0.42
0.81

0.09
0.12
0.19

0.19

0.25
0.53

0.01

0.11

0.10

0.07

0.02
0.04

0.01

0.17

0.16

0.66
0.84

0.40
0.40

0.11
0.12
0.17

0.21

0.16

0.08

0.01

0.18

96
96

.

I . 98

I

1

I
.

.83
.87
2.91
I

1

1

0.98
38
1 20

0.03
0.02

0.02

0.01

0.16

0.10

0.05

0.05

0.03
0.04

0.00

0.02
0.01

0.01
0.03

0.01
0.02
0.01

0.02

0.13

0.04

0.12
0.18

0.04

0.14

0.07

0.13

0.09

0.06

0.35

0.10

0.05

0.02
0.04
0.03

0.05

0.18

LINK(a)
LINK(a)
LINK(a)

b)

LINK(b)
LINK(b)

INTERLINK
INTERLINK

EPA
EPA
EPA

METEOR
METEOR

D E SMOS

DESMOS

Na ye

MCM
MCM
MCM

UK
UK
UK

UK
UK
UK

UK
UK

UK
UK
UK

UK
UK

UK
UK

UK

UK
UK
UK

3

LINK(a)

LINK(b)
LINK ( b)
LINK(b)

INTERLINK
INTEPLINK

EPA
EPA

IT
IT
IT

IT
IT

IT
IT
2

2
3

-0.02

0.02

0.02
0.04

0.04
0.06

0.01

0.03
0.05

2
3

0.01
2

LINK(a)

0.05
0.07
0.03

0.01

0.11

0.04

0.02
0.01

0.01

0.03
0.06

LINK (a)

3

2

A fly

3

2

2
3

2
3

0.02
0.04
0.06

0.04
0.05

2
3

0.01

1

0.01

2
3

A fly

0.04
0.09

0.03

0.01
0.01

IT
IT
IT

I

(

Naive

FR

LINK

DESMOS
DESMOS

FR
FR
3

2

METEOR
METEOR

FR
FR

FR

2
3

EPA

EPA
EPA

FR

FR

0.02
0 08

0.04

0.02

0.05

0.02
0.05

0.02
0.03

0.01

0.03
0.03

0.01

0.01

0.03
0.07

0.03
0.09
0.14

0.04
0.08

0.03
0.05
0.05

0.03
0.03

0.01

0.01

0.06

0.03

0.11

0.05

0.01

0.14
0.30

0.08
0.18

0.07
0.16
0.20

0.02
0.03
0.05

0.02
0.03
0.03

0.03

0.04

0.02

0.07
0.15

0.08
0.23
0.26

0.23

0.11

0.17

0.11

0.08

0.02
0.03
0.04

0.08

0.07
0.09

0.23

0.14

0.07
0.24
0.32

0.19
0.43

0.08
0.16

0.03
0.06
0.06

0.03
0.04

0.02

0.03

0.02
0.03

0.06
0.12

0.10
0.30
0.38

0.09
0.19

0.04
0.05

0.03

0.02
0.02

.72

0.01

1

.

46
1.61
1

1. 1€

78

1.85

3 .02
2 .63

16
.43

14
16

55

57

29

0.09
0.15

0.05
0.11

0.02
0.06
0.06

0.03
0.06
0.08

1.15
20
I. 15
•

1 .

19

.23

.

I.

1

I

0.65

1.31
0. 78

I

1.

I.

I.

1.07

1

1.24
.69
1.51

0.03

0.03
0.04

0.15

0.07

0.06
0.21
0.23

I

1

1

54

.

39

. 18

.

16

.83
.94
1.

1

1

1.61

30
1.51
.80

0.03

0.02
0.04

0.11

0.05

0.05
0.15
0.22

0.09
0.19

0.13

0.11

0.08

0.03
0.06
0.08

0.09

0.05
0.08

0.11
0.18

0.06
0.19
0.30

0.03
0.08

0.02
0.05

0.02
0.05
0.05

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.02
0.03
0.02

0.04

0.08
0.16

0.15

0.11

0.04

0.07
0.12

0.08

0.07

0.05

0.03
0.06
0.05

0.01

0.03
0.08

0.01

0.05
0.09

Any

LINK(b)
LINK(b)
LINK(b)

INTERLINK
INTERLINK

EPA
EPA
EPA

RDX2-MPS
RDX2-MPS

Naive

MCM
MCM
MCM

CA
CA
CA

CA
CA

CA
CA
CA

CA

CA

CA
CA
CA

1

0.12

3

,

0.17

0.03
0.01

0.02

0.12

1

2

0.11

0.06

0.01

0.03

0.0l

001

-0.04
-0.09

0.02
0.06
0.09

0.05
0.07

0.01

0.01
0.01

0.02
0.04
0.05

.0.13

0.02
0.05
0.04

0.08
0.12

0.05

2
3

1

2
3

2
3

I

2
3

0.00

0.12

0.01

0.00

0.03
0.05

0.01

0.02
0.03
0.03

001

0.01
0.06
0.11

0.02
0.04

0.00

0.06
0.12

0.01

0.03

for DESMOS, 1970-74; for COMET,
for RDX2-MPS. 1963-70; for MCM.
1975-78;for Fair, 19761-771V;
for INTERLINK. 1978-80; for EPA, 1974-77.

1979-82;
1973-80;

;

-0.01
-0.02

0.00

0.02

0.02
0.07
0.09

0.01
0.01
0.01

0.00
0.00

0.02
0.02

0.01
0.0l

1.15
1.15

0.03
0.05
0.06

0.05
0.09
0.08

0.01
0.01
0.01

0.02
0.03
0.03

1.27
1.49

0.02
0.03

0.01

0.01
0.05
0.07

1.04
1.00
1.00

1.50

0.89
0.80

1.52
1.97
1.84

1.38
1.3€
1.37

0.01

0.02
0.02

0.79

0.01

1.70

0.02

0.06

0.05

1.69
2.37

0.03
0.05

0.04
0.08

0.05
0.09

0.12

1.68

0.17

0.53

0.34

Sources for the results are as follows: for METEOR
and Naive, Deardorff and Stern (1979); for
LINK(a), Hickman(1974); for LINK(b), Filatov, Hickman
and Klein(1982)
for RDX2-MPS. Helliwell(1974); for
DESMOS. Waelbroeck and Dramais(1974); for Fair,
for
Fair(1982); for COMET. Barten et al(1976)
Amano,
INTERLINK, OECD(1980); for EPA
et al(l982). The MCM results were produced for
this survey.
Simulation period for LINK(a) was 1973-75; for LINK(b)

;

2
4

LINK(a)
LINK(a)
LINK(a)

CA
CA
CA

CA

Any

Naive

IT

1

3

DESMOS
DESMOS

IT
IT

3

EPA

IT

1.05
1.01
1.11
1.07
1.06
1.05
1.01

1st year

OECD

1.08
1.04
1.20
1.12
1.12
1.08
1.01

2nd year
1.02
1.12
1.05
1.01
1.03
1.26
1.00

1st year

EPA

1.08
1.13
1.10
1.03
1.40
1.70
1.00

2nd year

al (1982).

Calculated from data in OECD (1980). and Amano et

CA

IT

UK

GE
FR

US
UA

Country

Table 3.2
Ratio of linked to unlinked government spending
multipliers.

0.964
0.879
0.902

1.000

JA

1.000

0.602
0.575
0.449

1.000
1.000

Large
Large
1.000
1.386
1.000
1.134

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

From Amano et al (1982).

CA
CA

CA

CA

IT
IT
IT
IT

UK

UK

1.100
0.476
2.000
3.095

1974
1975
197€
1977

UK
UK

1.000

1.000

1.000

0.596
0.670

0.596
0.602
0.545

1.000

0.507

0.581

0.729
0.614

.

1

.

000
lOG

1.000
0.756
0.831
0.505

0.500
0.838
0.711
0.381

1.130
1.215
1.173
1.257

1.189
0.935
0.900
1.089

0.712
0.953
0.882
0.667

.

.

0.964
1
150
405

1

0.847

1

1.474
1 .000

.

I

1.030
1.109
1.321
1.740

0.795
0.575
0.504

1.000

1.000
0.726
0.214
0.212

0.680
0.805
0.696

1.000

0.874
0.707
0.682

1.216

0.919
0.722
0.469

1.000

1.019

0.842
0.882
0.807

.

197
1.689
346
374
1

CA

IT

0.800
0.779
0.702
0.817

0.926

See footnote to Table 3.4.

0.596
0.443
0.276

0.496
0.332
0.350
0.295

0.421

1.024
1.381
1.475

0.319
0.292
0.502

0.884
0.725
0.587

0.631

1.032

0.771
0.626'

0.919

000

.968

0.952

0.781

1.014
1.083
1.083
1.157

050

0.373
0.357
0.378
0.315

0.667
0.462
0.436

0.680
0.667
0.458

1.000

2.056

1.000
2.941
1.692

1974
1975
1976
1977

FR
FR
FR
FR

.

0.937

1

000
0.874
0.882

.225
195
1.111
364
1

UK

2.485

1.139
1.584

0.721

0.920
0.944

1.000

0.952
2.030
3.165

1.000

for
FR

0.927
0.762
0.773
0.778

0.923

Small

1.000

1.198

0.757
0.504
0.312
0.216

5.444
6.361

4.000
4.102

GE

Multiplier ratio

-1.467 0.789
Large 0.613
-2.500 0.513

Small

0.474 0.987
0.474 1.013
-0.333 1.084

1.016
1.042
1.063
1.135

US

1974
1975
197€
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

Year

GE
GE
GE
GE

JA
JA

JA

iA

US
US
US
US

in

Increase in
Expenditure

Table 3.3
Effect of endogenizing exchange rates in the EPA World Econometric Model.'
Displayed are the ratios of the fiscal multiplier With exchange rates endogenous
to the multiplier when the exchange rate is exogenous. Actual values of the
multipliers with endogenous exchange rates are given in Table 3.1. Impacts on
prices and exchange rates are given in Table 3.4.

0.067
0.080

-0.008 -0.008 -0.000
-0.008 -0.034 -0.017
0.026 -0.052 -0.026
0.037 -0.147 -0.028
0.021 -0000 0.000 -0.032 0.368
0.021 -0.072 -0.000 -0.113 1.471
-0.022 -0.209 -0.022 -0.110 3.824
0.000 -0.258 -0.032 -0.043 6.794

1976
1977

1974
1975
197€
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

GE
GE

FR
FR
FR

UK
UK
UK

CA
CA
CA
CA

IT
IT

II

IT

UK

FR

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

0.037 0.007

1974
1975

GE
GE

JA

%JA

-0.000
-0.050
-0.154
-0.278

0.021

0.040

0.019
0.066

1.67€
3.341

0.110
0.116

0.057

0.009

0.593
0.943

0.024
0.208

CA

-0.000
-0.016
-0.034
-0.052

-0.085
-0.149
-0.120
-0.122

-0.134
-0.252
-0.428
-0.111

0.115
0.890

0.353

0.092
0.088

0.734
2.116
3.498
0.000 4.814

0.017
0.066
0.051

0.032
0.021
0.044
0.333
0.017
0.034
0.035

0.000

0.011
0.021
0.022
0.022

0.008 -0.034 -0.008
0.017 -0.008 -0.008
0.035 0.122 0.026
-0.000 0.046 0.046

-0.248

-0.011 -0.000 0.000 -0.000 0.000 0.000 0.528
0.000 -0.011 0.000 -0.011 0.023 0.045 l.6&2
0.023 -0.035 0.024 0.000 0.083 0.106 2.842
0.012 -0.085

0.017
0.016
0.034
0.035

1.089 -0.261

0.877
0.391

0.085
0.747

IT

0.060 -0.060 0.060 0.037 0.022
0.425 -0.231 0.209 0.052 0.060

1.131

1.751

-0.689 1.868 -0.240

-0.097
0.084 -0.353

0.606

0.812

0.085

0.019 -0.065 0.000 -0.000 0.019
0.057 0.085 0.009 -0.019 0.132
0.070 0.609 0.010 -0.030 0.220
0.032 1.710 0.011 -0.053 0.095

0.541
1.172

0.024

1974
1975
1976
1977

-0.116
0.121

0.024

JA
JA

Us
Us

0.061

0.024

-0.098 0.245 0.257 -0.000 0.527

1974
1975
1976
1977

Us
us

JA

Impact on PA
in
t3E
FR
UK

US

Year

(Endogenous exchange rates.)

In

Increase in
Expenditure

I

Table 3.4
Impact of increased autonomous expenditure in the Japanese EPA
World Economic Model.
Impacts are presented2 as per cent
difference from control for a one per cent increase in expenditure

0.017
0.116
0.240
0.365

0.088 -0.066
0.129 -0.043
-0.017
-0.066
-0.086
-0.070

0.000
0.050
0.120
0.174

0.000 0.000 0.011
0.011 0.000 0.057
0.035 -0.000 0.142
0.061 -0.000 0.244

0.055
0.065
0.017
0.033
0.051
0.070

0.000
0.023
0.047
0.061

0.055
0.075
0.017
0.033
0.051
0.070

0.011
0.045
0.094
0.122

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

UK
UK

IT
IT
IT
IT

CA
CA
CA
CA

0.000 0.404
0.034 1.243
0.059 1.757
0.073 1.863

0.017
0.050
0.103
0.156

1.029
1.278
1.688

0.031 -C).041

0.085
0.182
0.326
0.556

0.011
0.062
0.132
0.172

0.011
0.041
0.055
0.065

0.378

0.000 -0.011

1974
1975
1976
1977

UK
UK

0.011
0.021

0.061
0.101

0.011
0.031

0.000
0.017

0.008 -0.000
0.092 0.000
0.245 0.017
0.359 0.018

-0.243
-0.562
-0.586
-0.332

0.000
0.025
0.079
0.138

1974
1975
1976
1977

FR
FR
FR
FR

0.000
0.008
0.026
0.034

1977
0.000
0.017
0.035
0.046

0.015
0.074
0.169
0.248

0.211

0.009
0.076
0.160

1.320

0.109
0.417
0.864

CA

0.030
0.097
0.138
0.153

-0.015
0.037
-0.082
0.223
0.491
-0.130
1.138 -0.088 0.705

0.082
0.462
0.889

0.015
0.045
0.084
0.112

0.015
0.052
0.100
0.120

GE
GE
GE
GE

JA

1974
1975
1976

0.009
0.047
0.070
0.063

0.009 0.084 0.000 0.000 0.009
0.047 0.236 0.019 -0.000 0.094
0.070 0.120 0.060 -0.010 0.240
0.084 -0.275 0.095 -0.021 0.370

1.266

1974
1975
1976
1977

-0.054

JA
UA
JA

0.000
0.037
0.116
0.216

0.024
0.061
0.103
0.175

US
US
US

-0.000 0.049
-0.025
0.319
-0.064
0.748

0.012
0.037
0.103
0.148

IT

0.073
0.000
0.206
0.795

UA

US

Impact on PA
in
FR
UK
GE

1974
1975
1976
1977

Year

US

in

Increase in
Expenditure

(Exogenous exchange rates.)

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

FR
FR
FR
FR

UK
UK
UK

IT
IT
IT
IT

CA
CA
CA
CA

-0.326
-0.746
-1.415
-2.484

0.222
0.397
0.429
0.556

5.567
0.231 15.186
0.151 11.105

0.011 -0.011
0.000
-0.079 0.023 -0.045 0.000
-0.259 0.142 0.130 -0.047
-0.390 0.560 0.280 -0.134

-0.011
0.011
0.147
0.318
0.499

7.330

2.238
4.328

0.943

-0.104

-0.083
-0.069

-0.051

0.021 -0.123
0.683 -0.066
1.398 -0.043

-0.495 -0.632 -0.051 2.835
-0.942 -0.512 -0.248 7.620
-0.669 -0.840 0.000 -0.583 10.718
-1.043 -0.904 -0.348 -0.382 13.364
-0.051
-0.281

-0.771 -0.154
-1.290 -0.774 -0. 172

0.411 -0.026
0.322 -0.018

0.025 -0.025
0.403 -0.034

0.126 -0.032 -0.074

1.528 -0.000
2.717 -0.361
0.723 -0.691
1.814 -0.507

0.147 -0.074 -0.347 -0.378
-0.391 -0.689 -0.535

-0.422
-1.752

-0.166

-0.787

-0.160
-0.386

-0.112 -0.887 -C).813 0.007 -0.224 -0.052
-0.700 2.287 -1,281 -0.655 -0.074 -0.142
-1.633 6.387 -0.337 -2.063 1.809 -0.153
-2.389 10.525 0.128 -1.683 4.361 -0.200

-0.126 -0.017
-0.151 -0.084
0.262 -0.280
0.046 -0.617

0.328
-0.037
-0.598
-1.339

1.715

1

Calculated from data in Amano et al, (1982).
Actual shocks were a sustained increase in real government non-wage
expenditure in the U.S. of $10 billion, a sustained increase
in real government expenditure in West Germany
of 10 billion DM, a sustained increase in real
government gross fixed investment in Japan of
trillion yen,
an increase in the U.K. of general gross fixed capital formation
by I bIllion pounds, increases In Italy of
government expenditure and the constant term
of the fixed investment equation by 700 bIllion lire.
and an increase in Canada of government
fixed Investment by $1 billion.

UK

1974
1975
1976
1977

GE
GE
GE
GE

'1.703

0.205 -0.626 -0.168 -0.093 0.065 0.000 -0.075
0.274 -0.245 -0.557 -0.330 -0.057 -0.085 -0.142
-0.359
2.805 -0.399 -0.190 -0.699 -0.190 -0.120
-1.710 8.573 0.348 -C).021 -0.940 0.053 -0.148

1975
1976
1977

6.960

1.176

1974

0.946

0.995 -0.340
4.607 -0.417
2.655 15.636 12.684 0.825 10.389 1.353
6.021 29.755 17.390 -0.687 18.993 0.674

2.596

0.412

-0.776
-1.997
-5.620
-8.998
0.898

Impact on FXS
in

exchange rates.)

1974
l975
1976
1977

Year

JA
JA
JA
JA

US

US
US
US

in

Increase in
Expenditure

(Endogenous

1964
1966

1964
1966

US
us

CA

1964
1966

1964
1966

US
US

CA
CA

2

Year

1964
1966

1964
1966

in

US

CA
CA

Decreased
expenditure

-0.00 -0.61

-0.04
-0.09

0.89
0.80

2.03 -0.15
0.93 0.28
-0.11

-0.02

-1.37

0.00 -0.66

-0.21
-1.08

CA
0.02

in
US

In
CA

PGNP

Impact on

Impact on
GNP
US

-0.01 -0.55
-0.02 -0.60

-0.01 -0.52
-0.02 -0.69

-0.29 -0.02
-0.32 -0.01

Impact on
RS
in
US
CA

1.23
1.27

-0.37
-0.35

Impact on
FXS

fixed money supplies.)

-0.04 -1.06

-0.29 -0.02
-0.32 -0.03

Impact on
PS3
in
US
CA

in

CA

-0.16

-0.13

2.02
2.69

2.47 -0.27
2.43 -0.11

US

(3NP

Impact on
CA

-0.07

-2.00

-0.00 -0.99

-1.28-0.19

-0.21 -0.00

US

Impact on
PGNP

-0.07 -2.99
-0.16 -4.47

-1.62 -0.18
-2.70-0.31

Impact on
Ml
in
CA
US

-0.31
-0.88

0.05
0.20

Impact on
FXS

Percent

From Helliwell (1974), 259-261, and Helliwell and McRae (977), 174-175.
of 1963 GNP
Percentage points.

US

0.83
0.58

(Fixed exchange rate,

-0.06
-0.10

-1.08 -0.20

0.01

-0.21

0.22

1.97 -0.16

Impact on
PGNP
in
CA
US

0.88

Impact on
GNP1
in
US
CA

(Flexible exchange rate, fixed short-term interest rates.)

Year

in

Decreased
expenditure

CA

Year

in

Decreased
expenditure

(Flexible exchange rate, fixed money supplies.)

Table 3.5
Sustained
Impact of fiscal policy in linked RDX2 - MPS system.
cut equal to 1% of 1963 GNP. Impacts given as per cent difference from
control
Shock starts in 1963.

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

FR
FR
FR
FR

UK
UK
UK
UK

IT
IT
IT
IT

CA
CA
CA
CA

GE

GE

0.01

0.03

0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01

-0.00
0.01

0.01

0.00

0.01
0.01
-0.01

0.00

0.02

0.01
-0.01
-0.03
-0.05
-0.05

0.01
0.01

0.01
-0.01

0.00
-0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

-0.01
-0.01

-0.00

0.00
-0.04
-0.09
-0.11

-0.03
-0.04
-0.05

-0.31
-0.39

-0.20

-0.08

-0.00

1977

1JA

1974
1975
1976
1977

0.02

1976

GE
GE

0.01
0.01
0.01

1974

1975

-0.68
-0.51
-0.14

JA
JA
JA

-0.03

-0.10

-0.36

1974
1975
1976
1977

US
US
US
US
-0.14
-0.13

JA

US

Year

in

Increase in
Interest rate

0.02
0.02

0.01

0.00

0.01
-0.00
-0.02
-0.02

0.02
0.02

0.01

0.02

0.01
-0.01
0.01
-0.01

-0.54
-1.29
-2.01
-2.31

0.02
0.03
0.04

0.01

-0.15

0.24
0.22
0.06

-0.02
-0.03
-0.02

0.01
0.01

0.00
0.00
0.01
-0.01

0.00
0.00

0.16

-0.00

0.01

0.02

0.01

0.00

-0.41
-0.40
-0.24

0.01

0.03
0.04
0.03

0.02
0.05
0.05
0.01

0.03

0.01
-0.02
-0.01
-0.03

0.00
0.03

-0.03
-0.03
-0.03

-0.01

-0.02
-0.22
-0.42
-0.61

0.03

0.02

0.01
0.01

-0.01
-0.00
-0.14
-0.21

IT

-0.14
-0.08
0.08
-0.07

0.01

-0.21
-0.48
-0.69
-0.52

-0.03
-0.22
-0.30
-0.40

-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01

0.00
0.02
0.03
0.06
-0.11
-0.42
-0.77
-0.72

-0.06

-0.02
-0.11
-0.04
-0.12

-0.01
-0.15
-0.17

Impact on GNP
in
GE
FR
UK

(Endogenous exchange rates.)

0.00
-0.05
-0.49
-0.87

0.01
0.01
0.02

0.00

0.02
0.04
0.04

0.01

0.01
0.01

0.00

0.01

-0.07
-0.08

0.01
-0.03

0.02
0.03
0.05

0.01

-0.40

-043

-0.13
-0.38

CA

Table 4.1
Impact of a one percentage point increase in discount rate in the
Japanese EPA World Economic Model
Impacts are presented as per cent difference from control solution.

-0.02
0.00
0.00
-0.01
-0.02

-0.00
-0.00
-0.00
-0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

IT
IT
IT
IT

CA
CA
CA
CA

UK
UK

0.02
0.03
0.03

0.01

0.02
0.02

0.01
0.01

0.01
0.02
0.04
0.05

-0.01
-0.02

-0.00

0.00
-0.00
-0.00
0.00

1974
1975
1976
1977

-0.03
-0.05
-0.05

-0.01
-0.01
-0.02

UK
UK

-0.01

-0.00

1974
1975
1976
1977

-0.05
-0.12
-0.18

FR
FR
FR
FR

-0.27
-0.81
-1.14
-1.14

-001

1974
1975
197€
1977

0.03
-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
-0.03

0.00
-0.00

-0.01
-0.00
-0.01
-0.05
-0.08
-0.08

0.00
-0.00

0.00
-0.01
-0.04
-0.06
-0.06

-0.02

-0.01

0.00
-0.00
-0.01
-0.02

-0.01
-0.02

-0.03

0.00
0.00
-0.01
-0.02

-0.06
-0.18
-0.24
-0.14

-0.00
-0.01
-0.01
-0.00

-0.06
-0.04

-0.00
-0.02

-0.01
-0.01

-0.00

-C).44

-0.52

-0.01
-0.02
-0.04
-0.05

-0.01
-0.02
-0.04
-0.04

-0.16
-0.41

-0.26

-0.03
-0.19
-0.36
-0.46

-0.00
-0.00
-0.01
-0.01

-0.02
-0.06
-0.09
-0.10

IT

-0.03
-0.16
-0.25

-0.11
-0.47
-0.78
-0.76

-0.01
-0.01
-0.02

-0.00

-0.01
-0.01
-0.01

-0.00

-0.00
-0.01
-0,01
-0.01

-0.04
-0.12
-0.19
-0.24

GE
GE
GE
GE

JA
JA

0.02
0.02
0.02

0.01

-0.09

1974
1975
1976
1977

-0.20

-0.17

-0.13
-0.11

-0.11
-0.10

JA
JA

US

-0.60

-0.0€
-0.19

-0.02
-0.09

-0.02
-0.07

Impact on GNP
in
UK
GE
FR

-0.03
-0.11
-0.16
-0.17

-0.39
-0.75

US
US
US

1974
1975
1976
1977

JA

US

Year

in

Increase in
Interest rate

(Exogenous exchange rates.)

-0.35

-0.45

-0.01

0.00

-0.01
-0.02
-0.02

-0.00

0.02

0.01

0.00
0.00

-0.01
-0.01

0.00
-0.00

-0.01
-0.04
-0.09
-0.12

-0.00
-0.00
-0.01

0.00

-0.40
-0.37
-0.33

CA

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

UA
JA
iA
JA

GE
GE
GE
GE

FR
FR
FR
FR

UK
UK
UK
UK

IT
IT
IT
IT

CA
CA
CA

CA

0.84

0.02

0.00
0.00
-0.01

0.04
0.03

0.01

0.00

-0.07

-0.01

0.01

0.02
0.05
0.06

—0.10

0.00
0.00
0.00

0.01
0.01
0.01

0.00

0.01
0.01
0.01

-0.05

0.00

0.01

0.01

0.01
0.01

0.00

-0.00

0.00
0.00

0.02
0.02

0.03

0.01

0.01
-0.01

0.02

0.01

-0.09
-0.04
-0.11
-0.01

0.31

0.12
0.18

0.01

0.<)2

-0.01
-0.05
-0.39
-0.79
-1.31

0.01
0.01
0.01

0.01

0.05
0.04
0.18

F

0.00
0.00
-0.00

0.04
0.18
0.28
0.26

GE
UK

0.00
0.00
0.02

0.04
0.08
0.08

0.01

-1.21
-1.33

-0.13
-0.70

0.03
0.04
0.07

0.01

0.03
0.05
0.08
0.25

0.02

0.06

0.00
-0.06
-0.41

0.01

0.02
0.04
0.04

0.01

0.03
0.03
0.04

0.01

0.03

0.01
0.01
0.02

0.00

0.01

0.02
0.02

0.02

0.01
0.01
0.02

-0.37
-0.48

—0.02
-0.16

CA

0.00

-0.36
-1.26
-1.89
-1.91

0.08
0.12
0.06
0.05

0.00
-0.07

-0.03

0.03

-0.13
-0.25
-0.57

0.02

0.00

0.01

0.01

0.03
0.08
0.12

0.12
0.55
0.54
0.39

IT

0.01

-0.09
—0.29

0.06

0.01

Impact on PA
in

-0.00

0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.02

0.02
0.02
0.08
0.23

-1.27
-1.74

-0.28
-0.76

0.01

0.02
0.03
0.04
0.03

0.04

0.03

0.01
0.01

0.03
0.02
0.03
0.06

0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04

0.61

-0.47

0.13
0.38

-0.08
-0.12
-0.31

1974
1975
1976
1977

US
US
US
US

JA

US

Year

In

Increase in
Interest rate

(Endogenous exchange rates.)

1974
1975
1976
1977

CA
CA

CA
CA

-0.01
-0.01

0.00
0.00

-0.01
-0.01
-0.01

-0.01

0.00
0.00
-0.00

-0.01
-0.01

-0.00
-0.00

-0.00

1974
1975
1976
1977

II
IT
IT
IT

0.01
0.01

0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.01

0.00
-0.00
-0.01
-0.02

0.02
0.00
0.00

-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04

-0.03

-0.00

-0.00

0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.01

-0.00
0.02

-0.04
-0.04
-0.00
-0.01
-0.03
-0.05

0.00
0.01

0.00

0.01

-0.00
-0.00
-0.00
0.00

-0.00
-0.00
-0.01
-0.01

-0.01
-0.01

-0.01
-0.01

-0.00
-0.00
-0.05

-0.01

0.00
0.00

0.00
-0.00
-0.00
-0.00

0.00
0.00

1974
1975
1976
1977

UK
UK
UK
UK

—0.01
-0.03
-0.05

0.05
0.08
0.07

-0.01
-0.02

-0.00

0.01

-0.00
-0.00

-0.00
-0.00
-0.01
-0.01

0.00
-0.00
-0.00
-0.00

0.12
0.13

-0.36
-0.55

1974
1975
1976
1977

FR
FR
FR
FR

-0.06

-0.05

-0.01
-0.04
-0.07
-0.09

-0.01
-0.07
-0.23
-0.40

-0.02

-0.01

-0.00
-0.00
-0.01
-0.01

-0:01
-0.02
-0.05
-0.08

IT

-0.00
-0.00

0.05

0.01

-0.00
-0.00
0.00
0.00

-0.23
-0.33

-0.10

0.01
0.01

-0.00

-0.02

0.00

-0.02
-0.15

-0.00
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06

-0.00
-0.02

1974
1975
1976
1977

-0.04

GE
GE
GE
GE

-0.01

-0.03

JA
JA
0.01

-0.00

-0.00
-0.01
-0.03
-0.06

-0.00
-0.00

-0.01
-0.02

-0.01
-0.01
-0.04
-0.06

JA

Impact on PA
in
GE
FR
UK

-0.00
-0.00
0.00

1974
1975
1976
1977

JA
JA

Us
Us

-0.02
-0.05
—0.22
-0.37

Us
Us

1974
1975
1976
1977

US

Year

in

Increase in
Interest rate

(Exogenous exchange rates.)

-0.27

-0.10

0.01

0.00

-0.01
-0.01
-0.02

-0.00

0.01

0.00
0.00
0.00

-0.01
-0.01

0.00
-0.00

-0.02
-0.07
-0.12

-0.00

-0.00
-0.01
-0.01

0.00

-0.31
-0.39

-0.14

-0.02

CA

0.28
0.66
0.97

1974
1975
1976
1977

iA

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

1974
1975
1976
1977

FR
FR
FR
FR

UK
UK
UK
UK

IT
IT
IT
IT

CA
CA
CA
CA

0.94

2.90

0.33
0.83

1.01
1.45

0.00
0.18
0.75
0.86

0.05
0.14
0.18

0.01

0.27
0.55
0.54
0.30

0.15
0.08
0.26
0.03

-5.34

0.01

1.10

-0.01

-0.06
-0.12

0.08

0.00
0.01

-0.26

-0.41

0.00
-0.00

-0.04
-0.19
-0.30

0.02
-0.03
-0.19

-0.04

-0.06

13

-0.03
0.04

0.00
-0.01
0.08
0.03

0.00
-0.01

-0.05

—0.01

-0.23

-0.10

0.03

0.01

-1.63
-3.12
-2.76
-1.28

0.08

0.01
0.11

0.02

1.28
1.19

0.08
0.38

0.20
0.12

0

0.03

0.23

0.85
0.82
0.05

-C).06

0.02

-0.12
0.04

-0.01

-0.11

-0.02

-1.08
-0.46
-1.79

0.39
-0.33
0.56

-0.36

0.03
-0.06
-0.03
-0.03

0.69

2.34

0.63

-0.22
-0.18

0.02

-0.20
-0.01
-0.11
-0.27
-0.41

-0.04
-0.16

-0.01
-0.06
-0.12

-0.10

-7.79

-3.17

-0.02

0.60

-2.08

-0.22
-0.30
-0.47

0.51

-4.00
-5.09

-1.18
-2.71
-0.10

2.63
2.49
2.19

1.63
2.38

0.75

UA

Impact on FXS
in
GE
FR
UK

exchange rates.)

0.05
0.20
0.18

0.00

-1.64
-5.00
-5.94
-4.90

0.20
0.12
-0.13
0.06

-0.09
-0.22
-0.29
-0.34

-0.29
-0.80
-1.49
-2.93

0.01
-0.05
-0.10
-0.15

1 25
2.80
2.25
0.84

IT

width of text is 70 characters
Calculated from data in Aman
2
For the U.S., U.K., Germany and dapan, the discount rates w
Increased; In France, the call money rate, in Italy, the trea
rate. In Canada. Ml was reduced appropriately.

1974
1975
1976
1977

GE
GE
GE
GE

2J4

2JA

tJA
1.31

-1.03
-1.08
-1.23
-0.74

1974
1975
1976
1977

US
US

US
US

US

Year

(Endogenous

in

Increase in
Interest rate

0.00
-0.50
-2.08
-2.38

-0.01
-0.04

0.00
-0.00

-0.04
-0.05

-0.02

-0.01

0.02

-0.01
0.01

-0.00

-0.00
0.06
0.09
0.09

-0.01
-0.02
-0.02
-0.03

-0.10

-0.06

0.19
0.03

CA

Year

Model

1975
1976
1977
1978

0.5
0.6
0.6

0.2

0.4
0.4
0.6
0.6

0.6

0.2
0.5
0.7

1.0
1.2
1.5

0.5

0.1

0.2
0.2

0.1

0.1
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0
0.0

0.1

0.1
0.4

0.2

0.0

0.1
0.1
0.2

0.1
0.1

0.0
0.0

0.0

0.3
0.3

0.0

0.0
-0.3
-0.3
-0.6

0.2

C).1

0.0
0.0

0.2

C).l

0.0
0.0

Impact on price level
in
UK
US
JA
GE

0.4

0.2
0.7
0.6

0.3
0.6
0.7
0.7

US

Impact on income
in
JA
GE
UK

0.1
0.4
0.6

0.0

0.2
0.4

0.0

0.0

'CA

0.1
0.5
0.7
0.7

0.4
0.8
0.7

0.2

CA

outset.

From data in Klein, Simes and Voisin (1981). Simulated
shock was a 2 per cent cut, so we have scaled the impacts by
.5. Exchange rates are exogenous, and in the case of tiapan
and some other countries not shown, investment was shocked
directly by I per cent In the first year, 2 per cent in the
second and 3 per cent in the last two years.
2
From a simulation provided for this study. Exchange rates
are endogenous. The shock was a monetary contraction, so we
have reversed the signs of the impacts. The shock was
administered through the central bank discount rate and
standardized across countries to yield approximately one per
centage point change In short term Interest rates at the

MCM

1983

1982

1980
1981

1975
1976
1977
1978

MCM

LINK

1980
1981
1982
1983

Year

LINK

Model

Table 4.2
Impacts of a co-ordinated 1 per cent cut in interest rates
as simulated by LINK' and the Multi-Country Model.2 Impacts
are presented as per cent difference from control solution.

0.3

MCM (isolated)
MCM (coordinated)

0.7

0.9
2.0

LARGE

0.1

0.4

0.0

UK

-0.0

In
GE

0.9

1.1

0.5

0.5

CA

2

Calculated from data in Klein, Simes and Voisin (1981). See notes to
Table 4.2.
Calculated from data In a simulation provided for this study. See
notes to Table 4.2.

0.3

0.4
0.5

LINK (isolated)
-0.9
LINK (coordinated) -0.9
1.0
0.3

JA

US

Price/output ratio

Table 4.3
Comparison of the effects of isolated and coordinated monetary policy
as simulated by LINK' and MCM'. The tabulated
figures are ratios of
the percent change- in price level to the percent
change in income in
the fourth year of the shock, a measure of the inflation
cost of the
induced output. (In no case did output decrease.)

price

19811

1980 -0.91

MCM

GE

in
FR

2.62
0.41

5.08 -0.07 -0.43

JA

-0.2C

1.33

UK
0.00

1.89

0.04

CA

IT

-0.17 -0.46 -0.33

Impact on FXS

-1.46

0.03

Calculated from data in Fair (1982), Table 10. A 50 per cent price shock was
simulated, so we have scaled down Fair's Impacts by 5.
2 From Amano et al (1982), With endogenous exchange rate.
From Amano et al (1982), with exogenous exchange rate.
Calculated from data in Hooper and Tryon (1982), Tables 7 to Ii. Estimated historical
patterns for OPEC absorption and investment. Their price shock was
100 per cent of the base, so we have scaled their impacts down by 10.
Simulation provided for this survey. The shock was a 25 per cent price
Increase, so impacts have been scaled down by 2.5.

1975 -1.20

US

EPA

Increase
modelled
Year
by

10% oIl price

Eurollnk5

-0.18
1.00 -0.38

1.32

0.39

-0.05

1980 -0.21 -0.56 -0.09

MCM1

0.99

0.60

0.39

0.20

0.13

1.35

0.37

-0.49 -0.44 -0.02

1975 -0.66 -0.78 -0.07 -0.21

EPA
0.15

0.34

0.31

1.56

0.84

0.36

0.24

.10

2.59

0.32

-0.19 -0.29 -0.47 -0.44 -0.06

0.22

1.01

0.26

0.38

CA

IT

0.43

0.02

0.58

0.59

0.19 -0.14

0.10 -0.22

CA

JA

IT

Impact on PGNP
in
UK
GE
FR

US

0.08 -0.10

JA

1975 -0.64 -0.62

1977 -0.23

US

Impact on GNP
in
GE
FR
UK

EPA2

Fair'

lncrmase
modelled
Year
by

10% oil

Table 5.1

Impact of an oil price shock according to four models.
Impacts are presented as per cent difference from control,
in the second year of the shock.

Table 5.2

1974
1975
1976
1977

Year

1974
1975
1976
1977

Year

1974
1975
1976
1977

Year

1974
1975
1976
1977

Year

JA

0.29
0.37
0.38
0.45

US

36

0.26
0.32
0.33
0.32

-0.39

-0.50

-0.17
-0.47

0.05
-0.07
-0.22
-0.23
-0.44

0.03
0.10
0.12
0.07
1

.06

1.04

0. 33

0 37

0.26
0.84

0.36

0.31

Impact on PA
in
GE
FR
UK

1.08
1.35
1.30
1.31

iA
0.27
0.34
0.41

0.41

0.03
0.13
0.18
0.17

0.25
0.60
0.63
0.55

Impact on PA
in
GE
FR
UK

1.09
1.18

0.77
0.99

IT

.06
.56
1.45
1. 17

IT

-0.82

-0.70

-0.03

-0.23

-0.49
-0.46
-0.43

-0.21
-0.25
-0.22

IT

-0.10

Impact on GNP
in
GE
FR
UK

0.03

IT

-0.44
-0.85
—1.03

(Exogenous exchange rates)

5 .42

2 .59
3 . 95

JA
.

-0.54

-0.53

-029

-0.09

(Endogenous exchange rates)

-0.27
-0.78
-1 .03
-1 .08

I

-0.39
-0.55

0.01
-0.19

(Exogenous exchange rates)

-0.62
-0.69
-0.60

-0.23

UA

US

-0.81
-0.79

-0.23
-0.66

US

-0.85

-0.22
-0.64
-0.85

US

Impact on GNP
in
GE
FR
UK

(Endogenous exchange rates)

0.20
0.34
0.37
0.36

CA

0.21

0.30

0.31

0.19

CA

-0.02
-0.16
-0.24

0.07

CA

-0.06
-0.27
-0.42

0.05

CA

Impact of a 10 per cent oil price increase with the dapanese EPA model.
The Impacts are presented as per cent difference from control solution.

-1.95
-2.58

-1.20

-0.53

US

13.67

9.65

1.41
5.08

iA

-0.43
-1.20
-0.80

0.54
0.81
1.33
1.10
1.18

Impact on FXS
in
GE
FR
UK
0.21
-0.07
-0.07
-0.86

From Amano et al. (1982).

1974
1975
1976
1977

Year
IT

-1.11

0.32

1.51
1.89

(Endogenous exchange rates)

-0.30

0.00
-0.15

0.01

CA

-0.4
-0.5

1978
1979

6.6
6.0

0.2
0.2

1978
1979

0.4

0.6

0.6
1.2

1.9

2.3

-----

IT

UK

in

-0.6
-0.8

on PC

-0.5

-0.4

FR

Impact

-0.6
-0.9

GE

-0.8
-1.1

GE

0.0
0.0

US

0.3
0.7

CA

1.5

1.1

0.3
0.6

1.1

1.1

OECD

1.6
1.9

fourth.

2

1.2

0.4

UK

-6.0 -l 6

-1.9
-4.3

-0.2
0.1

Impact on Trade Balance
in
JA
GE
FR
UK

-0.7

-03

1.0
1.1

FR

GE

JA

-15.5 -13.0 -4.2

-6.7

US

Table 5.3 (continued)

-0.5
-0.9
-1.4
-1.9

S-lOb
$-32b

0.0
-0.1

OECD

CA

Impact on PGDP

The 1978-79 simulation is from Klein (1978), Table 2, and the 1979-82
simulation is from ilatov, Hickman and Klein (1982), Table 6.
In the 1978-1979 sImulation, the shock is an oil price increase of $2 per
barrel over control in the first year and $4 per barrel over control in the
second year.
In the 1979-82 simulation, the shock is an oil price increase over control of
8.5 per cent in the first year, an additional 3.2 per cent In the second years,
an additional 6.5 per cent in the third, and an additional 5.2 per cent in the

1979
1980
1981
1982

JA

US

-4.0

-2.3

JA

Year

1979
1980
1981
1982

US

Year

Impact on GDP
in
FR
UK
IT

Inipacts2,

Table 5.3

Impacts of oil price shocks calculated by LINK.'
are presented as per cent shock minus control over control,
or, where indicated, in billions of $US.

-1.2
-2.3

IT

-0.1
-0.1

IT

4.4

2.7
4.4

1.8

2.1

44
0.2
0.1

CA

Impact

on
World
Price

0.5
0.9

CA

-0.30
-1.16

US

0.25
0.02

197611
197711

Year

197611
1977II

GE

FR

UK

0.91 -0.01
0.79 -0.12

in

1.91 -0.02
2.39 -0.21

JA

IT

2.31

2.44

IT

0.47 -0.30 -0.24
0.94 -0.71 0.51

Impact on RS

0.41 -0.51

0.03 -0.40

UA
1.22
2.96

US
0.81
2.91

JA

0.44
0.80

CA

1.89

0.08

1.47 -1.47

-----1.69 -0.94
-6.30 -5.26 -5.51

JA

5.05

19761.

I

0.32
1.30

Impact on FXS
in
GE
FR
UK

0.46

0.10

US

Table 5.4 (continued)

-0.19
-1.12

CA

Impact on PGNP
in
GE
FR
UK

From Fair (l982), Table 10. The shock is a sustained 50% increase in
the price of exports from the oil exporting countries, beginning in

US

Year

Impact on GNP
in
FR
UK
GE

Table 5.4
Impact of an oil price shock in the Fair model.1
Impacts are presented as percent difference from control.

CA

0.33
1.10

CA

-0.40 -0.16
-1.60 -0.71

IT

1.33
5.06

IT

GE

0.63

Year

1980
1981
1982
1983

0.54
1.64
2.49
3.18
1.80
2.45
2.83

0.61

-0.50
-0.13
0.73
0.86

IT

0.33
-0.83
-1.13
-1.14

IT

GE

0.18
0.49
0.27
0.18

GE

6.92
8.78

6.13

3.07

Impact on PS
in
FR
UK

3.72
4.41

1.21
2 .04

50

2
.

0.73

0.08

-0.83
.

34

0.78
0.84
2.76
1.84

IT

-0.95
-0.01
0.12

-I

Impact on PGNP
in
FR
UK
IT

simulation.

Simulation provided for this survey. In the simulation. Rest of
World Is exogenous, and in the shock mode, the Rest of World oil price
(SITC 3) Is increased by 25 per cent throughout the period of the

1.35
1.52
1.66

.

.

-1.14
- I 36
- I 20

-0. 19

Impact on PC
in
FR
UK

-3.66
-3.41
- I 75

.

0.07

-0.43
-0.99
-0.85

-2.03

GE

1980
1981
1982
1983

Year

Impact on GNP
in
FR
UK

Table 5.5
Impact of an oil price shock in the Eurolink model.'
Impacts are presented as percent difference From control

