                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           PRIVATE BENEFITS AND CROSS-LISTINGS
                                  IN THE UNITED STATES

                                           Evangelos Benos
                                          Michael S. Weisbach

                                          Working Paper 10224
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10224


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




This paper is based on a talk at the Darden School of Business’ Emerging Markets Conference, May 29-30,
2003. We thank Dan Bernhardt, Craig Doidge, Jordan Siegel, Andrew Karolyi, Bill Reese, and participants
in presentations at the Darden School, and the University of Illinois for helpful suggestions. The authors can
be reached via email at ebenos@uiuc.edu, and weisbach@uiuc.edu. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Evangelos Benos and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Private Benefits and Cross-Listings in the United States
Evangelos Benos and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 10224
January 2004
JEL No. G3, F3

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper, we review the literature on private benefits and cross-listings in the United States. We

first discuss the alternative approaches used to measure private benefits. We survey recent evidence

documenting cross-country differences in the levels of private benefits obtained by corporate

managers, as well as the country-specific factors associated with high and low private benefits. We

then explain how, by cross-listing its stock in a market with high disclosure and regulatory standards

such as the United States, a firm can commit to a relatively low level of private benefits in the future.

We discuss the circumstances under which managers would choose to cross-list their stocks in the

United States, when such a cross-listing has important implications for managers' private benefits.

Finally, we survey recent empirical work that tests empirical implications of this bonding view of

cross-listings. Overall, this evidence provides a compelling case that the desire to protect

shareholders' rights so as to facilitate access to equity markets is one of a number of reasons why

firms choose to cross-list their stocks in the United States.

Evangelos Benos
University Of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
ebenos@uiuc.edu

Michael S. Weisbach
University Of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
weisbach@uiuc.edu
                  Private Benefits and Cross-Listings in the United States

1. Introduction

        Managers’ and controlling shareholders’ ability to take private benefits from their

firms is an important aspect of corporate governance. Firms can raise external finance only

to the extent that they can commit to return this capital to investors and not extract it for the

managers’ personal use. Various laws and institutions provide limits on how much wealth

managers can take from investors, and thus make it possible for firms to raise external

finance. Thus, there is a logical connection between private benefits and firms’ opportunities

in the capital market. Not surprisingly, there is a significant relation in the data between the

strength of minority shareholders’ legal rights and the ability of firms to raise capital [see La

Porta et al. (1997)].

        Measuring the extent of private benefits accruing to managers and controlling

shareholders is therefore a central question in corporate finance, both because the nature of

these benefits are interesting and important in their own right, and also because they have a

direct impact on firms’ access to external capital. A number of recent studies have estimated

the level of private benefits, and the extent to which they vary across countries.

        These studies have relied on two alternative approaches. First, the analysis of

Zingales (1995) suggests that in equilibrium, the value of a vote will be associated with the

value of controlling a corporation, and thus with the large shareholders’ private benefits. By

comparing the prices of otherwise similar high-vote and low-vote shares, Nenova (2002) and

Doidge (2003) estimate average private benefits in a number of countries. Second, the

analysis of Barclay and Holderness (1989) suggests that private benefits can be measured by

the difference between the prices at which controlling blocks change hands, and the prices of

minority shares. Dyck and Zingales (2003a) measure the premia of controlling blocks across

countries and estimate private benefits in these countries.


                                                 1
       The relation between private benefits and external finance implies that from a

manager’s perspective, there are costs as well as benefits when resources are taken from

shareholders. In particular, when a firm has access to valuable investment opportunities that

require external finance, the value of having access to external capital can be large relative to

the size of the private benefits. In this circumstance, Stulz (1999) and Coffee (1999, 2002)

have argued that managers/controlling shareholders will wish to bond themselves not to take

private benefits so as to ensure access to external capital markets.

       Coffee (1999, 2002) has emphasized that one way to perform such bonding is to

cross-list the firm’s stock on an exchange that imposes higher regulatory and legal costs than

the firm’s primary exchange. In particular, listing a non-U.S. firm on the NYSE or

NASDAQ, either directly or through an ADR, requires registration with the U.S. SEC.

Doing so, provides minority shareholders (even those that purchase their shares outside the

U.S.) with substantially more legal rights than they have absent such a cross-listing. Doidge

(2003), Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz (2003), and Reese and Weisbach (2002) all examine

implications of this argument, and find evidence broadly consistent with it.

       This paper synthesizes the arguments about private benefits, access to external capital,

and cross-listings in the U.S. It discusses in detail the methods used by recent studies,

focusing on five particularly important ones: Nenova (2002), Dyck and Zingales (2003a),

Doidge (2003), Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz (2003), and Reese and Weisbach (2002). It also

summarizes the evidence on a number of questions: Can we measure the value of private

benefits? How does this value vary across countries? What country-specific factors lead to

larger levels of private benefits? Are there circumstances under which managers would

voluntarily choose to commit not to pursue private benefits? How can cross-listing limit

private benefits? Is there evidence that commitment to limit private benefits is one reason

why firms cross-list in the U.S.?



                                                2
2. Data on Private Benefits and Cross-Listings

        In the past few years, data availability in international corporate finance has improved

dramatically. Data on stock prices and returns are available from Datastream, firms’

financial data is on Worldscope, and information about security offerings is on the Securities

Data Corporation (SDC) database. In addition, the Bank of New York maintains a complete

database of American Depositary Receipts (ADRs), and the exchanges’ websites contain the

identities of firms that cross-list directly.

        Table 1 summarizes the construction of the databases for the five recent papers we

focus our discussion on, below. More details on the samples’ construction can be found in

each of the papers themselves. Nonetheless, this table indicates that each study includes a

wide variety of countries, and each sample is constructed using data mostly from the 1990s

(for reasons of data availability).



3. Private Benefits

        Private benefits, sometimes called control benefits, are benefits that accrue to

managers or shareholders that have control of the corporation, but not to minority

shareholders. They can be non-pecuniary, such as the ability to direct a company’s resources

to a cause one agrees with (Demsetz and Lehn (1985)), a preference for glamorous projects

(Jensen (1993)), or the use of a position for the enhancement of one’s human capital (Shleifer

and Vishny (1989)). Alternatively and more substantially, private benefits can have an

enormous direct financial effect on minority shareholders, through transactions that divert

corporate resources to other companies owned by the managers or their families. Russian oil

companies are the most extreme examples of such ‘asset stripping’, a consequence of which

is that the value (measured as the price per barrel of oil owned by the company) of Russian

oil companies is usually a tiny percentage of comparable Western Companies. For example,



                                                3
in April 2003, Gazprom, a Russian oil company particularly prone to asset stripping, traded at

$.15 per barrel of oil it owns, about 1 percent of the $12.38 per barrel price of Exxon/Mobil

at the same time [Dyck (2002)].1

3.1. Measuring Private Benefits.

There have been several recent papers estimating private benefits of control internationally,

using two alternative approaches. The methods used by these papers are summarized in

Table 2.

The Control Block Approach. One approach to measuring private benefits was originally

proposed by Barclay and Holderness (1989), and relies on ownership changes of controlling

blocks of shares. Barclay and Holderness argue that the difference between the price per

share paid by the acquiring party and the price per share prevailing on the market after the

acquisition has taken place will reflect private benefits associated with the control of that

company. This difference is a plausible measure of private benefits since the price per share

paid by the acquiring party reflects not only the expected future cash flows but also the value

of control, whereas the market price of the shares reflects only the cash flow benefits.

        Extending the Barclay/Holderness approach to an international context, Dyck and

Zingales (2003a) calculate the control (or block) premium in 393 control- transfer

transactions spanning 39 countries for the years 1990-2000. These authors define the block

premium as:

        Block Premium = λBb + (1-λ) Bs - α(1-λ)(Yb – Ys), (1)




1
 Examples of private benefits taken by managers are extremely common in business press, and sometimes
outrageous. One recent blatant example occurred at Hollinger, Inc., where the chairman, Conrad Black, paid
$12 million of the corporation’s money to purchase thousands of historical documents about Franklin Delano
Roosevelt to help in the preparation of a book that he personally was writing about the former president. When
asked why he used Hollinger’s money rather than his own, Black responded that the $12 million ‘was not
something I was prepared to spend’. [See MacLeans, September 1, 2003]


                                                      4
where Bs,b is the level of private benefits extracted by the seller (buyer), Ys,b is the seller’s or

buyer’s level of cash flow benefits per share, λ∈[0,1] represents the bargaining power of the

controlling shareholder selling his shares and α∈[0,1] are the cash-flow rights or the size of

the controlling block. This number is the aggregate price differential that the buyer pays the

seller. For the case where λ=1, i.e. the seller has all the bargaining power, the block premium

reduces to Bb implying that the buyer pays the seller the entire value of private benefits.

Dyck and Zingales rely on this case, implicitly λ=1, and estimate the following regression:



BP/Yb = α(Country Dummy) + β(deal char) + γ(buyer-seller char) + δ(industry char) +ε (2)



       To make cross-country comparisons of the level of private benefits, these authors

control for differences in the characteristics of the block trades, differences in firm and

industry characteristics, differences in investor legal protection in the acquirers home country

and whether the target firm is cross-listed. Once these factors are controlled for, the

coefficient of the dummy variable for each country is an estimate of the private benefits

associated with a typical firm in that country.

        One limitation of this approach is that it implicitly assumes that the private benefits

associated with the firms in which a block is traded are the same as they are for firms in

which blocks are not traded. Without a structural model of the supply and demand for private

benefits in firms, it is hard to tell if this selection issue will lead to an overestimate (if blocks

change hands when benefits are large because new buyers have a large demand) or an

underestimate of private benefits (if blocks are unlikely to change hands whenever benefits

are really large). Nonetheless, this selection issue should be kept in mind when this method

is discussed.




                                                  5
The Voting Approach. The second way of measuring private benefits is to calculate the

percentage difference in the price of shares with different voting rights but same dividend

rights. This voting premium can then be used as an alternative estimate of private benefits.

       It is important however to understand the theoretical linkage between private benefits

and the voting premium at a firm as outlined by Zingales (1995). The price differential

between different classes of shares reflects not only the magnitude of private benefits that the

controlling party is enjoying, but also the probability that a vote will be pivotal in a control

contest. A vote that is unlikely to be pivotal will have low value, even if control is associated

with high private benefits. The likelihood of a control contest depends then on the firm’s

ownership structure; the more concentrated the ownership, the less it is likely that some

control contest will take place. Therefore, a limitation of the Voting Premium approach is the

fact that the voting premium is likely to be strongly related to the market’s assessment of the

probability of a control contest in the future.

       In addition, selection issues are also present with the voting premium approach. The

mere existence of dual class shares is likely to be correlated with higher private benefits since

empirical work suggests that controlling shareholders typically control the voting rather than

the non-voting shares (see DeAngelo and DeAngelo 1985). Thus, the voting approach could

potentially overstate the level of private benefits, since the samples of studies based on dual-

class firms are prone to include a disproportionately large number of firms with large private

benefits.

       Doidge (2003) and Nenova (2003) both use the voting approach to estimate the

private benefits accruing to managers in different countries. Doidge estimates the voting

premium as his measure, while Nenova uses an adjustment for shares outstanding in each

class to estimate the control benefits.

       Doidge estimates the voting premium as:



                                                  6
         Voting Premium = (PH – PL)/(PL – rv ∗ PH) (3)


In this formulation, PH and PL are the weekly local market closing prices of high and low

voting shares and rv is the relative number of votes attached to the low voting shares

(between 0 and 1). Intuitively, this measure reflects the price difference per vote.2 Doidge

does not control for either the likelihood of a control contest or for any other factors. This

lack of controls should be kept in mind when comparing his estimates of private benefit

magnitudes to those from other studies.

         Nenova’s approach is to estimate the value of a control block votes as:

VCBV = [PM(t)-PL(t)]/(1-k) ∗ ([NM + NL∗k]/2)/[NM∗PM(t) + NL∗PL(t)] (4)

where PM(t), PL(t) are the weekly prices of multiple and limited voting shares, NM and NL are

the numbers of multiple and limited voting shares and k is the ratio of the voting power of a

limited voting share to that of a multiple voting share. By this approach, Nenova attempts to

capture the value differential not of a single vote but of a controlling block of shares.

Intuitively, the value of a marginal vote depends on the relative number of shares in each

class and so she has to control for this factor. This approach requires that an assumption be

made about how “big” a controlling block is. Nenova assumes that control requires 50% of

the vote, and thus multiplies her estimate by one half of the total voting power (factor

[NM+NL*k]/2). Finally, to control for firm size she divides her voting premium measure by

the total market value of the firm (factor NM*PM(t) + NL*PL(t)).

         Because she is interested in cross-country comparisons, Nenova estimates a

regression similar to that of Dyck and Zingales to control for the probability of a vote being

demanded during a control change, and the differences in dividend payments and in liquidity




2
 Note that in the common case of the low voting shares having no votes at all, this equation reduces to (PH –
PL)/PL, , or the percentage difference in price relative to the low-voting class.


                                                       7
between the classes of shares. The country effects are the coefficients on country-specific

dummy variables in the following regression:

VCBV = α (Country Dummy) + β (Shapley value) + γ (log Firm Size) + δ (Dividend Ratio) +

ε(cumulative LV dividend) + ζ(Registration Costs for MV) + η(log difference in turnover) (5)

           The Shapley value of a voting game, which is intented to reflect the value of control

to the participating players (i.e. the extend to which each player’s vote is expected to be

pivotal), is used as a proxy for the probability of a control contest.3 Firm size is defined as

firm’s market value scaled by the stock market capitalization of its country. The dividend

ratio between low and high voting shares captures the differences in cash flow benefits, while

the cumulative LV (low vote) dividend variable is a dummy that takes the value 1 if dividend

payments to a limited voting share are cumulative. The “Registration Costs for MV (multiple

vote)” variable is also a dummy that equals 1 if the multiple voting class of shares has

registration costs that do not apply to the limited voting class. Finally, the difference in

turnover defined as: limited voting turnover/ multiple voting turnover accounts for differences

in the liquidity of the two classes of shares.

3.2. Cross-Country Estimates of Private Benefits

           The estimates of private benefits in each country are presented in Table 3. In general,

estimates of private benefits are correlated across studies, suggesting that each approach is

measuring the same thing. For example, in countries like Brazil, Italy, and South Korea, each

approach leads to relatively high measures of private benefits, while in the U.S., Norway, and

Sweden, the estimates of private benefits are fairly low. On the other hand, there are some

countries like Mexico and Switzerland, where there is reasonably high variation across

approaches.




3
    For an introduction to Shapley Value, see Appendix A of Chapter 18, in Mas-Colell et al. (1995).


                                                         8
        The results summarized in Table 3 indicate that countries vary widely in terms of

managers’ abilities to extract private benefits. What leads private benefits to be so small in

some countries and so large in others? These papers perform cross-sectional analyses to

isolate the factors affecting the ability of managers to take private benefits.

Legal Environment. Consistent with the analysis of La Porta et al. (1998), the most important

factor explaining the level of private benefits is the legal environment in which this firm

operates. Controlling shareholders all over the world maximize their own utility; what differs

across countries are the legal restrictions they face that limit their ability to do so. The better

the minority shareholders are protected, the more difficult it is for controlling shareholders to

expropriate value from them. Minority shareholder protections include the ability to sue the

management, strict disclosure, high accounting standards, and takeover laws that ensure that

in the event of a control transfer, minority shareholders receive a proportional share of the

control premium.

        Dyck and Zingales (2003a) and Nenova (2002) verify that in fact, private benefits are

related to these variables. For example, Dyck and Zingales find that a one standard deviation

increase in accounting standards (as measured by the CIFAR index), reduces the value of

control by 9%, a one standard deviation increase of an anti-director rights index reduces the

value of control by 4.4%, and a one standard deviation increase of law enforcement (as

measured by the IBR index) decreases the value of control by 7%. Similarly, Nenova

estimates that in her sample, the value of control block votes is 48% with the worst observed

levels of the shareholder protection variables (Law enforcement, Investor protection,

Takeover Law, Corporate Charter provisions), and is reduced to 5% with the best levels. In

addition, each of these variables has a negative coefficient in a regression using the value of

control block votes as the dependent variable. Finally, Nenova finds that the value of control

block votes is larger in French Civil Law countries (which generally provide relatively weak



                                                 9
investor protection) than it is in British Common Law countries (which provide relatively

strong investor protection).

Emerging Markets. An interesting question concerns whether private benefits are larger in

emerging markets, or developed markets. While this question is not addressed directly in the

papers we focus on, we can supplement the analysis in these papers by comparing their

estimates of private benefits across countries.

       To do so, we rely on the International Finance Corporation (IFC) classification

scheme utilized by Lins, Strickland, and Zenner (2003). The IFC classifies 22 of the

countries listed in Table 3 as emerging and 16 as developed. Since the Dyck and Zingales

paper contains private benefit estimates for most of the countries, we report comparisons

using these estimates, but the results are similar using the Nenova or Doidge estimates. Dyck

and Zingales find that for the 22 emerging market countries, the average private benefit level

is 18.1%, while for the 16 developed market countries, the average level is 3.8%. This

difference is statistically significant using standard tests of means. The large difference in

private benefits across countries suggests that it is substantially easier to expropriate private

benefits in emerging markets than in developing ones.

Other factors. In addition to the legal environment, there are other factors that affect the size

of private benefits. Such factors include product market competition, public opinion

pressure, the nature of the media, and the quality of tax enforcement. Product market

competition makes prices more accurately reflect cost, making it difficult to extract firm

value through manipulated transfer prices. In addition, recent research suggests that both

public opinion and the media exert pressure on managers to behave according to the

prevailing social norms, implying that the magnitude of their effect on private benefits can be

large or small depending on the social norms of a given country (see Dyck and Zingales

2003b). Finally, to the extent that controlling shareholders might be using transfer prices to



                                                  10
extract private benefits, enforcement of tax rules that regulate transfer prices should curb

private benefits (Desai, Dyck and Zingales (2003)).

     Dyck and Zingales (2003a) verify empirically that these extra-legal factors have indeed

a significant effect on the magnitude of private benefits. In a univariate analysis, they find

that a one standard deviation increase in their measure of market competition reduces the

value of control by 6% and that competition explains 20% of the cross-country variation in

private benefits. A one standard deviation increase in the diffusion of the newspapers,

decreases the value of control by 6.4 % while a one standard deviation increase of their tax

compliance measure curtails the value of control by 8.6 percentage points. In a subsequent

multivariate analysis all of the variables retain their sign but only tax compliance and

newspaper diffusion remain significant.

3.3. Private Benefits’ Impact on Financial Development

     The quantity of private benefits managers receive has a large impact on financial

development. In countries with large private benefits, entrepreneurs will receive on average a

substantially lower price for their firms in the public market conditional on the same cash

flows than they would have received in a market with lower private benefits. As a

consequence, high private benefits imply that the threshold for going public will be higher,

and we will observe fewer firms that are more mature having a public market for their

securities. In addition, minority positions will sell for relatively low prices because of the

risk of expropriation by the majority shareholders. Hence, in countries with large private

benefits, fewer companies’ securities will trade on public markets, and the capitalization of

the equity market relative to the GDP should be small.

       In addition, since entrepreneurs are more likely to retain control even after they list

their company, we expect few companies to be widely held. Finally, in countries with high

private benefits, a revenue-maximizing government should prefer to transfer control of state-



                                               11
owned firms via private negotiations rather than public offerings, since the price received in a

negotiation will reflect the control benefits, while the price in a public offering will not.

         Dyck/Zingales examine these propositions empirically. They find that in countries

with high private benefits, ownership is more concentrated, governments avoid selling firms

in public offerings and the equity market is less developed. Their econometric work implies

that a one standard deviation increase in the size of private benefits, measured by the Block

Premium, leads to 11% more equity being held by the three largest shareholders, to 36%

more firms being privatized through private negotiations and to a 67% decline in the

proportion of external equity capitalization over GNP.



4. The Bonding Hypothesis

4.1. The Demand for Bonding

         Consider the situation facing managers of a firm when the legal system does not

protect shareholders well and, as a consequence, private benefits are high. While the

managers enjoy private benefits, their firms face restricted access to capital markets. Their

firms cannot accept all positive net present value projects that they have access to, and to the

extent that managers own substantial stakes in their firms (typically true in high private-

benefit countries), the managers themselves lose their portion of the projects’ net present

value.

         The manager of a firm with access to a valuable investment opportunity faces

somewhat of a dilemma. The private benefits he enjoys prevent him from accessing the

capital market, and hence from reaping the positive net present value of the project. If he

could somehow commit to forego taking private benefits personally (and convince potential

investors of this commitment), he could then undertake the project and reap his share of the




                                                12
net present value. By this logic, if the project were sufficiently valuable, then it would make

sense for managers to ‘bond’ themselves to avoid taking private benefits.

4.2. Cross-Listings and Private Benefits

        In a country with a weak legal system, or one that favors controlling shareholders

relative to minority shareholders, it is potentially difficult to think of ‘bonding devices’ that

would be persuasive to potential outside shareholders. After all, once their investment is

sunk, investors’ only recourse is to a court system that typically works against investors.

However, Coffee (1999) and Stulz (1999) have suggested that one way to persuade investors

(at least partially) to invest in a such a firm, is to cross-list the firm’s equity on an exchange

of a country that does protect minority shareholders well.

        A foreign company can either list its shares on a US exchange directly, or it can list

via an American Depositary Receipt (ADR) program. ADRs are negotiable certificates of

ownership of outstanding shares of a foreign firm traded in the US markets. An ADR holder

has all the voting and dividend rights stemming from the underlying shares, the shares

themselves being deposited in a Depositary Bank in the firm’s home country. These

Depositary banks convert all dividends and other cash flows into US dollars and charge a

small fee.

        Coffee (1999, 2002) emphasizes that regulations associated with cross-listing in the

United States have significant regulatory and disclosure implications for a company listing its

stock on an organized exchange. These implications vary with the type of listing that firms

choose; listing on an organized exchange is generally associated with similar regulatory and

disclosure requirements to those faced by U.S. firms, while over-the-counter listings entail

minimal requirements.

        Depositary receipts fall into several different categories, each of which has a different

regulatory burden. Firms wishing to have their depositary receipt traded on the NYSE or



                                                13
Nasdaq must list via a “Level 2 or 3” ADR, in which case they are subject to similar

requirements with those firms that cross-list directly. Level 2 ADRs are traded on a US

exchange but cannot raise issue equity in the U.S. Issuers of Level 2 ADRs are required to

register and file Form 20-F reports with the SEC and reconcile their accounting with US

GAAP. Level 3 ADRs are traded on an exchange as well, and are allowed to raise equity in

the U.S. These issuers are subject to full SEC disclosure, compliance with US GAAP, and

registration on Form F-1. Both Level 2 and Level 3 ADRs are subject to the provisions of the

Securities Exchange Act.

           If a firm does not wish to have its stock trade on the NYSE or Nasdaq, there are two

options that are far less costly from a regulatory perspective. If a firm uses a Rule 144a

ADR, its regulatory requirements are minimal, but its security can only trade among

registered institutional traders. Finally, firms can issue Level 1 ADRs, which trade over-the-

counter as “Pink Sheet” issues, and have little disclosure or accounting requirements.

           Panel B of Table 4 summarizes the additional regulatory requirements associated with

a Level 2 or Level 3 cross-listing, which is associated with SEC registration.4 These

restrictions comprise some of the most important governance provisions faced by U.S. firms.

Two particularly important provisions are the right of shareholders to file 10b-5 suits under

U.S. law rather than foreign law, and the requirement that accounting must comply with U.S.

GAAP.

           Other than the possibility of shareholder suits and accounting changes, the

effectiveness of bonding through cross-listings depends on the degree of SEC enforcement of

these rules. Licht (2003) argues that the SEC “cuts corners” on corporate governance rules

for foreign issuers and generally has a “hands off” policy towards these firms. Undoubtedly,

Licht must be correct to some extent; it is hard to imagine the SEC enforcing governance


4
    See Coffee (1999) for much more detail about these requirements.


                                                       14
regulations to the same degree against a non-U.S. company as they do to a U.S. company.

However, the regulations are on the books nonetheless, and it is at least plausible that they are

enforced some of the time, and, more importantly, that investors assign a positive probability

that they will be enforced in the future.

        Siegel (2002) attempts to assess the SEC enforcement policy towards foreign firms

listing in the U.S., by considering its actions towards Mexican firms with ADRs during the

years 1995-2002. He finds that in all cases of asset tunneling, US institutional response has

been weak, as the SEC did not take any action to recover the billions of dollars taken from

US investors. For the same period he finds only 13 legal actions against foreign firms in

general, and concludes that SEC enforcement does not have a meaningful impact for non-

U.S. firms listing in the U.S. Siegel emphasizes the reputational consequences of cross-

listing, rather than the legal ones.

        To us, the essence of the question, however, is not whether we can measure the degree

of actual actions done by the SEC or not or if the SEC treats offenses by foreign firms the

same as it treats those by domestic firms. The issue of economic importance is whether

managers and investors perceive cross-listings to have incremental protection or not. To

examine this proposition, the appropriate approach is not to count SEC actions and debate

whether they are important or not. Rather, it is to examine the data for empirical implications

of the hypothesis that cross-listings provide incremental protection, and therefore serve as a

device enabling managers of non-U.S. firms to commit to protect the interests of their

minority shareholders. This is the approach taken by Doidge (2003), Doidge, Karolyi and

Stulz (2003) and Reese and Weisbach (2002).

4.3. The Geography of Cross-Listings

      The patterns that appear in cross-listings around the world, and the way these patterns

change over time, are useful starting points of any discussion trying to identify what explains



                                               15
the firms’ cross-listing behavior. One feature of international cross-listings is that they tend to

be clustered among countries that are close to each other, and also have similarities and

historical ties. For instance, most of the cross-listed firms in Vienna’s stock exchange are

German and a large number of European firms cross-listed on US exchanges are British.

      Sarkissian and Schill (2003) show that factors such as common language, colonial ties,

trade relationships and similar industrial structure are important in explaining the selection of

a cross-listing destination. Pagano et al. highlight the importance of investors’ ability to

assess information, as they emphasize: “…for a US investor, the accounting data and the

performance of a British company, are easier to decipher than those of a French or Spanish

company”.

       An even more important pattern however, is a dramatic increase in the number of

European firms listing in the US, which is likely to be related to the failure of European

markets to attract new listings during the nineties. The reason why this pattern is important, is

twofold: First, the European companies that have cross-listed in the US are high-tech export

oriented firms that rely on equity funding to pursue a rapid expansion (Pagano et al. 2002).

Second, they are firms from countries whose markets are generally perceived as liquid. This

implies that the US exchanges have been for some reason, other than liquidity, better able to

satisfy the demand for equity capital.

       Table 5 (taken from Pagano et al. 2002) summarizes the numbers of European and

American cross-listed firms on the major US and European exchanges in the years 1986,

1991 and 1997. Although in 1986 there were more than five times as many American firms

listed on European exchanges than European firms listed in the US, in just a decade the

pattern reversed and the European companies listed in the U.S. became more than the U.S.

companies listed in Europe. This relation is likely to be part of a general phenomenon, a

consequence of which is that European exchanges failed to attract domestic listings as well.



                                                16
4.4. Empirical Implications of the Bonding Hypothesis.

       The bonding hypothesis suggests that one reason why firms should cross-list in the

United States is to protect minority shareholders from managers consuming private benefits,

and to facilitate their access to capital markets. Of course, there are many other reasons why

firms may cross-list their stock on other markets. These reasons have been well surveyed by

Karolyi (1998), and involve both financial and “informational” benefits that result from

overcoming market segmentation and reducing informational asymmetries. First, cross-

listings lower the cost of capital as they expand a firm’s shareholder base, spreading the

firm’s risk over a greater number of investors who, in turn, demand a smaller premium. Also,

cross-listings ease credit constraints by providing access to the large and liquid US capital

market.

       Karolyi (1998) also discusses a number of information-related potential advantages

associated with cross-listing. To the extent that trading on capital markets provide general

visibility, trading on a US market potentially could affect US sales of a firm’s products. The

mere act of cross-listing could conceivably signal that a firm is of high quality since doing so

would convey to the market that the firm satisfies the eligibility criteria for cross-listing and

is willing to subject itself to the strenuous disclosure requirements that are involved (Cantale

(1997)). The existence of a body of well-informed analysts may be an additional reason for

companies, especially in high-tech areas, to cross-list (Lang, Lins and Miller (2003). These

analysts are experts in evaluating the companies’ growth opportunities and can significantly

affect a company’s amount of equity finance by shaping investors’ opinions.

       The bonding hypothesis is not mutually exclusive from these other arguments.

However, it does have a number of implications that do not arise from these more traditional

explanations for cross-listing. These predictions are summarized in Table 6.




                                                17
Cross-listing and Shareholder Protection: According to the bonding arguments, firms cross-

list when they have good investment opportunities and wish to access external capital

markets to undertake these investments. Clearly, this reason is more relevant for firms from

countries where there is poor protection; the incremental protection from cross-listing would

not be important if shareholders’ rights were already well-protected. However, if a firm that

does not have good investment opportunities is considering cross-listing for a reason other

than bonding, the fact that a cross-listing increases shareholders’ rights will make a cross-

listing less attractive because managers would lose their private benefits with no offsetting

advantage. Therefore, private benefits will lead firms that do not have good investment

opportunities to be less likely to cross-list. Overall, the relation between shareholder

protection and the number of cross-listings is likely to be strongly dependent on firms’

demand for external capital; without knowing this demand it is possible for cross-listings to

be either increasing or decreasing in shareholder protection.5

Cross-listing and Firm Value: If firms cross-list at least in part to limit private benefits and to

access capital markets, then there are strong predictions about the relation between cross-

listing and firm value (see Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2003)). First of all, the firms that

cross-list will be more likely to have good investment opportunities than otherwise identical

firms that do not cross-list. Therefore, we expect that other things held constant, firms that

cross-list have more growth opportunities and higher values prior to the cross-listing. In

addition, after the cross-listing occurs, not only do expected private benefits decrease for the

cross-listing firms, but also new growth opportunities are now worth more since cross-listed

firms can better exploit them. So this difference in value should increase at the time and after

the cross-listing. Finally, both of these effects should be larger when a firm is from a country



5
    See Lombardo and Pagano (2000) and Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2003) for related arguments.




                                                      18
with poor protection and high private benefits. If a firm with a high level of private benefits

cross-lists its stock, then this firm must have growth opportunities sufficiently high to offset

the large private benefits in that country. Therefore, we expect the difference in value

between cross-listed and non-cross-listed firms to be larger for firms when home country

protection is poor.

Cross-listing and Private Benefits: We expect a cross-sectional relation between private

benefits and cross-listing for two reasons: First, we have argued that a cross-listing lowers

private benefits by increasing shareholders’ rights. At the time of cross-listing, observed

private benefits should decrease, leading, for firms with dual classes of stock, to a drop in the

price difference between the high-vote and low-vote shares. Second, firms that have a

proclivity for high private benefits have more to lose from cross-listing, so they are less likely

to cross-list. Therefore, we expect that firms which have the highest levels of private benefits

will be the least likely to cross-list their stocks, so that cross-listed firms should have lower

observed levels of private benefits.

Cross-Listings and Access to Equity Capital: If cross-listings occur at least in part for the

reasons emphasized by the bonding arguments stressed above, then we should observe firms

raising capital following cross-listings. The protections associated with SEC registration

apply more to equity than debt, so we expect firms to issue equity following cross-listings in

the U.S. Of course, if firms list their stock in the U.S. to access new markets independent of

any effect on private benefits, we would also expect an increase in equity offerings.

However, the bonding argument has an additional prediction from the “access to capital”

argument; the bonding argument implies that the increase in equity offerings should be larger

from countries with weak protection. In contrast, the access to capital argument makes no

prediction about shareholder protection in the home country. Thus under the bonding




                                                19
hypothesis, once a firm from a country with weak investor protection has cross-listed, it is

more likely to issue equity than a firm from a strong protection country.

     In addition, we expect shareholder protection in the home country to affect the location

of the offerings. When the offering is from a country with strong protection, we expect firms

to access U.S. markets to raise capital from U.S. investors. We expect such a relation

because firms from countries with strong protection have no inherent difficulty in raising

capital at home, so when they cross-list in the US, they do so to access US capital markets.

In contrast, when the offering is from a country with weak protection, we expect firms to be

more likely to cross-list in the U.S. and then raise capital at home (or in a third country

outside the U.S.) because one reason for the cross-listing is to improve protection for all

shareholders, including those outside the U.S. Shareholder protection arising from SEC

regulations acts as a public good. Firms from outside the U.S. take advantage of this

protection to commit to investors both in the U.S. and outside of the U.S. that the firm’s

managers will not seize private benefits after the capital has been raised.

4.5. Empirical Evidence on Bonding

        The implications of the bonding argument discussed above have all been tested in a

number of studies. Next we survey this empirical work, and discuss the empirical relations

that have been documented between cross-listings and each of: shareholder protection, firm

value, private benefits and access to equity capital. Finally, we discuss the empirical evidence

on stock price reaction to cross-listings and we relate these findings to the bonding argument.

Cross-listings and shareholder protection: Reese and Weisbach (2002) examine the relation

between the number of cross-listings and the level of shareholder protection in the cross-

listed firms’ home country, using a sample of 2038 firms between 1985 and 1995. Univariate

statistics show that on average a higher proportion of firms from French Civil Law countries

(assumed to provide weaker shareholder protection) cross-list on the NYSE or Nasdaq than



                                               20
firms from English Common Law (10.1% vs. 7.4%). These listings on NYSE or NASDAQ

are most relevant for the bonding arguments because they require firms to register with the

SEC while OTC cross-listings do not. Thus, these results are suggestive that firms from

countries with weak shareholder protection bond themselves to protect shareholder interests

by listing in the United States.

       However, in a subsequent multivariate analysis where the level of shareholder

protection is proxied for by the country’s legal system, an anti-director rights index and an

accounting standards index, the same results are reversed when they control for potentially

important factors such as firm size, the home country’s GNP and whether the home equity

market is developed or not. Reese and Weisbach argue that this difference is probably due to

the presence of the control variables, since larger firms are more likely to cross-list and

French Civil Law firms tend to be larger than English Common Law firms. Overall, the

empirical evidence on this point is somewhat mixed, which is not surprising given the

ambiguous theoretical predictions.

Cross-listings and Firm Value: The relationship between firm value and cross-listing is

examined in great detail in Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2003). In a sample of 714 cross-listed

and 4078 non-cross-listed firms from 40 countries, Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz find that on

average, firms that are cross-listed in the United States have a 16.5% higher Tobin’s q ratio

than firms that are not cross-listed. In addition, this cross-listing premium is much higher for

firms listed on a US exchange (36.5%) than firms listed via rule 144a (14.2%) or over the

counter (4.5%). This relation also holds in a multivariate regression analysis.

       Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz also find that the cross-listing premium is robust after

controlling for a firm’s growth opportunities (as measured by the sales growth in the past two

years and the median q of the industry to which the firm belongs) and country specific

variables like the type of legal system, as well as measures of “anti-director rights”,



                                               21
accounting standards, judicial efficiency and liquidity ratio. Finally, also consistent with the

bonding hypothesis, they provide evidence in a series of regressions that the cross-listing

premium effect is larger for countries with weak shareholder protection.

       Comparing the effect for emerging markets and developed markets, Doidge, Karolyi

and Stulz’s findings suggest that the difference in q is slightly larger for emerging markets

than for developed markets (.23 for emerging markets vs. .20 for developed markets).

However, the difference between emerging and developing markets is not significantly

different from zero.

Cross-listings and Private Benefits: Doidge (2003) provides the best estimates on the relation

between cross-listings and private benefits, and suggests that cross-listed firms exhibit

substantially lower levels of private benefits than non-crosslisted firms. Doidge uses the

voting premium approach to estimate private benefits in a sample of 745 firms with dual-

class voting shares. Of these 745 firms, 137 are cross-listed in one of a number of ways

(Rule 144a, Level 1, 2, 3 ADR). The observations are from 20 countries and span the years

1994-2001. To isolate the effects of cross-listings only on the voting premium, he controls

for firm-level variables like differences in voting power, dividends, liquidity and firm size, as

well as country-level variables like minority shareholder rights, disclosure environment,

system of legal enforcement and ownership concentration. The (random effects) regression

equation is:

         VPit = α + γ1 L144ait + γ2 L1it + γ3 L2/3it + b xit + d ci + µi+ eit (6)



where VPit is the Voting Premium of firm i in year t as defined in section 3.1; L144ait, L1it,

L2/3it are dummy variables that take the value 1 if a firm cross-listed with a particular ADR

program and 0 otherwise, xit represent the firm level controls and ci denotes the country level




                                               22
controls. The coefficient of interest is γ3, since among the ADR programs, only the Level 2

and 3 ADR listings subject firms to significant regulatory and disclosure standards.

       Doidge finds that the coefficient γ3 is negative and statistically significant, suggesting

that Level 2/3 ADR listings have a significant negative effect on private benefits. In

particular, Level 2/3 cross-listed firms have a 43% smaller voting premium than non-

crosslisted or Level 1 ADR /Rule 144a cross-listed firms. This finding is consistent with the

bonding hypothesis, since the strenuous regulations and laws of the Level 2/3 ADRs limit the

ability of controlling shareholders to appropriate value from minority shareholders.

       Doidge also measures how the impact of cross-listings on private benefits varies with

the level of home country investor protection, with differing types of ADRs (Level 2 vs.

Level 3), and for firms that cross-list low vote shares compared to firms that cross-list high-

vote shares or all shares. Doidge finds that indeed the impact of cross-listings on private

benefits varies with home country investor protection, consistent with the bonding

hypothesis. However, there does not appear to be a difference between a Level 2 and Level 3

cross-listing. In addition, the change in private benefits is unaffected by the class of shares

that is cross-listed (the high-vote class or the low-vote class).

Cross-listings and access to equity capital: Reese and Weisbach (2002) contains a number of

findings concerning the relation between cross-listings and equity issues. First, they find that

following a cross-listing, firms’ propensities to issue equity increase. Comparing the

quantities of equity issues by each firm during the two years before and after the cross-listing,

Reese and Weisbach find that on average, firms issue 84% more equity after they have cross-

listed in the United States. This effect is much larger for firms that are cross-listed on NYSE

or NASDAQ, where regulatory requirements increase substantially, than for firms who trade

over-the-counter or do a 144a offering, whose regulatory requirements are essentially

unaffected. This fact suggests that there is no mechanical link between cross-listings and



                                                23
equity offerings, but that cross-listings are related with the extra shareholder protection

associated with NYSE/NASDAQ listings.

       Consistent with the bonding hypothesis, Reese and Weisbach also document that the

increase in equity offerings following a cross-listing is larger for firms whose country of

origin is less effective in protecting minority shareholders’ interests. For example, the new

issues of firms from French Civil Law countries with listings on NYSE/NASDAQ are 6.4%

and 32% respectively of the total frequency and the total value of all new issues from these

countries, while the same statistics for the firms from English Common Law countries are

3.3% and 20.6%. These results are verified in a multivariate context where the level of

shareholder protection is measured not only by the judicial system, but also by direct

measures of shareholder rights and accounting quality.

       Finally, Reese and Weisbach document that following equity issues in the United

States, firms from countries with weak shareholder protection tend to issue equity outside the

United States in contrast to firms from countries with strong shareholder protection that issue

equity predominately in the United States following cross-listings. For example, French Civil

Law firms issue more than 62% of their new equity outside the United States following cross-

listings in the United States, in contrast to English Common Law firms, who issue 65% of

their new equity inside the United States following cross-listings. The same pattern also

describes the value of these new equity issues. Again, these results are supported by a

multivariate regression analysis. These findings suggest that the two groups of firms cross-

list for different reasons; the French Civil Law firms cross-list to protect shareholders around

the world, while English Common Law firms cross-list to gain access to U.S. capital markets.

Cross-listings and stock price reaction: Evidence documenting positive stock-price reactions

to the announcement of a cross-listing, is also consistent with the bonding hypothesis, among

other explanations. While Karolyi (1998) surveys a number of such papers, perhaps the most



                                               24
recent study is Miller (1999). Consistent with previous work, Miller finds positive abnormal

returns around the announcement date of a US cross-listing. More importantly however, the

abnormal returns are much higher for NYSE/Nasdaq listed firms than for Rule 144a and

Level 1ADR listed firms (2.63% vs. 1.27%). One explanation for this difference is that

investors take into consideration and appreciate the corporate governance restrictions to

which exchange listed firms are subjected. In addition, Miller also finds that capital-raising

listings (Level 3 ADRs) are associated with higher returns than non-capital raising exchange

listings. The three-day average abnormal return of Level 3 ADRs is 3.23%, compared to

1.83% for Level 2 ADRs. These results provide additional support for the bonding

hypothesis to the extent that equity issuing ADRs are subject to somewhat more strict liability

provisions than non-equity issuing ADRs. This finding is also noticeably in contrast to the

usual negative stock price reaction to seasoned equity offerings, suggesting that extra

information about shareholder protection is conveyed when a firm issues equity through an

ADR, compared with a typical offering in the home country.

         One puzzle emphasized by Stulz (1999) is that the short-term stock-price reactions to

cross-listings documented by Miller (1999) and others are too small to explain the estimated

drops in firms’ cost of capital at the time of cross-listing.6 One possible answer to this puzzle

is that methodological difficulties with event studies, especially regarding partial anticipation

of the cross-listing, cause the short-term reaction to understate the complete reduction in the

cost of capital. Foerster and Karolyi (1999) argue that a way of avoiding these difficulties is

to focus on long-run rather than short-run abnormal returns when firms cross-list. Foerster

and Karolyi document that in the year prior to a cross-listing, firms earn an abnormal return

of about 19 percent, and in the year following the cross-listing, they earn an abnormal return




6
 Sarkissian and Schill (2003b) is the most recent in a long series of papers documenting a decrease on the cost
of capital when a firm cross-lists. See Karoly (1998) for a detailed discussion of these papers.


                                                       25
of 14 percent. These long-run returns are consistent with a decline in a firm’s cost of capital

around the time of the cross-listing.



5. Summary

       The ability of managers to take resources from their firms as private benefits is an

important factor in corporate finance because it has a large impact on the ability of firms’ to

raise external capital. A number of recent studies have estimated the average level of private

benefit consumption across countries. These studies find that managers’ ability to take

private benefits from their firms differs dramatically across countries. The studies also find

that the average level of private benefits is related to measures of shareholders’ rights.

       A natural response to this problem by a manager who wishes to raise capital is to

commit somehow to protect the interests of his shareholders. Since making such a

commitment is impossible in a legal environment that works against shareholder, Coffee

(1999) proposed that shareholders in countries with poor protection can free-ride on the

protections inherent in SEC registration by cross-listing in their stock in the United States. A

number of papers have empirically examined the implications of this argument, and generally

find evidence suggesting that such ‘bonding’ does occur and is one of a number of reasons

why foreign firms cross-list their stocks in the United States.

       Ultimately, as Shleifer and Vishny (1997) put it so well, the key question in corporate

governance is why, when investors provide funds to a firm, they expect the firm’s managers

to give it back to them rather than expropriating it for the managers’ own uses. The answer

to this question varies across the world, leading to important differences in financing patterns.

Private benefits are thus a key component of the system of corporate financing, which, as

Rajan and Zingales (1998) emphasize, is a crucial determinant of an economy’s growth and

overall performance. As such, understanding more about private benefits’ magnitude and the



                                               26
things that countries can do to affect this magnitude seems like an important topic for

research. We have surveyed a number of recent papers on this topic. Given the inherent

importance of the issue, in the near future we expect much more work on private benefits and

voluntary, as well as government-imposed approaches to limit them.




                                              27
                                          References



Barclay, M. and C. Holderness, 1989, The private benefits of control of public corporations,
Journal of Financial Economics, 371-395.

Cantale, S., 1997, The choice of a foreign market as a signal, Unpublished working paper,
INSEAD.

Coffee, J., 1999, The future as history: the prospects for global convergence in corporate
governance and its implications, Northwestern Law Review, 93, 641-708.

Coffee, J. 2002, Racing Towards the Top? The Impact of Cross-Listings and Stock Market
Competition on International Corporate Governance, Working Paper, Columbia University.

DeAngelo, H. and L. DeAngelo, 1985, Managerial ownership of voting rights: A study of
public corporations with dual classes of common stock, Journal of Financial Economics, 14,
33-69.

Demsetz, H. and K. Lehn, 1985, The structure of corporate ownership: Causes and
Consequences, Journal of Political Economy, 93, 1155-1177.

Desai, M., A. Dyck, and L. Zingales, 2003, Corporate Governance and Taxes, Working
Paper, University of Chicago and Harvard Business School.

Doidge, C., 2003, U.S. Cross-Listings and the private benefits of control: Evidence from
dual-class firms, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Doidge, C., A. Karolyi, and R. Stulz, 2003, Why are foreign firms that are listed in the U.S.
worth more? Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Dyck, A., 2002, The Hermitage Fund: Media and Corporate Governance in Russia, Harvard
Business School Case N2-703-010.

Dyck, A. and L. Zingales, 2003a, Private benefits of control: An International Comparison,
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Dyck, Alexander, and Luigi Zingales, 2003b, "The Corporate Governance Role of the
Media," in Cornelius, Peter and Bruce Kogut (eds.) Corporate Governance and Capital
Flows in a Global Economy, (New York: Oxford University Press).

Foerster, S. and A. Karolyi, 1999, The Effects of Market Segmentation and Investor
Recognition on Asset Prices: Evidence from Foreign Stocks Listing in the United States, 54,
Journal of Finance, 981-1013.

Jensen, M., 1993, The modern industrial revolution, exit, and the failure of internal control
systems, The Journal of Finance, 48, 831-880.




                                              28
Karolyi, A., 1998, Why do companies list their shares abroad? A survey of the evidence and
its implications Blackwell Publishers, Boston.

Lang, M., K. Lins and D. Miller, 2003, ADRs, Analysts, and Accuracy: Does cross-listing in
the U.S. improve a firm’s information environment and increase market value? Journal of
Accounting Research, forthcoming.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1997, Legal determinants of
external finance, Journal of Finance, 52, 1131-1150.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1998. Law and finance. Journal
of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

Licht, Amir N., 2003, Cross-Listing and Corporate Governance: Bonding or Avoiding,
Chicago Journal of International Law, 4.

Lins, Karl, D. Strickland, and M. Zenner, 2003, Do Non-U.S. Firms Issue Equity on U.S.
Exchanges to Relax Capital Constraints?, forthcoming, The Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis.

Lombardo, D. and M. Pagano, Law and equity markets; A simple model, Unpublished
working paper, CSER and University of Salerno, Italy.

Mas-Colell, A., M. Whinston, and J. Green, 1995, Microeconomic Theory, Oxford University
Press.

Miller P. D., 1999, The Market Reaction to International Cross-Listings: Evidence from
Depositary Receipts, Journal of Financial Economics, 51, 103-123

Nenova, T., 2002, The value of corporate voting rights and control: A cross-country analysis,
Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Pagano, M., A. Roell, and J. Zechner, 2002, The Geography of Equity Listing: Why do
Companies list abroad? Journal of Finance, 57, 2651-2694.

Rajan, R. and L. Zingales, 1998, Financial Dependence and Growth, American Economic
Review.

Reese, W.A., and M. Weisbach, 2002, Protection of minority shareholder interests, cross-
listings in the United States, and subsequent equity offerings, Journal of Financial
Economics, 66, 65-104.

Sarkissian, S. and M. Schill, 2003a, The Overseas Listing Decision: New Evidence of
Proximity Preference, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Sarkissian, S. and M. Schill, 2003b, The Cost of Capital of Overseas Listings: Market
Sequencing and Selection, Darden School Working Paper, 03-03.

Shleifer, A and R. Vishny, 1989, Management Entrenchment: The case of firm-specific
investments, Journal of Financial Economics, 25, 123-140.



                                             29
Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, 1997, A survey of corporate governance, Journal of Finance.

Siegel J., 2003, Can Foreign Firms Bond Themselves Effectively by Renting U.S. Securities
Laws? working paper, Harvard Business School.

Stulz, R., 1999, Globilization of equity markets and the cost of capital, Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance 12, 8-25.

Zingales, L, 1995, What determines the value of corporate votes? Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 110, 1047-1073.




                                              30
                                         Table 1

                      Samples Construction in Recent Studies of
                         Private Benefits and Cross-Listings



   Paper            Number of          Time Period       Number of       Sources
                Firms/Observations                       Countries
                                                                         SDC
Dyck-Zingales      393 Control           1990-2000          39         Datastream
   (2003)          Transactions
                                                                       Datastream,
Doidge (2003)   745 dual-class firms     1994-2001          20       FISonline, Extel,
                                                                        Moody’s


   Nenova       661 dual class firms   Jan. 1- Dec. 31      18         Datastream
   (2002)                                   1997
                  714 cross-listed
  Doidge-         firms, 4078 non
Karolyi-Stulz    cross-listed firms    Dec. 31, 1997        40         Worldscope
   (2003)
                 2038 cross-listed                                   SDC, Bank of
   Reese-        firms, 1051 firms       Jan. 1985 -                  New York
  Weisbach       with firm-specific      June 1999          45       website, CRSP
   (2002)               data
                                    Table 2

           Approaches to Estimating Private Benefits of Control



   Paper                       Raw Measures of Private Benefits

Dyck-Zingales     Block Premium = λBb + (1-λ)Bs - α(1-λ)(Yb - Ys)
   (2003)       Bb,s: level of private benefits extracted by the buyer (seller)
                Yb,s: per share cash flow benefits generated by the buyer (seller)
                λ: seller’s bargaining power (between 0 and 1)
                α: size of control block of shares, normalized between 0 and 1

                                Voting Premium = (PH – PL)/(PL – rv ∗ PH)
Doidge (2003)   PH, PL: weekly local market closing prices of high and low voting shares
                rv: relative number of votes attached to the low voting shares (between 0
                and 1)


                 VCBV = [PM(t)-PL(t)]/(1-k) ∗ ([NM + NL∗k]/2)/[NM∗PM(t) + NL∗PL(t)]

Nenova (2003)   VCBV: Value of Control Block Votes
                PM(t), PL(t): weekly prices of multiple and limited voting shares
                NM, NL: number of multiple and limited voting shares
                k: ratio of voting power of a limited voting share to a multiple voting
                share.
                                      Table 3

 Alternative Estimates of Country Average Private Benefits of Control

                      Nenova              Doidge               Dyck-Zingales
Country           (Country-dummy        (Raw measure)       (Country-dummy
                  coefficients)                             coefficients)


Argentina                    -----                -----             18.3%
Australia                  23.2%                15.5%                 5.4%
Brazil                   23.19%                 25.3%              65.5%
Canada                      2.7%                11.9%              -5.9%
Chile                    23.14%                  8.5%                 16%
Colombia                      -----             29.5%              28.2%
Czech Republic                -----              ------            56.3%
Denmark                    0.84%                 8.8%                2.8%
Egypt                         -----              ------              7.7%
Finland                       -5%                7.2%              -0.2%
France                       28%                40.4%                7.6%
Germany                    9.5%                 15.5%                3.8%
Hong Kong                 -2.9%                    -----             3.9%
Indonesia                     -----                -----             4.2%
Israel                        -----                -----           25.4%
Italy                      29.4%                49.1%              32.3%
Japan                         -----                -----           -3.2%
Malaysia                      -----                -----               9%
Mexico                     36.4%                 0.8%              34.8%
Netherlands                   -----                -----           -2.5%
New Zealand                   -----                -----             2.7%
Norway                     5.83%                 4.2%                  6%
Peru                        -----                  -----             7.6%
Phillipines                   -----                -----           14.7%
Poland                        -----                -----             4.5%
Portugal                      -----              4.3%              20.4%
Singapore                     -----                -----             4.6%
South Africa                                      7.6%              -1.4%
South Korea             28.94%                      67%            12.8%
Spain                      -----                    -----            5.8%
Sweden                   1.04%                    4.5%               4.4%
Switzerland              5.44%                   16.2%              -5.4%
Taiwan                     -----                    -----           -3.8%
Thailand                   -----                    -----           11.1%
Turkey                     -----                    -----          36.4%
United Kingdom             9.5%                 15.7%                 2.9%
United States               2%                      -----             3.7%
Venezuela                   -----               13.4%               23.4%
                          Table 4

      Regulatory Implications of Cross-Listing

                  Panel A: Disclosure Requirements



Type of listing      Financial Reporting and
                     disclosure requirements



Rule 144a-           Exempted from the US reporting
Level 1 ADR          requirements
program


 Level 2 or 3        Reconciliation with US GAAP accounting
 ADR program         rules concerning disclosure of non-financial
                     items (e.g. ownership, executive
                     compensation). Subject to insider trading
                     rules, tender offer rules, “going private”
                     rules.
               Panel B: Requirements Associated with SEC Registration


1) Section 13(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 requires any person or group
   beneficially owning at least 5% of any equity security to file a report within five days
   of when the 5% threshold is crossed. This 5% threshold is noticeably smaller than the
   10% that is required by the European Community’s Transparency Directive and
   clearly has a large impact on takeover strategies and their implications for small
   shareholders.

2) Under Section 14(d) of the Exchange Act, all tender offers for corporations registered
   with the S.E.C. have to comply with U.S. disclosure and procedural rules. These
   rules would apply if one European company makes an offer for a second European
   company that has an ADR in the U.S., even if the shares traded in the U.S. amount to
   less than one percent of the outstanding shares. An important aspect of these
   procedural rules is that each shareholder of a particular class has the right to
   participate in any tender offer and to receive the best price paid to any other
   shareholder pursuant to the tender offer. Registering in the U.S. thus substantially
   increases the rights of shareholders of non-U.S. firms when faced with a tender offer.

3) Firms cross-listing on a U.S. exchange are subject to most of the rules of the
   exchange regarding corporate governance. [See Table 1 of Reese and Weisbach
   (2002)]


4) The S.E.C. is granted authority under Section 13(e) of the Exchange Act to regulate
   the treatment of minority shareholders in “going private” transactions.


5) Under the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, all registered U.S. corporations are required
   to keep books and records that fairly reflect the transactions of the issuer. The
   purpose of this law is to prevent corporations from engaging in bribery or similar
   practices.


6) Rule 10b-5 gives shareholders the right to sue for losses ensued because of fraudulent
   statements made by a company whose equity they own. Listing in the United States
   subjects foreign companies to this rule, and allows them to be sued in the United
   States for fraudulent statements made anywhere in the world.



7) All accounting statements must conform to U.S. GAAP.
                                          Table 5

            Number of Cross-Listings in 1986, 1991 and 1997 (End of Year Values)

Table 5 describes the European and US cross-listings in 1986, 1991 and 1997. For each
exchange, the table displays the number of foreign cross-listed firms by country of origin.
Each cell contains three values: the top one provides cross-listings for 1986, the middle for
1991, and the bottom for 1997. This table is taken from Pagano et al. (2002).
                                               Table 5 (continued)




                                                        Country of Origin

Stock       Netherlands   Belgium   Germany   Italy    UK      Spain      France          Sweden      Austria   EU9       USA    Total
Exchange                                                                                                                         Comp


Amsterdam                   7         12        3      14                                    2                   38       129     167
                            8         11        3      20                    2                                   44       108     152
                            7         10        1      11                    2                                   31        83     114

Brussels       15                     10        5      14                    8               2                   54        36      90
               15                      9        4      17                    13              1           1       60        36      96
               14                     18        2      11                    12              1           1       49        34      83

Frankfurt      12            2                     4   14         6          5               3           2       48        51      99
               16            4                     6   21         4          10              4           9       74        58     132
               19            4                     5   13         4          8               4           8       65        42     107

Milan                                  2                                                                          2                 2
                                       3                                         1                                4                 4

London         7             2        8         1                 4              4           15                  41       139     234
               10            1        11        1                 4              7           13                  47       159     206
               12            2        11                          4              5           14                  47       111     158

Madrid                                 3                                                                          3                 3
                                       3                                         1                                4                 4


Paris          10           12        12       6       14        5                           5                    64       52     116
                9           11        15       6       24        5                           5           1        76       52     128
                8           9         13       3       17        4                           5           2        61       37      98

Stockholm                                                                                                             0     1       1
                                       1                                         2                                    3     1       4
                   1                   1                                         2                                    4     5       9

Vienna             4                   17              1                                                          22        3      25
                   5                   21      3       1                                                          30        4      34
                   5                   20      1                                                                  36        2      28

Easdaq                       6                 2       3                         5                       2        18        2      20




European      48           23         59      19       57        15              17          27         2        267       465    732
Exchanges     55           24         73      23       83        13              34          23        11        339       418    757
              58           28         69      14       55        12              36          24        13        309       316    625

AMEX                                                       3                                                          3             3
                                                           4                     1                                    5             5
                                                           4                                                          4             4

Nasdaq         6                       1                18                           2        7                   34               34
               5                       1                25                           2        6                   39               39
              17            3          1        2       55                           8       10                   96               96

NYSE           4                                        11            1                                           16               16
               6                               4        26            7           3                               46               46
              16            1          7      11        46            9          14              3                107             107

Total         58           23         60      19        89        16                 19          34     2         320      465    785
Listings      66           24         74      27       138        20                 40          29    11         429      418    847
              91           32         77      27       160        21                 58          37    13         516      316    832


Total         27           17          26      10       54         8                 15          18     2         177      284    461
Companies     32           15          29      11       89         9                 22          15     9         231      234    465
              48           24          31      19      130        10                 43          21    11         337      184    521
                                                   Table 6
                           Theoretical Predictions of the Bonding Argument



Cross-listings    The predicted relation between level of protection in home country and
and shareholder   quantity of cross-listings in the US is ambiguous.
protection.


Cross-listings    The value of cross-listed firms should be higher than similar non-cross-listed
and firm value.   firms.

                  Firms with more growth opportunities are more likely to cross-list.

                  The difference in value between cross-listed and non-cross-listed firms should be
                  negatively related to shareholder protection in the home country.


Cross-listings    The estimated private benefits should be lower for cross-listed firms.
and private
benefits.         The difference in private benefits between cross-listed and non-cross-
                  listed firms should be negatively related to the quality of shareholder
                  protection in the home country.

                  The price of both the high-vote and the low-vote shares should increase
                  following a cross listing. However, the price of a low voting share should
                  increase by a higher amount, leading to a decrease in the voting
                  premium.

Cross-listings    Firms with weak shareholder protection in their home countries are more
and access to     likely to issue equity following a cross-listing.
equity capital.
                  Firms from countries with strong protection for minority shareholders are
                  more likely to issue equity in the US whereas firms from countries with
                  weak protection are more likely to issue equity at home or in a third
                  country.
                                    Table 7

                              Empirical Results


Cross-listings     No clear empirical relation between the quantity of cross-listings
and Shareholder    and level of shareholder protection at home. Univariate statistics
Protection         show that 10.1% of firms from French Civil Law countries cross-
(Reese-Weisbach    list in the United States versus 7.4% of firms from English
2002)              Common Law countries. Multivariate analysis results suggest the
                   opposite.



Cross-listings     Firms listed in the US have a q ratio that is 16.5% higher than the
and Firm Value     q ratios of firms from the same country that do not cross-list in the
(Doidge-Karolyi-   U.S.
Stulz, 2003)
                   The cross-listing premium is larger for exchange listings (36.5%)
                   than Rule 144a and Level 1 ADR listings (14.2% and 4.5%
                   respectively).

                   The cross-listing premium is also larger for firms from countries
                   with weak shareholder protection.

Cross-listings     Cross-listing via a Level 2/3 ADR in the US increases minority
and Private        shareholder protection and reduces the private benefits.
Benefits
(Doidge 2003)      Firms that cross-list have voting premiums that are 43% lower
                   than those of non-cross-listed firms.

                   The negative impact of cross-listings on voting premium is larger
                   for firms from countries with weak shareholder protection.


Cross-listings     There is a large increase (84%) in both the number and value of
and Access to      equity offerings following cross-listings.
Equity Capital
(Reese-Weisbach    Firms from countries with weak shareholder protection than firms
2003)              from countries with strong protection to issue equity following
                   their cross-listing.

                   Firms from countries with weak protection issue equity in larger
                   quantities than firms from countries with strong protection.

                   Firms from countries with strong protection are more likely to
                   issue equity in the US following a cross-listing. Firms from
                   countries with weak shareholder protection are more likely to issue
                   equity outside the U.S. following a cross-listing in the U.S.
