NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE NEW NEW FINANCIAL THING:
THE SOURCES OF INNOVATION
BEFORE AND AFTER STATE STREET
Josh Lerner
Working Paper 10223
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10223
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004

The methodology in this paper borrows heavily from Kortum and Lerner (2003). Research assistance was
provided by Chris Allen, Daniel Bergman, Jonathan Man, Felix Momsen, Karl Neumar, Kaego Ogbechie,
and Sarah Woolverton. Jim Bessen, Andrew Marquez, Peter Tufano, and participants in seminars and
informal workshops at MIT, the NBER, Stanford, and the University of Pennsylvania provided helpful
comments. Harvard Business School’s Division of Research provided financial support. All errors and
omissions are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The New New Financial Thing: The Sources of Innovation Before and After State Street
Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 10223
January 2004
JEL No. G2, O3
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the sources of financial innovations between 1990 and 2002, using Wall Street
Journal articles as indicators of innovations. No evidence suggests that larger firms are particularly
innovative; in many specifications, there is a disproportionate representation of smaller firms among
the innovators. Less profitable firms and those with stronger academic ties also innovate more. The
elasticity of innovation with respect to size appears to have increased sharply since the State Street
decision that greatly accelerated the rate of financial patenting. I conclude by exploring how the
origins of financial patents resemble or differ from those of innovations.
Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center, Room 214
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
josh@hbs.edu

The significance of financial innovation is widely recognized. Many leading
scholars, including Miller (1986) and Merton (1992), have highlighted the importance of
new products and services in the financial arena. Empirically, Tufano (1989) showed
that of all public offerings in 1987, 18% (on a dollar-weighted basis) consisted of
securities that had not been in existence in 1974. These innovations are not just critical
for firms in the financial services industry, but also impact other companies: for instance,
enabling them to raise capital in larger amounts and at a lower cost than they could
otherwise.

Yet despite this importance, the sources of financial innovation remain
surprisingly poorly understood. In a recent review article, Frame and White (2003)
highlight the paucity of empirical research in this area.

While innovation in

manufacturing industries has inspired literally thousands of academic studies, the authors
are only able to identify 39 empirical studies of financial innovation. Moreover, this
literature is highly concentrated on the “back end” of the innovation process, focusing
largely on the diffusion of these innovations, the characteristics of the innovation
adopters, and the consequences of innovation for firm profitability and social welfare.
The authors can only identify two papers on the origins of innovation, Ben-Horim and
Silber (1977) and Lerner (2002). This paucity of research can be contrasted with the
abundant literature on the sources of manufacturing innovation.

This paucity of research is particularly puzzling given the likelihood that the
dynamics of financial innovation are quite different from that in manufacturing. The

financial services industry has historically differed substantially from the bulk of
manufacturing industries in regard to the ability of innovators to appropriate their
discoveries. Until recently, firms have been very limited in their ability to protect new
ideas through patents. As a result, new product ideas have diffused rapidly across
competitors (Tufano (1989)). Second, product innovations have been typically subject to
a great deal of exposure, due to the need to market these products to potential customers
and (frequently) to file documentation with public regulatory agencies. Third, firms in
many segments of the financial services industry frequently engage in collaborative
activities, whether syndications of particular innovations or collaborations to market new
products. Such collaborations—while certainly also seen in manufacturing industries—
may shape the incentives to innovate and nature of innovations.

Together, these

considerations suggest the need to examine financial innovation as a phenomenon in its
own right.

As Frame and White point out, one of the major barriers to the study of financial
innovation has been a paucity of data.

Studies of manufacturing innovation have

traditionally focused on R&D spending and patenting. Given the rareness with which
financial service firms report R&D sending and the infrequency of financial patents until
recently, these measures are unlikely to be satisfactory. This paper seeks to take a first
step towards addressing this gap, by developing a measure of financial innovation based
on news stories in the Wall Street Journal.

2

The analysis proceeds in two parts. First, I explore the economic characteristics
that are associated with financial innovation, seeking to test a number of hypotheses
suggested by the innovation literature. The second part examines one specific regulatory
change, the State Street decision of the late 1990s. While financial patents were awarded
prior to the late 1990s, this litigation dramatically changed the financial service firms’
perception of the validity and value of these awards. (See Appendix A for a discussion of
this case and its implications.)

I examine whether this change in appropriability

conditions has affected the type of firms pursuing innovations.

Several conclusions emerge from the analysis:
•

Contrary to representations in the earlier literature, financial innovation has been
characterized by an even participation of firms across the size spectrum, or even a
disproportionate representation of smaller firms. More specifically, a doubling in
firm size is associated with less than a doubling in innovations generated in most
regression specifications.

•

Firms that are less profitable in their respective sectors are disproportionately
innovative. This result is consistent, for instance, with depictions by Silber (1975,
1983).

•

While little evidence exists of firms translating localized knowledge spillovers
from their peers into more innovations, firm with ties to academic institutions
appear to be disproportionately more innovative.

•

The years since the State Street decision are characterized by an increased
domination of innovation by large firms. The elasticity of innovation with respect

3

to size has increased sharply in this period. Some evidence suggests that the
academic connections may have declined in importance as a spur to innovation.
•

This increasing role of larger firms in innovation does not appear to be a
consequence of who is filing for patents, which mirrors the population of
innovators in many respects. Other possible explanations include that the value of
patent awards may differ for firms in different size classes, or that this shift is a
consequence of an unrelated change in the economic or regulatory environment.
Less academically connected firms appear to be more frequent patentees.

Two limitations should be acknowledged at the outset. First, the time span
covered in this study is relatively limited, from 1990 to 2002. This choice implies that
the number of major regulatory and tax policy changes during the period under study was
quite modest, and the identification of their consequences challenging. Instead, I focus
on exploring the impact of only one major change, the emergence of financial patenting
in the late 1990s. There is no reason, however, that this methodology could not be
extended to a longer dataset, which would allow the more ready identification of these
effects.

The second limitation related to the methodology employed. This paper focuses
on developing a number of “stylized facts” about financial innovation. While many of
the studies of manufacturing innovation have proceeded in a similar manner, others (e.g.,
Kortum (1997)) have sought to develop structural models of patenting, productivity, and
R&D. Reflecting the early stage of the study of financial innovation and the lack of

4

many meaningful measures of innovative performance, a simpler approach seemed
desirable.

The organization of this paper is as follows. Section 1 describes the hypotheses
that will be tested in the paper. The development of the dataset is summarized in Section
2. Section 3 presents the key patterns of financial sector innovation. The changes around
the State Street decision are analyzed in Section 4. The final section concludes the paper.

1. Hypotheses
In this initial section, I outline the hypotheses that motivate the analysis. I
highlight the extent to which the analyses of financial innovation undertaken below have
been anticipated in earlier theoretical and empirical work on manufacturing innovation.

In the first analysis, I focus on three hypotheses regarding the determinants of
differences in the innovation rate across firms. These relate to the consequences of the
firms’ competitive positions, capital constraints, and abilities to access knowledge
spillovers. In the second analysis, I examine how a change in the ability to protect
discoveries affected innovation. Each of these topics has been explored in the theoretical
and empirical literature on manufacturing innovation, and some in the theoretical
literature on financial innovation. While this review is not intended to be exhaustive
(Cohen (1995) provides a comprehensive overview of literature on manufacturing
innovation, and Allen and Gale (1994) and Tufano (2003) on financial innovation), it can
hopefully suggest the broad outlines of the literature.

5

Firm competitive position. This literature has most frequently examined how
firms’ rate of innovation varies with two aspects: their size and age. The relationship
between firm size and innovation has been a topic of enduring interest to economists at
least since Schumpeter’s (1942) argument that large firms were the ideal manner in
which to pursue innovation.1 Whatever the advantages of small firms for insuring intense
static price competition, he asserted, they were unlikely to have the incentives to engage
in long-term R&D if much of the rents were likely to be subsequently competed away.

While the empirical literature analyzing this question has been voluminous, few
distinct conclusions have emerged. An illustration of these frustrations can be seen by
comparing the two most comprehensive studies in this literature, Bound, et al. (1984) and
Cohen, Levin, and Mowery (1987). While Bound and his co-authors found that R&Dintensity was highest among very small and very large firms, the latter paper found that once
industry effects were controlled for, R&D intensity did not change with firm size. Acs and
Audretsch (1988), using a database of articles about innovations, suggested that small firms
disproportionately contribute to innovative activity.

A number of theorists have suggested that younger firms may be more effective at
introducing new products.

Holmstrom (1989) argued that the established corporation

primarily exists to fulfill production and marketing goals and that to effectively pursue these
goals it has to organize in a way that compromises incentives to innovate. Providing
This work has also inspired many cross-industry studies of how innovation at the
industry level differs with market concentration.

1

6

incentives for both types of activities within one organization is more costly than providing
them through separate organizations. Aron and Lazear (1990) presented a model in which
new firms pursue less risk-averse strategies and are hence more likely to undertake radical
new research programs and to introduce new products.

Prusa and Schmitz (1994) tested these theories by examining the introduction of
new software products. The authors suggested that new firms appear to be more effective
at creating new software categories, while established firms have a comparative
advantage in extending existing product lines.

Similar conclusions emerged from

Henderson’s study of the photolithographic industry (1993), which suggested that
established companies failed to successfully pursue major technological opportunities.

The relationship between firm characteristics and innovation has not attracted a
great deal of attention in the theoretical literature on financial innovation: much of the
work has ignored the effects of financial institutions. The works that have appeared are
mixed in their conclusions. Bhattacharyya and Nanda (2000) argued that investment
banks with greater market power and more secure relationships with their customers are
likely to innovate. Silber (1975, 1983), on the other hand, argued that those firms that
most constrained by market imperfections—which he implies will be the weakest and
smallest firms—should be the most innovative.

Financial constraints. Another extensively scrutinized question has been the
extent to which financial resources affects firms’ ability to pursue innovations. Since

7

Arrow (1962), it has been understood that the substantial information problems
surrounding R&D projects make it difficult to raise external capital to finance them. As a
result, firms with promising projects may be unable to pursue them. This intuition is
formalized in models such as Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) and Myers and Majluf (1984).

Many early studies suggested a relationship between cash flow and R&D
spending, a finding that could be interpreted in various ways.

Recent works have

examined these issues more systematically. Himmelberg and Peterson (1994) looked at a
panel of small firms, and showed that the sensitivity of R&D investments to cash flow
seems to be considerably greater than that of physical investments. But the bulk of the
attention has focused on the impact of leverage on R&D spending. Hall (1990) showed
that firms that increase their leverage tend to reduce R&D spending. Similar conclusions
emerged from Greenwald, Salinger, and Stiglitz (1992). This topic has been little
explored, however, in the theoretical literature on financial innovation.

Ability to Access Knowledge Spillovers. An extensive theoretical literature (e.g.,
Romer (1986)) has argued that spillovers of technological knowledge are an important
spur to future innovation. As Krugman (1991) and others have hypothesized, these
spillovers—particularly of tacit knowledge—are likely to be geographically concentrated.

Jaffe, Henderson, and Trajtenberg (1993) demonstrated that patents are more
likely to be cited in patents awarded to other entities in the same region, an effect that
they suggest is consistent with the localization of knowledge spillovers.

8

Similarly,

Audretsch and Feldman (1996) showed that not only is innovative activity more
concentrated than manufacturing, but that this is particularly the case in industries where
knowledge spillovers are important.

Another source of spillovers may be ties to academic institutions. Cohen and
Levinthal (1989) hypothesized that firms may seek to build close connections to
academia to boost their “absorptive capacity.” The authors hypothesize that these
activities enhance firms’ abilities to interpret scientific discoveries and to translate them
into innovations.

Some supporting evidence for these claims has been found in the life sciences.
Henderson and Cockburn (1996) showed that pharmaceutical firms that embraced
scientific-based research were particularly successful in developing new drugs. In related
work, they showed that other practices—such as co-authorship between corporate
scientists and public sector researchers—are also associated with enhanced drug
discovery. Zucker, Darby, and Brewer (1998) demonstrated that the formation of new
biotechnology firms in regions is largely driven by the presence of academic science.
The impact of knowledge spillovers on innovation in the financial services industry has
been little scrutinized, from either a theoretical or an empirical perspective.

Appropriability.

Beginning with Nordhaus (1969), much of the theoretical

economics literature has assumed an unambiguous relationship between the strength of
patent protection and the rate of innovation: an increase in the amount of patent

9

protection offered should increase the rate of innovation. A crucial assumption behind
such findings is that the nature of the patent award does not affect the incentives of
subsequent researchers to pursue innovations. This assumption has been relaxed in a line
of work on sequential innovation, beginning with Scotchmer and Green (1990). When
the nature of protection offered the initial innovator affects the incentives of subsequent
researchers, the conclusions may change. This literature suggests that strong patent
protection may actually lead to significantly less innovation than no patent protection at
all. Gallini (1992) considered the impact of increasing patent protection when rivals can
“invent around” previous discoveries (at some cost). This model suggested that the
relationship between patent strength and innovation will display an “inverted U” shape.

This impact of appropriability conditions on innovation has attracted considerable
empirical attention, but the results have been mixed (see Gallini (2002) for a review).
Many studies of specific policy changes (e.g., Sakakibara and Branstetter’s (2001) study
of the 1988 strengthening of patent protection in Japan) have proven to be inconclusive.
This literature has also sought to assess what types of firms are likely to benefit from
stronger patent protection. Here too, a clear conclusion is elusive. Hall and Ziedonis
(2001) argued that the strengthening of patent protection in the U.S. over the past two
decades harmed innovation by smaller firms in the semiconductor industry because they
could not participate in the cross-licensing agreements that the major firms entered into.
Merges (1996), on the other hand, argued that the strengthened intellectual property
regime allowed small biotechnology firms to more readily attract venture capital
financing and enter into alliances with pharmaceutical firms.

10

This issue, as well, has been little explored in the context of financial innovation.
One exception is Herrera and Schroth (2002), who showed in a theoretical analysis that
even when inventions cannot be patented, investment banks will have considerable
incentives to develop new products.

To be sure, the list of potential explanations for financial innovation that I will
examine here is far from exhaustive. The most important omission is demand side shifts,
whose importance in spurring innovation was highlighted by Schmookler (1966). For
instance, the emergence of a new high-technology industry with particularly severe
informational asymmetries may spark the introduction of new financial instruments
geared to their particular needs. Similarly, alterations to the tax code or regulations may
stimulate corporations to demand new financial products and services.2, 3 I cannot really
effectively capture these demand side shifts here, and so will ignore them. To the extent
to which they are correlated with the independent variables, these may introduce an
omitted variables bias.

The extensive theoretical literature examining these issues is reviewed by Harris and
Raviv (1989) and Allen and Gale (1994). For illustrations of financial innovation
triggered by the special characteristics of the biotechnology industry, for instance, see
Beatty, Berger, and Magliolo (1995) and Chacko, Tufano, and Vetter (2001).
2

3

It is unlikely, however, that tax policy shifts will affect the supply curve for innovations.
Under the Internal Revenue Code § 41, the credit is limited to “research in the laboratory
or for experimental purposes, undertaken for discovering information, technological in
nature.” In a series of decisions, tax courts have held that this definition does not include
R&D performed by financial service institutions or involving software development more
generally. Recent examples include Tax & Accounting Software Corp. v. U.S., 301 F.3d
1254 (10th Cir. 2002) and Eustace v. Commissioner, 2002 U.S. App. LEXIS 25530 (7th
Cir. 2002).
11

2. Developing the Data-Set
As highlighted in the introduction, traditional measures of innovative activity—
e.g., R&D spending and patenting—are unlikely to be very illustrative in this setting. An
alternative measure is needed. This section describes the manner in which I develop the
database of financial innovations.

A. Identifying Innovations
My goal is to examine financial innovation before and after the State Street
decision. This is a challenging task. Not only are traditional approaches inadequate, but
the listings of new securities compiled by Securities Data Company (which maintains the
leading database of corporate new issues) are inadequate. First, much of the innovation
in financial services has taken place outside the realm of publicly traded securities, such
as new Automatic Teller Machines and insurance products. Second, as Tufano (2003)
points out, many of the “novel” securities identified in the SDC database are minor
variants of existing securities, often promulgated by investment banks seeking to
differentiate themselves from their peers.

As a result, I need an alternative measure of innovative activity. I employ an
approach here—originally developed in Kortum and Lerner (2003)—of examining
articles in the Wall Street Journal concerning financial invention or innovation.

I

compile all such articles between 1990 and 2002 that related to new financial products,
services, or institutions. While such a measure is far less frequently used as a measure of
innovation than R&D and patents, I am not the first to use counts of stories to study

12

innovations: Acs and Audretsch (1988), Chaney, Devinney, and Winer (1991), and
Cardinal and Opler (1995) are earlier examples. The latter two papers use counts of
stories exclusively from the Wall Street Journal. Given the Journal’s intensive coverage
of the financial services industry, the use of this measure seems particularly appropriate
here.

In order to undertake this analysis, it is critical to have a consistent definition of
what constitutes an invention and an innovation.4 According to the relevant definition in
Webster’s Dictionary, an invention is “an original contrivance or apparatus,” while an
innovation refers to the “introduction of something new.” I take inventions to be new
products or processes, while innovations refer to the first time an invention is put to use.
I wish to count both.

Even if I ignore the distinction between invention and innovation, in many cases
either definition is too vague to be useful in deciding which entries to count. To address
this problem, first I define some terms which scholars have found useful for delineating
what counts as an invention or innovation. From this literature (e.g., Schmookler (1966)
and Jewkes, Sawyers, and Stillerman (1969)), I can find definitions which are much more
concrete than the dictionary's. These authors make a distinction between scientific and

The following six paragraphs are from Kortum and Lerner (2003). Sam Kortum
originally wrote the first three paragraphs. A related concern was insuring consistent
coding of the databases by the research assistants. Before beginning working on the
database, each research assistant coded the same test section. The responses were
compared to the author’s coding of this section. When necessary, a second test section
was coded as well. Frequent team meetings discussed questionable cases and helped
insure consistency.

4

13

technological knowledge, the former being a set of general principles while the latter is a
set of specific techniques, products, and processes. Scientific knowledge is expanded by
discoveries about how the world works while technological knowledge expands via
inventions. I want to count inventions but not discoveries.5

Schmookler makes the critical distinction between innovation and imitation:
When an enterprise produces a good or service or uses a method or input
that is new to it, it makes a technical change. The first enterprise to make
a given technical change is an innovator. Its action is innovation.
Another enterprise making the same technical change later is presumably
an imitator and its action, imitation (pg. 2, emphasis in the original).
I do not want articles about imitation. Once invented, several firms can in principle use a
technique at once without diminishing its performance. Thus, I do not want to include
articles about firms that are simply expanding production. Some new products may be a
direct consequence of scaling up production. For example, as the number of investment
bankers at financial institutions increases, it is obvious that more transactions can be
underwritten. Such behavior is simply expansion or replication of an existing production
process. I would, however, count a story about the bank's development of a new product.

For the most part, I will not attempt to evaluate the importance of any invention or
innovation, but will simply assume that if the Wall Street Journal finds it worth writing
about it should be included. I use the Wall Street Journal due both to the consistency in
its editorial mission over the years and the thoroughness of its indexing, which should
Scholars also distinguish between invention and development, the latter being concerned
with getting an invention to work in practice. I will not worry about this distinction (in
the same way I want to include both inventions and innovations).
5

14

lead to fewer biases. (The New York Times, for instance, launched a series of regional
editions over the same period, and greatly enhanced their coverage of local news from
outside the New York metropolitan area.) The specific rules I use for including or
excluding innovations are contained in Appendixes B and C.6

I consider the individual article as the unit of observation. I include multiple
articles even if they concerned the same innovation. I assume that articles about new
products and services were in fact about innovations unless the article explicitly suggests
otherwise. In other words, I err on the side of including new products even if they might
be imitations.

One natural concern is that the fluctuations in stories about innovations in the
Journal may have had little to do with any change in the fundamental innovativeness of
the American financial services industry. For instance, the State Street decision may
have triggered firms to disclose more discoveries, since they no longer needed to rely as
heavily on trade secrecy to protect ideas. To address this concern, I coded the extent to
which the stories unambiguously represented a true innovation.

I employed an

(admittedly subjective) three-part classification scheme, denoting stories As, Bs, and Cs,
depending on the extent to which I was sure that it described an innovative contribution.
No evidence of changing quality appeared in the tabulations: for instance, between 1990
One criterion in the appendices should be highlighted. I focus on innovations in the
United States, whether by a foreign or domestic firm. I make this choice because I
believe the Wall Street Journal’s coverage of U.S. innovations is much less likely to be
affected by selection biases. I also take this route because this measure is closely
analogous to the U.S. patents analyzed below (which can be applied for by any entity,
foreign or domestic, but only cover the United States).

6

15

and 1998, 69.9% of the stories were classified as either an “A” or a “B.” After the State
Street decision (between 2000 and 2002), 68.5% of the stories were so classified.

I also talked with a current and former reporter of the Wall Street Journal in order
to understand biases that may have been at work in the selection of stories. They
highlighted two issues, which may make small firms appear more or less innovative than
they actually are. First, lacking the distribution networks of established firms, small
financial institutions may have more aggressively sought publicity for their discoveries.
Second, the Wall Street Journal pays particular attention to the largest financial
institutions, often assigning dedicated reporters to cover these firms.

This intense

coverage might have led to more articles about innovations by larger firms. They also
noted that a significant—though difficult to ascertain—number of innovations never
make it into the Journal: for instance, the development of a new pricing methodology for
mortgage-backed securities by the proprietary trading group of an investment bank or a
hedge fund is unlikely to be publicized.

I identify stories between 1990 and 2002 using two sources. The Wall Street
Journal Index (WSJI) is a printed volume with at least one entry for each article in the
Wall Street Journal. In any given year, the entries in the WSJI are organized by topic.
The same article may appear more than once as it may relate to more than one topic.
Each WSJI entry contains a short summary of the article from which one can evaluate
whether the article concerned an invention or innovation. Unfortunately, the length and
detail of these summaries deteriorated over the 1990s, as most readers began relying on

16

on-line sources. As a result, I also identify stories through a second source, the Factiva
database. I search this database using a large number of keywords associated with new
discoveries or product or service introductions.

I combine the stories from both sources to construct the database. In each case, I
identify the entities featured in the story. In some cases, articles list large numbers of
firms (e.g., a review article recapping a set of innovations). In these cases, I identify only
the four entities most prominently featured in the story, based on the number of words
devoted to each entity in the original article. (In case of ties, I employ the entities
mentioned earliest in the article.) In some cases, these entities included government
bodies (e.g., “World Bank issues novel security,” “Commodities Future and Trading
Commission approves new derivative contract”), exchanges, and other non-profit
organizations.

Table 1 summarizes the distribution of articles and entities in the dataset. Panel A
summarizes the distribution of the 651 news stories meeting our criteria. No clear time
trend is evident from the data. Panel B presents a breakdown of the types of innovations
reported on. The bulk of the stories relate to the underwriting of novel securities or
trading technology (33.5%), asset management (26.2%), and retail banking or mortgages
(11.6%). Panel C shows the breakdown of stories over time, now focusing solely on the
387 stories about entities that listed in Compustat (as discussed below, I will focus on this
subset of firms). The final panel shows the breakdown of the industry of the innovators,
by three-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code. Not surprisingly, the three

17

most common classes are classified among “finance, insurance, and real estate”:
securities brokers and dealers (23.5%), commercial banks (22.3%), and other nondepository credit institutions (8.2%). Following these categories, however, are a wide
variety of industries, ranging from computer programming to publishers to motor vehicle
manufacturers.

I assess the importance of these announcements by examining the market reaction
to these stories. In all, there are 305 distinct dates on which stories appear about entities
whose stock price is included in the databases of the Center for Research in Security
Prices. (In some cases, Compustat-listed firms are not found in CRSP; in others, multiple
stories about innovations at a single firm appear within one week of each other.7) The
firms' equity returns around the time of the Wall Street Journal story are consistently
positive and statistically significant. For instance, when I estimate a market model using
a (-1, +1) window centered on the date the story appeared, the average cumulative
abnormal return is +0.63% and the associated t-statistic is 2.68. (The result is significant
at the one-percent level using a one-sided t-test.) (All observations must have at least
three observations between one and twelve months before or after the event window,
which is used to compute the correlation with the market. The value-weighted CRSP
index is used as a benchmark.) The results are similar when I use longer or shorter
windows, alternative indexes, or different specifications. For instance, when I estimate a
market-adjusted model over the (-2, +1) window, the average cumulative abnormal return

When multiple stories appear about a company within five trading days of each other, I
only employ the first observation. The results are robust to using the latter observation or
deleting these overlapping observations entirely.

7

18

is +0.84% with an associated t-statistic of 3.04.

These results suggest that the

innovations are indeed significant ones to the firms in the sample.

B.

Supplementary Data
In addition to the database of innovations, I collect a variety of additional

information. These come from three sources: databases derived from U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission filings, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office’s (PTO) on-line
patent database, and academic-practitioner finance journals.

In order to effectively characterize the firms, I focus on only those firms that are
contained in the Compustat database. This decision means that a variety of entries are
excluded, including government agencies, non-profit organizations, and private entities
that are not publicly traded (e.g., Fidelity Investments and Visa). Nonetheless, this
choice is the only way to insure a consistent set of variables to analyze.

Each entry is assigned the Compustat identifier associated with the firm at the
time of the innovation.

These assignments are not always apparent, but can be

determined by reviewing the corporations’ history using the Hoover’s directory, LexisNexis, the SDC Mergers and Acquisitions database, and on-line searches. Thus, for
instance, an innovation by Wachovia Bank in 1999 would be assigned to Compustat
GVKEY 11247 (denoted “Wachovia Corp-Old”), while one by First Union Bank in that
year would be assigned to GVKEY 4739 (denoted “Wachovia Corp,” reflecting the fact
that First Union acquired Wachovia in 2001 and assumed its name). In some cases,

19

Compustat has multiple listings for a single firm (typically when a firm has a highly
visible subsidiary or a tracking stock, but also when the firm releases “pro forma”
earnings in addition to those computed in a standard manner). In these cases, I assign the
innovation to the record of the parent firm that uses the standard definition of earnings. I
drop the other records associated with the firm from the analysis.

I download from Compustat a wide variety of financial data on all firms with at
least one Wall Street Journal innovation and all firms with a primary assignment to
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes 60 through 64 and 67. The choice of these
industries is driven by the SIC scheme: I included all firms in “Finance, Insurance and
Real Estate” except for SIC class 65, which contains real estate operators. Very few
innovations were associated with SICs 673 and 6798, “Trusts” and “Real Estate
Investment Trusts.” In diagnostic regressions discussed below, I repeat the analysis
below without these categories.8

The second source is the records of the PTO. The PTO has an on-line database
that summarizes all patents awarded since 1976. Following the procedure in Lerner
(2002), I identify all patents assigned to relevant U.S. Patent Classification subclasses. I
use a somewhat broader set of patent subclasses than that paper for two reasons. First,
because the innovations database includes a broad array of bank and insurance

I also use other sources to supplement Compustat for one measure: the time the firm has
been publicly traded, a measure that is frequently incomplete in Compustat. If missing, I
use the date of the IPO as reported in the SDC Corporate New Issues database. If not
included here, I use the first date the firm in which was listed in CRSP or Datastream.
As a result, the earliest firms are listed as going public in December 1925.

8

20

innovations, I wish to be sure that all relevant patents are captured. Second, the PTO
initiated in 2000 a “second review” of patent applications in class 705, in which many of
the most controversial Internet-related patents were classified. Since this date, there has
been a tendency of applicants to seek to get their financial applications classified in Class
902. I employ all patents with a primary assignment to subclasses 705/4, 705/35 through
705/45, and 902/1 through 902/41.

In all, I identify 1969 patents awarded between 1990 and 2002 and the entity to
which the patent was assigned (if any). I once again code these with the appropriate
Compustat firm identifier, following the procedure outlined above. There are 922 distinct
assignee-patent pairs where the assignee is listed in Compustat.

Table 2 summarizes the innovators and patentees most frequently found in the
databases. Panel A, which summarizes the distribution of innovators, highlights the
frequency of stories about some of the largest financial institutions. The two most
frequent innovators, Merrill Lynch and Citigroup, also appear on the list of leading
patentees. Information technology firms and data vendors dominate the list of patentees.
Two of these firms, IBM and Reuters, also appear on the list of financial innovators.

The third source is academic-practitioner finance journals. I want to characterize
the extent to which each firm is close to the academic frontier. I employ a proxy similar
to that in Lerner (2002): the firm’s representation on the editorial boards of four leading

21

academic-practitioner journals.9

I calculate each firm’s editorial board seats at the

beginning of each year. I count a firm that is a sponsor of a journal as having the
equivalent of two editorial board seats. While this proxy is undoubtedly crude (the
overwhelming majority of institutions never serve on such boards, even if they may have
academic contacts in other ways), it nonetheless appears to at least roughly identify many
firms that have strong academic ties.

3. The Origins of Financial Innovations
I now turn to understanding how my measure of financial innovation relates to the
characteristics of the potential innovators. I first perform some cross-tabulations, and
then undertake a series of regression analyses.

Table 3 compares the features of all Wall Street Journal innovators with all firms
with a primary assignment to the financial services industry. Each firm-year pair is used
as a distinct observation (and assumed to be independent). Inspired by the discussion in
Section 2 above, I examine the firms along several dimensions:
•

Total assets. I use assets (rather than employees or revenues) for several reasons.
The measure is more frequently available in Compustat than employees: using assets
rather than employees increases the sample size by 56%. I also believe it better
conveys the scale of activity for many institutions which may have considerable

The journals employed were Financial Analysts Journal, Financial Management, the
Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, and the Journal of Portfolio Management. These
journals were selected using a variety of sources, including Alexander and Marby (1994),
McNulty and Boekeloo (1999), and various on-line compilations by the Institute for
Scientific Information.
9

22

resources under management, but may have a relatively modest number of employees
or revenue flows from fees. Assets are in millions of 2002 dollars.
•

Time the firm has been publicly traded. While ideally I would have a measure of the
firm’s overall age, this is a frequently used proxy.

•

Profitability of the firm. I wish to capture a measure of relative profitability that is
unaffected by capital structure choices. Thus, I use the ratio of earnings before
interest, debt, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA) to total revenues.

•

Leverage. I employ the ratio of the book value of the firm’s long-term debt to total
capitalization (the book value of its long-term debt and preferred stock plus the
market value of its common stock).

•

Other financial firms in zip code. In order to capture the presence of localized
spillovers, I compute the number of other financial service firms with a headquarters
in the same zip code as the firm in the year of the observation.

•

Financial innovations in zip code. One possibility suggested by the literature is that
spillovers are particularly likely from innovative firms in the same locality. I thus
compile the count of the total number of financial innovations in the same year by
firms with a headquarters in the same zip code as the firm. This measure is highly
correlated with the count of other financial firms, so I only use one of the variables in
the regression at any time.10

•

The ratio of editorial board seats to assets. I compute the total number of editorial
board seats of and editorial sponsorships by each financial institution in a given year

Correlation coefficients between the other measures are modest. The next highest
correlation is between assets and leverage (a coefficient of 0.106).
10

23

as described above, and normalize it by the total assets (in billions of 2002 dollars) of
the firm.
These univariate comparisons do not, of course, have any controls for industry
characteristics. To partially address this issue, I also undertake the comparisons for the
subset of firms whose primary assignment is to SIC codes 60 through 64 and 67.

The table highlights that the fact that innovators tend to be larger and older. They
are less likely to be located in zip codes where there are many financial firms and
financial innovations, a pattern that remains true even when I look at the subset of
financial service firms. Innovators are likely to have stronger academic ties. The results
regarding profitability (EBITDA margin) and leverage are mixed: the results in the
sample as a whole are inconsistent or insignificant, but innovators are more profitable and
more leveraged when only financial service firms are compared.

In any case, our

interpretation of these results must be cautious. Not only is the absence of controls for
industry, time period, and company location troubling, but the observations are clearly
not independent.

Table 4 examines how the propensity to innovate varies with firm size. I divide
the firm-year observations into quartiles based on assets (expressed in 2002 dollars). In
the table, I present the number of innovations awarded in each year per billion dollars of
assets (again in 2002 dollars) for each size quartile. The greater propensity of smaller

24

firms to innovate is apparent.11 Once again, though, our interpretation of the patterns
must be cautious.

I address these concerns in Tables 5 through 7, which examine the determinants
of innovations in a regression framework. Following the template of Hausman, Hall, and
Griliches (1984), I employ Poisson and negative binomial specifications. Both are well
suited for handling this type of non-negative integer dependent variable, though the
negative binomial specification is frequently preferred due to its more flexible features.

I address the panel nature of the data set in two ways.

First, I pool all

observations, employing each observation separately (though computing heteroskedasticadjusted standard errors that reflect the presence of multiple observations for each firm).
I then estimate random effects regressions, which essentially combine information from
fixed effects regressions (which add a dummy variable for each firm) and within
regressions (that use only one observation from each firm). In the pooled regressions, I
include dummy variables to control for the nation in which the company has its
headquarters, its three-digit SIC code, and the year of the observation; in the random
effects ones, I only control for the year (due to the presence of firm-level controls).

These patterns—and those discussed below—continue to hold when I divide firms by
employees rather than assets. The ratio of the count of innovations to employees is 13.7
times greater for the quartile of smallest firms than for the quartile of the largest firms.
The ratio decreases monotonically with firm size: the ratio for the smallest firms is 5.8
times greater than for the second largest quartile and 3.0 times greater than the third
largest quartile.
11

25

Table 5 presents an analysis of the impact of firm size on innovation. I use as
observations three sets of firms: those with at least one Wall Street Journal innovation,
those with at least five financial patents, and all firms with a primary assignment to
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes 60 through 64 and 67.12 I first simply use
the logarithm of size as an independent variable, and then employ a piece-wise
specification. In the latter case, four separate independent variables take on the value of
the logarithm of size if size falls into that quartile, and zero otherwise.

The size measures are consistently different from zero at the one-percent
confidence level: larger firms, not surprisingly, are more innovative. A natural question
is whether the elasticity of innovations with respect to size is greater or less than one. In
other words, does a 10% increase in size lead to more or less than a 10% increase in
innovations? To examine this, I exponentiate the coefficients and subtract one: thus, a
coefficient of 0.693 would translate into an elasticity of one. The implied elasticities are
consistently less than one, with the exception of the smallest-quartile firms in the second
and fourth regressions. In the final line, I test whether these differences from one are
significant. In seven out of eight regressions, the null hypothesis that the elasticity is
equal to one can be rejected at the ten-percent confidence level; in five out of eight, it can
be rejected at the five-percent level. This finding of an elasticity of less than one can be
contrasted with the consensus in the literature, which depicts innovation being undertaken
disproportionately by the largest financial institutions (e.g., Tufano (2003)).

The reason for using a higher cutoff for patenting is that there were many more such
awards than innovations in our database.

12

26

In Tables 6 and 7, I estimate similar equations that examine the influence of the
other proposed explanatory factors.

Each pair of columns in Table 6 is similar in

structure. In the first column, I report the results of six separate regressions, in which one
of the additional independent variables is used along with a variety of control variables.13
In the second column, I report the result of a regression that employs all of the
independent variables simultaneously (though, as noted above, I only use one of the two
zip code-based measures). In Table 7, I rerun the regressions reported in second column
of these pairs (focusing on the negative binomial specifications) to explore the robustness
of the results. The reported regressions include those where (a) firms not based in the
United States are eliminated, (b) only innovations ranked as particularly important (see
the discussion in Section 2) are included,14 (c) an additional control for R&D spending is
added,15 and (d) a correction is made to the regression specifications for the possible
incidence of too many observations with no innovations.16

I employ the logarithm of all independent variables that are not ratios. In order to
include observations with a value of zero, I add one to each independent variable before
taking the logarithm.
13

The reported results here use all innovations classified as “As” and “Bs.” The results
using only “As” are similar.

14

I assume that all firms that do not report R&D spending in their financial statements
perform no R&D. In point of fact, most financial services firms do not report R&D
spending, even if they undertake substantial R&D (see Long (2003)). 98% of the firms in
the sample with a primary assignment to the financial service industries do not report
positive R&D. For instance, neither Citigroup nor Merrill Lynch report any R&D
between 1990 and 2002. Thus, I must approach this measure with caution.
15

In addition, I undertake a variety of additional analyses that are not reported. These
including deleting firms that are not assigned to SIC codes 60 through 64 and 67, deleting
trusts and real estate investment trusts, and weighting the observations to reflect whether
the firm is the sole focus of the story or is featured alongside with other firms. The
results are little changed.

16

27

The key results of Table 6 and 7 are as follows:
•

Older firms appear to be associated with more innovations in the first set of random
effects regressions, but this result does not appear to be robust to modifications of the
specification.

•

Less profitable firms are consistently significantly more innovative. In the second
regression in Table 6, a one standard deviation increase in the ratio of EBITDA to
sales translates into a 36% decline in the predicted rate of innovation.

•

More levered firms are less innovative in the regressions with random effects; no
such pattern appears in the pooled regressions. This suggests that as individual firms
become more levered, the rate of financial innovation is likely to decrease, but that
this pattern does not appear in a cross-section of firms.

•

More financial innovations occurring in a firm’s zip code are associated with less
innovation in the random effects regressions.

•

Closer ties to academia are consistently statistically associated with more innovation,
though the magnitude of the effect is more modest. In the second regression of Table
6, a one standard deviation increase in the ratio of editorial board seats to assets leads
to a 7% increase in the expected rate of innovation.

4. How Does Innovation Before and After State Street Differ?
The second analysis examines changes associated with the dramatic shift in the
ability to appropriate discoveries associated with the State Street decision. While I can
say little about how the decision affected the overall rate of financial innovation—the

28

pace of innovation may have been affected by many other considerations, such as tax
policy and other regulatory shifts—I can examine whether the distribution of innovators
was affected by the policy change.

Table 8 summarizes regressions similar to those in the fourth and eighth columns
of Table 5 and the fourth and eighth column of Table 6. (Once again, I focus on the
negative binomial estimations.) In this estimate, I include a second set of independent
variables, which consist of interactions between the key independent variables of interest
and a dummy variable denoting if the observation is from the year 2000 or after. In Panel
A, I report the coefficients and the associated t-statistics of the interaction terms. In
Panel B, I report the implied coefficients before and after 2000.

The clearest pattern to emerge from the table is the substantial increase in the
coefficient on assets in the post-State Street era. The implied elasticities prior to 2000 are
all less than one (consistent with the analysis in Table 5). In 2000 and after, however, the
elasticities are (in all but one reported case and the overwhelming majority of the
unreported ones) greater than one.

In many cases, the differences from one are

statistically significant.

The results regarding the other independent variables are weaker. The one result
worth commenting on is the apparent decline in the significance of the ratio of editorial
board seats to assets. Rather than being positive, as is the case before 2000 and in the
regressions reported above, the coefficient is now negative in both reported regressions.

29

In one case, the interaction term is significant at the five-percent confidence level. Our
interpretation of this result must be cautious, as in the other reported regression (and in
many of the unreported ones), the interaction term is not statistically significant.

It is important to pause to emphasize the importance of caution when interpreting
the results. Even if the coefficients are significant, the change may not have been caused
by the State Street decision. Moreover, many of the effects of financial patenting may
not make themselves felt for years to come.

In addition, the modest number of

observations after the State Street decision implies that any changes are likely to be
observed with considerable imprecision.17

The final set of analyses examines the filing of patent applications by the firms in
our sample. I replicate the analyses above, in the hopes of getting a better understanding
of causes of the changes seen above. If the patterns in patenting mirror the changes seen
in recent years in the nature of financial innovations, I may be more confident in
attributing the changes to this policy shift.

Table 9 repeats the analysis in Table 3, now comparing the features of all firms
with five or more financial patent awards between 1990 and 2002 and all firms with a
The need for caution in the interpretation of this analysis is also underscored by an
examination of the coefficients from (unreported) annual regressions of the number of
innovations on firm size (using the controls above). While the coefficients on firm size
are the highest during the period 2000 to 2002, and there is a sharp discontinuity between
1999 and 2000, the coefficient is quite unstable from year-to-year. In addition, the
influence of other aspects of the economic environment is apparent: for instance, the
coefficient is particularly low in 1998 and 1999, apparently due to the large number of
stories on smaller firms that had recently raised venture financing or gone public.

17

30

primary assignment to the financial services industry. As before, each firm-year pair is
used as a distinct observation (and assumed to be independent).

Similar to the analysis of innovators, patentees tend to be larger and older. They
are less likely to be located in zip codes where there are many financial firms and
financial innovations, a pattern that remains true even when I look at the subset of
financial service firms. Unlike the analysis of innovators, stronger academic ties are only
weakly associated with more patents. As above, the results regarding profitability and
leverage are mixed: the results are inconsistent or insignificant.

Table 10 replicates the analysis in Table 4, examining how the propensity to
innovate and patent varies with firm size. Again, I divide the firm-year observations into
quartiles based on assets (expressed in 2002 dollars). In the table, I present the number of
patents awarded in each year per billion dollars of assets (again in 2002 dollars) for each
size quartile. The greater propensity of smaller firms to patent is apparent, though the
magnitude of the effect is somewhat smaller here than in Table 4.

I then turn to examining patenting in a regression framework.

A general

consensus in the productivity literature is that it makes sense to examine the filing date of
patent applications, rather then their award dates. The processing times for these awards
differ across time and technology classes. Moreover, studies suggest that the lag between
the patent application filing and the R&D activity is minimal (Hall, Griliches, and
Hausman (1986)). While this approach is certainly desirable, it has the consequence of

31

limiting the time period over which I can examine patenting behavior. Applications are
often held confidential in the United States prior to award, so I cannot ascertain how
many applications each firm has made in recent years. I consequentially restrict the
analysis to patents applied for prior to 2000.

Table 11 corresponds to the analyses of innovations in the Panels A of Tables 5
and 6. Panel A of Table 11 highlights the fact that the elasticity of patenting with respect
to size is typically well less than one, a difference that is generally both economically and
statistically meaningful. Panel B reveals both some similarities with and differences
from the patterns seen among innovations. Like the innovators, patentees tend to be less
profitable. Unlike them, however, they tend to be less likely to have an academic
affiliation. In addition, patentees appear to be significantly less leveraged, a pattern
found in some of the innovation regressions. The results remain robust when other
specifications (e.g., akin to those in Panels B of Tables 5 and 6) are used.

The analysis of patenting is intended to be exploratory, and my conclusions must
of necessity be tentative.

Certainly, I cannot attribute the increased elasticity of

innovation with respect to firm size after 1999 to any difference in the nature of firms
seeking patent protection. It may well be, however, that the value of these patents are
greater for larger firms (perhaps due to their greater ability to enforce these awards
(Lerner (1995))). But the increased elasticity could also reflect other, totally unrelated
changes. It is also tempting to relate the seeming decline in the importance of academic

32

ties in spurring innovation to the lesser importance of this activity as a determinant of
patenting, but this claim again would be beyond what the evidence would support.

5. Conclusions
In this paper, I analyze the sources of financial innovations between 1990 and
2002. I find evidence that suggests that small firms are as innovative or even more
innovative than their larger peers. Less profitable firms and those with stronger ties to
academia also innovate more. Recent evidence suggests that these relationships may be
changing after the State Street decision, which greatly encouraged financial patenting.

This paper is very much of an initial look at these issues. Far more could be done
to relate changes in the rate and type of innovations to shifts in the tax, regulatory, and
overall economic environment. In order to fully explore these issues, it will probably be
necessary to look over a longer time frame. A second area that would reward exploration
is tracing out how these breakthroughs affected the profitability and growth of the
innovators and their competitors.

33

References
Acs, Zoltan J., and David B. Audretsch, 1988, Innovation in large and small firms: An
empirical analysis. American Economic Review 78, 678-690.
Alexander, John C., Jr., and Roland H. Marby, 1994, Relative significance of journals,
authors and articles cited in financial research. Journal of Finance 49, 697-712.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 1994, Financial Innovation and Risk Sharing (MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA).
Aron, Debra J., and Edward P. Lazear, 1990, The introduction of new products. American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 80, 421-426.
Arrow, Kenneth J., 1962, Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for
innovation: in Richard R. Nelson, ed.: The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity:
Economic and Social Factors (Princeton University Press, Princeton), pp. 609-625.
Audretsch, David B., and Maryann P. Feldman, 1996, R&D spillovers and the geography
of innovation and production. American Economic Review 86, 630-640.
Beatty, Anne, Philip G. Berger, and Joseph Magliolo, 1995, Motives for forming research
and development financing organizations. Journal of Accounting and Economics 19, 411442.
Ben-Horim, Moshe, and William L. Silber, 1977, Financial innovation: A linear
programming approach. Journal of Banking and Finance 1, 277-296.
Bhattacharyya, Sugato, and Vikram K. Nanda, 2000, Client discretion, switching costs
and financial innovation. Review of Financial Studies 13, 1101-1127.
Bound, John, Clint Cummins, Zvi Griliches, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Adam B. Jaffe, 1984,
Who does R&D and who patents?; in Zvi Griliches, ed.: R&D, Patents and Productivity
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago), pp. 21-54.
Cardinal, Laura B., and Tim C. Opler, 1995, Corporate diversification and innovative
efficiency: An empirical study. Journal of Accounting and Economics 19, 365-381.
Chacko, George, Peter Tufano, and Geoffrey Verter, 2001, Cephalon, Inc.: Taking risk
management theory seriously. Journal of Financial Economics 60, 449-485.
Chaney, Paul K., Timothy M. Devinney, and Russell S. Winer, 1991, The impact of new
product introductions on the market value of firms. Journal of Business 64, 573-610.
Cohen, Wesley M., 1995, Empirical studies of innovative activity; in Paul Stoneman, ed.:
Handbook of the Economics of Innovation and Technological Change (Blackwell,
Caambridge, MA), pp. 182-264.
34

Cohen, Wesley M., Richard C. Levin, and David C. Mowery, 1987, Firm size and R&D
intensity: A re-examination. Journal of Industrial Economics 35, 543-565.
Cohen, Wesley M., and Daniel A. Levinthal, 1989, Innovation and learning: The two
faces of R&D. Economic Journal 99, 569-596.
Frame, W. Scott, and Lawrence J. White, 2003, Empirical studies of financial innovation:
Mostly talk and not much action? Journal of Economic Literature forthcoming.
Gallini, Nancy T., 1992, Patent policy and costly imitation. Rand Journal of Economics 23,
52-63.
Gallini, Nancy T., 2002, The economics of patents: Lessons from recent U.S. patent
reform. Journal of Economic Perspectives 16, 131-154.
Greenwald, Bruce, Michael Salinger, and Joseph Stiglitz, 1992, Imperfect capital markets
and productivity growth. Unpublished working paper, Bellcore, Boston University, and
Stanford University.
Hall, Bronwyn H., 1990, The impact of corporate restructuring on industrial research and
development. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 85-124.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Zvi Griliches, and Jerry A. Hausman, 1986, Patents and R and D: Is
there a lag? International Economic Review 27, 265-283.
Hall, Bronwyn H., and Rosemarie H. Ziedonis, 2001, The patent paradox revisited: An
empirical study of patenting in the U.S. semiconductor industry, 1979-1995. Rand
Journal of Economics 32, 101-128.
Harris, Milton, and Artur Raviv, 1989, The design of securities. Journal of Financial
Economics 24, 255-287.
Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Zvi Griliches, 1984, Econometric models for
count data with an application to the patents-R&D relationship. Econometrica 52, 909938.
Henderson, Rebecca, 1993, Underinvestment and incompetence as responses to radical
innovation: Evidence from the photolithographic alignment equipment industry. Rand
Journal of Economics 24, 248-270.
Henderson, Rebecca, and Iain Cockburn, 1996, Scale, scope, and spillovers: The
determinants of research productivity in drug discovery. Rand Journal of Economics 27,
32-59.
Herrera, Helios, and Enrique Schroth, 2002, Welfare in unpatentable financial inventions.
Unpublished working paper, New York University.

35

Himmelberg, Charles P. and Bruce C. Petersen, 1994, R&D and internal finance: A panel
study of small firms in high-tech industries. Review of Economics and Statistics 76, 3851.
Holmstrom, Bengt, 1989, Agency costs and innovation. Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization 12, 305-327.
Jaffe, Adam B., Rebecca Henderson, and Manuel Trajtenberg, 1993, Geographic
localization of knowledge spillovers as evidenced by patent citations, Quarterly Journal
of Economics 108, 577-598.
Jewkes, John, David Sawers, and Richard Stillerman, 1969, The Sources of Invention
(W.W. Norton, New York), 2nd edition.
Kortum, Samuel S., 1997, Research, patenting, and technological change. Econometrica
65, 1389-1419.
Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner, 2003, Unraveling the patent paradox. Unpublished
working paper, University of Minnesota and Harvard University.
Krugman, Paul, 1991, Geography and Trade (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
Lerner, Josh, 1995, Patenting in the shadow of competitors, Journal of Law and
Economics 38, 563-595.
Lerner, Josh, 2002, Where does State Street lead? A first look at finance patents, 19712000. Journal of Finance 57, 901-930.
Long, William, 2003, R&D data for lines of business and new industries: Presentation to the
Board on Science, Technology and Economic Policy, National Academy of Sciences.
http://www7.nationalacademies.org/step/Long_R&D_ppt.ppt.
McNulty, James E., and John Boekeloo, 1999, Two approaches to measuring journal
quality: Application to finance journals. Journal of Economics and Finance 23, 30-38.
Merges, Robert P., 1996, Contracting into liability rules: Intellectual property rights and
collective rights organizations. California Law Review 84, 1293-1393.
Merton, Robert C., 1992, Financial innovation and economic performance. Journal of
Applied Corporate Finance 4 (Winter) 12-22.
Miller, Merton H., 1986, Financial innovation: The last twenty years and the next.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 21, 459-471.
Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984, Corporate financing and investment
decisions when firms have information that investors do not have. Journal of Financial
Economics 13, 187-221.
36

Nordhaus, William D., 1969, Invention Growth, and Welfare: A Theoretical Treatment of
Technological Change. (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
Prusa, Thomas J., and James A. Schmitz, Jr., 1994, Can companies maintain their initial
innovation thrust? A study of the PC software industry. Review of Economics and
Statistics 76, 523-540.
Romer, Paul M., 1986, Increasing returns and long-run growth. Journal of Political
Economy 94, 1002-1037.
Sakakibara, Mariko, and Lee Branstetter, 2001, Do stronger patents induce more
innovation? Evidence from the 1988 Japanese patent law reforms. Rand Journal of
Economics 32, 77-100.
Schmookler, Jacob, 1966, Invention and Economic Growth (Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA).
Schumpeter, Joseph A., 1942, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy (Harper and Brothers,
New York).
Scotchmer, Suzanne, and Jerry Green, 1990, Novelty and disclosure in patent law. Rand
Journal of Economics 21, 131-146.
Silber, William L., editor, 1975, Financial Innovation (Lexington Books, Lexington,
MA).
Silber, William L., 1983, The process of financial innovation. American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 73, 89-95
Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Andrew Weiss, 1981, Credit rationing in markets with incomplete
information. American Economic Review 71, 393-409.
Tufano, Peter, 1989, Financial innovation and first-mover advantages.
Financial Economics 25, 213-240.

Journal of

Tufano, Peter, 2003, Financial innovation; in George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and
Rene Stulz, eds.: Handbook of the Economics of Finance (North Holland, Amsterdam)
forthcoming.
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Marilynn B. Brewer, 1998, Intellectual human
capital and the birth of U.S. biotechnology enterprises. American Economic Review 88,
290-306.

37

Appendix A: Summary of Patent Policy Changes
The fervent in the U.S. patent system—and in financial patents in particular—had its
origin in two shifts. Neither was thoroughly discussed at the time. Nor did policymakers
appear to appreciate the interaction between these two changes:
•

The first was a seemingly technical shift in the appellate process. Since the birth of the
republic, almost all formal disputes involving patents have been tried in the federal
judicial system. The initial litigation must occur in a district court. Before 1982,
appeals of patent cases were heard in the appellate courts of the various circuits. These
circuits differed considerably in their interpretation of patent law, with some of them
more than twice as likely to uphold patent claims than others. These differences
persisted because the Supreme Court rarely heard patent-related cases. In 1982, the
U.S. Congress established a centralized appellate court for patent cases: the Court of
Appeals for the Federal Circuit (CAFC). The CAFC was staffed mostly with judges in
the federal system that had experience as patent attorneys. Not surprisingly, many had
an outlook that was sympathetic to the patent system. Over the next decade, in case
after case, the court significantly broadened patent-holders’ rights. The court expanded
patent-holders’ rights along a number of other dimensions as well.

•

The operation of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (PTO) itself also changed
over this period. Over the course of the 1990s, Congress converted the PTO from a
tax-revenue-funded agency that collected nominal fees for patent applications into
one funded solely by fees. Indeed, the PTO has become a “profit center” for the
government, collecting more in application fees than it costs to run the agency. These
effects of this policy change has been severe financial pressures, particularly in
emerging industries. Consequently, awards of patents in several critical new
technologies have been delayed and highly inconsistent.

With this background, I will now turn the specifics of financial and business
method patents. Since the early days of the twentieth century, there has been
considerable doubt as to whether methods of doing business fell under the definition of
patentable subject matter, namely “any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or
composition of matter.”1 While the United Sates did not explicitly forbid business
method patents, as many countries did, there was still a presumption that they did not fall
into these four categories and hence were not patentable.2

1

35 U.S.C. 101.

2

The crucial decision in establishing such an exception was Hotel Security Checking Co.
v. Lorraine Co., 160 F. 467 (2d Cir. 1908), which concerned a restaurant bookkeeping
system.
38

This presumption changed with the CAFC’s July 1998 decision in State Street
Bank & Trust v. Signature Financial Group.3 State Street Bank sued to have Signature’s
1993 patent on software to fix closing prices of mutual funds for reporting purposes
declared invalid. While State Street’s argument prevailed in the Federal District of
Massachusetts, where a summary judgment of patent invalidity was issued. The CAFC
reversed the decision on appeal. In its decision, the appellate court explicitly rejected the
notion that there was a “business method” exception for patentability. Rather, the CAFC
stated “the question of whether a claim encompasses statutory subject matter should not
focus on which of the four categories of subject matter a claim is directed to … but rather
on the essential characteristics of the subject matter, in particular, its practical utility.”4
State Street’s certiorari petition to the Supreme Court, asking them to review this
decision, was rejected in January 1999.
Assessing the extent to which this decision has affected firm behavior is difficult.
Certainly, financial patents have issued for many years. (The patent issued to Merrill
Lynch in 1982 for its cash management account was one highly publicized example.)
But interviews that Peter Tufano and I have conducted suggest that the State Street
decision has spurred many financial institutions to reconsider their policies regarding
patenting. Certainly, the volume of financial patent applications has increased
dramatically (Lerner (2002)). An examination of the financial patents that issued both
before and after the State Street decision underscores many of the issues regarding
examination quality discussed above. Numerous examples exist of patents covering
“discoveries” that actually have been known for many years.

3

149 F.3d 1368 (Fed. Cir. 1998).

4

State Street, 149 F.3d at 1375.

39

Appendix B: Examples of Included Stories
•

Announcements of new financial products and processes.

•

Announcements of new products incorporating an improvement.

•

Plans to develop or introduce new products or processes.

•

Experimental new products.

•

Joint ventures if an innovation is mentioned as the goal.

•

Government grants and contracts to fund something new and innovative (even if
government is only seeking to award a contract). (Unlike for new products and
processes, for grants and contracts I required that there must be some clear
evidence that something innovative is sought):

•

Government approvals (or applications for approval) of new products, including
approvals by foreign governments.

•

Innovative new applications or combinations of existing product.

•

Applications of new technology to finance: “High-yield junk bonds auctioned
electronically.”

•

Articles about innovation even if it concerned only the intention to surpass some
technological hurdle. My reasoning is that an invention or innovation probably
spurred the attempt. The fact that the research may ultimately fail is not a
concern, as even many patented inventions turn out to be useless.

•

Innovative applications on the Internet: “First application of online banking.” I
do not include announcements of new web pages unless there is a clear
innovation, i.e., the first application of a new idea.

40

Appendix C: Examples of Excluded Stories
•

Cases in which marketing issues are central and technological achievements only
secondary.

•

Reports on the spread or diffusion of an existing technology.

•

Expansion of a market: “Branch banking to hit Hawaii.”

•

Letters to the editor, editorials, or corrections.

•

Political decisions, new laws, and regulations. (But patents issued and
government approvals of new products are included.)

•

Articles concerning standards, even if they are technological standards.

•

New design or product in which the improvement is clearly esthetic rather than
technological.

•

Government grants or contracts for production of an existing product, or one that
is not clearly innovative.

•

New products or innovations occurring in foreign markets, which have no
consequences for U.S. producers or consumers.

•

New issues of stocks or bonds where the security types.

•

Patent infringement cases or stories about licensing technology. These cases
concern ownership of intellectual property, not its creation.

•

New scientific discoveries. Here, the discovery does not point to a specific new
product or process; if it had, I would include it.

41

Table 1. Summary of stories about innovations. The table provides information on the distribution of news stories about financial innovations in the
Wall Street Journal. Panel A presents the breakdown of all news stories by year. Panel B provides a breakdown of the types of innovation. Panel C
tabulates the mentions of Compustat-listed entities in these stories by year. Panel D presents the distribution of the firms in Panel C by their primary
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code (at the three-digit level).
Panel A: Total
Stories by Year
1990
48
1991
61
1992
47
1993
49
1994
38
1995
29
1996
34
1997
54
1998
49
1999
55
2000
74
2001
55
2002
58

Panel B: Breakdown of
Innovation Types
Security underwriting; trading
Asset management; pensions
Combination of classes; other
Retail/mortgage banking
Credit cards
Insurance
Commercial banking

33.5%
26.2%
17.7%
11.6%
5.2%
5.2%
0.6%

Panel C: Mentions of CompustatListed Entities by Year
1990
27
1991
32
1992
30
1993
22
1994
28
1995
18
1996
21
1997
40
1998
16
1999
40
2000
46
2001
25
2002
42

42

Panel D: Distribution of CompustatListed Innovators by 3-Digit SIC Code
Securities brokers & dealers (621)
23.5%
Commercial banks (602)
22.3%
Other non-depository credit insts. (619)
8.2%
Computer programming & related (737)
6.7%
Books (273)
4.4%
Newspapers (271)
3.5%
Motor vehicles & equipment (371)
2.9%
Miscellaneous business services (738)
2.6%
Fire, marine & casualty insurance (633)
2.1%
Petroleum refining (291)
2.1%
Telephone (481)
2.1%
Life insurance (631)
1.8%
Services w/ securities exchange (628)
1.5%

Table 2. Most frequently represented Compustat-listed innovators and patentees. The table lists
those firms who had the greatest number of Wall Street Journal stories about innovations and patent
awards between 1990 and 2002 while listed in Compustat.
Panel A: Innovators
Company Name
Merrill Lynch
Citigroup
American Express
Citicorp
McGraw-Hill
Charles Schwab Corp.
Dow Jones
Morgan Stanley
Goldman Sachs
Bear Stearns
International Business Machines
Reuters Group
Bank of America
Barclays
Chase Manhattan
J P Morgan

Panel B: Patentees
Company Name
Hitachi
International Business Machines
NCR
Citigroup
Fujitsu
AT&T
Diebold
Toshiba
Merrill Lynch
First Data
Citicorp
Microsoft
Xerox
Electronic Data Systems
Lucent
Reuters Group
Unisys

Number
20
15
13
13
13
11
10
10
9
8
8
7
6
6
6
6

Number
76
55
55
47
47
33
30
23
18
14
13
12
12
10
10
10
10

NOTE: These tabulations are based on the assignment to the Compustat GVKEY code, which typically
continues with a firm even as it changes its name. Thus, Citigroup includes activity by Citigroup after the 1998
merger and by the Travelers Group (and predecessor entities) previously. Citicorp includes activity by Citicorp
prior to the 1998 merger.

43

Table 3. Characteristics of innovators and other financial firms. The sample consists of 20,916 annual
observations of financial innovators and other financial service firms listed in Compustat between 1990
and 2002. The first column summarizes the characteristics of all firms with a primary assignment to the
financial service industry. The second and third present the characteristics for all firms undertaking at
least one financial innovation (reported in the Wall Street Journal) and all innovators who had a primary
assignment to the financial service industry. The results of t- and median tests comparing these firms to
other financial services firms are also presented.
All Financial
Service Firms
Assets
Mean
Median
Years since IPO
Mean
Median
EBITDA Margin
Mean
Median
Leverage
Mean
Median
Other Financial Firms in Zip Code
Mean
Median
Financial Innovations in Zip Code
Mean
Median
Editorial Board Seats/Assets Ratio
Mean
Median

All Firms

Innovators
Financial Service Only

10,899
516

90,112***
28,693***

132,304***
57,115***

8.6
6

21.4***
16***

18.7***
18***

0.18
0.28

0.24***
0.23***

0.32***
0.31***

0.28
0.21

0.29
0.26***

0.33***
0.31***

294
3

194***
2***

153***
2***

2.46
0

1.76***
0***

1.40***
0***

0.0005
0

0.0031***
0***

0.0034***
0***

* = significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at the 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.

44

Table 4. Distribution of innovations across firm size quartiles. The sample consists of 20,916 annual
observations of financial innovators and other financial service firms listed in Compustat between 1990
and 2002. The table divides the firm-year observations based on assets (in 2002 dollars) in the year of
the observation. The table then reports the average annual number of innovations per billion dollars of
assets (also in 2002 dollars).
Asset Size Quartile
Under $148.27 million
Between $148.27 and $554.70 million
Between $554.71 and $2,487.26 million
Over $2,487.26 million
p-Value, F-test of difference

Number of Firm-Year Observations
5210
5211
5211
5210

45

Innovations/Assets ($B 2002)
0.0389
0.0058
0.0043
0.0012
0.022

Table 5. Regression analyses of the impact of firm size on innovative activity. The sample consists of 20,916 annual observations of financial innovators,
financial patentees, and other financial service firms listed in Compustat between 1990 and 2002. The regressions employ pooled observations or random
effects, with a Poisson or negative binomial specification. The dependent variable in each regression is the count of innovations by a given firm in a given
year. The independent variables are the logarithm of assets (in millions of 2002 dollars) or the logarithm of assets if the observation is in each quartile.
Additional control variables in the pooled regressions (not reported) include dummies for the location of the company, the three-digit Standard Industrial
Classification class of the firm, and the year of the observation; the random effects regressions employ the year dummies. Standard errors (heteroskedasticadjusted in the pooled regressions) are in parentheses.

Logarithm of assets
Log of assets if assets are in smallest quartile
Log of assets if assets are in second quartile
Log of assets if assets are in third quartile
Log of assets if assets are in largest quartile
Location dummy variables
SIC code dummy variables
Year dummy variables
Number of observations
Log likelihood
p-Value, chi-squared test
p-Value, F-test of equality of coefficients
p-Value, test of equality of elasticity to 1

Panel A: Pooled Regressions
Poisson
Negative Binomial
0.57
0.60
***(0.07)
***(0.06)
0.71
0.83
***(0.27)
***(0.25)
0.53
0.61
***(0.20)
***(0.18)
0.55
0.62
***(0.16)
***(0.15)
0.57
0.62
***(0.11)
***(0.10)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
20,821
20,821
20,821
20,821
-1070.6
-1069.3
-1044.8
-1043.1
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.385
0.207
0.086
0.007
0.133
0.007

* = significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at the 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.

46

Panel B: Random Effects Regressions
Poisson
Negative Binomial
0.60
0.62
***(0.04)
***(0.04)
0.56
0.63
***(0.17)
***(0.17)
0.41
0.44
***(0.12)
***(0.12)
0.46
0.49
***(0.09)
***(0.09)
0.54
0.56
***(0.06)
***(0.06)
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
20,821
20,821
20,821
20,821
-1144.0
-1140.8
-1138.3
-1135.1
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.100
0.091
0.021
0.010
0.058
0.020

Table 6. Regression analyses of the other independent variables on innovative activity. The sample consists of 20,916 annual observations of financial
innovators, financial patentees, and other financial service firms listed in Compustat between 1990 and 2002. The regressions employ pooled observations or
random effects, with a Poisson or negative binomial specification. The dependent variable in each regression is the count of innovations by a given firm in a
given year. The independent variables include the logarithm of years since the firm’s initial public offering, the ratio of its earnings before interest, taxes,
depreciation and amortization to revenues, the ratio of the book value of the firm’s long-term debt to total capitalization (the book value of its long-term debt
and preferred stock plus the market value of its common stock), the logarithm of the number of financial firms based in the firm’s zip code, the logarithm of
the number of financial innovations in that year by other companies based in the firm’s zip code, and the ratio of the firm’s editorial board seats on
academic-practitioner journals to assets. Additional control variables in the pooled regressions (not reported) include the logarithm of assets and dummies
for the location of the company, the three-digit Standard Industrial Classification class of the firm, and the year of the observation; the random effects
regressions employ assets and the year dummies. The first column of each pair represents the coefficients from six separate regressions using each
independent variable in turn; the second column reports the coefficients from a single regression. Standard errors (heteroskedastic-adjusted in the pooled
regressions) are in parentheses.

Log of years since firm’s IPO
EBITDA/revenues ratio
Leverage ratio
Log of financial firms based in zip code
Log of financial innovations by others in zip code
Editorial board seats/assets ratio
Logarithm of assets
Location dummy variables
SIC code dummy variables
Year dummy variables
Number of observations
Log likelihood
p-Value, chi-squared test

Panel A: Pooled Regressions
Poisson
Negative Binomial
0.10
0.10
0.12
0.10
(0.08)
(0.10)
(0.08)
(0.10)
-0.67
-0.65
-0.71
-0.72
***(0.17)
***(0.22)
***(0.14)
***(0.17)
-0.47
-0.45
-0.64
-0.51
(0.58)
(0.57)
(0.61)
(0.59)
-0.02
-0.002
(0.05)
(0.05)
-0.14
-0.09
-0.09
-0.04
(0.14)
(0.16)
(0.14)
(0.15)
0.03
0.08
0.04
0.08
***(0.005)
***(0.01)
***(0.01)
***(0.01)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
NA
15,937
NA
15,937
NA
-873.9
NA
-849.7
NA
0.00
NA
0.00

* = significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at the 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.
NA = not applicable (column consists of coefficients from multiple regressions, rather than a single regression).

47

Panel B: Random Effects Regressions
Poisson
Negative Binomial
0.27
0.20
0.26
0.19
***(0.08)
**(0.10)
***(0.08)
**(0.10)
-0.64
-0.65
-0.64
-0.65
***(0.13)
***(0.16)
***(0.13) *** (0.17)
-1.42
-1.38
-1.32
-1.24
***(0.37)
***(0.40)
***(0.38)
***(0.40)
-0.11
-0.12
***(0.04)
***(0.04)
-0.38
-0.43
-0.41
-0.46
***(0.10)
***(0.12)
***(0.10)
***(0.12)
0.04
0.10
0.04
0.11
***(0.02)
***(0.03)
***(0.02)
***(0.03)
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
NA
15,937
NA
15,937
NA
-908.6
NA
-903.1
NA
0.00
NA
0.00

Table 7. Robustness of the results. The sample consists of 20,916 annual observations of financial innovators, financial patentees, and other financial service
firms listed in Compustat between 1990 and 2002. The regressions employ pooled observations or random effects, with a negative binomial specification
(except for the last regression, which employs a Poisson specification). The dependent variable in each regression is the count of innovations by a given firm
in a given year. The independent variables include the logarithm of years since the firm’s initial public offering, the ratio of its earnings before interest,
taxes, depreciation and amortization to revenues, the ratio of the book value of the firm’s long-term debt to total capitalization (the book value of its longterm debt and preferred stock plus the market value of its common stock), the logarithm of the number of financial firms based in the firm’s zip code, the
logarithm of the number of financial innovations in that year by other companies based in the firm’s zip code, and the ratio of the firm’s editorial board seats
on academic-practitioner journals to assets. Additional control variables in the pooled regressions (not reported) include the logarithm of assets (in millions
of 2002 dollars), dummies for the location of the company, the three-digit Standard Industrial Classification class of the firm, and the year of the observation;
the random effects regression employs assets and the year dummies. The first pair of regressions eliminate firms not based in the United States; the second
pair only use discoveries ranked as highly innovative; the third pair adds the ratio of R&D to assets as a control variable; and the final pair employs an
adjustment for extra zeros in the sample. Standard errors (heteroskedastic-adjusted in the pooled regressions) are in parentheses.

Log of years since firm’s IPO
EBITDA/revenues ratio
Leverage ratio
Log of financial innovations by others in zip code
Editorial board seats/assets ratio

Negative Binomial Specification
“Good” innovations
R&D control
Pooled
Rand.eff.
Pooled
Rand.eff.
0.03
0.14
0.10
0.19
(0.12)
(0.11)
(0.10)
**(0.10)
-0.88
-0.68
-0.72
-0.65
***(0.16)
***(0.18)
***(0.17)
***(0.17)
-0.69
-1.46
-0.51
-1.24
(0.68)
***(0.48)
(0.59)
***(0.40)
-0.03
-0.43
-0.04
-0.46
(0.17)
***(0.14)
(0.15)
***(0.12)
0.08
0.11
0.08
0.11
***(0.01)
***(0.03)
***(0.01)
***(0.03)
0.12
0.13
***(0.03)
(0.10)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
15,937
15,937
15,937
15,937
-634.8
-693.3
-849.6
-902.9
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Eliminating non-US firms
Pooled
Rand. eff.
0.06
0.10
(0.10)
(0.10)
-0.78
-0.73
***(0.16)
***(0.16)
-0.19
-1.00
(0.64)
**(0.41)
-0.08
-0.46
(0.15)
***(0.13)
0.08
0.11
***(0.01)
***(0.03)

R&D/assets ratio
Logarithm of assets
Location dummy variables
SIC code dummy variables
Year dummy variables
Number of observations
Log likelihood
p-Value, chi-squared test

Y
N
Y
Y
15,034
-775.2
0.00

Y
N
N
Y
15,034
-816.9
0.00

* = significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at the 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.

48

Poisson
Zero adjustment
Pooled
Pooled
0.14
0.14
(0.10)
(0.12)
-0.80
-0.74
***(0.21)
***(0.24)
-0.81
-0.68
(0.77)
(0.67)
-1.35
-1.27
**(0.60)
***(0.50)
0.09
0.08
***(0.01)
***(0.01)
Y
Y
Y
Y
9,951
-624.6
0.00

Y
Y
Y
Y
9,951
-636.4
0.00

Table 8. Regression analysis of the impact of firm characteristics on innovative activity with interaction
terms for observations after the State Street decision. The sample consists of 20,916 annual observations
of financial innovators, financial patentees, and other financial service firms listed in Compustat between
1990 and 2002. The regressions employ pooled observations or random effects, with a negative binomial
specification. The dependent variable in each regression is the count of innovations by a given firm in a
given year. The independent variables in the first and third regressions are the logarithm of assets (in
millions of 2002 dollars) if the observation is in each asset quartile (not reported) and interactions
between these terms and a dummy denoting if the observation is in 2000 or after. The independent
variables in the second and fourth regressions include the logarithm of years since the firm’s initial
public offering, the ratio of its earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization to revenues,
the ratio of the book value of the firm’s long-term debt to total capitalization (the book value of its longterm debt and preferred stock plus the market value of its common stock), the logarithm of the number
of financial firms based in the firm’s zip code, the logarithm of the number of financial innovations in
that year by other companies based in the firm’s zip code, the ratio of the firm’s editorial board seats on
academic-practitioner journals to assets (all not reported), and interactions between these terms and a
dummy denoting if the observation is in 2000 or after. Additional control variables in the pooled
regressions (not reported) include the logarithm of assets (in the second regression only), dummies for
the location of the company, the three-digit Standard Industrial Classification class of the firm, and the
year of the observation; the random effect regressions employ assets (in the fourth regression only) and
the year dummies. Standard errors (heteroskedastic-adjusted in the pooled regressions) are in
parentheses. Panel B reports the coefficients implied by the regressions for the periods before 2000 and
2000 and after.
Panel A: Interactions Terms in Negative Binomial Regressions
Pooled Regressions
Random Effects
Log of assets if assets are in smallest quartile
0.61
0.62
**(0.30)
*(0.35)
Log of assets if assets are in second quartile
0.35
0.38
(0.29)
(0.25)
Log of assets if assets are in third quartile
0.49
0.46
**(0.21)
***(0.16)
Log of assets if assets are in largest quartile
0.27
0.28
**(0.12)
***(0.08)
Log of years since firm’s IPO
-0.04
-0.16
(0.16)
(0.15)
EBITDA/revenues ratio
-0.43
-0.56
(0.27)
*(0.33)
Leverage ratio
0.17
0.13
(0.75)
(0.65)
Log of financial innovations by others in zip code
0.06
0.14
(0.28)
(0.23)
Editorial board seats/assets ratio
-1.11
-0.35
**(0.46)
(3.90)
Logarithm of assets
Y
Y
Location dummy variables
Y
Y
N
N
SIC code dummy variables
Y
Y
N
N
Year dummy variables
Y
Y
Y
Y
Number of observations
20,821
15,937
20,821
15,937
Log likelihood
-1038.2
-848.1
-1128.7
-898.6
p-Value, chi-squared test
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Panel B: Implied Coefficients in Above Regressions
Pooled Regressions
Random Effects
Log of assets if assets are in smallest quartile
Pre 2000
0.63
0.40
2000 and after
1.24
1.02

49

Log of assets if assets are in second quartile
Pre 2000
2000 and after
Log of assets if assets are in third quartile
Pre 2000
2000 and after
Log of assets if assets are in largest quartile
Pre 2000
2000 and after
Log of years since firm’s IPO
Pre 2000
2000 and after
EBITDA/revenues ratio
Pre 2000
2000 and after
Leverage ratio
Pre 2000
2000 and after
Financial innovations by others in zip code
Pre 2000
2000 and after
Editorial board seats/assets ratio
Pre 2000
2000 and after

0.48
0.83

0.29
0.67

0.46
0.95

0.34
0.80

0.53
0.80

0.47
0.75
0.12
0.08

0.24
0.08

-0.52
-0.94

-0.42
-0.98

-0.55
-0.38

-1.28
-1.16

-0.05
0.01

-0.50
-0.36

0.08
-1.03

0.10
-0.25

* = significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at the 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.

50

Table 9. Characteristics of patentees and other financial firms. The sample consists of 20,916 annual
observations of financial patentees and other financial service firms listed in Compustat between 1990
and 2002. The first column summarizes the characteristics of all firms with a primary assignment to the
financial service industry. The second and third present the characteristics for all firms awarded five or
more financial patents and those who had a primary assignment to the financial service industry. The
results of t- and median tests comparing these firms to other financial services firms are also presented.
All Financial
Service Firms
Assets
Mean
Median
Years since IPO
Mean
Median
EBITDA Margin
Mean
Median
Leverage
Mean
Median
Other Financial Firms in Zip Code
Mean
Median
Financial Innovations in Zip Code
Mean
Median
Editorial Board Seats/Assets Ratio
Mean
Median

All Firms

Patentees
Financial Service Only

10,899
516

76,348***
30,572***

210,396***
132,842***

8.6
6

24.6***
18***

30.0***
25***

0.18
0.28

0.17
0.17***

0.37**
0.34***

0.28
0.21

0.19***
0.13***

0.37***
0.38***

294
3

192***
1***

61***
1***

2.46
0

1.89***
0**

0.68***
0***

0.0005
0

0.0007
0***

0.0033
0***

* = significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at the 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.

51

Table 10. Distribution of patents across firm size quartiles. The sample consists of 20,916 annual
observations of financial patentees and other financial service firms listed in Compustat between 1990
and 2002. The table divides the firm-year observations based on assets (in 2002 dollars) in the year of
the observation. The table then reports the average annual number of patents per billion dollars of
assets (also in 2002 dollars).
Asset Size Quartile
Under $148.27 million
Between $148.27 and $554.70 million
Between $554.71 and $2,487.26 million
Over $2,487.26 million
p-Value, F-test of difference

Number of Firm-Year Observations
5210
5211
5211
5210

52

Patents/Assets ($B 2002)
0.0467
0.0127
0.0079
0.0024
0.011

Table 11. Regression analyses of the impact of firm size on patenting. The sample consists of 15,961
annual observations of financial innovators, financial patentees, and other financial service firms listed
in Compustat between 1990 and 1999. The regressions employ pooled observations, with a Poisson or
negative binomial specification. The dependent variable in each regression is the count of successful
patent applications filed by a given firm in a given year. The independent variables in Panel A are the
logarithm of assets (in millions of 2002 dollars) or the logarithm of assets if the observation is in each
quartile. Additional control variables (not reported) include dummies for the location of the company,
the three-digit Standard Industrial Classification class of the firm, and the year of the observation. The
independent variables in Panel B include the logarithm of years since the firm’s initial public offering,
the ratio of its earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization to revenues, the ratio of the
book value of the firm’s long-term debt to total capitalization (the book value of its long-term debt and
preferred stock plus the market value of its common stock), the logarithm of the number of financial
firms based in the firm’s zip code, the logarithm of the number of financial innovations in that year by
other companies based in the firm’s zip code, and the ratio of the firm’s editorial board seats on
academic-practitioner journals to assets. Additional control variables (not reported) include the
logarithm of assets and dummies for the location of the company, the three-digit Standard Industrial
Classification class of the firm, and the year of the observation. The first column of each pair in Panel B
represents the coefficients from six separate regressions using each independent variable in turn; the
second column reports the coefficients from a single regression. Heteroskedastic-adjusted standard
errors are in parentheses.
Panel A: Analysis of Firm Size
Poisson
Logarithm of assets
0.41
***(0.08)
Log of assets if assets are in smallest quartile
0.82
**(0.40)
Log of assets if assets are in second quartile
0.73
**(0.32)
Log of assets if assets are in third quartile
0.58
**(0.27)
Log of assets if assets are in largest quartile
0.53
***(0.16)
Location dummy variables
Y
Y
SIC code dummy variables
Y
Y
Year dummy variables
Y
Y
Number of observations
15,886
15,886
Log likelihood
-1160.4
-1151.7
p-Value, chi-squared test
0.00
0.00
Panel B: Other Independent Variables
Poisson
Log of years since firm’s IPO
-0.08
-0.01
(0.15)
(0.17)
EBITDA/revenues ratio
-0.66
-0.79
***(0.15)
***(0.21)
Leverage ratio
-1.93
-2.15
**(0.85)
**(0.97)
Log of financial firms based in zip code
-0.06
(0.10)
Log of financial innovations by others in zip code
0.05
-0.01
(0.19)
(0.24)
Editorial board seats/assets ratio
-0.36
-0.33
***(0.13)
**(0.15)
Logarithm of assets
Y
Y
Location dummy variables
Y
Y

53

Negative Binomial
0.46
***(0.09)
0.81
(0.52)
0.66
*(0.37)
0.49
(0.31)
0.54
***(0.21)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
15,886
15,886
-969.8
-963.2
0.00
0.00
Negative Binomial
-0.11
-0.08
(0.10)
(0.13)
-0.91
-0.91
***(0.18)
***(0.28)
-1.76
-1.78
**(0.76)
**(0.81)
-0.11
(0.07)
-0.18
-0.08
(0.19)
(0.21)
-0.39
-0.32
***(0.12)
***(0.11)
Y
Y
Y
Y

SIC code dummy variables
Year dummy variables
Number of observations
Log likelihood
p-Value, chi-squared test

Y
Y
NA
NA
NA

Y
Y
11,941
-920.9
0.00

Y
Y
NA
NA
NA

Y
Y
11,941
-771.8
0.00

* = significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at the 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.
NA = not applicable (column consists of coefficients from multiple regressions, rather than a single regression).

54

