                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  WHAT HAPPENS WHEN CHILD CARE INSPECTIONS
             AND COMPLAINTS ARE MADE AVAILABLE ON THE INTERNET?

                                              Ann Dryden Witte
                                               Magaly Queralt

                                           Working Paper 10227
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w10227


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       January 2004


The work reported in this paper was supported by grant #90YE0032 from the Child Care Bureau, Administration
for Children and Families (ACF), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). The grant was
awarded to the Wellesley Child Care Research Partnership through the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The support of DHHS for this work does not indicate their concurrence with our results, nor is DHHS in any way
responsible for errors that we may have made. This project would not have been possible without the support of
many people in Broward County and Miami-Dade County, Florida. Shawn Lamarche, Director, Broward County
Child Care Licensing and Enforcement, provided support, guidance and feedback throughout the project as well
as access to their data. She also provided rankings on the seriousness of various types of violations of minimum
child care standards, which we use in this study. Nate Reiss, Systems Analyst, Broward County Child Care
Licensing and Enforcement, helped us to obtain the inspection data used for this project. From Family Central,
Inc., we would like to thank Barbara Weinstein, President and CEO, Vice Presidents Carol Wasserman, Mark
Gross, and Ann de Las Pozas, and Anita Platt, head of Resource and Referral (R&R), for their insights, guidance
and feedback and for providing Broward and North Miami-Dade R&R data and subsidized provider assessments
used in this project. Mark Parker, President of MAP Software, Inc, helped us to export the inspection and
complaint data from SansWrite to DBase. We also would like to thank Linda Tamanini, Executive Director of
the Pinellas County License Board for Children’s Centers and Family Day Care Homes, for her insights and
rankings of the seriousness of various types of violations of minimum child care standards. We would like to thank
Claudia Wehbe for collecting the complaint data and Ashley Maurier and Rebecca Russell for assisting us in the
preparation and analysis of the data. Finally, we would like to thank Dr. Pia Divine and others at the Child Care
Bureau for their valuable comments and suggestions on an earlier draft.The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Ann Dryden Witte and Magaly Queralt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
What Happens When Child Care Inspections and Complaints Are Made Available on the
Internet?
Ann Dryden Witte and Magaly Queralt
NBER Working Paper No. 10227
January 2004
JEL No. D8, I5, I3

                                            ABSTRACT

        We provide substantial evidence that placing child care provider inspection and complaint
reports on the Internet changed the behavior of child care inspectors and improved the quality of
child care received by low-income children. We believe that these results were forthcoming in part
because: (1) the media widely reported the availability of this information on the Web, (2) the
information was easy to locate and use and (3) the inspector’s name and contact information
appeared on the first page of the reports.

        To be more specific, we find that, after child care provider inspection and complaint reports
are made available on the Internet: (1) inspectors produce significantly more inspection reports and
(2) inspectors become significantly more likely to provide mixed reviews of centers in the course
of their routine inspections, finding that centers sometimes meet minimum standards and other times
fail to do so.

        Controlling for time trends and other unobserved policy and economic changes, we also find
that, after inspection reports are made available on the Internet, there is a significant improvement
in classroom environment and center management at centers serving low-income children with child
care subsidies. While the magnitude of the improvement in terms of observational assessment scores
(i.e., 2.82 points, or ½ of a standard deviation) is moderate, it is comparable in size to improvements
often achieved by more expensive approaches to improve classroom environment or the curriculum.

Ann Dryden Witte                                       Magaly Queralt
Department of Economics                                Wellesley Child Care Research Partnership
Wellesley College                                      155 Ocean Lane Drive
106 Central Street                                     Suite 812
Wellesley, MA 02481                                    Miami, FL 33149
and NBER                                               mqueralt@wellesley.edu
awitte@wellesley.edu
1. Introduction

       The large increases in the number of low-income children in child care as a result of

welfare reform and the increased emphasis on ensuring that these children are ready to learn

when they enter regular school have focused attention on the need to improve the quality of

care received by low-income children. Common approaches to improving care include setting

and enforcing minimum standards, paying higher prices to subsidized providers (i.e., higher

provider reimbursement rates) for higher quality care, improving the curriculum used by child

care providers, and providing parents with better information about providers. As far as we

know, there has been no systematic study of the possible effects of providing better information

about child care providers on the quality of care received by low-income children.

       One of the oldest methods used to improve child care quality is the setting and

enforcement of minimum standards. To date, however, there have been few investigations of

the possible effects of minimum standards on the quality of child care and no systematic

analysis of how enforcement of minimum standards might affect the quality of child care.

       We believe that the dearth of research on the enforcement of minimum standards stems

both from the difficulty of obtaining inspection reports, which only recently began to be

computerized, and the fact that inspections are frequently carried out by agencies that are not

primarily concerned with child care, such as human service departments or health departments.

Due to the difficulty of accessing inspection reports, the public has made limited use of these

reports to assess the quality of child care choices in their communities.

       In this paper, we assess the changes in the quality of care received by children using

child care subsidies associated with a major effort to make inspection reports more accessible

and to increase their use by parents, providers, and advocates. We also examine a number of




                                                                                                  5
other possible effects of making available child care inspection and complaint data on the

Internet.

       Our study area is Broward County, Florida’s second larges county. In January 2001, the

Broward County child care licensing and inspection office made inspection and complaint

reports available on a user-friendly and readily accessible website. The agency issued a press

release announcing the availability of the reports on the Internet and the local media, including

radio, television and newspapers, widely reported the availability of this information.

       To briefly preview our results, we find that placing the results of inspections of child care

facilities on a readily accessible and widely advertised website: (1) significantly increases the

number of inspections per year carried out by inspectors, (2) makes inspectors significantly less

likely to consistently report that centers meet minimum standards and more likely to find that

centers sometimes meet minimum standards and other times fail to do so and (3) improves the

quality of care received by low-income children, as measured by various observational

assessments.

       Our paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we briefly describe the study

area. Sections 3, 4, and 5 provide background information on Broward County’s child care

minimum standards and its complaint system, the county’s CCDF-subsidized child care program

and how inspection reports were made available on the web. Section 6 describes the data that

we use to carry out our analyses and Section 7 discusses some economic models that help us to

predict and understand likely effects of making child care inspection reports available on the

Internet. Section 8 presents our findings. The final section contains our conclusions.

2. The Study Area

       Broward County is the second largest metropolitan area in Florida, located between

Miami-Dade and Palm Beach counties on South Florida’s East Coast. In 2000, Broward had a




                                                                                                    6
population of 1,623,018 spread over 30 municipalities, the largest being Ft. Lauderdale,

Hollywood, Coral Springs and Pompano Beach. The Broward County population is

overwhelmingly urban and predominantly white non-Hispanic (58%). Nearly 40% of the

population belongs to minority groups, with blacks comprising 20%, Hispanics (of any race)

17% and Asians 2%. According to the 2000 Census, 256,836 children ages 11 and under

reside in Broward County. Of these children, over 39,296 (15.3%) live in homes with incomes

below the poverty level.

3. The Context: Broward County’s Child Care

Minimum Standards and Complaint System

       Unlike most other counties in Florida, Broward County is empowered to establish,

administer, enforce, and regulate conditions in child care facilities in Broward through a

licensing program and to set minimum standards for substantial compliance for facilities and

arrangements not subject to (i.e., exempt from) licensure. Since 1981, a county agency, the

Child Care Licensing and Enforcement Section of the Human Services Department, has

inspected licensed as well as license-exempt child care facilities and arrangements to ensure

that they comply with the county’s minimum standards for child care. In most other counties in

Florida (a total of 59 out of 67), child care licensing and enforcement programs are

administered directly by Florida’s Department of Children and Families (DCF).

       Broward County Ordinance 94-2, pursuant to Chapter 402 of the Florida Statutes, sets

forth the county’s minimum standards for child care facilities. All child care facilities and

arrangements in Broward with more than 5 children unrelated to the operator and that receive

a payment for any of the children must be licensed. Religious affiliated facilities and non-public

schools and their integral programs are exempt from licensure. Although license exempt, these

facilities are regularly inspected and must comply with requirements for substantial compliance




                                                                                                  7
set forth under Article II of Broward Ordinance 94-02. Public school programs are exempt from

licensing and from substantial compliance inspections. Ordinance 96-42 governs family child

care homes. All family child care homes with children from at least two unrelated families and

which receive a payment must be licensed.

       Discussion of specific child care minimum standards in Broward County is beyond the

scope of this paper; however, it should be understood that, in order for a local area to have its

own standards in Florida, its standards must be at least as stringent as the State’s imposed

standards. As of this writing, a draft of the current version of the Broward Ordinance governing

child care facilities was available online at http://www.broward.org/chi00603.pdf.

       Child care centers and child care homes in Broward are required to provide inspectors

with access to the facility or home, staff, and records without notice (i.e., unannounced) during

regular business hours to assure compliance with the provisions of the child care Ordinances.

By Ordinance, all licensed child care facilities are to be inspected no less than three times per

year. Any violation reported to the facility must be corrected within the time period specified.

Chronic or more serious violations may result in license denial, suspension or revocation,

imposition of an administrative fine, prosecution or imprisonment.

       Broward County also has its own a standard operating procedure for handling

complaints filed with the Child Care Enforcement and Licensing Section. Only complaints

alleging violations of licensing standards can be investigated. If a caller reports child abuse or

neglect, the caller is instructed to call directly to DCF Child Abuse Hotline. Complaints are

assigned to Child Development Specialists or Supervisors and are required to be investigated on

site within 72 hours of the initial report (excluding weekends). After investigation is completed

a complaint report is written indicating whether each individual complaint is founded. If a




                                                                                                     8
complaint is founded, a Notice of Violation may be issued. All founded complaints are posted

on the agency’s website. All complaint reports are public record.

4. The Context: Broward’s CCDF-Subsidized Child Care Program

       The child care coordinating (4C) agency in Broward County (Family Central, Inc.)

contracts with licensed providers to provide subsidized care for children. Presently, about one-

fourth of licensed providers in Broward are under contract. The 4C agency receives referrals

from various sources, including its own Early Care and Education (ECE) Resource Developers

who recruit potential providers. The recruitment begins by sending providers an information

packet explaining the contractual process.

       The ECE Recruiters follow a three-step process to recruit new providers. The first step

is an initial visit. This includes a tour of the facility to assess compliance and to explain the

benefits of subcontracting, the documentation necessary and DCF’s required Child Care

Assessment Tool. The second step is a follow-up visit to the facility. During the follow-up,

necessary paperwork is collected and technical assistance is provided to ensure compliance with

the DCF Program Assessment Tool. Technical assistance also provides help with programming,

room arrangement, and inventory of equipment. The number of follow-up visits varies

depending on how much technical assistance is needed to bring the facility into compliance with

the DCF Child Care Assessment Tool. The final step in the contractual process is a walk through,

which is done with an ECE Specialist to ensure the facility is ready for assessment and

subcontracting.

       All subcontracted providers are assessed at least once per year using the assessment

tool, and all programs need to score a minimum of 80% overall on their assessment. Program

Assessors call the providers in advance to notify them that their program will be assessed

within the six week period following the notification. This is the only notification that




                                                                                                    9
subcontracted providers receive before an assessment. In addition to the assessments, ECE

Specialists conduct regular site visits to ensure that providers are in compliance with

requirements. Through this evaluation process, they are able to identify providers in need of

technical assistance in order to meet requirements and remain in the network of subcontracted

providers.

5. The Context: Making Reports Available on the Web

        The possible effects of making inspection and complaint reports available on the

Internet will depend upon how accessible the Internet information is, how aware interested

parties are that the information is available, and how much use they make of the reports. We

briefly summarize how reports were made available on the Internet in Broward County, and we

provide evidence that reports were used substantially more after they were placed on the web.

       How Reports Were Made Available in Broward

       In March 1999 inspectors at the licensing and enforcement agency in Broward began

using laptop computers to record the results of their visits to child care facilities. The system

was completely computerized by December 1999. Since January 2001, the licensing and

enforcement agency has made available on the Internet all the computerized reports of

inspectors’ visits to child care facilities. Verified complaint reports were added in July 2001 (see

http://www.co.broward.fl.us/chi00601.htm).

       The process of making inspection and complaint reports available on the web involved

multiple and carefully planned steps. Before placing the reports on the web, the Broward Child

Care Licensing and Enforcement Section held meetings to explain to the child care industry how

this would work. There were some initial fears expressed (especially from family child care

providers, who thought there might be troubled if their addresses were published). The




                                                                                                    10
providers were invited to write to the Director of the licensing and inspection agency concerning

any problems. The Director received only one letter.

       On January 23, 2001 the Broward County Human Services Department issued a press

release announcing the web availability of this new information. The Department emphasized

the importance of this information for parents in the press release and on the entry page for

the website. For example, on the entry page to the website, the agency states: “To assist you

in finding quality licensed or registered child care in Broward County, this site was designed for

you to access information and inspection reports on various types of child care arrangements.”

       The local media was enlisted, including local newspapers, local radio stations and local

television stations, and they widely reported the availability of these data. In addition, the

licensing and enforcement section placed an ad on the official Broward County website

(Broward.org), which is widely visited. They also advertised the new inspection website in all

their licensing correspondence to the industry, asking providers to check out the website and to

provide feedback. Ads were also placed in the Broward County Child Care Directory. In

addition, the new website was discussed in a publication distributed by one of the local

universities (Nova Southeastern), which serves as the department’s Training Coordinating

Agency, and it was mentioned in a survey of discounts from child care providers distributed by

the Broward County benefits office to their 8,000+ employees. Also, the child care R&R agency

in Broward, which is run by Family Central, routinely gives information to all parents who

receive child care referrals regarding how to access monitoring reports and founded complaints

on the licensing website.

       Some states and local areas have run into difficulties with providers in their attempts to

post inspection and complaint information on the Web. This was not the case in Broward.

Several factors may have facilitated this accomplishment. The move to computerize the data




                                                                                                  11
and to place it on the web started earlier than in many other places. Since 1981, the county

has been setting its own regulatory standards and conducting its own inspections. The agency

in charge of inspections has a philosophy of helping child care providers. Inspectors are known

as Consultants, and they spend a good deal of their time teaching providers about

developmentally appropriate practices, safety and health. The Child Care Licensing and

Enforcement Section regularly sponsors sector meetings for providers to network and learn and

for the inspection staff to listen and get feedback. Thus, they are more likely to be viewed as

an integral part of the community than state regulators would be. Also, Broward’s providers are

not very well organized or politically active. At the time of this writing there were two family

child care associations in the community and an active chapter of NAEYC. But, to the best of

our knowledge, child care facility owners did not have their own association. Those who

contracted with the child care coordinating (4C) agency to provide subsidized care (about 27%)

met regularly, but this was done under the auspices and as required by the 4C agency.

       Increased Use of Reports after the Internet

        While both the reports of provider inspections and visits and substantiated complaint

reports were public record prior to making them available on the Internet, placing these reports

on the web greatly increased their accessibility and use. Prior to being placed on the Internet,

inspection and complaint reports were available to the public only if interested individuals came

in person to the Licensing and Inspection office in Fort Lauderdale. According to Shawn

Lamarche, Director of the Broward Child Care Licensing and Enforcement Section, prior to

placing inspection information on the web, on average, about one parent a day came to the

licensing office to use inspection information.

       Table 1 provides a monthly record of the number of times the website of the

Department of Human Services’ Children’s Services Administration Division1 was visited (or “hit,”




                                                                                                   12
in computer jargon) between January 2000 and December 2002. The first thing to notice is the

large increase in hits after the January 23, 2001 press release (from 39,731 hits in December

2000 to 56,260 in January 2001). The increase in visits to the website, beginning in January

2001, provides evidence that the work of child care licensing and enforcement inspectors

became more visible after reports were placed on the Internet.

       The easy accessibility of the website where reports are placed helps to facilitate their

use. As a test, interested readers may try typing “Broward child care” into their Internet

browser’s address command line or into a standard search engine such as Google. When we

searched using Google while writing this paper, the first item on the list of websites that

appeared was a link to the Licensing and Enforcement Section’s page that allows one to search

for child care provider inspection and complaint reports.

       The Internet site that holds the reports is also simple and easy to use. It allows searches

by name of provider, city, zip code, street intersection and type of care. Once a provider is

found, inspection reports are clearly visible, as well as other basic information about the

provider such as whether it is accredited, child ages served, type of program and schedule. An

interested person can also click on a button to obtain a map showing the exact location of each

provider.

6. The Data

       In October 2002 we received from the Broward Child Care Licensing and Enforcement

Section a database containing information on all computerized child care inspections and

complaints. The earliest inspection in the database was for March 19, 1999 and the latest was

for June 27, 2002. The database contained the results of inspections of: (1) licensed child care

centers (2) licensed before- and after-school programs, (3) licensed family child care homes




                                                                                                  13
and (4) license-exempt substantial-compliance providers. Fifty-four percent of the 6,720

inspections in the database were for licensed child care centers.

       This report analyzes the 3,641 inspection reports we found in the database for a total of

505 licensed center providers. Of these providers, 137 (27%) had at least one assessment

score from the 4C agency, indicating that they were, at least at some point during the period of

our study, participating in the CCDF-subsidized child care program. We decided to focus on this

sector of the child care market because we had proportionately far more minimum-standards

inspection data on centers and we had more observational quality assessments for the CCDF-

subsidized centers than on any other type of child care provider in Broward. Using the same

methodology we employed, we could have analyzed family child care providers. However, we

have fewer assessment scores for family child care providers and fewer inspections for family

child care providers. For example, there were 316 family child care providers in the Broward

inspection database. These family providers had 1,129 regular inspections between January

2000 and July 2002 and 505 additional inspections for re-licensing. While there was a lot of

information on family child care providers in the inspection database, very few (about 10%)

were subcontracted for CCDF-subsidies. In fact, by the end of our study period, only 30 family

providers were being observationally assessed by the subsidy management agency. In short,

we had a very small set of family providers for whom we had matching minimum-standards

inspection data and observational assessments of quality by the subsidy management agency.

       Eighty-four percent of the licensed center inspections we studied were the routine

inspections required by Broward County ordinance. Almost 4% of the inspections were carried

out because of complaints. Ten percent were re-visits to check on more serious violations and

2% were for technical assistance. For most of the work reported in this paper, we use results

for the routine inspections since these contain the most comparable, complete and consistent




                                                                                                14
information. Representative routine inspection reports are available at

http://gis.broward.org/website/child2/search.htm.

       During 2001 and 2002 (the two year for which we have full-year data), most licensed

centers were routinely inspected an average of three times per year. However, some centers

received fewer than three routine inspections per year, and some received more than three.

       There were a total of 141 complaints about licensed centers in the database. In 2000,

8.9% of such centers had one or more complaints, including 9 centers with more than one

complaint. In 2001, 9.8% of licensed centers had one or more complaints, including 11 centers

receiving more than one complaint.

       The database contained a total of 370 center re-visitation reports. Re-visits typically

occur when a routine inspection uncovers a violation that requires follow-up. In 2000, 16.1%

of the centers had one or more re-visits and 20 had two or more re-visits. In 2001, 26.1% of

the centers had one or more re-visits and 36 had two or more re-visits.

       Content of Reports of Routine Inspections

       The following summarizes how the inspection reports for child care centers are

structured in Broward. The first page contains basic information about the facility (i.e., name

and address, name of Director, name of owner, and whether or not the facility is accredited),

contact information for the inspector, including name, address and phone number, and

summary information regarding the visit and results of the inspection.

       The second page of the report has a summary of all findings and indicates any changes

required to bring the facility into conformance with minimum standards regulations. The

findings recorded are both positive (e.g., a comment that new equipment has been added to

the playground) and negative (e.g., a comment that the torn, ripped and taped bedding needs

to be replaced). All instances of failure to comply with minimum standards are listed in this




                                                                                                  15
summary. The remaining pages of the report indicate the outcome for each item inspected. In

inspection and complaint circles, these last pages are called the inspection “check list.”

7. Economic Models

       There are a number of economic models that help us to understand the possible effects

of placing inspection reports on the Internet. These include: (1) benevolent government

models, (2) regulatory capture models, (3) private-empowerment models, (4) models of

perception updating and information use and (5) public choice models.2

       Under benevolent government models, inspectors would be considered to behave in the

public interest. That is, under such models, child care facility inspectors would be seen as

working to ensure that facilities meet minimum standards requirements. Placing inspection

reports on the web might increase the diligence with which inspectors enforce minimum

standards because their work would acquire greater visibility and potential impact.

       Regulatory capture models indicate that regulated firms (those subject to minimum

standards) will try to control inspectors and have them behave in ways that are beneficial to the

firms. This behavior is referred to as regulatory capture. Such theories remind us that some

child care providers might try to collude with inspectors to circumvent costly minimum

standards requirements. Generally, the longer an inspector inspects a child care facility, the

greater the danger that regulatory capture will occur. To try to prevent this potential problem,

many regulatory agencies rotate inspectors on a regular basis. While we observe some rotation

of inspectors in Broward County over the 2 ½ years of inspection data we studied, the majority

of centers (54%) had a single inspector for the entire period.

       Private empowerment models suggest that providing information to the public serves to

empower them to be more effective monitors. Thus, under the assumptions of these models,




                                                                                                 16
one would expect that placing inspection reports on the web should serve to increase the public

monitoring of providers and inspectors and should limit the extent of regulatory capture.

       Models of perceptual updating and information use suggest that people use information

when they are ready to make choices. Thus, parents would likely make use of the information

about providers on the web when they are ready to re-assess their child care choices. Families

often make such decisions in the early fall, after summer programs and summer vacations.

Otherwise, as long as parents are reasonably satisfied with the care they have chosen, they

tend to leave their children with the same provider until the end of the academic year. Over

the summer, however, children frequently have different child care arrangements due to

programs closing for the summer, family vacations or the desire to place the children in summer

camps. Consistent with information-processing models, Table 1 shows that the number of hits

to the licensing and inspection website increased markedly, from 67,665 in August 2001 to

138,515 in September 2001, the fall after the inspections were placed on the web.

       Two types of public choice models also have potential relevance to our work: (1) models

of bureaucratic “shirking” and (2) models of local government. Under shirking models,

minimum standards inspectors would be seen as inclined toward maximizing their well being by

working as little as possible. Under models seeking to understand how local government

operates, citizens who are dissatisfied are seen as having two main options: (1) to work to

improve the situation by becoming more actively involved or (2) to “vote with their feet” by

leaving the undesirable community. If citizens do vote with their feet, bad communities should

experience a decline in population and revenue.

       Parents who become aware of violations of minimum standards by their children’s child

care providers basically have the same two choices delineated above. They can either work to

improve the care that their current provider offers, or they can vote with their feet and move




                                                                                                 17
the child to another facility that more consistently meets minimum standards. Due to such

things as low-income or location, some families may be less able to vote with their feet than

others.

8. Findings

          To assess the possible effects of Internet availability of inspection reports, we consider

the record, before and after reports were placed on the Internet, on a large variety of measures

such as number of inspectors and inspections, number of inspection passes and failures issued,

violation notices, fines, re-visits, number of “findings,” seriousness of violations, provider

vacancy rates, accreditation and overall quality assessment scores received by providers

participating in the child care subsidy program.

          Number of Inspectors and Inspections

          Because we only have full-year data for 2000 and 2001, we use data for these years to

determine if there was any change in the number of inspectors or in the number of routine

inspections completed. Based on the Broward County reports we examined, 9 inspectors

completed routine inspections in 2000 and 12 inspectors completed routine inspections in 2001.

During 2001 one inspector left the system and three new inspectors were hired.

          The number of routine inspections increased from 969 in 2000 to 1,329 in 2001. In

2000, the mean number of routine inspection per center was 2.67, and in 2001 it was 3.18. A

T-test indicates that the increase in the mean number of inspections between 2000 and 2001

was significant at any usual level of statistical significance (T-value=18.16; p-value=0.0000).

          Part of the increase in the mean number of inspections during the period of our study

was due to the net increase of 2 inspectors between 2000 and 2001. 3 However, there was also

a significant increase in the number of inspections carried out by inspectors who worked full-

year in both 2000 and 2001. On average, there were 14 more routine inspections per inspector




                                                                                                   18
in 2001 than in 2000. This increase was highly statistically significant (T-value=14.62; p-

value=0.000).

        Inspection Passes and Failures, Violation Notices, Fines and Re-Visits

        We consider three summary measures from the inspection reports: (1) whether the

center passes or fails the inspection, (2) whether the center receives a violation notice, which is

an indication of a more-serious-than-usual violation and (3) whether the center receives an

administrative fine, which is an indication of an even more serious violation. In addition, we

consider re-visits. We examine whether or not there was a significant difference in these

summary measures and in the number of re-visits after reports were placed on the Internet.

        Using information on whether the centers passed or failed a routine inspection, we

calculate the probability that a center would pass all inspections, pass some inspections or fail

all inspections during the period before reports were placed on the Internet and in the period

after reports were available on the Internet. Table 2 shows the results.

        As can be seen in Table 2, centers were much more likely to always pass or always fail

inspections before inspection reports were placed on the Internet than after. After reports were

on the web, as compared to the period before, centers were more likely to pass some

inspections and fail others. To be more precise, before reports were placed on the Internet, 5%

of centers failed all routine inspections they received, 25% passed some and failed some and

70% passed all routine inspections. After reports were placed on the Internet, only 2% of

centers failed all routine inspections, 39% passed some and failed other inspections and 59%

passed all routine inspections. The difference in the various possible inspection outcomes before

and after the Internet is statistically significant ( χ 22 = 76.07 ; p-value-=0.00).

        The summary measures indicating more serious violations show a similar pattern. To be

more specific, centers were more likely to always receive fines or notices of violation or to never



                                                                                                 19
receive them before placing inspection reports on the Internet than after. After reports were

made available on the Internet, as compared to the period before, centers were more likely to

receive fines or violation notices sometimes rather than always or never. For example, before

reports were placed on the Internet, 1.5% of centers received fines as a result of all their

routine inspections, 15% received fines on some inspections but not on other inspections and

83% did not receive a fine on any inspection. After reports were placed on the Internet, only

.5% of centers received fines on all routine inspections, 25% received fines as a result of some

inspections but did not receive fines as a result of other inspections and 75% never received a

fine as a result of an inspection. The difference in the outcomes before and after the Internet is

statistically significant for both fines ( χ 22 = 44.04 ; p-value-=0.00) and violation notices

( χ 22 = 30.67 ; p-value-=0.00). We are unable to discern whether the change in the probability

of getting a fine or in the probability of receiving a violation notice after reports were placed on

the Internet was the result of a change in inspector behavior, center behavior or a change in

the behavior of both inspectors and centers.

        Number of Findings and Seriousness of Violations

        We next consider whether placing reports on the Internet affected (1) the number of

“findings” (i.e., written comments, positive or negative) by the inspectors and (2) the

seriousness of violations of minimum child care standards.

        There were significantly fewer findings noted by the inspectors in 2001 (after reports

were placed on the Internet) than in 2000 (before placement on the Internet) (T-Value=3.09;

p-value=0.002). To be more specific, when findings were given, inspectors, on average, listed

6.8 findings per center in 2000 and 6.1 findings per center in 2001. In both years, 46% of

routine inspections resulted in no findings.




                                                                                                  20
        We took two approaches to estimating the seriousness of violations. First, we

considered the inspectors’ level of concern about the situation at the center, as indicated by the

decision to re-visit the facility after a routine inspection. Specifically, if inspectors feel that a

violation is serious, normally they will indicate that they will re-visit the facility in a few days to

check on progress toward compliance. Generally, the more quickly inspectors plan to re-visit a

facility, the more serious one can infer the violation to be.

        For our second approach to estimating the seriousness of violations, the Directors of the

Broward County and Pinellas County licensing and inspection offices and the two authors of this

paper independently ranked the relative seriousness of various types of violations of minimum

child care standards on a scale from 1 (least severe) to 5 (most severe). We took the median

of the four independent rankings as a measure of the seriousness of a violation and weighted

all violations by their judged median seriousness.

        We found no evidence that the seriousness of violations changed after reports were

placed on the Internet. The mean number of days until an inspector re-visited a facility after a

violation was first reported was 10.9 in 2000 (the period before placement of reports on the

Internet) and 9.4 in 2001 (the period after reports were available on the Internet) (T-

value=.97; p-value=.34). The average total seriousness rating of all center violations was 11.9

in 2000 (before the Internet) and 12.4 in 2001 (after the Internet). The difference between the

two averages is not statistically significant (T-value=.81; p-value=.42).

        Parents and Centers

        As noted previously, public choice models indicate that parents can use inspection

information to get involved and try to improve the situation at their children’s centers, if some

standards are not being met, or they may be able to vote with their feet and remove their

children from a center where deficiencies are noted.




                                                                                                        21
       To discern if parents voted with their feet during our period of observation in Broward

County, we used various quasi-experimental and regression strategies to see if centers that

failed inspections after reports were made available on the Internet had lost enrollment or

experienced increases in vacancy rates relative to centers that passed inspections. We did not

have direct information on child care enrollments, but inspectors do record the number of

children present at the time of their routine inspections. We use this information as a proxy for

enrollments.

       The regression and quasi-experimental strategies we used indicate that there was no

significant change in enrollments related to: (1) whether a center passed or failed previous

inspections and (2) whether or not inspection reports were available on the Internet.

       Inspection reports contain no information on vacancies at centers, but Resource and

Referral (R&R) data include both the number of vacancies that a provider has and the provider’s

licensed capacity. This R&R data provide an alternative way of discerning if parents are moving

their children to providers with more positive inspection reports. We use the R&R measure of

the number of vacancies and the R&R recorded capacity of the center to calculate vacancy

rates, that is, vacancies as a fraction of capacity. We calculate the change in this vacancy rate

across academic years. We restrict our work to academic years because many providers close

for the summer or run different programs during the summer and because informational models

indicate that parents are most likely to change their child care choices across academic years.

       To be more precise, we calculate the change in the vacancy rate between Academic

Year (AY) 1999-2000 and AY2000-2001 and between AY2000-2001 and AY2001-2002. If

placing inspection reports on the Internet led parents to move their children from centers that

failed inspections to those that passed, then we would expect an increase in the vacancy rates

for centers that failed inspections prior to AY2001-2002.4




                                                                                                  22
       We do find a significant 10% increase in the vacancy rate for failing centers in AY2000-

2001 relative to AY1999-2000 and in AY2001-2002 relative to AY2000-2001. But we also find

an increase in the vacancy rate for centers that consistently passed inspections in AY2000-2001

relative to AY1999-2000 and in AY2001-2002 relative to AY2000-2001. Although the increase in

vacancy rates observed for passing centers (8%) was lower than that for centers that failed

some or all inspections, the difference between the two changes in vacancy rates was not

significantly different from zero.

       We also do not find significant evidence that parents were more likely to file complaints

after inspections were placed on the Internet. The number of filed complaints does increase

markedly after inspections are made available on the web. But relative to the total number of

centers, the before-after increase in complaints is non-significant. To be more specific, prior to

the time when inspections and complains were placed on the Internet, we observe 50

complaints against centers. After inspections were placed on the Internet, we observe 91

complaints. However, this almost doubling of complaints increased the complaint rate only

from 3.69% to 3.99%. Such an increase is non-significant at normal levels of statistical

significance ( χ12 = .21 ; p-value=.65).

       Private empowerment models would suggest that low-quality providers should be more

likely to stop providing child care after inspection reports are made available on the Internet,

given parents’ and advocates’ increased vigilance. While we find that center providers are

significantly more likely to stop providing child care after they fail an inspection than if they

pass it, we find no evidence that placing inspections on the Internet further increases the

likelihood that centers that fail inspections cease to provide child care.




                                                                                                    23
       Quality of Child Care

       The many possible quality ratings in the inspectors’ reports are affected both by the

actual quality of child care they observe and by any changes in the inspector’s behavior or

perception. Because we find evidence that inspectors significantly changed their behavior after

inspection reports were placed on the Internet, we cannot use any quality measures derived

from their inspections to discern if placing inspection reports on the Internet was associated

with changes in the quality of child care.

       In addition to inspection reports, we had two other administrative sources of data

available to obtain measures of child care quality: (1) the Broward County R&R database,

maintained by the Community Child Care Coordinating (4C) agency in Broward,5 which contains

data on various structural measures of quality and (2) the 4C agency’s observational measures

of quality for providers contracted to provide subsidized child care. We use both of these

sources to discern if there were any changes in the quality of child care associated with the

placing of inspection and complaint records on the Internet.

       We use accreditation information derived from the R&R database as a measure of

provider quality. We consider whether the probability of being accredited increased after

inspection reports made available on the Internet. These reports include information on the

Florida Gold Seal accreditation status of the provider. (The Florida Gold Seal program awards

accreditation status to providers accredited by 10 different approved national accrediting

organizations, including NAEYC.) We find that the likelihood that a center would (1) be

accredited by NAEYC, (2) have Florida Gold Seal accreditation or (3) have Broward County Gold

Seal6 accreditation all increased after inspection reports were made available on the web, but

only the likelihood of Broward Gold Seal accreditation increased significantly ( χ12 = 4.34 ; p-

value=.037).



                                                                                                   24
       Finally, we use the overall assessment scores received by providers participating in the

child care subsidy program. The 4C agencies managing the child care subsidy program7 in

Florida carry out a comprehensive assessment of participating providers. This generally occurs

twice per year, unless the facility receives two consecutive scores of 95 or higher, which

qualifies them, while the 95+ scores are maintained, for once-per-year inspections. Six

different assessment tools are used to evaluate centers. A “generic” tool covers areas such as

program management and staff development. The other five tools used are for each age group

in care (i.e., infants, toddlers, two-year-olds, preschoolers, and school-age children) and cover

things such as physical environment (indoor and outdoor), learning environment, staff/child

interaction, developmental program, parent involvement, health and nutrition. (Copies of the

assessment tools are included in the Appendix of Queralt, Witte & Griesinger, 2000). The

overall assessment score that we use is the average of the scores that the provider receives for

each age group in care combined with the provider’s rating on program management and staff

development.

       During the time period for which we have complete assessment information (the second

half of 1999 through the first half 2002), on average, 28% of centers in Broward County had

assessment scores (i.e., were participating in the CCDF-subsidized child care program).

Assessment scores for these centers provide valuable information about the changes in the

quality of care received by children in subsidized child care that are associated with the

placement of inspections on the Internet. However, the results obtained using these scores

only pertain to subsidized centers and may not be generalizable to centers that were not

participants in the subsidized child care program.

       On a possible scale of 100, the mean overall assessment score for Broward centers

participating in the subsidized child care program was 89 before reports were placed on the




                                                                                                25
internet and 91 after. This difference in scores represents an improvement of .36 of a standard

deviation8 and is significant at any normal level of statistical significance (T-value=3.80; p-

value=.0002). The size of this observed difference is comparable to the size of before-and-

after differences often observed in association with early care and education programs

instituted to improve classroom environment or the curriculum.

       We observe increases in mean overall assessment scores for each half-year period for

which they were available. Specifically, mean scores went from 88.8 in the second half of 1999

(the first period for which data were available) to 91.5 in the first half of 2002.

       The secular increase in mean overall assessment scores that we observe may have

resulted from some trend (possibly one similar to grade inflation at universities) rather than as

a result of placement of inspection reports on the Internet. To control for this possibility, we

regressed assessment scores on a set of binary variables for each time period and a binary

variable equal to one after reports were made available on the Internet and zero before. The

time period binaries control for any underlying trend or other period-specific effects. Results

indicate that, controlling for time period effects, mean overall assessment scores increased by

2.7 points after inspection reports were placed on the Internet. This increase is significant at

any normal level of statistical significance (T-value=3.70; p-value=0.000).

       It is possible that some change other than placing inspection reports on the Internet or

a time related effect was responsible for the increase in assessment scores. To examine this

additional possibility, we use overall assessment scores for providers participating in the

subsidized child care program in the northern third of Miami-Dade County (MDC). MDC is

adjacent to Broward County, and it is located directly south of it. The northern third of MDC has

the same 4C subsidy management agency (Family Central, Inc.) as does Broward County.




                                                                                                   26
However, child care provider inspections in MDC are carried out by the Florida Department of

Children and Families (DCF).

       Provider inspection reports for MDC are less directly accessible on the web and accessed

considerably less frequently than the inspection reports in Broward.9 Unlike Broward County,

which set its own child care standards and carries out it own inspections, MDC’s child care

standards are set by the State. The local office of the Florida Department of Children and

Families (DCF) carries out inspections to enforce the State’s minimum standards. For most of

2001, these inspection reports for MDC child care providers were only available to individuals

coming in person to the local DCF office in downtown Miami. In July 2001, DCF began

computerizing inspection reports and in late 2001 DCF began placing the reports on the

Internet.

        Using the combined assessment scores from Broward County and from the northern

third of MDC, we carried out what is called in the economics literature a difference in

differences analysis. Results are reported in Table 3. To carry out this analysis, we first

calculated the difference in scores for both areas before and after inspection reports were

placed on the web in Broward. As can be seen in Table 3, the mean assessment score in

Broward increased by 1.55 points after Broward inspection reports were placed on the Internet.

The mean assessment score in MDC decreased by 0.05 points after Broward inspection reports

were placed on the Internet. Taking the difference between these two differences, we obtain

the difference in differences estimate: an increase in assessment scores of 1.6 points following

the placement of Broward inspections on the Internet. This estimate controls for any changes

that may have affected both Broward and the northern part of MDC (e.g., change in the subsidy

agency’s policies, change in labor market conditions).10




                                                                                                 27
       Finally, we carry out a regression that uses (1) the comparison with the northern part of

MDC to control for unobserved policy or economic differences between Broward and the

northern part of MDC and (2) period binaries to control for time-varying effects. The regression

indicates that, controlling for both unobserved differences in our two study areas and time-

varying effects, the best estimate is that placing Broward inspections on the Internet increased

mean assessment scores in Broward County by 2.82 points, that is, by about one-half of a

standard deviation. This result is significant at any normal level of statistical significance (T-

value=4.07; p-value=0.000).

       9. Conclusions

       We provide substantial evidence that placing child care inspection and complaint reports

on the Internet in a readily located and accessible format, when combined with media

coverage of availability, is associated with changes in the behavior of child care inspectors

and in the quality of child care available in the community. We suspect that displaying the

inspectors’ names and contact information prominently on the first page of the computerized

reports contributed to the change in inspector behavior.

       We found that inspectors perform more inspections and provide more mixed reviews of

centers after inspection and complaint reports are made available on the Internet. In addition,

the quality of child care received by subsidized children, as judged by observational measures of

center management and classroom environment, increases significantly after inspection and

complaint reports are placed on the Internet. While the magnitude of the increase in quality is

moderate (i.e., an increase of about one-half of a standard deviation in observational

assessment scores), it is comparable to improvements often achieved by more expensive

approaches such as improvements of classroom environment or the curriculum.




                                                                                                     28
        There are increasing numbers of low-income children in child care as a result of welfare

reform, and greater emphasis is being placed on their school readiness. The fact that we

observe an increase in quality associated with the placement of inspection reports on the

Internet in centers serving subsidized, low-income children is a matter of substantial public

policy interest.

        To be more specific, we find that, after placing inspection reports on the Internet: (1)

inspectors significantly increase the number of inspections they perform; (2) inspectors are

significantly more likely to give centers a mixture of passes and failures on routine inspections,

rather than all passes or all failures and (3) inspectors are also significantly more likely to give

some violation notices and some administrative fines, as opposed to always giving them or

never giving them.

        To measure the quality of care, we use data from comprehensive observational

assessments of providers participating in the program to provide subsidized child care to eligible

low-income children. Such assessments are generally carried out twice per year and cover both

center management and classroom environment. After controlling for both time trends and

other unobserved policy, economic or other differences between our two study areas, we

estimate that the overall assessment scores received by centers providing subsidized child care

in Broward County increased by 2.82 points (about one-half of a standard deviation) after

inspection and complaint records were made available on the Internet. Because we only have

observational measures of quality for the 28% of centers in Broward participating in the

subsidized child care program, these results may not generalize to centers not participating in

this program.

        Independent of the inspection system, the only other quality information that we have

available on all providers is accreditation information. We find that providers were more likely




                                                                                                   29
to be accredited after inspection reports (containing information on the provider’s Florida Gold

Seal accreditation status) were made available on the Internet. However, only Broward Gold

Seal accreditation increased significantly (significant at the .05 level) after placement on the

Internet.

       We can use economic theories to speculate as to why inspectors changed their behavior

and how this change in inspector behavior affected the quality of child care. According to

benevolent government theories, inspectors may be primarily interested in effectively enforcing

minimum standards. Under bureaucratic shirking theories, they may be mainly interested in

leading as easy and comfortable a life as possible. Our guess is that most inspectors, like most

human beings, have a mixture of these two motivations. Regulatory capture theories also

indicate that regulated firms (in this case, child care centers) will try to control inspectors and

have them behave in ways that are beneficial to the firms.

       We speculate that the significant decrease in the likelihood that centers would pass all

routine inspections after reports were placed on the Internet could result either from lessened

regulatory capture or from increased inspector effort and attention to enforce minimum

standards as a result of the greater impact and visibility of their work. The significant decrease

in the probability that centers would fail all routine inspections may well be the result of

providers fearing the economic consequences of a string of failed inspection reports placed in

plain public view.

       Increases in the quality of care provided associated with the placement of inspection

reports on the Internet have a number of potential explanations: (1) parents voted with their

feet and left centers with low quality and such centers went out of business, (2) parents or

advocates pressured failing centers to improve, (3) the changed behavior of inspectors

pressured centers to improve or (4) inspectors had increased leverage to compel centers to




                                                                                                      30
improve quality as a result of being able to make failures more widely and easily visible through

the Internet.

       In our short period of observation, we find no significant evidence that parents voted

with their feet and removed their children from centers that failed inspections. We also find no

significant evidence that parents placed increased pressure on failing centers to improve the

quality of care they provide.11 This leaves us with the explanation that the improved quality of

child care that we observe was primarily the result of some combination of inspector’s increased

leverage or pressure on providers to improve quality or lessened regulatory capture.




                                                                                                31
                                            References



       Beck, T., A. Demirgus-Kunt & R. Levine (2003) “Bank Supervision and Corporate

Finance.” Working paper #9620, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

       Mueller, D. (1997) Perspectives on Public Choice: A Handbook. Cambridge, England:

Cambridge University Press.

       Queralt, M., A. Witte & H. Griesinger (2000) “’Championing Our Children’: Changes in

Quality, Price and Availability of Child Care in the Welfare Reform Era.” Working paper #2000-

07, Wellesley College Department of Economics, Wellesley, MA.




                                                                                              32
                                    Table 1
      Broward County Children's Services Administration Division
                    Monthly Hits - all web pages

   2000          Hits                2001       Hits                   2002    Hits
Jan.              42728           Jan.           56260              Jan.        78545
Feb.              25783           Feb.           56543              Feb.        75879
Mar.              26785           Mar.           63108              Mar.        79628
Apr.              22937           Apr.           66888              Apr.        82834
May.              33068           May.           63532              May.        82823
Jun.              34629           Jun.           58198              Jun.        82823
Jul.              31258           Jul.           61276              Jul.        85446
Aug.              39024           Aug.           67665              Aug.        70384
Sep.              35949           Sep.          138515              Sep.        65837
Oct.              42933           Oct.          107364              Oct.        82028
Nov.              49233           Nov.           63924              Nov.        60792
Dec.              39731           Dec.           53627              Dec.       161290
Total per year   424058                         856900                        1008309

Avg. per month 35338.17                        71408.33                       84025.75




                                             Table 2
                               Oucomes Before and After Internet
                               (Number of Inspections in Parenthesis)
                                                   Probability Probability
                          Outcome                    Before       After
                                                     5.42%       2.02%
                          Fail All Inspections       (n=61)      (n=36)
                                                    24.69%      38.59%
                          Pass Some; Fail Some      (n=278)     (n=689)
                                                    69.89%      59.41%
                          Pass All Inspections      (n=787)    (n=1061)




                                                                                         33
                                              Table 3
                            Differences & Differences in the Differences
                                        (P-Values in Parentheses)
                                                              Mean Score    Mean Score   P(After)-
                                                                  Before         After   P(Before)
Broward                                                            89.22         90.77       1.55
                                                                                             0.00
North Dade                                                          91.46       90.40       -0.05
                                                                                            -0.06
Difference in the Differences                                                              1.600
(Broward(After)-P(Before))-(North-DadeP(After)-P(Before))                                  (0.00)




                                                                                                     34
                                                Endnotes



        1
           The Sections in the Division are: Contract Administration & Planning, Child Care Licensing &
Enforcement and the Sexual Assault Treatment Center. Only the Child Care Licensing & Enforcement
Section had a major change in Internet offerings between 1999 and 2002.
         2
           See Mueller (1996) for a summary of these models and Beck, et al. (2003) for an assessment of
the relative usefulness of these models for bank supervision.
         3
            The increase in the number of inspectors between 2000 and 2001 likely was related to the
increase in the number of licensed facilities in Broward, from 501 in September 2000 to 522 in September
2001.
         4
           Our measure of failure is the failure rate for the center’s inspections for the 7 months preceding
the academic year under consideration.
         5
           Family Central is the Community Child Care Coordinating (4C) agency in charge of administering
the subsidized child care program in Broward County and in the northern one-third of Miami-Dade County
in Florida.
         6
           Child care providers are awarded Broward Gold Seal status on a yearly basis by the Broward
County Child Care Licensing and Enforcement Section of the Bureau of Children’s Services, Human
Services Department. Selection depends on fulfillment of 9 different criteria, including passing four
routine inspections meeting all criteria, having an average of 95% or higher percentage of children’s
records, and having no founded complaints. Approximately 25% of centers in Broward have the Broward
Gold Seal designation.
         7
           It is important to note that the subsidy management agency in Broward County is completely
independent of the inspection and complaint office.
         8
           The overall standard deviation of assessment scores is 5.5 points.
         9
            The computerized inspection reports for the 59 out of 67 Florida Counties in which DCF is
responsible for carrying out child care provider inspections were placed by DCF in a centralized statewide
website. At the time we accessed the web reports while writing this paper, the reports did not include
the name, address or telephone number of the inspector or other contact information for DCF. We are
not aware of any public notice or media coverage when the inspection reports were placed on web.
Further, the DCF database is difficult to access directly, except through links provided by local
organizations. In Miami-Dade, a link is provided under the category of “child care provider search” in the
Teach More/Love More website funded by The Early Childhood Initiative Foundation. Typing “Miami-
Dade child care” in the command line of an Internet Browser program is likely to elicit the Teach
More/Love More website, which parents may or may not connect in their minds with accessing child care
provider inspection reports. However, once parents looking for provider information arrive at the Teach
More/Love More website, they are likely to click on “child care provider search” or on “How can I check
out a child care provider?” If they click on “child care provider search,” they arrive at the DCF inspection
and complaint database. If they click on “How can I check out a child care provider?” they are given the
phone number for the local licensing office of DCF, where records are kept on all licensed facilities. The
hit counter for the Florida DCF website where the statewide inspection reports reside read 158,918 when
we accessed it while writing this paper. Although the site contains inspection reports for 59 Florida
counties, including Miami-Dade, which is the largest county in Florida, the site has been visited less over
the year and a half year period since inception than the Broward site was visited in the month of
December 2002 (see Table 1).
         10
             Discussions with representatives from the Broward County Child Care Licensing and
Enforcement Office and from Family Central, Inc. did not reveal any child care policy changes (exclusively
affecting Broward County and not North Dade) that were implemented around the time inspection reports
were placed on the web in Broward. Quality and technical assistance funds were not segregated out until
the 2002-2003 contract year; therefore, it was not possible at this time for Family Central to discern if
there was a difference in their funding resulting in increased quality and technical assistance activity
starting specifically around the time inspections were placed on the web in Broward, but such coincidence


                                                                                                          35
is highly unlikely. The child care licensing and inspection staff and Family Central’s staff in Broward
County have a long history of consultation and coordination of activities, including occasional joint
meetings and shared cellular telephones for emergencies. Additionally, Family Central in Broward often
recruits guest speakers from the Licensing and Enforcement Office for their CDA classes to speak on
ordinance issues and has linked electronically its database with the inspection databases. These
established mechanisms enable the staff of the two agencies to share information and concerns. In the
northern part of MDC, the subsidy administering agency works to help family child care providers to
become licensed and sends complaints to DCF’s licensing office when it notes violations or allegations of
abuse/neglect. However, coordination between the subsidy administering agency and the licensing office
in MDC on other matters traditionally has not been as close as the coordination between these two
agencies in Broward County. This may be due, at least in part, to the fact that licensing and inspections
is a local agency in Broward, while it is part of a large state bureaucracy in MDC.
         11
            Many low-income parents with children receiving child care subsidies had limited access to the
Internet in 2001. Thus, it is not likely that placing inspection reports on the web would significantly and
directly affect their behavior. Our findings reinforce this view.




                                                                                                        36
