NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POPULATION AND REGULATION
Casey B. Mulligan
Andrei Shleifer
Working Paper 10234
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10234
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004

We appreciate the comments of Lucian Bebchuk, Gary Becker, Dora Costa, Simeon Djankov, Ed Glaeser,
Claudia Goldin, Louis Kaplow, Jim Hines, Larry Katz, Matt Kahn, Sam Peltzman, seminar participants at
Clemson, Harvard, and the University of Chicago, data from Steve Tenn, and the research assistance of
Herbert Lian, Pakshun Ng, Walter Theseira, and Vasu Vadlamudi. Mulligan gratefully acknowledges the
financial support of the University of Chicago’s Stigler Center for the study of the Economy and the State,
and computing support from the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Casey B. Mulligan and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Population and Regulation
Casey B. Mulligan and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 10234
January 2004
JEL No. H11, K10
ABSTRACT
We present a model of efficient regulation along the lines of Demsetz (1967). In this model, setting
up and running regulatory institutions takes a fixed cost, and therefore jurisdictions with larger
populations affected by a given regulation are more likely to have them. Consistent with the model,
we find that higher population U.S. states have more pages of legislation and adopt particular laws
earlier in their history. We also find that specific types of regulation, including the regulation of
entry, the regulation of labor, and the military draft are more extensive in countries with larger
populations. Overall, the data show that population is an empirically important determinant of
regulation.
Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street, #506
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu
Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
In a classic paper, Demsetz (1967) argues that the creation of institutions is shaped by
demand. Introducing an institution only becomes efficient when the scale of an activity it supports
becomes significant enough to cover the costs of creating and running it. Using the example of
Indians in the Quebec region circa 1700, Demsetz maintains that the aggregate value of fur trading
explains the emergence of enforced land ownership rights. In this paper, we show that Demsetz’s
logic is quite general theoretically but also valid empirically. We show that population of a
community – our measure of the scale of various activities – is an important determinant of whether
and how much these activities are regulated by that community.
The focus on population as a determinant of regulation is uncommon in theoretical and
empirical work. Much of research on regulation has focused on contrasting public interest theories,
in which regulation cures market failure (e.g., Pigou 1934), with public choice theories, in which
regulation helps special interests to make money (e.g., Tullock 1967, Stigler 1971, Peltzman 1976,
or McChesney 1987). This work generally focuses on particular industries to understand the
structure of regulation. Our work is closer to the recent writings on regulation that see it as one
strategy of enforcing good conduct, which needs to be compared to private orderings, dispute
resolution in courts, and other enforcement strategies (e.g., Glaeser, Johnson and Shleifer 2001,
Djankov et al. 2003). However, that work ignores scale as a potentially important factor shaping
public involvement. Our purpose is to explore the implications of fixed organization, adoption, and
enforcement costs of regulation on its use by focusing on total population of a community – a U.S.
state or a country – as a determinant of its regulatory structure.
Section II presents a simple model of the creation of regulation of different types. The model
establishes the relationship between population and regulation, but also permits a calculation of the
population elasticity of regulation. Section III presents our cross-state data on the amount of law,
showing how bigger states regulate more activities and tend to regulate each activity in more detail.
Section IV revisits the previous literature on regulatory adoption, adding population to the list of
explanatory variables, and shows how larger states tend to adopt regulations earlier. Section V looks
at five types of regulation across countries, showing how high population countries tend to regulate
a given activity more. Section VI extends the basic model to consider redistributive and not just
efficient regulation, shows that many of the same insights apply, and presents some evidence on the
empirical significance of that model. Section VII concludes.

Population and Regulation - 2
II. Regulation Creation in a Simple Model with Fixed Costs and Zipf’s Law
Our starting point is the efficiency approach to regulation which holds, in broadest terms,
that a society chooses to regulate an activity when doing so is cheaper than alternative strategies of
addressing social problems. Perhaps the simplest example of this approach, and one that we model,
is resolution of disputes. Consider a jurisdiction, such as a U.S. state, where people interact with
each other, and sometimes have a dispute. These disputes can be resolved in a number of ways.
They can be resolved completely privately, perhaps because neighbors want to get along (Elickson
1991) or because participants in a given industry have established a private ordering to facilitate
business in the long run (Greif 1993, Bernstein 1992). Alternatively, they can be resolved in court
based on general principles of fairness, without any reference to legislation or regulation. Both of
these strategies of enforcing good conduct have much to recommend them, but sometimes they fail.
Private orderings are vulnerable to abuse of the weak by the strong; mafia enforcement is an
example. Dispute resolution based on custom or common law is also expensive when application
of general principles requires the assembly of a great deal of data and expertise. When private
orderings and common law do not work well, mutually beneficial transactions might not take place.
As an efficient response to such problems, many societies introduce legislation and
regulation, which delineate the rights and obligations of various parties in a community. Sometimes
legislation just describes the rules of the game, and leaves the enforcement of these rules to private
parties. Its main function is to reduce the cost of settling disputes in court. In other instances,
enforcement is also taken over by the state, as in the case of regulatory agencies. At least in some
instances, legislation and regulation reduce the transaction costs of enforcing good conduct relative
to private orderings and common law. Glaeser, Johnson and Shleifer (2001) argue, for example,
that regulation reduces enforcement costs because regulators have stronger incentives to enforce
rules than do the judges. Glaeser and Shleifer (2001) and LaPorta et al (2003) give examples of why
“bright line rules” provided by regulation are easier to enforce – both publicly and privately – than
torts. For our purposes, we do not assume that regulation is always more efficient, or identify the
exact transaction costs – it is sufficient that, in some instances, regulation does reduce these costs.
As an example of this approach, consider the regulation of securities markets. In these
markets, a crucial problem is the issuance of worthless securities to a poorly informed public by
dishonest promoters and entrepreneurs. One can argue that underwriter and issuer reputation would
eliminate this risk, but in many countries they do not; the temptation to take the money and run is

Population and Regulation - 3
just too strong. One can also argue that general principles of tort law, such as negligence, are
sufficient to enforce good conduct and provide restitution to deceived investors. But in many cases,
it is just too expensive to show that issuers and underwriters knew something material and
negligently failed to disclose this information to investors. The questions about materiality of
undisclosed information, of underwriter responsibility, and of issuer and underwriter intent are very
expensive to answer. By delineating the exact duties of issuers and underwriters with respect to
disclosure, and the exact burdens of proof on investors necessary to recover damages, a securities
law can reduce the transaction costs of litigation, and thereby increase the level of activity in
markets. The evidence provided by La Porta et al. (2003) is broadly supportive of this efficiency
interpretation of securities laws and regulation.
Below we provide a formal model of regulation along the lines of this example, which helps
us explore some of the implications of scale for the extent of regulation. But we stress that the focus
on efficient dispute resolution, as in the example above, is only illustrative. First, regulation can in
principle be a cost-reducing strategy for dealing with social problems in contexts other than just the
resolution of disputes. As the size of a community rises, even if it remains very homogeneous in
terms of income, education, or occupations, the variety of situations in which community members
find themselves also rises. If a community wants to achieve some kind of uniformity of outcomes,
it might resort to rules rather than markets or informal arrangements. Formulating and enforcing
such rules takes a fixed cost, but they reduce the marginal cost of achieving social objectives.
Suppose, for example, that the issue is providing education for deaf children. In a small
community, parents might get together and collectively decide how best to educate one or two deaf
children. As the size of the community expands, so will the number of deaf children as well as the
number of views their parents hold about the obligations of the community. The efficient way to
resolve these disagreements in a larger community might be to establish formal rules for how deaf
children are educated rather than to mediate community preferences in each case. As a second
example, suppose that a country wants to raise an army. The market for volunteers is available
regardless of country size, just as it is for the private sector. But the volunteer system may not fully
achieve social objectives such as having an army representative of the nation’s whole population,
or minimizing the costs of tax collection. Once population becomes high enough, a country may
find it worthwhile to pay the fixed costs of setting up and administering a draft system, so that it can
turn away from the volunteer system for some of its military manpower needs.

Population and Regulation - 4
Second, it is not important for our results whether regulations serve public rather than special
interests, only that some component of the fixed organization, adoption, and enforcement costs are
among the determinants of the extent of regulation. In our empirical work, we adopt this broader
view of regulation, but in the model, we examine regulation as one a strategy for reducing the social
cost of resolving disputes. Section VI begins to explore the question of whether the effects of
population might be different if regulation serves special rather than public interests.
Let c denote the amount by which a dispute’s resolution costs are reduced when there is
legislation or regulation governing an activity. Interactions, and hence the nature of disputes, are
heterogeneous. A day laborer’s interaction, and potential disputes, with his employer are different
from those between a salaried employee and his employer. We let t 0 [0,4) index the type of
interaction that might occur in a community, or perhaps more literally the type of dispute that might
occur. The index t is ordered so that the more frequent disputes have lower values of t. f(·) is a
monotone decreasing density function, with f(t) describing the likelihood that a randomly chosen
dispute is of type t. When population is of size N, the total number of disputes of type t is Nf(t).1
This specification assumes the same function f across all communities, and that the ordering
of activities on the t axis is the same everywhere, which is clearly not true. Some communities
specialize in particular economic activities or social groups. In this case, what determines the
adoption of regulation is not the total population, but the number of people who would benefit
(efficiently) from the activity being regulated.

Moreover, communities might endogenously

specialize in regulation, hoping to attract more of a given activity – as is the case with Delaware’s
specialization in corporate law. When we discuss empirical implications, we recognize that in some
instances it is not the total population of the community, but rather the total affected population, that
shapes the adoption of regulations.
Creating and enforcing regulations pertaining to a dispute of type t costs r(t) = ρ + βNf(t).
This can be interpreted either as a social cost, or as a politically-weighted average cost. r(t) has a
fixed component ρ, and a variable component βNf(t), which is proportional to the total number of
disputes of type t. For simplicity, we treat ρ, β, and c as constants even though in principle they can

1

For simplicity, we have assumed that there is one dispute per capita. We could
introduce a parameter indicating the number of disputes per capita, but it would just affect the
measurement of the fixed regulation cost, rather then the regulation’s population gradient.

Population and Regulation - 5
vary with GDP per capita or education.
Under the assumption of efficiency, legislation pertaining to disputes of type t is created if
and only if the aggregate cost savings c exceed the aggregate regulation cost:
Nf(t)c $ r(t) = ρ + βNf(t)

(1)

If β $ c, there will be no regulation regardless of the dispute frequency or the population size. In
particular, if c < 0, regulation is less efficient than private orderings or common law, and will not
be adopted. Accordingly, we focus on the activities for which β < c.2
Since, by assumption, f(·) is monotone decreasing, equation (1) implies that there is a critical
value T such that there is regulation pertaining to all disputes t # T, and no regulation pertaining to
disputes t > T. Hence, T is the total range of regulation, and is determined by the formula:
T ' f &1

ρ
(c&β) N

(2)

The fraction of disputes that are subject to regulation is simply F(T). Equation (2) says that
regulation is increasing with population, and that the population elasticity is the same (in magnitude)
as the fixed cost and variable cost elasticities.
The presence of fixed costs implies that jurisdictions that regulate an activity tend to have
larger populations. In addition, if we fix a particular activity, such as the mining business,
jurisdictions may vary according to exactly where mining is in their distribution f or what is the net
variable cost (c-β) of not regulating. For example, mining may be a common activity in West
Virginia, but uncommon in Georgia, so that if it were not for the fixed cost, a larger fraction f of
West Virginia’s population stands to benefit from mining regulation. In this example, total affected
population Nf(t) determines regulatory adoption, so that some states like West Virginia may regulate
mining even though their overall population N is small. More generally, some states with small
overall populations will be among the states regulating a particular activity because of their large
desired intensity (as measured by f, (c-β), or some combination).

2

An interesting exercise in this case would be to think about forces that might lead to
reductions in β. Becker and Mulligan (2003) and Peltzman (1989) conclude, for example, that
regulation increases in response to its own enhanced efficiency.

Population and Regulation - 6
Equation (2) says more in the interesting case where f is a particular member of the Pareto
distribution family:3
f(t) ' (t%1)& 2

Y

T '

(c&β) N
& 1
ρ

(3)

This Pareto distribution for disputes implies that the elasticity of the range of regulation T with
respect to population is essentially constant and equal to 0.5. The fraction F of disputes that are
subject to regulation has population elasticity 0.5F/(1-F), which can be greater or less than 0.5,
depending on the (hard to measure) relative frequency of regulated and unregulated disputes.
One theoretical reason to expect the distribution of disputes to be Pareto with shape
parameter near one derives from a simple “Gibrat’s Law” model of the growth and decline of
various forms of human interaction, by analogy with Gabaix’ (1999) model of the growth of cities.
Empirically, various forms of human interactions seem to occur at frequencies that are pretty nearly
Pareto with shape parameter one.

Examples include cities (Gabaix 1999), occupations,4

homeowners insurance claims (Stuart 1983), and firm sizes (Axtel 2001).
III. Regulation Across States Measured in KB’s
Population and the Amount of Law

3

Equation (3) shows the regulation formula corresponding to a Pareto distribution f with
shape parameter one. If the shape parameter were α…1, then the exponent on [(c-β)N/ρ] would
be 1/(1+α) rather than 0.5. Equation (3) applies only in the case where ρ<(c-β)N. Otherwise the
fixed component of cost is too large and we simply have T = 0.
4

We have calculated the 1990 Census PUMS distribution of workers by occupation, as 3digit coded by the United States Census Bureau. There are 247823 employed men aged 25-54
with occupation coded. The most common code is 22 = “ Managers and administrators, n.e.c.,”
for which there are 14874 observations (6.0% of the observations with occupation code). The
second most common code is 804=”truck drivers,” for which there are 11007 observations (4.4%
of the sample). Overall, there are 191 occupation codes with a minimum of 249 observations, or
0.1% of the sample. In a graph (available upon request from the authors) of the occupation rank
versus occupation frequency, using log scales, for the 191 occupations, we see nearly a straight
line with slope -1.1, which means that the occupation types are distributed nearly Pareto with
shape parameter near one.

Population and Regulation - 7
One aggregate measure of regulation is the number of pages of law, made famous by Ronald
Reagan in his first state of the union address when he recalled the reduction during his
administration in the number of Federal Register pages. To compute this indicator of regulation for
states, we measure the number of kilobytes (KBs) of unannotated state law in 37 states in 2001,
2002, or 2003. A kilobyte (KB) is 1024 bytes, and each byte represents a character. For example
“Thou shalt not kill.” is 20 bytes (including spaces and the period), or 0.0195 KB. We found that
one page of law is roughly one kilobyte of law, and the typical state has tens of thousands of
kilobytes.5 Appendix I describes our algorithm for counting KBs of law for the states, and explains
why 13 states were excluded from the counting.
Pages or KBs of law may measure the range of regulation T or, to the extent that the
inframarginal disputes are regulated in more detail than the marginal ones, they may proxy for the
fraction F of disputes that are subject to regulation. In either case, our model calibrated with Zipf’s
law says that the population elasticity should be about 0.5. Although not included in our model,
there may be a “necessary” range of activities like murder, elections, or traffic, that are regulated
in some detail regardless of population, in which case we might expect the population elasticity to
be less than 0.5 and then rise with population to approach 0.5 as the regulation moves significantly
beyond the necessary range. There is also a real possibility that a small state can adopt a regulation
more cheaply by imitating the earlier-adopting large states. Imitation induces a positive correlation
between population and the cost of adopting certain types of regulation. This positive correlation
means that the cross-state population elasticity may be less than 0.5, especially among the smaller
states whose statutes consist mainly of the “imitated” regulations.
The empirical relation between statute KB’s and population is shown in Figure 1. The
correlation (of the logs) is 0.88, and the overall regression elasticity is 0.31. The comparison of
Delaware and Wyoming, and of Texas and New York, illustrates the basic fact. Delaware and
Wyoming are similar in terms of total population, but different in terms of population density

5

There are three reasons to measure KB rather than pages. First, not all states have their
statutes published by the same publisher (or, within publisher, in the same format), so cross-state
comparisons of pages would require adjustments for each publisher’s font size, formatting style,
etc. Second, some states have their total statutes published irregularly, and publish only
additions and retractions in the meantime. Third, bytes can be calculated (as described below)
by computer and potentially be dis-aggregated by statute type.

Population and Regulation - 8
(Wyoming is the 2nd least densely populated state, while Delaware is 7th most). Given that both of
these states have a similar number of statute KBs, and both fit near the regression line, it seems that
population is much more important than population density in determining regulation. Texas and
New York offer a similar comparison, since they have the same population, similar numbers of
statute KBs, while New York is about 6 times more dense than Texas. Also notice that Delaware
and New York state have similar population densities (almost 400 persons per square mile), but
pages of statutes that differ by almost an order of magnitude, as predicted by our model.
Table 1 examines the validity and the robustness of the relationship between population and
regulation illustrated in Figure 1. We include a southern state dummy, lawyers per capita, land area,
income per capita, and several additional state characteristics as controls. The relationship between
population and regulation remains strong, and the coefficient stays near .3. Southern states have
fewer KB’s of law. More law and more lawyers go together.6 The regressions in Table 1 do not
show any significant effect of income per capita on KB’s of law. This is a surprising result,
especially in light of the fact that Demsetz (1967) and North (1981) generally think of the aggregate
level of economic activity as a determinant of adoption of institutions. Indeed, our model’s focus
on population rather than aggregate activity distinguishes it from the earlier work. One reason that
population rather than income may matter for regulation is that, as income rises, so do real wages
and therefore the fixed labor cost of setting up and running a regulatory institution. If the fixed costs
rise as fast as do the aggregate benefits per capita, population rather than income determines the
adoption of a regulation.7

6

The number of lawyers is likely to be correlated with other determinants of number of
laws. However, including this variable does not affect the estimated population elasticity
because population and lawyers per capita happen to be uncorrelated. Appendix II explains how
lawyers per capita are measured from the 1990 Census. Another measure of lawyers per capita
for 2003 from the American Bar Association (2003) also does not help predict KB’s of law, in
part because it records (unlike the Census) NY and MA as extreme outliers.
7

We are aware of only two studies that use absolute population as a determinant of
regulation. Among the variables they use to predict adoption of “general incorporation code” by
U.S. states, Shughart and Tollison (1985) include both aggregate population and aggregate
manufacturing income (both in levels, with population measured in different years for different
states). They find that populous states adopt later and states with more manufacturing income
earlier, so it is hard to tell from their results whether populous states adopted earlier or later (we
find the raw correlation between year of adoption and log 1910 population to be -0.55).

Population and Regulation - 9
Alesina and Spolaore (2003) present a model of the determinants of country size, in which
the benefits of spreading the fixed costs of a particular policy among more people are traded off
against the inefficiency of implementing uniform policies in a heterogeneous population. In their
view, population is positively correlated with heterogeneity such as ethnic diversity. In our model,
population is a proxy for a different kind of heterogeneity – namely the likelihood of having at least
some minimum number of people engaged in esoteric activities – which could be found in a large
jurisdiction even if it were very homogeneous in terms of race, geography, education, or income.
Empirically for U.S. states, does population proxy for heterogeneity and if so which kind?
Specifications (1)-(3) suggest that population does not proxy for heterogeneity as measured by
income inequality, occupational diversity, the importance of cities, or the prevalence of racial
minorities, because these measures do not predict KB’s or affect the estimated population elasticity.8
Figure 1 also does not readily tell us whether the amount of law in a state today depends on
its current population or, since statutes accumulate over time, the population it had in the distant past
and/or the number of years the state has existed (as a state). As shown in Table 1, these two
variables (the former measured as 1920 population) have no power to predict statute KB’s
conditional on current population. We also include log of the number seats in each state’s House
and Senate, in case the amount of law depends on the number of lawmakers which just happens to
be correlated with population.9 This control does not matter either.
Our model says that the population elasticity of regulation is 0.5, while the estimated
elasticities shown in the first few columns of Table 1 are lower. We discussed above how in theory
the elasticity may be smaller among the small states, and about 0.5 among the large states, because
small states have regulations that are “necessary” or “imitable” from the big states. Figure 1
suggests, and specifications (4) and (5) confirm, that a larger elasticity in fact prevails among the
larger states. Specification (4) is for the entire 37 state sample, and without the various controls

McCormick and Tollison (1981) use absolute size of legislature to predict occupational
licensing, and note that Stigler (1976) used absolute population to predict the size of legislature.
8

See Appendix II for details on constructing the heterogeneity measures. We have also
tried various measures of earnings inequality from the 1990 Census PUMS, and the fractions of
income and employment in agriculture, with similar results.
9

Log seats is more correlated with log 1920 population than with log 2000 population.

Population and Regulation - 10
other than Southern, and displays an elasticity of 0.33. Specification (5) throws out the 20 of the
37 states with below median population (i.e., states with a smaller 2000 population than Kentucky’s
4,041,000), and displays an elasticity of 0.46. Although not shown in the Table, the estimated
population elasticity is similar if we cut the sample at 3, 5, or 6 million rather then 4,041,000.
What Do KB’s of Law Represent?
There are two reasons we believe that pages of statutes are correlated with the real amount
of regulation. First, the aggregate time series of Federal Register pages (the Federal Register
consists of new laws passed by Congress, executive orders, and federal government agency reports)
deviates significantly from its trend during exactly those periods (since 1936) when it is commonly

believed that federal regulation was accelerating the most – World War II and the 1970's. Second,
as we show in Section IV, the population gradient seen in Figure 1 also appears in studies of the
history of states’ adoption of various laws, including occupational licensing, telegraph regulation,
and worker’s compensation. However, regulations like these diffuse pretty quickly from small to
large states and, at least in the case of occupational licensing, the cross-state regulation-population
gradient falls over time as regulation diffuses. Hence the pages we measure in 2003 may not have
much to do with the adoption of regulations like occupational licensing and worker’s compensation
that began their diffusion decades ago, but rather with the adoption in more recent areas of
regulation, with further elaboration of old regulations, or with the adoption of esoteric regulations
by the big states that may never diffuse to the smaller ones.
IL and IN are an interesting comparison, as the states are similar in many ways, except that
IL has twice the population. Both states are near the regression line; IL has 40% more bytes of law
than IN. Part of this difference is that IL has almost twice the bytes of criminal law and
corrections.10 Can these byte counts be attributed to a number of activities that are legal in IN and
illegal in IL? Or do both prohibit the same set of activities and IL is just more detailed in its
regulation of them? Several examples suggest that both differences are present.
Relative to IN, IL has many acts devoted to pretty minor issues (such as the “Coin Slug Act”

10

From the annotated statutes (not used for the KB counts cited in the text) we see that IL
has many more annotations to its criminal law and corrections than does IN.

Population and Regulation - 11
and the “Peephole Installation Act”).11 Among the issues covered in the criminal law of both states,
IL seems to regulate them in more detail. For example, IL has 359 KB devoted to drug offenses
while IN has only 124 KB.12 Included among IL’s 359 KB is an entire “Drug Asset Forfeiture
Procedure Act” (22 KB) devoted to the forfeiture of assets by persons involved in drug offenses,
where IN has only a Civil Law chapter “Forfeiture of Property Used in Violation of Certain Criminal
Statutes” (21 KB) on the seizing of assets of criminals, and this chapter applies to all kinds of
criminals, including thieves, (media) pirates, smugglers, and terrorists.
Consider offenses related to animal fighting. IN has only a few sections (totaling 2 KB) in
a chapter “Offenses Relating to Animals,” while IL has a criminal section “Dog Fighting” plus two
sections of the “Human Care for Animals Act” (with all three fighting sections totaling 11 KB). The
IN statutes prohibit promotion, use of animals, or attendance with animal (or without) at animal
fighting contest, and the possession of animal fighting paraphernalia. Conducting or attending a dog
fight is also explicitly illegal in IL, but so is a whole range of other activities connected to dog
fighting. Namely, IL explicitly prohibits a person to:
(a) “own, capture, breed, train, or lease a dog” for fighting,
(b) “promote, conduct, carry on, advertise, collect money for or in any other manner assist
or aid in the presentation” of a dog fight,
(c) “sell or offer for sale, ship, transport, or otherwise move, or deliver or receive any dog
which he or she knows has been captured, bred, or trained, or will be used, to fight another dog or
human,”
(d) “manufacture for sale, shipment, transportation, or delivery any device or equipment
which he or she knows or should know is intended for use in any [dog fight],”

11

IN covers coin slugs under a wider law regarding “Forgery, Fraud, and Other
Deceptions” in reference to a slug that might be “deposited in a coin machine.” IL’s Coin Slug
Act explicitly references “slug, washer, disc, token, string, cord or wire or by means of any false,
counterfeited, mutilated, sweated or foreign coin, or by any means, method, trick, or device
whatsoever not lawfully authorized by the owner of such coin box telephone, coin operated
transit turnstile or transit fare box.” In addition, IL has a “Telephone Coin Box Tampering Act.”
To our knowledge, IN has no statute covering peephole installation (apartment units must
be built with peepholes for the occupants to see out).
12

Results are similar if we use statutes inclusive of annotations: IL has 426 drug pages
while IN has 147.

Population and Regulation - 12
(e) “possess, sell or offer for sale, ship, transport, or otherwise move any [dog fighting
equipment],”
(f) “make available any site, structure, or facility, whether enclosed or not, that he or she
knows is intended to be used for the purpose of conducting [a dog fight]”.
IL law also details the procedures for sheltering animals found in connection with the enforcement
of the animal fighting statutes.
The IN-IL comparison is likely to be representative of the population-animal regulation
gradient for all 50 states. We have counted words of statute devoted to animal fighting for 37 states.
Regressing log animal fighting words on log 2000 population and a dummy for south yields
coefficients of 0.30 (s.e.=0.14) and 0.02 (s.e.=0.30), respectively.13 The population elasticity for
animal laws is the same as that for all laws combined.
IV. Evidence on Population and the Diffusion of Regulation Across States
Our model predicts that the regulatory difference between the more and the less populated
states would be in the regulation of the interactions that are relatively infrequent, or that have
relatively small net benefits. In the previous section, we have tested and confirmed this proposition
using data on modern state statutes. Another approach is to look at the introduction of regulations,
and to ask whether the more populous states introduce a given regulation earlier.
Patterns of Adoption: Occupation and Industry Regulation
Stigler (1971) looks at the licensing of 37 occupations in the 48 mainland U.S. states. He
predicts the year a state licenses an occupation using the prevalence and urbanization of that
occupation in the state, and occupation fixed effects. Our model suggests that total population, or
the absolute size of the occupation, should be added to the licensing year regressions. Roughly
speaking, the difference between Stigler’s specification and that suggested by our model is the
inclusion of log total population as regressor in addition to, or instead of, occupational prevalence.14

13

14

Coefficient estimates are similar if we include proxies for the importance of agriculture.

Stigler did not enter occupational prevalence (total number of persons practicing the
occupation divided by total labor force) in log form, but if he had, and occupation size were

Population and Regulation - 13
When we regress year of licensing on occupation dummies, the fraction of the population living in
cities, and the log of 1910 population, the estimated population elasticity is -2.13 (standard error
clustered by state = 0.55). Larger states tended to license occupations earlier.
To obtain an indicator of how pages of occupational regulation might have varied with
population at various points in history, we transform Stigler’s data set into repeated cross-sections.
The year y cross-section lists states and the fraction of the 37 occupations it has licensed as of year
y. The population elasticity is positive in the various cross-sections and, not surprisingly, is higher
during the peak licensing years 1900-20. For example, the cross-state regression of fraction
occupations licensed by 1850 on log 1950 population yields a coefficient of .005 (OLS standard
error = .002). The regression coefficients are .031 (s.e.=.010) and .018 (s.e.=.015) if we measure
occupations licensed as of 1910 and 1950, respectively.15 This pattern suggests that the populationpages gradient we observe in 2002 derives more from regulations that are at the peak of their
diffusion (or esoteric regulations adopted by big states that will never diffuse), than from regulations
that mainly diffused years ago – like the licensing of Stigler’s 37 occupations.
Other evidence is broadly consistent with our findings on Stigler’s data. Nonnenmacher
(2001) looks at the adoption of telegraph regulation circa 1850. Figure 2 graphs total state
population, measured in 1850 and on a log scale, versus the year of first telegraph regulation for
each of the 32 U.S. states at the time. As expected, the populous states like NY, PA, MA, and VA
were early adopters, and the last adopters (TX, FL, MN, IA, AR) were relatively unpopulated. The
correlation between year of first law and log population is -0.56 (t-stat=3.73).
More populous states were also quicker to regulate working hours of women. Figure 3
graphs Landes’ (1980, Table 1) report of the year of first maximum female working hours legislation

normalized by population rather than labor force, then his specification and ours would differ
only by a log population term. Stigler’s estimated occupational prevalence coefficient was
statistically insignificant. Another reason we emphasize log population, rather than log
occupation size, as a regressor is that licensing may effect occupation size more readily than it
affects population.
15

Results are similar if we measure population in 1910 instead of 1950: the log population
coefficients are .005, .031, and .011 for occupations licensed as of 1850, 1910, and 1950,
respectively. Note that less than 1% of state-occupations were licensed as of 1850. The highest
licensing rates were 1900-20, when more than one percent of the 1776 state-occupation cells
became licensed each year.

Population and Regulation - 14
against (log scaled) 1890 population. The correlation is -0.34 (t-stat=2.3). Among the 23 states for
which Landes reports there being a minimum wage law for women, the correlation between year of
first minimum wage law and log population is -0.29 (t-stat=1.0). TX, ND, DC, AR, and KS had an
average 1890 population of 1.0 million and were the last of the 13 to legislate a minimum wage,
while MA passed the first law and had an 1890 population of 2.2 million.
Population or Affected Population?
In Section II, we noted that the exact specification of the model might be too narrow, and that
what matters for efficiency is the size of the population (and the number of interactions and
conflicts) affected by a given regulation. Some evidence indeed supports this view.
Worker’s compensation provides an interesting application of our analysis, because the
population relevant for determining whether there will be worker’s comp regulation – namely, the
individuals likely to be hurt in workplace accidents – can be quite different from the total state
population, especially in the early 20th century when states were first taking up these laws. For
example, the 1910 Census shows Wyoming’s ranking 47th out of 48 in terms of total population, but
29th out of 48 in terms of total number of persons working as miners (a group likely to experience
serious work injury). Figure 4 graphs total state miners found in the 1910 Census PUMS, on a log
scale, against the year of first workers’ compensation law (from Fishback and Kantor 2000, Table
4.3) for each of the 48 U.S. states at the time. The correlation is -0.27 (t-stat = 1.9). If we regress
year of first law on log miners and miners per capita, log miners is the more important variable: the
t-statistics on the regression coefficients are -1.5 and -0.5, respectively.
The size of the affected population also predicts which states were early to pass legislation
“prohibiting discrimination in employment on the grounds of race, creed, color, or national origin”
(Landes 1968, p. 507). When Landes wrote, 18 northern states had laws and agencies to enforce
them. As Table 2's “enforceable” column shows, the average 1950 black population in these states
was 171,615, and three quarters of these states had at least 100,011 blacks. The four northern states
with discrimination laws but no commission to enforce them (ID, ME, MT, VT) were much smaller
– each had roughly 1,000 blacks. North Dakota and South Dakota were the only Northern states
without laws; their black populations were 257 and 727, respectively. Table 2 is consistent with our
hypothesis that small states are late to adopt regulation. However, in this case total population is
correlated with population frequency; the last row of the Table shows that the regulating states were

Population and Regulation - 15
not only populous, but also had a relatively large black population percentages.16

V. Population and Regulation Across Countries
A few studies have tried to measure regulations for a broad cross-section of countries. Here
we briefly analyze the employment laws index of Botero et al (2003), the business entry regulation
index of Djankov et al (2002), the death penalty measures of Mulligan et al (2004), and measures
of military conscription. Table 3 reports one cross-country regression in each column. The columns
differ according to their regulation measure (one of the four referenced above), and to whether a
broader set of political variables (namely “left power”) are included. The broadest sample is the 127
country “MGX” sample of Mulligan et al (2004), but includes only measures of death penalty,
population, British legal origin, GDP per capita, democracy, whether a country belongs to Kornai’s
(1992) list of communist states, and some information about military activities. A narrower 71
country “LaPorta” sample of Botero et al (2003) and Djankov et al (2002) includes the regulation
measures from those studies and a political measure of “left power”.17
Specifications (1)-(4) suggest that, holding constant legal origin, GDP per capita, democracy,
and communism, more populous countries have more business entry procedures, employment
regulations, and are more likely to have the death penalty. The results on business entry procedures
and labor regulations are particularly supportive of our model since, generally speaking, incremental
regulations in these areas cover more “issues” that might arise in the course of economic activity.
Consistent with our model, a small jurisdiction might not think it worth while to deal with these
issues through regulation, but a larger jurisdiction faces enough demand to cover the fixed costs.
Military conscription, as an addition to the volunteer army,18 is a common form of reliance

16

Interestingly, among the 28 states with enforceable legislation, the correlation of year of
first law with log total black population (black population share) is -0.26 (-0.11), respectively.
17

Botero et al (2003) and Djankov et al (2002) have 85 countries. We exclude the former
Soviet republics, Vietnam, and Lebanon, due to insufficient data on GDP for the years 1960-90.
18

To our knowledge, all militaries have some volunteers. For example, among the 68
countries in our sample having conscription (and reporting data on the number of draftees), the
typical military force is about half volunteer and half drafted. The lowest volunteer intensities
were in Senegal, Switzerland, Turkey, and Cyprus, where 5, 9, 15, and 15 percent, respectively,

Population and Regulation - 16
on regulation rather than contract to meet social objectives. Furthermore it is relatively easy to
measure for a large panel of countries – on both the intensive and extensive margins. We obtain data
on the existence of the draft, and on the number of draftees for 138 countries for the years 1985,
1990, and 1995 from The Military Balance published annually by the International Institute for
Strategic Studies. Following Ross (1994), we use measures of the size of the Armed Forces,
democracy, and economic development as predictors of a country’s reliance on conscription.19
Specifications (5) and (6) are like the previous four specifications, except that some military activity
variables are added to the list of independent variables, and that the dependent variable is the
fraction of years 1985, 90, and 95 enlisting conscripts in the armed forces. The common law effect,
which is large and significant in all specifications, is broadly consistent with the general finding that,
in labor as well as other markets, common law countries are more likely to rely on contract and less
on regulation to achieve social goals (Djankov et al 2002, Botero et al. 2003).
The population effect is large, significant, and consistent with our theory in the sample of
127 countries. However, once we restrict attention to the subsample of 71 countries for which we
have measures of left power, the size of the effect falls and its significance disappears. This is a
consequence of using the subsample of richer and more democratic countries: the correlation
between left power and log population is -.02 in the smaller sample, so omitting the left power
variable has essentially no effect on the left power coefficient. We also find that, when a country
uses the draft, it uses it intensively, especially when the country is small (results not reported in the
Table). Among the countries with less than median population and having a draft, 75% have more
conscripts than volunteers. This observation is consistent with fixed costs of having a draft system,
and inconsistent with the hypothesis that small countries just happen to intend to use the draft
lightly.

of their armed forces were volunteers. Hence, the question is not a volunteer versus a draft
system, but whether to have a draft system supplement the volunteer system.
19

We have also used government spending/GDP and the share of the population over the
age of 65, and obtained similar results.

Population and Regulation - 17
VI. An Extension to the Politics of Regulation.
We can extend the model to consider regulatory incidence. We suppose that each type of
interaction involves two types of agents, whom we (arbitrarily) call “producers” and “consumers.”
For this purpose, we simplify our analysis by assuming that the fixed cost is entirely a cost of
mobilizing an interest group to pass legislation, and that consumers and producers do not mobilize
cooperatively. Each group faces a fixed cost of organizing, which we denote ρ and ρN for producers
and consumers respectively, and normalize group identities so that ρ < ρN.20 The social variable
costs of regulating or not regulating are, as above, β and c, respectively. If only one of the groups
organizes, regulation is passed and the organized group receives fraction θ > 0.5 of the variable
social surplus (β-c)Nf(t). If both groups organize, they divide the variable surplus evenly.
The producers have the greater incentive to organize to push for regulation of an unregulated
activity. Their criterion for organizing is an equation exactly like (1), except that the variable cost
parameters β and c are multiplied by the sharing parameter θ. The total quantity of regulation T is
then determined by an equation exactly like (2), except that the variable surplus term (β-c) is
multiplied by the sharing parameter θ, and we can derive all of the results cited above. Note that,
when θ > 1, the marginal regulations add to net social cost. For this reason, we refer to the
regulation created by one party alone as “redistributive” and that created by both parties as
“efficient,” even though for some parameters even the “redistributive” regulation reduces social
costs.
Because they have the larger organization cost, the consumers’ organization decision
involves not the tradeoff between regulation or not, but how the regulation surplus should be shared.
When consumers are near the margin of being organized, the producers are already organized, so
consumer organization serves the purpose of raising consumers’ variable surplus from regulation
by the amount (θ-0.5)(β-c)Nf(t), and lowering the variable surplus of the producers by the same
amount. Consumers trade this benefit off against their organization cost ρN. The scope of “efficient”
regulation Te is calculated in much the same way as we calculate T:

20

The costs of political organization are not well understood, but one possibility is that
producers organize more readily than consumers because the former is a more concentrated
group and thereby suffer less from free-riding (Olson 1971).

Population and Regulation - 18

Te ' f & 1

ρ)
(θ&0.5) (c&β) N

(4)

The quantity of redistributive regulation is T-Te. F(T) is, as above, the total fraction of interactions
regulated, F(Te) is the fraction of interactions regulated in an efficient way, and the difference is the
fraction of activities regulated in a redistributive way.
Both T and Te increase with population. The ratio Te/T can either rise or fall with population,
depending on the distribution of interactions. With the shape-one Pareto distribution, Te is
essentially proportional to T, with the proportion determined by the relative fixed costs and the
sharing parameter θ:
Te % 1
T%1

'

ρ θ & 0.5
ρ)

θ

(5)

Figure 5 graphs formula (2) (amended to multiply (c-β) by the sharing parameter θ) and the
formula (4), showing how population, activity type, and the model parameters determine whether
and how an activity is regulated. Activities are unregulated above the solid line and regulated below
the solid line. The dashed line partitions the regulated activities into those regulated in an efficient
vs. a redistributive way. Both schedules slope up, which implies three things. First, in a given
jurisdiction, the infrequent activities are less likely to be regulated. Second, fixing the type of
interaction (moving horizontally in Figure 5), smaller jurisdictions are less likely to have any
regulation. Third, conditional on having a regulation of a given type (moving horizontally in Figure
5, in the region to the right of the solid schedule), the smaller jurisdictions are more likely to have
redistributive regulations. The last result is intimately related to Becker’s (1983) model of
government policy, which holds that, when more interest groups with countervailing interests form,
government policy becomes more efficient as a broader range of interests is articulated.
Do Small States have More Redistributive Regulation? The Case of Attorney Licenses
Our model distinguishes the margin of adopting a regulation (equation 2) from the margin
determining whether a regulation is efficient or redistributive (equation 4). Small states are less

Population and Regulation - 19
likely to regulate a given activity but, conditional on regulating, more likely to regulate in a
redistributive way. For some evidence on this point, we look at the regulation of lawyers. Because
every state has licensing requirements for its lawyers, the operative margin is the degree to which
those requirements redistribute income. Tenn (2002) has created, for 48 states and the three Census
years 1970-90, a index of the degree to which licensing laws might raise the incomes of lawyers.
He considers whether obtaining a license requires an examination, the difficulty of the examination,
whether a lawyer must have a degree from an American Bar Foundation approved school, the
residency requirements, and the amount of the bar exam fee, to form his index of licensing strictness,
with stricter licensing delivering a higher value for the index. We calculate each state’s timeaveraged index, and graph it in Figure 6 versus log 1970 population. It appears that larger states
have less strict regulations; the correlation is -0.27 (t-stat=-2.0).
VII. Summary and Conclusions
In this paper, we have presented a model of efficient regulation along the lines of Demsetz
(1967). In this model, setting up and running regulatory institutions takes a fixed cost, and therefore
jurisdictions with larger populations affected by a given regulation are more likely to have them.
We then tested the model using data from both U.S. states and countries around the world. We
found that higher population U.S. states have more pages of legislation and adopt particular laws
earlier in their history. We also found that specific types of regulation, including the regulation of
entry, the regulation of labor, and the military draft are more extensive in countries with larger
populations. Overall, the data show that population is an empirically important determinant of
regulation, consistent with the theory.
The results in this paper naturally raise the question of optimal regulatory jurisdictions. In
both the efficiency and redistribution versions of our model, having a larger jurisdiction is better.
In the efficiency model, regulation reduces the marginal cost of addressing social problems and so,
with larger jurisdictions, a greater range of such problems is addressed efficiently. In the
redistributive model of regulation, more interests are articulated when the jurisdiction is larger.
However, in more general models, it no longer needs to be true that larger jurisdictions are always
optimal. Competition among jurisdictions as in Tiebout (1956) or diversity of preferences among
people (Alesina and Spolaore 2003) are arguments favoring smaller jurisdictions. Even with these
considerations, however, our evidence suggests that the choice of an optimal jurisdiction must in

Population and Regulation - 20
part be determined by population.
Many of these results are most naturally interpreted from the efficiency perspective, but
some evidence is also consistent with the public choice theories of regulation, in which the relevant
fixed cost is that of organization rather than enforcement. The results also suggest that, because of
increasing returns in regulation, we would expect to observe regulatory specialization, particularly
in activities that can cheaply travel across jurisdictions. Delaware’s specialization in corporate law
is broadly consistent with the perspective of this model. Regardless of the exact model of fixed
costs, the evidence is broadly supportive of the view that overcoming such costs is an important
determinant of regulatory choice.

VIII. Appendix I: Algorithm for Counting KB’s of Law
VIII.A. Statute Types
There are two main formats for publishing state laws – “annotated” and “unannotated.” The
former are most commonly found in libraries – presumably because they are more useful to lawyers
– and contain the text of each statute in effect at a point in time, plus some of the precedents that
have affected interpretation of the statute and perhaps information about previous versions of the
statute. The unannotated statutes contain only the text of the statute. Since we are interested in the
relation between regulation and population, the distinction between annotated and unannotated
statutes is important. A populous state is more likely to have had a court case that tested a particular
statute, so we expect the quantity of annotations to increase with population.
VIII.B. Computer Algorithm for Counting KB’s of Law
Every state has unannotated statutes available for browsing on the internet. The browsing
is either in html, java, or pdf format, or in multiple formats. Our computer programs can only
browse the internet in html format, so we were unable to make counts for 9 states which had laws
on-line only in java format.21 The byte counts of pdf files exceed the number of characters in the

21

Those 9 states are Colorado, Kansas, Louisiana, Maryland, New Mexico, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Virginia, Wisconsin. A number of states have both java and html statutes on line,
including AR, CA, SD, TN.

Population and Regulation - 21
file (due to formatting), so we exclude the two states (Kentucky and North Dakota) for which on-line
statutes are only in pdf format. The final two states, Georgia and New Hampshire, were excluded
from the sample even though they had html statutes available, because they were not in a format
accessible by our programs. As we show below, the 13 states excluded from our data set are very
similar to the 37 included in terms of population and many other characteristics.
Statutes on-line are usually presented in a tree format, where users first browse a list of titles,
for each title a list of chapters, etc., with the final nodes in the tree being the actual texts of laws.
The tree format can be used to categorized formats by their legal classification, for example, tax,
criminal, schools, occupations, or estates. States differ in terms of the number of levels in the tree,
the number of final nodes used to present a given set of statutes, and hence the number of statutes
and KB of statutes per final node. For example, New York has less than 4,000 final nodes, and
South Dakota more than 40,000, even while the former has a lot more statutes than the latter. Since
each html page usually includes headers and footers, this implies that the number of KB of html
required to present a given set of statutes expands significantly with the number of html pages on
which those statutes are presented. For example, SD has more bytes devoted to headers and footers
than actual statutes, whereas NY has more than 80 bytes of actual statutes per byte of header or
footer.22 We therefore count statutes KB in four steps:
(1) A computer program automatically browses the entire html tree presenting a state’s statutes, and
downloads each www page from the tree, stripped of html tags. The statutes browsed were those

22

A typical html page from SD statutes reads:
“32-5-10.2. Motorcycle safety education fee -- Deposit in special revenue fund. The county
treasurer shall remit to the department the motorcycle safety education fees collected pursuant
to § 32-5-10.1. The fees shall be deposited in the state treasury in a special revenue fund for
use as specified in § 32-20-14.
Statutes Menu | FAQ | My Legislative Research | Privacy Policy | LRC Menu This page is
maintained by the Legislative Research Council. It contains material authorized for publication
that is copyrighted by the state of South Dakota. Except as authorized by federal copyright law,
no person may print or distribute copyrighted material without the express authorization of the
South Dakota Code Commission”, where we have italicized the actual statute. The nonitalicized portion is 523 bytes, so we subtract 523 bytes per SD www page of law.

Population and Regulation - 22
in effect in 2001, 2002, or 2003.23
(2) A sample of downloads are visually inspected for a number of bytes of headers and footers on
a typical html page.
(3) The number of html pages is multiplied by the result from step (2) to give total KB of headers
and footers, and then subtracted from the total KB downloaded in step (1).
(4) If applicable, the aggregate KB of annotations are estimated as in steps (2) and (3), and then
subtracted from the total.
As a result, we interpret our KB counts as number of KB (and hence, roughly the number of pages)
of unannotated statutes, exclusive of headers and footers, but inclusive of tables of contents used to
organize those statutes.
IX. Appendix II: U.S. States Data Sources
1920 population by state. University of Virginia Geospatial and Statistical Data Center, plus AK
& HI from Texas A&M University (2002).
1990 and 2000 population by state. Census Burea (2001).
south Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi,
North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, West Virginia
lawyers per capita. 1990 Census PUMS weighted number of persons aged 25-54 and reporting
working in 1989 and reporting occupation code 178
land area square miles from http://www.imagesoft.net/flags/usstate1.html
90-10 family income differential. 10th and 90th percentiles of the within-state household income
distribution, from the March 2001 CPS (referring to year 2000 income). The 90th percentile is
divided by the 10th percentile, and the ratio is used in log form in the regressions.
fraction of labor force coded with just 75 occupation codes. Labor force is 1990 Census PUMS
persons aged 25-54, reporting work in 1989, and reporting an occupation. The fraction used is the
ratio of total labor force persons in a state’s 75 largest occupation codes to total labor force.

23

The only exception is VT, for which we counted statutes in effect as of 1995. Including
year of statute in the regressions has no impact on the results.

Population and Regulation - 23
fraction of labor force employed in agriculture. year 2000 from Statistical Abstract of the United
States 2001, 2002; Census 2000 Summary File 1, 2 at http://factfinder.census.gov
fraction of population urban, white. year 2000, sources above
income per capita. year 2000, personal income, sources above
number of state senators and representatives. year 2002 from Book of the States
year of statehood. http://cointown.com/htm/statehood_facts_2.htm

Appendix Table: Summary Statistics for U.S. State Data
(37 states with KB measures)
variable name

mean

std dev

min

max

47,723

21,963

20,922

132,862

2000 population (1000s)

5,970

6,975

493

33,871

1920 population (1000s)

2,165

2,321

55

10,385

.27

.45

0

1

2.25

0.80

0.70

3.93

area (square miles)

75,632

97,895

1,054

570,833

personal income per cap. (year 2000 $)

28,162

4,491

20,916

40,757

90-10 household inc differential, log

2.07

0.16

1.79

2.42

fraction of labor force coded with just
75 occupation codes

0.70

0.03

0.64

0.77

fraction of population urban

0.72

0.16

0.38

0.94

fraction of population white

0.78

0.14

0.24

0.97

# of state senators & representatives

140

49

49

253

1841

48

1787

1959

KB of law

south
lawyers per 1000 people

year of statehood

X. References
Alesina, Alberto and Enrico Spolaore. The Size of Nations. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 2003.
American Bar Association. National Lawyer Population by State. Chicago: ABA Market Research

Population and Regulation - 24
Department, 2003.
Axtel, Robert L. “Zipf Distribution of U.S. Firm Sizes.” Science 293, September 7, 2001: 1818-20.
Becker, Gary S. “A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups for Political Influence.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 98(3), August 1983: 371-400.
Becker, Gary S. and Casey B. Mulligan. “Deadweight Costs and the Size of Government.”
forthcoming, Journal of Law and Economics. 2003.
Bernstein, Lisa. “Opting out of the Legal System: Extralegal Contractual Relations in the Diamond
Industry.” Journal of Legal Studies 21, Month 1992, 115-157.
Botero, Juan, Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
“The Regulation of Labor.” NBER working paper no. 9756, June 2003.
Council of State Governments. The Book of the States. Chicago: Council of State Governments,
various issues.
Demsetz, Harold. “Toward a Theory of Property Rights.” American Economic Review 57(2), May
1967: 347-59.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. “The
Regulation of Entry.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1), February 2002: 1-37.
Djankov, Simeon, Edward Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei
Shleifer. “The New Comparative Economics.” Journal of Comparative Economics 31,
December 2003: 595-619.
Fishback, Price V., and Shawn Everett Kantor. A Prelude to the Welfare State. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press for the NBER, 2000.
Gabaix, Xavier. “Zipf's Law for Cities: An Explanation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(3),
August 1999: 739-67.
Glaeser, Edward L., Simon Johnson, and Andrei Shleifer. “Coase versus the Coasians.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116 (3), August 2001: 853-899.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Andrei Shleifer. “A Reason for Quantity Regulation.” American Economic
Review 91(2), May 2001: 431-35.
Goldin, Claudia. “Maximum Hours Legislation and Female Employment: A Reassessment.”
Journal of Political Economy 96(1), February 1988: 189-205.
Greif, Avner. “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: the Maghribi
Traders' Coalition.” American Economic Review 83(3), June 1993: 525-48.

Population and Regulation - 25
International Institute for Strategic Studies. The Military Balance. London, various issues.
International Monetary Fund. Government Finance Statistics. various issues.
Kornai, János. The Socialist System: The Political Economy of Communism. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1992.
Landes, Elisabeth M. “The Effect of State Maximum-Hours Laws on the Employment of Women
in 1920.” Journal of Political Economy 88(3), June 1980: 476-94.
Landes, William M. “The Economics of Fair Employment Laws.” Journal of Political Economy
76(4), July 1968: 507-52.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. “What Works in Securities
Laws?” NBER Working paper #9882, August 2003.
Lee, Dwight R., and Richard B. McKenzie. “Reexamination of the Relative Efficiency of the Draft
and the All-Volunteer Army.” Southern Economic Journal 58(3), January 1992: 644-54.
McChesney, Fred S. “Rent Extraction and Rent Creation in the Economic-Theory of Regulation.”
Journal of Legal Studies 16(1), January 1987: 101-18.
McCormick, R.E. and R.D. Tollison. Politicians, Legislation, and the Economy. Boston: Martinus
Nijhoff, 1981.
Mulligan, Casey B., Ricard Gil, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. “Do Democracies Have Different Public
Policies Than Nondemocracies?” forthcoming, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter
2004.
Nonnenmacher, Tomas. “State Promotion and Regulation of the Telegraph Industry, 1845-60.”
Journal of Economic History 61(1), March 2001: 19-36.
North, Douglass C., 1981, Structure and Change in Economic History, New York: Norton.
Olson, Mancur. The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1971.
Peltzman, Sam. “Toward a More General Theory of Regulation.” Journal of Law and Economics
19(2), 1976: 211-40.
Peltzman, Sam. “The Economic Theory of Regulation After a Decade of Deregulation.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, Special Issue, 1989: 1-41.
Ross, Thomas W. “Raising an Army: A Positive Theory of Military Recruitment.” Journal of Law
and Economics 37(1), April 1994: 109-31.
Shughart, William F. and Robert D. Tollison. “Corporate Chartering: An Exploration of the
Economics of Legal Change.” Economic Inquiry. 23(4), October 1985: 585-99.

Population and Regulation - 26
Stigler, George J. “The Sizes of Legislatures.” Journal of Legal Studies 5, January 1976: 17-34.
Stigler, George J. “The Theory of Economic Regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science 2(1), 1971: 3-21.
Stuart, Charles. “Pareto-Optimal Deductibles in Property-Liability Insurance: the Case of
Homeowner Insurance in Sweden.” Scandinavian Actuarial Journal 9(4), 1983: 227-38.
Tenn, Steven. “Occupational Licensing in the Legal Profession.” manuscript, November 2002.
Texas A&M University, Real Estate Center.

“State Population by Decade.”

Online

(http://recenter.tamu.edu/data/popsd/): Texas A&M University, 2002.
Tiebout, Charles M. “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures.” Journal of Political Economy. 64(5),
October 1956: 416-424.
Tullock, Gordon. “The Welfare Costs of Tariffs, Monopolies, and Theft.” Western Economic
Journal. 5(3), 1967: 224-32.
United States Census Bureau. Statistical Abstract of the United States. Washington, DC: Census
Bureau, 2001.
University of Virginia Geospatial and Statistical Data Center. United States Historical Census Data
Browser.

Online:

University

of

Virginia,

1998

Available:

http://fisher.lib.virginia.edu/census/.
Warner, John T., and Beth J. Asch. “The Economic Theory of a Military Draft Reconsidered.”
Defence and Peace Economics 7(4), 1996: 297-312.

Population and Regulation - 27

Table 1: KB’s of Law across States
independent vars

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

log(2000 population)

0.31
(0.06)

0.32
(0.07)

0.36
(0.09)

0.31
(0.02)

0.46
(0.06)

0.34
(0.24)

south

-0.21
(0.10)

-0.20
(0.09)

-0.22
(0.10)

-0.16
(0.06)

-0.17
(0.07)

-0.37
(0.23)

lawyers per capita, log

0.20
(0.10)

0.21
(0.10)

0.22
(0.10)

0.16
(0.07)

0.11
(0.11)

-0.05
(0.24)

land area, log

0.01
(0.04)

0.01
(0.04)

-0.01
(0.05)

-0.13
(0.12)

inc per cap, log

-0.28
(0.31)

-0.28
(0.31)

-0.23
(0.32)

-0.04
(0.73)

90-10 household inc
differential, log

0.13
(0.22)

-0.25
(0.44)

-1.45
(1.13)

fr. labor force coded
with just 75 occ. codes

addendum:
inclusion in
sample

0.13
(1.53)

fr. population urban
fr of population white

0.19
(0.28)

0.17
(0.29)

0.18
(0.28)

-0.20
(0.81)

# of state senators &
representatives, log

-0.12
(0.11)

-0.12
(0.11)

-0.15
(0.12)

-0.41
(0.24)

year of statehood/100

-0.08
(0.12)

-0.07
(0.12)

-0.05
(0.13)

0.03
(0.31)

log(1920 population)

0.03
(0.05)

0.03
(0.05)

0.01
(0.06)

-0.16
(0.15)

adj-R-squared

.82

.82

.82

.84

.85

.13

sample

37

37

37

37

17

50

Notes: (a) dependent variable is log of number of kilobytes of law (c. 2000), except in the last column which is a
dprobit for inclusion in our 36 state sample. constant terms are estimated for each specification, but not displayed in
the table
(b) specification (5) limits sample to states with year 2000 population at least the median
(c) see Appendix II for variable definitions

Population and Regulation - 28

Table 2: Northern States, Classified by
their Employment Discrimination Laws as of 1968
Employment Discrimination Law
enforceable

no enforcement
commission

no law

171,615

987

492

100,011

898

375

302,457

1,224

610

1950 Black Population
avg
interquartile range
avg % of total

1.8

0.2

0.1

enforceable states: AK, AZ, CA, CO, CT, HI, IL, IN, IA, KS, MA, MI, MN, MO, NE,
NV, NH, NJ, NM, NY, OH, OR, PA, RI, UT, WA, WI, WY.
no commission states: ID, ME, MT, VT. states w/o a law: ND, SD
Source: Landes (1968)

Table 3: Four Regulations across Countries
dependent variable:

business entry
procedures, log

employment
laws index

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

log(population)/10

0.97
(0.32)

0.43
(0.29)

0.50
(0.20)

0.71
(0.33)

0.75
(0.24)

0.20
(0.33)

British legal origin

-0.70
(0.10)

-0.51
(0.09)

0.30
(0.07)

0.40
(0.10)

-0.47
(0.08)

-0.56
(0.10)

real GDP per capita, log

-0.31
(0.08)

-0.11
(0.07)

0.09
(0.04)

0.06
(0.08)

-0.06
(0.05)

-0.02
(0.08)

democracy index

-0.02
(0.18)

-0.01
(0.17)

-0.56
(0.10)

-0.34
(0.19)

0.14
(0.12)

0.01
(0.18)

communist dummy

-0.11
(0.16)

-0.01
(0.14)

0.09
(0.10)

0.39
(0.16)

0.16
(0.11)

-0.03
(0.15)

left power

-0.05
(0.12)

0.10
(0.11)

independent vars

death penalty

have draft

-0.28
(0.13)

(6)

0.16
(0.12)

armed forces per male aged 15-24

1.82
(0.57)

2.04
(0.68)

years at war since 1950

-0.01
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.02)

adj-R-squared
sample
countries

.57

.37

.27

.32

.36

.47

LaPorta

LaPorta

MGX

LaPorta

MGX

LaPorta

71

71

127

71

127

70

Notes: (a) dependent variable is either log of business entry procedures, employment laws index, fraction of years 1976-90 that Amnesty International codes says
there was a "retentionist" death penalty policy, or fraction of years 1985, 90, 95 having conscription.
(b) OLS standard errors are in paren.

KB of unannotated law

1,000,000

CA

100,000

NY
TX

WA

IL
MI PA FL
NJ

MA
OR MN IN
MO
RIME NENV
AL TN NC
MS
IACT AZ
SDMT ID WVUTAR SC
HI
WYVT DE
AK

10,000
100

1,000
10,000
2000 population, 1000s

Figure 1. Statutes and Population Across States

100,000

1860
IA
AR

year of 1st telegraph regulation

1858
1856
MN

FL
TX

1854

SC

DE

1852

WI

MO

CA

1850

OH

IL
MS AL KY
LA
ME
IN

1848
RI

VT MI

MD

NHCT

1846

NC
TN
GA

VA

PA

MA
NJ

NY

1844
1E3

1E4

1E5
1850 population

1E6

Figure 2 Telegraph Regulation Across States

1E7

year of 1st max hours law for women

1940
AZ
NM

1920

NV

WY

ID

MT DE DC
UT

KS
ARMS NC
MDCA
KY TX
MO
MN
TN MI

VT

OR CO
WA

1900
OK

ND

SD
NH
RI

NY
PA

NE

MECT

LA

IL

NJ
VA
AL

1880

MA

WI

1860
OH

1840
1E4

1E5

1E6
1890 population

Figure 3 Female Hours Laws vs Population

1E7

year of 1st worker's comp law

1950

MS

1940

AR

FL

SC

1930

1920

NC

GA

ND
DE

NE
NH

1910
1E0

SD
LA

VT

ME
CT
WIMA

ID
NM

RI

OR

UT

VA

AL
MO
TN

WY
COIN
OK
MT
KY
AZMNIA
TX
NV
MD
MI
CA
NJ WA KS
NY

PA
WV
IL
OH

1E1
1E2
1E3
miners found in 1910 Census PUMS
Figure 4 Total Miner Population and the Adoption of Workers' Comp

1E4

Figure 5 Types of regulation,
as a function of population and other parameters

6
Tenn Lawyer Licensing Index, 1970-90

AZ
ID

5

NV

OR

FL

DE
NM

4
SD

3

WA
AR

NH

SC

MO
CO
NE WV

WY

OK

WI
TN
KY MN

PA
TX

NC

MT

2

CA

GA

MS

UT
RI
ME

NJ

ALMD
LA

IACT

OH
IL

MA
KS
VT

VAIN

ND

NY
MI

1
0
1E2

1E3

1E4
1970 population

Figure 6 Population and the Strictness of Lawyer Licensing

1E5

