                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         MARKET REACTIONS TO EXPORT SUBSIDIES

                                              Mihir A. Desai
                                            James R. Hines Jr.

                                          Working Paper 10233
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10233


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




The authors are grateful to Naomi Feldman for excellent research assistance and David Weinstein for expert
data guidance; to them and to seminar participants for helpful comments on earlier drafts; and to the Lois and
Bruce Zenkel Research Fund at the University of Michigan and the Division of Research at Harvard Business
School for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Mihir A. Desai and James R. Hines Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Market Reactions to Export Subsidies
Mihir A. Desai and James R. Hines Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 10233
January 2004
JEL No. F12, F13, H87, H25, D43

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the economic impact of export subsidies by investigating stock price reactions

to a critical event in 1997. On November 18, 1997, the European Union announced its intention to

file a complaint before the World Trade Organization (WTO), arguing that the United States

provided American exporters illegal subsidies by permitting them to use Foreign Sales Corporations

to exempt a fraction of export profits from taxation. Share prices of American exporters fell sharply

on this news, and its implication that the WTO might force the United States to eliminate the

subsidy. The share price declines were largest for exporters whose tax situations made the threatened

export subsidy particularly valuable. Share prices of exporters with high profit margins also declined

markedly on November 18, 1997, suggesting that the export subsidies were most valuable to firms

earning market rents. This last evidence is consistent with strategic trade models in which export

subsidies improve the competitive positions of firms in imperfectly competitive markets.

Mihir A. Desai
Harvard Business School
Morgan 363
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu

James R. Hines Jr.
Office of Tax Policy Research
University of Michigan Business School
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
jrhines@umich.edu
1.       Introduction

         International trade policies affect the welfare of nations and the profitability of exporters.
Classic trade models imply that countries benefit from free trade, whereas more recent strategic
theories identify conditions in which interventionist policies such as export subsidies can
improve domestic welfare. There has been considerable theoretical development of strategic
trade theories with only modest accompanying empirical support for underlying assumptions and
predictions. This paper offers evidence of the impact of a strategic trade policy by considering
market reactions to a surprise challenge to an export subsidy embedded in the U.S. corporate
income tax. This event identifies stock market valuations of tax-based export subsidies, and the
degree to which they are affected by export propensities, firm-specific tax considerations, and
market structure.

         On November 18, 1997, the European Union declared its intention to bring a complaint
before the World Trade Organization (WTO), accusing the United States of violating the rules
prohibiting WTO members from subsidizing exports. Europe maintained that the ability of
American firms to route their export sales through tax-avoidance devices known as Foreign Sales
Corporations (FSCs) provided them with export-contingent tax subsidies of roughly $4 billion a
year. The European Union argued that European firms were thereby unfairly disadvantaged in
competition with American firms in foreign markets, and requested that the WTO require the
United States to discontinue its export subsidy or else face sanctions and penalties. Negotiations
between the United States and Europe proved fruitless, and the WTO in due course ruled against
the United States twice, as a result of which the export subsidies are in the process of being
eliminated.1

         This paper investigates the extent to which share prices of American exporters capitalized
the threatened removal of export subsidies. For asset price reactions to convey such information,

1
  In February 2000 the WTO ruled that the FSC program represented an illegal export subsidy. In November 2000
the United States passed legislation eliminating FSCs, but simultaneously introducing a new tax exemption for
extraterritorial income that has almost exactly the same export-subsidy effect as the former FSCs. Europe balked at
this purely formal change, challenging the revised U.S. provisions before the WTO; the WTO in January 2002 again
found the United States to be in violation of its rules, and in August 2002 authorized the European Union to impose
up to $4 billion a year of retaliatory tariffs on the United States. In an effort to limit the economic damage from this
and other trade disputes, President Bush and Congressional leaders have declared their intention to remove the
export subsidies introduced in 2000, and not to replace them; such legislation is currently pending before Congress.
it is necessary that market participants considered the European challenge to be an unanticipated
and significant development. U.S. news accounts on November 18, 1997 offered extensive
coverage of the details and (large) magnitude of the subsidy; journalists described American
officials as “stunned;” and the chief of staff of the U.S. Congress Joint Tax Committee later
publicly commented, “frankly, we’ve been somewhat surprised by this development.”2
Consequently, share price movements on the day of the European announcement should embody
market valuations of expected losses from possible future repeal of the export subsidy.

        The evidence indicates that shares prices of American firms whose sales were dominated
by exports fell sharply on November 18, 1997. These price movements were greatly attenuated
for exporters with net operating loss carryforwards, for whom tax subsidies are less valuable than
they are for others. Similarly, the stock prices of firms with foreign income taxed at high rates
reacted less sharply than did other stock prices, reflecting the existence of a generous alternative
export subsidy available only to firms with heavily taxed foreign income. It is telling that share
prices of Japanese firms, who were not directly affected by the events of November 18, 1997,
exhibited none of the same price movement patterns as American firms, suggesting that the
American share price reactions reflect considerations that are specific to U.S. taxpayers.

        It is possible for export subsidies to improve the competitive positions of firms in
imperfectly competitive markets by committing them to high levels of production for export
markets, discouraging some of the competition that might otherwise come from foreign rivals.
The strategic trade models developed by Brander and Spencer (1985), Eaton and Grossman
(1986, 1988), and others, and reviewed in Brander (1995), take this observation as their point of
departure. Subsequent developments in this literature explore the impact of differing
specifications of oligopolistic interaction,3 the informational and commitment requirements of




2
  For journalistic accounts of the reaction from which these quotes are drawn, see Gordon Platt, “U.S. To Fight For
Foreign Sales Corporations,” Journal of Commerce, December 2, 1997 and Judith Burns, “Treasury’s Lubick Says
Can’t Rule Out Action Vs. EU,” Dow Jones News Service, December 12, 1997.
3
  See, for example, Eaton and Grossman (1986, 1988), Maggi (1996), Bagwell and Staiger (1997, 2001), Leahy and
Neary (2001), Zhou, Spencer, and Vertinsky (2002), and Kohler and Moore (2003).




                                                                                                                      2
effective export promotion through subsidies,4 and the impact of export subsidies when product
quality is difficult to verify.5

        Krugman (1993), Feenstra (1995) and others note that there is little in the way of
systematic empirical investigation of the extent of competition in export markets and, therefore,
the scope for income-enhancing strategic trade policies.6 Krugman (1993) observes that “efforts
to quantify the gains from rent-snatching suggest small payoffs” and Maggi (1996) adds that the
“jury is still out for the empirical evaluation of trade policies.” A notable exception is Berry,
Levinsohn and Pakes’s (1999) study of voluntary export restraints in the automobile industry.
Share price reactions to the removal of export subsidies offer evidence of market perceptions,
since the value of such subsidies should vary systematically with the degree of export market
competition. The evidence indicates that the share prices of more profitable firms exhibited the
most sharply negative reactions to news of the European complaint, which is consistent with the
implications of models of export subsidies in imperfectly competitive industries and with aspects
of strategic trade theory.

        Section two of the paper considers a simple model of the incidence of export subsidies
embedded in the corporate income tax under varying market structures, drawing predictions for
the impact of the WTO controversy on share prices. Section three describes the two primary tax
subsidies available to American exporters and their interaction. Section four examines the
determinants of abnormal returns for American exporters on November 18, 1997, finding that the
WTO event is associated with stock price movements that match tax characteristics and in which
more profitable firms are the most severely impacted. Section five concludes with observations
about the political economy of providing export subsidies through the income tax.

2.      The Incidence of Export Subsidies Under Imperfect Competition

        In order to assess the determinants of share price reactions to the WTO complaint, it is
useful to consider a model of exporter behavior under varying market structures. This section


4
  As in Qiu (1994, 1995), Goldberg (1995), Brainard and Martimort (1996, 1997), Maggi (1999), and Leahy and
Neary (1999, 2000).
5
  See Bagwell (1991).
6
  More recently, Antweiler and Trefler (2002) offer evidence indicating that international trade patterns are
consistent with production processes exhibiting scale economies that may support oligopolistic outcomes.


                                                                                                                3
develops a partial equilibrium model that captures many of the features of the FSC regime –
particularly that subsidies are functions of profits – in order to isolate the most important
determinants of estimated price reactions, including the effect of market structure and the market
share of American exporters.

        Consider the case of an American firm acting as a Cournot competitor in an international
industry with a fixed number (N) of equal-sized firms producing homogenous products. In order
to simplify the analysis, firms are assumed to produce with constant return to scale technology
using fixed capital (k) and labor (l) inputs per unit of output. The U.S. government subsidizes
export income at rate s, so firm i’s economic profit ( π i ) is given by:


(1)                             π i = ( p − wl )(1 + s )xi − ρkxi ,

in which p is the market price of the firm’s output, xi the quantity it produces, and w the wage
rate. For simplicity, capital is assumed not to depreciate, and to be financed entirely with equity,
the opportunity cost of which is denoted ρ . Since income is defined for U.S. tax purposes
without a deduction for the opportunity cost of equity capital, the export subsidy applies to
accounting profits that do not correspond to the economic profits that the firm maximizes. In
this partial-equilibrium setting, it is appropriate to take p to be a function of industry output,
denoted X.

        The firm’s first-order condition characterizing the profit-maximizing output level is


(2)                             p + xi
                                         dp
                                            (1 + θ ) = wl + ρk ,
                                         dX                (1 + s )

                                                                ⎛ dX      ⎞
in which θ is firm i's conjectural variation, corresponding to ⎜⎜     − 1⎟⎟ . Differing market
                                                                ⎝ dxi     ⎠
structures correspond to differing values of θ . In a Cournot-Nash setting, in which firm i
believes that its quantity decisions do not affect the quantities produced by its competitors, then
θ = 0 . In a perfectly competitive setting, θ = −1 . Various Stackelberg possibilities correspond
to values of θ that differ from these, and indeed, need not lie in the [-1, 0] interval.




                                                                                                      4
           It is useful to consider the pricing implications of (2). In doing so, it is necessary to take
into account that foreign firms in the industry are ineligible for the American export subsidy
(unless they produce in the United States for export). Let n denote the number of American
exporters in the industry, and (N – n) the number of their foreign competitors. Furthermore, in
order to simplify the calculations that follow, we consider the case in which the consumer
                                           ∂2 p
demand function is locally linear, so that      = 0 .7 For an American firm, differentiating both
                                           ∂X 2


sides of (2) with respect to s produces the following comparative static:


(3)
                                      dp ⎡ dX dxi
                                         ⎢   +    (1 + θ )⎤⎥ = − ρk 2 .
                                      dX ⎣ ds ds           ⎦    (1 + s )

By contrast, the behavior of foreign firms – who are ineligible for export subsidies, but otherwise
(by assumption) identical to their American competitors – is determined by (indexing foreign
firms with j):

                                           ⎡ dX dx j         ⎤
                                           ⎢ ds + ds (1 + θ )⎥ = 0 .
                                      dP
(4)
                                      dX   ⎣                 ⎦

           In order to assess the incidence of the subsidy, it is useful to consider the responsiveness
                                                                                   dp dp dX
of the market price to changes in the subsidy as given by the identity               ≡      . Since the
                                                                                   ds dX ds
market contains (N-n) foreign firms and n domestic firms, the relationship between market
output and the subsidy is given by,

                                                    dx j   dx
                                         = (N − n )
                                      dX
(5)                                                      +n i
                                      ds             ds    ds

Equation (4) implies that, for foreign firm j and demand curves that are less than infinitely
elastic,

                                                     dx
                                                  = − j (1 + θ ) .
                                               dX
(6)
                                               ds    ds

7
    See Auerbach and Hines (2003) for an analysis of more general cases in which demand curves are not locally


                                                                                                                 5
      dx j                            dxi
As            is given by (6), and        is given by (3), (5) becomes
       ds                             ds

                                        dX (1 + θ + N − n ) dxi
(7)                                                        =    .
                                        ds     n(1 + θ )     ds

                                                       dp dp dX
Combining (2), (3) and (7) in the identity               ≡      produces:
                                                       ds dX ds


                                        dp         n    ⎡ ρK ⎤
(8)                                        =−           ⎢           ⎥.
                                        ds    1 + θ + N ⎣ (1 + s )2 ⎦


             It is possible to isolate the effect of changes in subsidies on firm profits by differentiating
(1) with respect to s:

                     dπ i
(9)                       = xi ( p − wl ) + xi
                                               dp
                                                  (1 + s ) + dxi [( p − wl )(1 + s ) − ρk ] .
                      ds                       ds            ds

Equation (3) implies that:

                                               dp      ρk
                                                  +
                                        dxi    ds (1 + s )2
(10)                                        =−               .
                                        ds      dp
                                                    (1 + θ )
                                                dX

Together, (2), (8), (9) and (10) imply:

                              dπ i                        ρk ⎡         2n ⎤
(11)                               = xi [ p − wL ] + xi           1−            ,
                               ds                                ⎢
                                                        (1 + s ) ⎣ 1 + θ + N ⎥⎦

which in turn can be interpreted as:

                              dπ i   πi             ρk ⎡1 + θ + N − n ⎤
(12)                               =       + 2 xi                          .
                               ds (1 + s )        (1 + s ) ⎢⎣ 1 + θ + N ⎥⎦



linear.


                                                                                                           6
Equation (12) indicates that the impact of export subsidies on firm profitability is a function of
the extent to which competition in firm i's product market is imperfectly competitive and the
prevalence of American firms in i's product market.

        The impact of subsidies on firm profits implied by equation (12) is usefully considered in
three limiting cases of market structure and the prevalence of American firms. First, in the case
in which American firms are greatly outnumbered by foreign competitors (n → 0 ) , (12) becomes
dπ i π i + 2 xi ρK
    =              , regardless of the value of θ . Inspection of equations (8) and (10) reveals
 ds      (1 + s )
why profits respond to higher subsidies in this way. Output prices do not react to changes in s,
allowing American firms to realize the full benefit of the product of the subsidy and taxable
                           π i + xi ρK
export profits (equal to                 ). At the same time, American firms increase their output and
                             (1 + s )
                                                                                           xi ρK
acquire market share from their foreign competitors, the value of which equals                     .
                                                                                          (1 + s )
Together, these two considerations account for the total change in exporter profits.

        In cases in which American firms dominate the export market (n → N ) , market structure
                                                               dπ i     πi
matters crucially. Under perfect competition (θ = −1) ,             =          = 0 , as any benefit of the
                                                                ds    (1 + s )
subsidy is passed on to consumers (and π i = 0 if the market is perfectly competitive and

                                                           dπ i   πi             ρk         1
dominated by Americans). In contrast, with θ = 0 ,              =       + 2 xi                   , which, in
                                                            ds (1 + s )        (1 + s ) (1 + N )
                                               dπ i π i + xi ρk
the case of monopoly (N=1) collapses to            =            = xi [ p − wl ] . In the case of a
                                                ds    (1 + s )
monopolist, the envelope theorem applies: the value of a change in the subsidy rate equals the
additional subsidy that would be received assuming no behavioral response. More generally, as
American firms constitute more of the market, market structure begins to dictate the incidence of
the subsidy, less competitive market structures corresponding to greater impact of subsidies on
profitability.




                                                                                                               7
        In order to use stock market data to measure the impact of export subsidies on
profitability, it is necessary to recast the relationship expressed in equations (11) and (12) as a
function of changes in share prices rather than simply profits. This exercise yields similar
intuitions but is useful in resolving the potential confusion arising from the fact that subsidies are
functions of profits. For this purpose, it simplifies notation to consider the impact of small
changes in export subsidies around the point that s = 0 . The value of a firm’s shares equals the
sum of economic profits and the value of its invested equity capital, which can be denoted (in
units of annual flows) by vi . Letting σ i denote firm i’s value from everything other than profits

                                  ⎛ π ⎞
on exports, vi = σ i + π i = σ i ⎜⎜1 + i ⎟⎟ . For a fixed stock of equity (which is appropriate in
                                  ⎝ σi ⎠
considering share price changes), and for π i small relative to σ i , then given that

                     πi       dσ i
log vi ≈ log σ i +      , and      = 0 , the effect of export subsidies on firm valuation is
                     σi        ds

d (log vi ) dπ i ds
           ≈        . If each firm has roughly similar markups over labor cost for its export and
    ds        σi
non-export sales, then σ i ≈ ( p − wl )zi , in which zi is firm i’s non-export sales. Consequently,
(11) implies:

                            d log vi xi ⎧     ρk ⎡1 + θ + N − 2n ⎤ ⎫
(13)                                ≈ ⎨1 +                           ⎬.
                               ds    zi ⎩ ( p − wl ) ⎢⎣ 1 + θ + N ⎥⎦ ⎭

        Equation (13) explains the impact of export subsidies on stock market valuation as a
function of the fraction of a firm’s sales devoted to exports and a term that captures the degree of

competition in the firm’s markets. From equation (2), ( p − wl ) = ρk − xi         (1 + θ ) . Normalizing
                                                                                dp
                                                                                dx

the initial output price to be unity ( p ≡ 1) , defining the inverse demand elasticity η ≡
                                                                                               dp X
                                                                                                    , and
                                                                                               dX p

                                             ⎧                                   ⎫
                                             ⎪                                   ⎪
            xi  1                d log vi xi ⎪        1        ⎡1 + θ + N − 2n ⎤ ⎪
noting that    = , (13) becomes:         ≈ ⎨1 +                                  ⎬.
            X N                     ds    zi ⎪ ⎛ η (1 + θ ) ⎞ ⎢⎣ 1 + θ + N ⎥⎦ ⎪
                                                 ⎜1 −       ⎟
                                             ⎪⎩ ⎜⎝    ρkN ⎟⎠                     ⎪⎭

Differentiating both sides of (13) with respect to θ produces:


                                                                                                        8
         d 2 log vi xi                             ⎧               ⎡ (1 + θ + N )(1 + θ + N − 2n ) ⎤ ⎫
                                                   ⎨2n(1 − µ ) + µ ⎢
                                   1
(14)               ≈                                                                               ⎥⎬ ,
           dsdθ      z i (1 + θ + N )2 (1 − µ )2   ⎩               ⎣            (1 + θ )           ⎦⎭

                η (1 + θ )
in which µ ≡               .
                  ρkN

        Equation (14) indicates that the effect of taxes on share valuation depends on the extent
to which firms operate in imperfectly competitive environments. Seade (1980) notes that stable
equilibria require that µ ≤ 0 , which for downward-sloping demand curves (η < 0 ) corresponds to
θ ≥ −1 . Hence n ≥ (1 + θ + N ) 2 is a sufficient condition for the right side of (14) to be positive:
a greater concentration of American firms in the export market increases the impact of imperfect
competition on share price reactions to export subsidies.

        In order to estimate the relationship implied by (14) it is necessary to have a measure of
the extent of competition in a firm’s export industry. In the absence of more direct measures,
one usable proxy is firm i’s profit rate. Given that (12) and (14) predict that market structure
matters in situations in which American firms comprise a nontrivial fraction of the firms in a
given product market, the corresponding empirical strategy is to investigate the share price
impact of the WTO controversy first as a function of the exposure of American firms to exports
and the usefulness of export tax subsidies. Subsequent analysis considers the impact of market
structure as proxied by average firm profitability.

3.      American export incentives8

        The United States subsidizes exports by exempting export profits from U.S. taxation and
by permitting taxpayers to declare that a portion of export profits represents foreign source
income; this section reviews these provisions and their implications.

3.1     Subsidy by exemption of income: FSCs and ETI

        Since 1971, firms exporting goods from the United States have been entitled to do so in a
legally roundabout fashion that enables them to exempt a fraction of export profits from taxation.

8
 For a more complete history of tax subsidies for U.S. exports, see Desai and Hines (2001a), from which this
section draws.


                                                                                                               9
A firm received tax benefits between 1971 and 1984 by routing exports through Domestic
International Sales Corporations (DISCs); between 1984 and 2000, similar tax benefits were
available by routing exports through FSCs. For example, an American computer company
selling a computer manufactured in Texas to a buyer in northern Italy in 1997 might first sell the
computer to its FSC located in Guam, which in turn sold the computer to the buyer in Italy. The
computer did not travel to Guam in the course of this sale, nor was it necessary that any
substantial business be conducted at the FSC offices located in Guam; instead, these were paper
transactions. As a result, a portion (roughly 15 percent) of the export profit was attributed to the
FSC and forever exempt from tax.9

         In November 2000 the United States discontinued FSCs, replacing them with an
automatic 15 percent exemption of “extraterritorial income” (ETI) from U.S. taxation. ETI
consists of income earned by exporting goods from the United States, as well as income earned
by foreign affiliates operating abroad. Since most exporters had previously used FSCs to exempt
15 percent of their export profits from U.S. taxation, the elimination of FSCs and their
replacement by an exemption for 15 percent of ETI did not substantially change the tax benefit
associated with exporting.

3.2      Subsidy by allocation of income: Export source rules

         An entirely separate type of export subsidy is available to American multinational firms
with excess foreign tax credits. The nature of the subsidy is that part or all of export profits can
be treated as foreign source income for the purpose of U.S. income taxation. This export subsidy
is more generous to qualifying firms than was the subsidy provided by the use of FSCs or the
more recent automatic exemption of 15 percent of export profits. Since many American
multinational firms have excess foreign tax credits,10 and the parent companies of American
multinational firms account for 58 percent of all U.S. exports of goods,11 it follows that this




9
  The tax benefits of exporting through FSCs were available to all corporations in the United States, including those
that were foreign-owned. Belmonte (2000) provides aggregate data on the use of FSCs in 1996. See Desai and
Hines (2001a) for a detailed description and analysis of FSC rules that permitted some taxpayers to exempt from
U.S. taxation a fraction greater than 15 percent of export income.
10
   See the data reported by Grubert (2001).
11
   See the data for 1997 reported in Mataloni (1999, p. 14).


                                                                                                                   10
export subsidy is potentially quite important. Notably, this export subsidy is not available to
American exporters that are not multinational firms.

         In order to understand the tax subsidy available from the foreign source rules, and the
circumstances under which taxpayers might be eligible for the associated tax benefits, it is
necessary to review certain aspects of U.S. taxation of the foreign income of American
taxpayers. A brief description of some of the relevant features follows.12

3.2.1 The foreign tax credit

         The United States taxes the foreign incomes of its resident companies, permitting them to
claim foreign tax credits for income taxes (and related taxes) paid to foreign governments. These
foreign tax credits are used to offset U.S. tax liabilities that would otherwise be due on foreign-
source income. The U.S. corporate tax rate is currently 35 percent, so an American corporation
that earns $100 in a foreign country with a 10 percent tax rate pays taxes of $10 to the foreign
government and $25 to the U.S. government, since its U.S. corporate tax liability of $35 (35
percent of $100) is reduced to $25 by the foreign tax credit of $10. The U.S. tax liability on such
foreign income is typically deferred until profits are repatriated in the form of dividends.13

3.2.2 Excess foreign tax credits

         Because the foreign tax credit is intended to alleviate international double taxation, and
not to reduce U.S. tax liabilities on profits earned within the United States, the credit is limited to
U.S. tax liability on foreign-source income. For example, an American firm with $200 of
foreign income that faces an U.S. tax rate of 35 percent has a foreign tax credit limit of $70 (35
percent of $200). If the firm pays foreign income taxes of less than $70, then the firm would be
entitled to claim credits for all of its foreign taxes. If, however, the firm pays $90 of foreign
taxes, then it would be permitted to claim no more than $70 of foreign tax credits. Firms
calculate foreign tax credits based on their total (worldwide) foreign incomes and foreign tax
payments (subject to certain restrictions). Taxpayers whose foreign tax payments exceed the
foreign tax credit limit are said to have “excess foreign tax credits;” the excess foreign tax credits

12
  Portions of this description are excerpted from Hines (1999).
13
  For analyses of the effect of taxation and deferral on dividend repatriations, see Hines and Hubbard (1990),
Altshuler and Newlon (1993), Altshuler, Newlon and Randolph (1995) and Desai, Foley and Hines (2001).


                                                                                                                 11
represent the portion of their foreign tax payments that exceed the U.S. tax liabilities generated
by their foreign incomes.

3.2.3 Source rules and excess credits

         U.S. tax law embodies the principle that the location of income arising from a sale is
determined, in part, by the site of the sale rather than the site of production. Section 863(b) of
the Internal Revenue Code provides that half of profits earned on goods exported from the
United States will be deemed to have foreign source if the taxpayer elects to pass the export title
(a purely formal action) in the foreign location rather than in the United States.

         Firms with excess foreign tax credits can use this source rule to reduce U.S. taxes
otherwise due on export profits. The benefit to a firm with excess foreign tax credits of
attributing half of export income to foreign source is illustrated by the comparison presented in
Table 1. The American multinational firm in this example earns $40 by exporting from the
United States and an additional $100 from the operations of its foreign affiliate. The foreign
affiliate is located in a country with a 50 percent tax rate, which, since it exceeds the U.S. tax
rate of 35 percent, implies that the parent company has $15 of excess foreign tax credits. If
export profits are treated as domestic income, then the firm’s $40 of export income is fully taxed
at the domestic tax rate of 35 percent, resulting in a tax liability of $14. If instead the exporter
can characterize 50 percent of export profits as having foreign source, then $7 of the firm’s
excess foreign tax credits can be applied against the U.S. tax liability on export profits, leaving a
net tax liability of $7 on export profits.14 Therefore, firms with excess foreign tax credits are
able to shield 50 percent of their export profits from U.S. taxation by taking advantage of the
opportunity provided by section 863(b).

3.3      Incentives for exporters and the prevalence of export subsidies

         Since 1971, American exporters have been faced with the enviable choice between two
export tax benefits: the partial exemption of export income, and the allocation of half of export
income to foreign source under section 863(b). These possibilities are exclusive, in that the same

14
  An important aspect of this benefit is that foreign governments do not coordinate their taxation of export income
with the United States. Thus, the election by an American taxpayer to treat $20 of export profits as having foreign
source for U.S. tax purposes has no effect on any foreign taxes that the taxpayer may owe.


                                                                                                                  12
dollar of export income cannot benefit from both subsidies. For firms without excess foreign tax
credits, the export source rules do not offer the prospect of reduced U.S. tax liabilities, since
income allocated to foreign source is nonetheless immediately taxed by the United States. From
1984-2000, such firms did better to route their exports through FSCs, in which case they were
eligible for a 15 percent exclusion of export profits from U.S. taxation. Firms with excess
foreign tax credits could benefit from the foreign source allocation rule under 863(b) to allocate
50 percent of export profits to foreign source and thereby exclude 50 percent of export profits
from U.S. taxation.

           The two columns of Figure 1 summarize an exporter’s tax options as of 1997. A 15
percent exemption of export income was available regardless of a firm’s excess foreign credit
status, though if the exporter was a multinational firm with excess foreign tax credits, 50 percent
of export income could escape taxation through the use of 863(b).

           There are two important complications to this otherwise simple story, the first stemming
from the fact that a firm’s excess foreign tax credit status may change over time and is itself a
function of many decisions that the firm makes every year. Such decisions include where to
locate foreign operations, whether to finance foreign operations with debt or equity, how many
dividends to repatriate from each of its foreign subsidiaries, and what costs (such as interest
expenses or R&D expenses) the firm will incur in the United States and allocate in part against
foreign income. Furthermore, excess foreign tax credits can be carried back two years and
forward five. As a result, distinctions between firms with excess foreign tax credits and those
with deficit foreign tax credits are only imperfectly captured by measured tax positions in any
single year.15

           The second complication is that the U.S. corporate income tax is asymmetric, in that
profitable corporations must pay corporate taxes while corporations making losses do not receive
refunds. Corporations with losses are permitted to carry them back against taxable income
earned in any of the previous two years, thereby entitling them to refunds for taxes previously
paid. If current tax losses exceed taxed income from the previous two years, then a corporation
is permitted to carry its losses forward (without interest) to apply against taxable income earned

15
     For an elaboration of this point see the discussion Scholes et al. (2002).


                                                                                                    13
in subsequent years. Firms with such “net operating loss carryforwards” are effectively untaxed
until (and unless) they return to profitability at some point in the future. Export tax subsidies are
of considerably less value to such firms than they are to firms without net operating loss
carryforwards, since the expected present value of a current tax benefit is reduced by nominal
discounting to the date at which the firm again becomes taxable, which could be never. All other
things equal, the threatened removal of export subsidies should therefore have much smaller
effects on firms with significant net operating loss carryforwards than they do on other firms.

4.     Data and Results

       This section evaluates the incidence of U.S. export subsidies by examining the
determinants of abnormal stock market returns on November 18, 1997, the date of the surprise
European announcement of its intention to file a complaint against the U.S. FSC program.

4.1    Data description

       In order to match stock price reactions to firm attributes it is necessary to combine
balance sheet and income statement data from Compustat with stock return data from CRSP.
Since export exposure is central to this study, firms are included in the sample only if they have
complete export data (which may be zero exports) continuously from 1992 to 1998, a restriction
that reduces the sample size to 691 firms.

       Share prices exhibit daily fluctuations for reasons that are unrelated to government
policy. In calculating abnormal stock returns for November 18, 1997 it is important to adjust
individual stock price movements for changes attributable to movements in aggregate stock
indices or the value of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies. Daily stock price returns for
the 400 trading days prior to November 18, 1997 were regressed separately for each firm on
contemporaneous daily changes in the S&P 500 index and changes in the dollar-pound sterling
exchange rate. The resulting firm-specific coefficients were then used to create predicted stock
returns for November 18, 1997 based on changes that day in the S&P 500 index and the value of
the U.S. dollar. Differences between actual returns and predicted returns represent abnormal
returns for that day.




                                                                                                    14
         Table 2 presents summary statistics for variables used in the regressions. Export
propensity is measured as the 1997 ratio of exports to sales; this variable has a sample mean of
0.163 and a median of 0.1144. A firm’s tax position, as measured by its ratio of net operating
loss carryforwards to sales, has a mean of 0.29 and a median of zero. The degree of
multinationality, as measured by the ratio of foreign to total assets, has a mean of 0.10 and a
median of zero. The average foreign tax rate in 1997 is defined as the ratio of foreign income tax
payments to foreign pretax income; its mean is 34.0 percent, and median is 33.2 percent. The
average foreign tax rate variable is available for only 202 firms. The average pretax profit
margin is the 1992-1998 mean ratio of pretax profits to total sales; this variable has a mean of 5.8
percent and a median of 6.6 percent.

         It is instructive to examine unadjusted stock price reactions on November 18, 1997.16
The U.S. stock market fell on that day, the S&P 500 falling by $61 billion, or 0.76 percent of its
aggregate value.17 Figure 2 depicts average (unweighted mean) daily returns for four subsamples
of firms, distinguished by exporting propensity and the presence of net operating loss
carryforwards. Firms classified as “major exporters” are those whose export/sales ratios exceed
the sample median of 0.1144; “minor exporters” have export/sales ratios below 0.1144.

         Shares of major exporters showed the greatest price declines on November 18, 1997,
particularly those without net operating loss carryforwards, whose average share price fell by
0.80 percent. Share prices of minor exporters without net operating loss carryforwards fell by
just 0.23 percent. Among firms with net operating loss carryforwards, share prices of major
exporters fell by more than did the share prices of minor exporters, but the difference between
them is considerably smaller than in the case of firms that are currently taxable. This price
movement pattern is consistent with changes in after-tax profitability that are likely to be
associated with the WTO action by the European Union, since tax benefits are less valuable to
firms with net operating loss carryforwards than they are to others.


16
  The pattern of abnormal returns is almost identical to that of unadjusted returns.
17
  It is noteworthy that the $61 billion loss of aggregate stock market value on November 18, 1997 approximately
equals the present value of the estimated $4 billion annual flow of FSC tax benefits to U.S. exporters, discounted at
the prevailing 30-year AAA corporate bond rate of 6.84 percent. While $4 billion per year is a conservative
estimate of FSC benefits (see Desai and Hines, 2001a), and the benefits were likely to grow significantly over time,
the WTO complaint by the European Union did not necessarily imply that the export benefits would be immediately
or permanently removed.


                                                                                                                   15
4.2    Determinants of abnormal returns

       Table 3 presents regressions in which the dependent variable is a firm’s abnormal stock
return on November 18, 1997. The sole independent variable in the regression in column 1 is a
firm’s export/sales ratio; its estimated coefficient is -0.0198, though not statistically different
from zero. The regression reported in column three includes two additional independent
variables: the net operating loss ratio and an interaction of the net operating loss ratio and the
export ratio. The estimated coefficients reported in column three confirm the visual picture
provided by Figure 2: the coefficient on the export ratio is negative (though statistically
insignificant), the coefficient on the net operating loss variable is negative, and the coefficient on
the interaction of the export ratio and net operating losses is positive. These coefficient estimates
imply that abnormal daily returns of exporting firms differed between those with and without
significant net operating loss carryforwards.

       The regressions reported in columns 4-7 add control variables that improve the fit of the
regression and continue to imply that share prices fell most sharply for firms most at risk from
the threatened removal of export tax benefits. The ratio of foreign to total assets indicates the
extent to which a firm has international production and therefore the ability to substitute foreign
production for domestic exports, as well as the possibility of generating excess foreign tax
credits that make the export source rule more attractive than exporting through FSCs. Hence
large values of the interaction of foreign assets and the export ratio should be associated with
smaller share price effects of FSC removal, and therefore a positive coefficient in the regression.
Log assets is included as an independent variable to control for any pure size effects that might
be correlated with export propensities, net operating loss carryforward status, or foreign asset
fraction. The negative effect of export shares on daily share price returns becomes statistically
significant in the regressions reported in columns 5-7, while other variables have expected signs
and magnitudes.

       It is useful to consider the economic interpretation of the magnitudes of the estimated
coefficients reported in column 6. The -0.0283 coefficient on the export ratio suggests that a
firm with one hundred percent exports would suffer a 2.83 percent negative abnormal share
return relative to the same firm with no exports. In principle, firms could use FSCs to reduce



                                                                                                      16
taxable income by roughly fifteen percent of export profits, which at a 35 percent tax rate
corresponds to a tax saving of 5.25 percent of export profits, or 8.08 percent of after-tax export
profits.18 Hence the estimated effect of the WTO event is just 35 percent (2.83/8.08) of the
profitability impact of an unexpected and permanent removal of export tax benefits. This
smaller effect is attributable in part to uncertainty over the ultimate resolution of the FSC
dispute, and the long delays in implementing any changes that reduce the present value of their
impact. Furthermore, removal of export tax benefits should occasion a fall in the value of the
U.S. dollar relative to other currencies,19 thereby offsetting a portion of the cost to exporters.
Finally, endogenous behavioral shifts on the part of exporters are likely to attenuate at least some
of the costs of losing the export subsidies.

        The estimated 0.0049 coefficient on the interaction of the net operating loss ratio and the
export ratio can be understood by comparing it to the export ratio coefficient. Given that the
export ratio coefficient is 5.8 times larger in magnitude, the implication is that a firm with net
operating loss carryforwards equal to 5.8 times annual sales would be fully insulated from any
adverse price effect associated with the loss of export tax subsidies. Certainly such a firm is
unlikely to return to taxpaying status any time soon, though there is always the possibility that
firms with ample net operating loss carryforwards might be acquired by taxable firms who can
use the losses to reduce tax obligations on their own income.20

        The regressions presented in Table 3 offer evidence that the U.S. share prices reacted to
the news of November 18, 1997 in a manner that is consistent with the profitability implications
of losing FSC tax benefits. Table 4 presents similar regressions for abnormal Japanese share
price movements on November 19, 1997 (the first Japanese trading day that could incorporate
news of the European Union announcement), calculating one-factor abnormal returns based on
covariance with the Nikkei index. Since the loss of U.S. tax benefits would not directly affect




18
   5.25/(1.0-0.35) = 8.08.
19
   Desai and Hines (2001b) offer evidence that the U.S. dollar fell on November 18, 1997 in a manner that is
consistent with the implied impact of the FSC dispute.
20
   For a more general discussion of mergers and tax loss carryforwards, see Auerbach and Reishus (1988).


                                                                                                               17
Japanese exporters,21 it is instructive to compare the determinants of Japanese price reactions to
the determinants of American price reactions.

           Japanese firms do not report foreign assets or foreign tax payments, making it impossible
to replicate exactly all of the regressions that can be run on American firms, but the broad pattern
of Japanese price reactions is clear from Table 4. Share prices of Japanese exporters did not
exhibit abnormal declines following the European Union announcement, and indeed, all of the
coefficients reported in Table 4 are statistically insignificant and of the opposite signs of their
counterparts in Table 3. Hence the drop in the share prices of exporters in the United States, who
stood to lose tax benefits, was not repeated among exporters abroad who never had tax benefits
to lose.

4.3        Firm Profitability and Abnormal Returns

           Table 5 presents regressions in which the November 18, 1997 abnormal returns to U.S.
shares are regressed against variables including foreign tax rates and total firm profit margins.
The foreign tax rates facing American exporters determine the desirability of using FSCs, since
firms whose foreign operations are located in high-tax countries are very likely to have excess
foreign tax credits, and therefore benefit by avoiding FSCs and instead using the source rule to
characterize export profits as foreign income. Unfortunately, foreign tax rate information is
available only for 202 firms, so the sample for the regressions reported in Table 5 is considerably
smaller than that for the regressions reported in Table 3.

           Column 1 of Table 5 reports estimated coefficients from a regression that includes as
independent variables export ratios, foreign tax rates, and interactions of these two variables.
The 0.1509 coefficient on the interaction of the export ratio and foreign tax rate implies that the
negative effect of greater exports is attenuated by having higher foreign tax rates, presumably
because higher tax rates reduce the value of exporting through FSCs. The regressions reported in
columns 2-5 add as independent variables measures of pretax profit margins and their
interactions with export ratios. A firm’s pretax profit margin is its average ratio of profits to
sales over the 1992-1998 period, and serves as a proxy for market structure (higher profits

21
  Japanese firms with affiliates in the United States were entitled to use FSCs for their U.S. exports, and therefore
stood to lose tax benefits, but this would represent a very small fraction of their total value.


                                                                                                                        18
corresponding to less competitive markets).22 The estimated effect of the interaction of the
export ratio and the foreign tax rate remains positive with the inclusion of profitability variables
and others in the regressions reported in columns 2-5.

         Share prices of profitable firms did not exhibit abnormal returns on November 18, 1997
that differed systematically from those of less profitable firms, but share prices of more
profitable firms with significant exports fell on that day. The estimated negative coefficients on
interactions of export ratios and profitability in the regressions reported in columns 2-5 indicate
that the combination of export exposure and high profit margins is associated with share value
losses (though the coefficient on the interaction is statistically insignificant in the regression
reported in column 3). Firms operating in less competitive markets are likely to maintain high
profit margins over time, and as outlined in section 3, market structure is an important
determinant of the predicted impact of the WTO event on shares prices to the extent that
American firms comprise a nontrivial fraction of the firms competing in a given industry.

         The regression reported in column 5 of Table 5 includes controls for the effect of net
operating losses, the magnitude of foreign assets, and total firm size, with an estimated –0.1878
coefficient on the interaction of average firm profitability and the export ratio. The magnitude of
this estimated effect can be evaluated by comparing it to the initial finding of a 2.83 percent fall
in market valuation for an export-only firm (relative to a firm with no exports). The –0.1878
coefficient on the interaction term suggests that a three percent higher pretax profit margin (for
example, the difference between 4.3 percent and 7.3 percent) increases by 20 percent the share
price impact associated with exports.23 While it is difficult to map differences in profitability to
measurable features of market structure, a profit margin difference of three percent is significant
relative to the sample mean of 5.8 percent, and has a correspondingly significant estimated effect
on the relationship between export exposure and share price reactions.




22
   Profitability is an imperfect indicator of the extent of competition, but alternatives such as concentration indices
are likewise problematic and cannot be constructed at the firm level for major exporters that operate in multiple
industries and markets, only some of which are publicly reported. Similar considerations make it impossible to
control directly for firm-level differences in the extent to which export markets are dominated by American firms, so
the profitability variable is a noisy measure of market considerations that are relevant to the likely share price impact
of export subsidies.
23
   0.03(0.1878)/0.0283 = 0.20.


                                                                                                                      19
       The WTO event caused firms to be revalued in a way that suggests that the stock market
perceived export subsidies to be most valuable to firms operating in imperfectly competitive
markets. Stock market reactions reflect the behavior of market participants, as expressed by their
willingness to buy and sell shares, so they are informative about market beliefs and not
necessarily the true state of the economy. These market reactions nonetheless offer useful
information about the likely impact of policy changes, since traders have incentives to price
securities accurately and to acquire the information necessary to do so.

5.     Conclusion

       This paper offers evidence of the importance of export subsidies to American exporters.
Stock price movements on November 18, 1997 imply that the threatened elimination of Foreign
Sales Corporations reduced the values of firms with large export exposures, those whose tax
situations rewarded the use of FSCs, and those with market positions that made them highly
profitable.

       The empirical strategy used to estimate share price reactions on November 18, 1997
combines the asset pricing approach to tax incidence (Summers, 1981, 1985; Cutler 1988) with
the strategic trade literature’s emphasis on the importance of imperfect competition. By
comparing predicted abnormal returns with the effects of mitigating factors such as net operating
loss carryforwards and the availability of substitute export subsidies, it is possible to sharpen
estimates of the value of FSCs. The correlation of price movements and firm profitability
implies that the stock market believes export subsidies to benefit firms with strong market
positions, suggesting that home country export policies could be designed to aid domestic firms
from a strategic trade policy perspective.

       The use of the income tax system to subsidize exports is just one example of the
connection between trade policy and broader domestic policies noted by Bhagwati and
Ramaswami (1963) and numerous subsequent observers. In a world where ad valorem subsidies
are being negotiated away, corporate tax policies are increasingly viewed as instruments of
international competition, not only to prevent taxation from impeding the ability of domestic
firms to compete in global markets, but also to enhance their competitive positions. While
analyses such as Bagwell and Staiger (2001) and Ederington (2003) consider how domestic


                                                                                                    20
policies such as labor standards and environmental policies might be incorporated into
multilateral arrangements, the embedding of subsidies in corporate taxes raises a number of new
issues, possibly strengthening calls for the coordination of corporate tax policies. These
corporate tax issues, including their implications for saving and investment and the implicit
indexing of subsidies to profitability, are likely to receive significant attention given the
magnitude and impact of subsidies such as those historically provided to exports under the U.S.
income tax.




                                                                                                  21
References

Altshuler, Rosanne and T. Scott Newlon, The effects of U.S. tax policy on the income
repatriation patterns of U.S. multinational corporations, in Alberto Giovannini, R. Glenn
Hubbard, and Joel Slemrod, eds. Studies in International Taxation (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1993), 77-115.

Altshuler, Rosanne, T. Scott Newlon and William C. Randolph, Do repatriation taxes matter?
evidence from the tax returns of U.S. multinationals, in Martin Feldstein, James R. Hines Jr., and
R. Glenn Hubbard, eds. The Effects of Taxation on Multinational Corporations (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1995), 253-272.

Antweiler, Werner and Daniel Trefler, Increasing returns and all that: A view from trade,
American Economic Review, March 2002, 92 (1), 93-119.

Auerbach, Alan J. and James R. Hines Jr., Perfect taxation with imperfect competition, in Sijbren
Cnossen and Hans-Werner Sinn, eds. Public Finance and Public Policy in the New Century
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003), 127-153.

Auerbach, Alan J., and David A. Reishus, The effects of taxation on the merger decision, in Alan
J. Auerbach, ed. Corporate Takeovers: Causes and Consequences (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1988), 157-183.

Bagwell, Kyle, Optimal export policy for a new-product monopoly, American Economic Review,
December 1991, 81 (5), 1156-1169.

Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger, Strategic export subsidies and reciprocal trade
agreements: The natural monopoly case, Japan and the World Economy, 1997, 9 (4), 491-510.

Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger, Strategic trade, competitive industries and agricultural
trade disputes, Economics and Politics, July 2001, 13 (2), 113-128.

Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger, Domestic policies, national sovereignty, and international
economic institutions, Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2001, 116 (2), 519-562.

Belmonte, Cynthia, Foreign sales corporations, 1996, SOI Bulletin, Spring 2000, 19 (4), 87-122.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, “ Voluntary export restraints on automobiles:
Evaluating a trade policy,” American Economic Review, June 1999, 89 (3), 400-430.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, V. K. Ramaswami, 1963, Domestic distortions, tariffs and the theory of
optimum subsidy, Journal of Political Economy, February 1963, 71 (1), 44-50.

Brainard, S. Lael and David Martimort, Strategic trade policy design with asymmetric
information and public contracts, Review of Economic Studies, January 1996, 63 (1), 81-105.

Brainard, S. Lael and David Martimort, Strategic trade policy with incompletely informed
policymakers, Journal of International Economics, February 1997, 42 (1-2), 33-65.


                                                                                                22
Brander, James A., Strategic trade policy, in Gene M. Grossman and Kenneth Rogoff eds.,
Handbook of International Economics, volume 3 (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1995), 1395-
1455.

Brander, James A. and Barbara J. Spencer, Export subsidies and international market share
rivalry, Journal of International Economics, February 1985, 18 (1-2), 83-100.

Cutler, David M. Tax reform and the stock market: An asset price approach, American Economic
Review, December 1988, 78 (5), 1107-1117.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., Repatriation taxes and dividend
distortions, National Tax Journal, December 2001, 54 (4), 829-851.

Desai, Mihir A. and James R. Hines Jr., The uneasy marriage of export incentives and the
income tax, in James M. Poterba, ed. Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 15 (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2001a), 41-94.

Desai, Mihir A. and James R. Hines Jr., Exchange rates and tax-based export promotion,
Proceedings of the National Tax Association Annual Conference, 2001b, 93, 275-285.

Eaton Jonathan and Gene M. Grossman, Optimal trade and industrial policy under oligopoly,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1986, 101 (2), 383-406.

Eaton Jonathan and Gene M. Grossman, Trade and industrial policy under oligopoly: Reply,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1988, 103 (3), 603-607.

Ederington, Josh. International coordination of trade and domestic policies, American Economic
Review, December 2001, 91 (5), 1580-1593.

Feenstra, Robert C., Estimating the effects of trade policies, in Gene M. Grossman and Kenneth
Rogoff, eds. Handbook of International Economics, volume 3 (Amsterdam: North-Holland,
1995), 1553-1595.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, Strategic export promotion in the absence of government
precommitment, International Economic Review, May 1995, 36 (2), 407-426.

Grubert, Harry, Tax planning by companies and tax competition by governments: Is there
evidence of changes in behavior? in James R. Hines Jr., ed. International Taxation and
Multinational Activity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001), 113-139.

Hines, James R., Jr., Lessons from behavioral responses to international taxation, National Tax
Journal, June 1999, 52 (2), 305-322.

Hines, James R., Jr. and R. Glenn Hubbard, Coming home to America: Dividend repatriations by
U.S. multinationals, in Assaf Razin and Joel Slemrod, eds. Taxation in the Global Economy
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), 161-200.




                                                                                                  23
Kohler, Philippe and Michael O. Moore, Domestic welfare effects of foreign strategic trade
policies, Journal of Economic Integration, September 2003, 18 (3), 573-586.

Krugman, Paul R., The narrow and broad arguments for free trade, American Economic Review,
May 1993, 83 (2), 362-66.

Krugman, Paul R. and Maurice Obstfeld, International economics: Theory and policy, 2nd ed.,
(New York: HarperCollins, 1991).

Leahy, Dermot and J. Peter Neary, Learning by doing, precommitment and infant-industry
protection, Review of Economic Studies, April 1999, 66 (2), 447-474.

Leahy, Dermot and J. Peter Neary, Strategic trade and industrial policy towards dynamic
oligopolies, Economic Journal, April 2000, 110 (463), 484-508.

Leahy, Dermot and J. Peter Neary, Robust rules for industrial policy in open economies, Journal
of International Trade and Economic Development, December 2001, 10 (4), 393-409.

Maggi, Giovanni, Strategic trade policies with endogenous mode of competition, American
Economic Review, March 1996, 86 (1), 237-258.

Maggi, Giovanni, Strategic trade policy under incomplete information, International Economic
Review, August 1999, 40 (3), 571-594.

Mataloni, Raymond J., Jr., U.S. multinational companies: Operations in 1997, Survey of Current
Business, July 1999, 79 (7), 8-35.

Qiu, Larry D., Optimal strategic trade policy under asymmetric information, Journal of
International Economics, May 1994, 36 (3-4), 333-354.

Qiu, Larry D., Strategic trade policy under uncertainty, Review of International Economics,
February 1995, 3 (1), 75-85.

Scholes, Myron S., Mark A. Wolfson, Merle Erickson, Edward L. Maydew, and Terry Shevlin,
Taxes and business strategy: A planning approach, 2nd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 2002).

Seade, Jesus K., On the effects of entry, Econometrica, March 1980, 48 (2), 479-489.

Summers, Lawrence H., Taxation and corporate investment: A q-theory approach, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1981 (1), 67-140.

Summers, Lawrence H., The asset price approach to the analysis of capital income taxation, in
George R. Feiwel, ed. Issues in Contemporary Macroeconomics and Distribution (London:
Macmillan, 1985), 429-443.




                                                                                                24
Zhou, Dongsheng, Barbara J. Spencer, and Ilan Vertinsky, Strategic trade policy with
endogenous choice of quality and asymmetric costs, Journal of International Economics,
January 2002, 56 (1), 205-232.




                                                                                         25
            Figure 1: Overview of Incentives for Exporters, 1984-2000



                  FSC                                                   Section 863(b)


                  Texas                                                 Texas


Guam                                Italy                                                 Italy



15% of export profits exempt from                              50% of export profits exempt from
U.S. taxation                                                  U.S. taxation



Valuable to all taxable firms                                  Valuable only to firms with excess
                                                               foreign tax credits


Requires use of FSC                                            Requires that title to export property
                                                               be passed in foreign location


Note: The figure depicts the two alternative export subsidies available to U.S. exporters from 1984 to 2000.
The left column depicts the use of a Foreign Sales Corporation (FSC) and the characteristics of that export
subsidy. The right column depicts the use of allocation of export income to foreign source under Section
863 (b) and the characteristics of that export subsidy.
                                                                     Figure 2: Stock Price Returns for Major and Minor Exporters, by Tax Loss Status, November 18, 1997


                                       0


                                    -0.1


                                    -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.2263%
                                    -0.3
Daily Return (%) for group median




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Minor Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (238 firms)

                                    -0.4                                               -0.3770%
                                                                                     Minor Exporters
                                                                                       (79 firms)
                                    -0.5


                                    -0.6


                                    -0.7                 -0.6740%


                                    -0.8               Major Exporters
                                                         (87 firms)                                                                                                                -0.7976%

                                    -0.9                                                                                                                                          Major Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                   (225 firms)


                                      -1
                                                        Firms with current net operating losses                                                               Firms without current net operating losses

                                    Note: The figure depicts stock returns of American firms on November 18, 1997, the day on which the European Union filed its complaint over the U.S. FSC program. The first two bars are
                                    for firms with net operating losses in 1997; the second two bars are for firms without net operating losses. Major exporters have export to total sales ratios exceeding 11 percent; minor
                                    exporters have export to total sales ratios of less than 11 percent. The bars depict the median daily returns of firms in each group.
                                                                  Table 1
                             The Benefits of Foreign Source Allocation to Firms with Excess Foreign Tax Credits




                                 Pretax           Pretax          Domestic         Foreign      Domestic        Foreign          After-Tax Net             Excess
                                Export           Income            Source          Source       Tax Rate         Tax                Income               Foreign Tax
                                Income            From             Income          Income                        Rate                                      Credits
                                                 Foreign
                                               Subsidiaries


Without Foreign                   $40               $100              $40           $100           35%            50%        $76=                             $15
Source Allocation                                                                                                            $50 ($100 x 50%) +
                                                                                                                             $26 ($40 x 65%)


With Foreign Source               $40               $100              $20           $120           35%            50%        $83=                              $8
Allocation of 50% of                                                                                                         $50 ($100 x 50%) +
Export Income                                                                                                                $20 ($20 x 0%) +
                                                                                                                             $13 ($20 x 65%)


Note: The figures above depict the tax payments associated with a firm with excess foreign tax credits that receives both export income and dividend repatriations
from foreign subsidiaries. In the top row, there is no foreign source allocation of export income. As a result, the firm has $15 ($100*(50%-35%)) in excess foreign
tax credits. In the second row, foreign source allocation of half of export income allows the exporter with excess foreign tax credits not to pay taxes on the portion
of export income allocated to foreign source. It is important to note that U.S. allocation rules have no effect on foreign tax liabilities.
                                                         Table 2
                                               Variable Summary Statistics
                                                                                                      Standard           No. of
                                                             Mean                 Median             Deviation            Obs.

Abnormal Returns, 11/18/97                                (0.0046)               (0.0012)              0.0376               648
Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997                            0.1630                 0.1144               0.1772               690
Ratio of NOLs to Sales, 1997                               0.2900                 0.0000               2.6544               647
Interaction of NOLs and Export                             0.0573                 0.0000               0.5063               647
Ratio
Ratio of Foreign Assets to Total                           0.0997                 0.0000               0.1700               691
Assets, 1997
Interaction of Foreign Asset                               0.0117                 0.0000               0.0298               690
Ratio and Export Ratio
Foreign Tax Rate, 1997                                     0.3397                 0.3323               0.2510               202
Interaction of Foreign Tax                                 0.0416                 0.0251               0.0609               202
Rate and Export Ratio
Average Pretax Profit                                      0.0579                 0.0662               0.1200               202
Margin, 1992-1998
Interaction of Pretax Profit                               0.0074                 0.0041               0.0297               202
Margin and Export Ratio
Log Total Assets, 1997                                     5.0835                 4.9114               2.0658               648
Interaction of Foreign Asset Ratio,                        0.0015                 0.0000               0.0305               647
Export Ratio and NOL Ratio
Interaction of NOL Ratio,                                  0.0015                 0.0000               0.0146               202
Export Ratio and Foreign Tax Rate

Note: Abnormal returns on November 18, 1997 control for the effect of stock market and exchange rate movements on that
day. "Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997" is the ratio of exports to total sales in 1997. "Ratio of NOLs to Sales, 1997" is the ratio
of net operating loss carryforwards to sales in 1997. "Interaction of NOLs and Export Ratio" is the product of "Ratio of Exports to
Sales, 1997" and "Ratio of NOLs to Sales, 1997." "Ratio of Foreign Assets to Total Assets , 1997" is the ratio of foreign assets to
total assets. "Interaction of Foreign Asset Ratio and Export Ratio is the product of "Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997" and
"Ratio of Foreign Assets to Total Assets, 1997. "Foreign Tax Rate, 1997" is the ratio of foreign taxes paid to foreign pretax
income. "Interaction of Foreign Tax Rate and Export Ratio" is the product of "Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997" and "Foreign
Tax Rate, 1997." "Average Pretax Profit Margin, 1992-1998" is the average of the annual ratios of total pretax profits to total
sales from 1992 to 1998. "Interaction of Pretax Profit Margin and Export Ratio" is the product of "Average Pretax Profit
Margin, 1992-1998" and "Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997." "Log Total Assets, 1997" is the natural logarithm of total assets in
1997. "Interaction of Foreign Asset Ratio, Export Ratio, and NOL Ratio" is the product of "Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997,"
"Ratio of Foreign Assets to Total Assets," and "Ratio of NOLs to Sales, 1997." "Interaction of NOL Ratio, Export Ratio and
Foreign Tax Rate" is the product of "Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997," "Foreign Tax Rate, 1997," and "Ratio of NOLs to Sales,
1997."
                                                                                 Table 3
                                                          Determinants of Abnormal Returns on November 18, 1997

                                                     Dependent Variable: One Day Abnormal Return from Two-Factor Model

                                           (1)                 (2)                 (3)                   (4)                 (5)                    (6)                    (7)
Constant                                   -0.0013           -0.0010               -0.0007               0.0000               0.0011                -0.0016                -0.0018
                                          (0.0019)          (0.0019)              (0.0019)             (0.0022)             (0.0024)               (0.0057)               (0.0057)

Ratio of Exports                           -0.0198           -0.0193               -0.0222              -0.0232              -0.0292                -0.0283                -0.0280
to Sales, 1997                            (0.0114)          (0.0115)              (0.0120)             (0.0119)             (0.0143)               (0.0137)               (0.0137)

Ratio of NOLs                                                -0.0012               -0.0016              -0.0016              -0.0017                -0.0016                -0.0015
to Sales, 1997                                              (0.0004)              (0.0002)             (0.0002)             (0.0002)               (0.0002)               (0.0002)

Interaction of NOLs                                                                 0.0045               0.0045               0.0048                 0.0049                 0.0033
and Export Ratio                                                                  (0.0021)             (0.0021)             (0.0021)               (0.0021)               (0.0024)

Ratio of Foreign Assets                                                                                 -0.0068              -0.0175                -0.0200                -0.0193
to Total Assets, 1997                                                                                  (0.0067)             (0.0095)               (0.0108)               (0.0108)

Interaction of Foreign Asset                                                                                                  0.0943                 0.0927                 0.0815
Ratio and Export Ratio                                                                                                      (0.0635)               (0.0625)               (0.0618)

Log Total Assets, 1997                                                                                                                               0.0006                 0.0006
                                                                                                                                                   (0.0010)               (0.0010)

Interaction of Foreign Asset Ratio,                                                                                                                                         0.0627
Export Ratio and NOL Ratio                                                                                                                                                (0.0208)

No. Obs.                                       647                647                  647                  647                  647                     647                   647
R-Squared                                   0.0084             0.0157               0.0182               0.0192               0.0224                  0.0232                0.0254

Note: The dependent variable in all specifications is the abnormal return on November 18, 1997, controlling for the effect of stock market and exchange rate movements on that day.
"Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997" is the ratio of exports to total sales in 1997. "Ratio of NOLs to Sales, 1997" is the ratio of net operating loss carryforwards to sales in 1997. "Interaction
of NOLs and Export Ratio" is the product of "Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997" and "Ratio of NOLs to Sales, 1997." "Ratio of Foreign Assets to Total Assets , 1997" is the ratio of foreign
assets to total assets. "Interaction of Foreign Asset Ratio and Export Ratio is the product of "Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997" and "Ratio of Foreign Assets to Total Assets, 1997."
"Log Total Assets, 1997" is the natural logarithm of total assets in 1997. "Interaction of Foreign Asset Ratio, Export Ratio, and NOL Ratio" is the product of "Ratio of Exports
to Sales, 1997," "Ratio of Foreign Assets to Total Assets," and "Ratio of NOLs to Sales, 1997." Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                                 Table 4
                Determinants of Abnormal Returns for Japanese Firms on November 19, 1997


                     Dependent Variable: One Day Abnormal Return from A One-Factor Model

                                         (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
Constant                               -0.0066           -0.0066          -0.0067           0.0322           0.0335          0.0353
                                      (0.0012)          (0.0012)         (0.0012)         (0.0125)         (0.0123)        (0.0123)

Ratio of Exports                        0.0036            0.0038           0.0037           0.0079           0.0085          0.0085
to Sales, 1997                        (0.0052)          (0.0053)         (0.0053)         (0.0054)         (0.0054)        (0.0055)

Ratio of NOLs                                             0.0013           0.0102                            0.0035          0.0159
to Sales, 1997                                          (0.0047)         (0.0159)                          (0.0053)        (0.0168)

Interaction of NOLs                                                       -0.0168                                           -0.0231
and Export Ratio                                                         (0.0231)                                          (0.0244)

Log Total Assets, 1997                                                                     -0.0022          -0.0023         -0.0024
                                                                                          (0.0007)         (0.0007)        (0.0007)

No. Obs.                                 1,202            1,202            1,202            1,202            1,202           1,202
R-Squared                                0.0003           0.0004           0.0010           0.0074           0.0078          0.0091

Note: The dependent variable in all specifications is the abnormal return for Japanese firms on November 19, 1997, controlling for the
effect of the local stock market on that day. "Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997" is the ratio of exports to total sales in 1997. "Ratio of
NOLs to Sales, 1997" is the ratio of net operating loss carryforwards to sales in 1997. "Interaction of NOLs and Export Ratio" is the
product of "Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997" and "Ratio of NOLs to Sales, 1997." "Log Total Assets, 1997" is the natural logarithm
of total assets in 1997. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                        Table 5
                           Firm Profitability and Abnormal Returns on November 18, 1997

                         Dependent Variable: One Day Abnormal Return from Two-Factor Model

                                             (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)                  (5)
Constant                                    -0.0037               -0.0041            -0.0061               -0.0088             -0.0126
                                           (0.0044)              (0.0051)           (0.0050)              (0.0057)            (0.0076)

Ratio of Exports                            -0.0241               -0.0209            -0.0179               -0.0021             -0.0008
to Sales, 1997                             (0.0156)              (0.0197)           (0.0183)              (0.0193)            (0.0192)

Foreign Tax Rate, 1997                      -0.0083               -0.0109            -0.0061               -0.0065             -0.0074
                                           (0.0103)              (0.0100)           (0.0099)              (0.0098)            (0.0097)

Interaction of Foreign                       0.1509                0.1766             0.1335                0.1364              0.1383
Tax Rate and Export                        (0.0593)              (0.0514)           (0.0532)              (0.0528)            (0.0526)
Ratio

Average Pretax Profit                                              0.0241             0.0266                0.0294              0.0259
Margin, 1992-1998                                                (0.0265)           (0.0265)              (0.0260)            (0.0262)

Interaction of Pretax                                             -0.2230            -0.1733               -0.1914             -0.1878
Profit Margin and                                                (0.1064)           (0.0983)              (0.0912)            (0.0916)
Export Ratio

Ratio of NOLs                                                                         0.0361                0.0391              0.0412
to Sales, 1997                                                                      (0.0705)              (0.0723)            (0.0725)

Interaction of NOLs                                                                   0.1217                0.0982              0.0988
and Export Ratio                                                                    (0.2478)              (0.2517)            (0.2537)

Ratio of Foreign Assets                                                                                     0.0109              0.0103
to Total Assets, 1997                                                                                     (0.0134)            (0.0137)

Interaction of Foreign Asset                                                                               -0.0793             -0.0834
Ratio and Export Ratio                                                                                    (0.0662)            (0.0660)

Log Total Assets, 1997                                                                                                          0.0007
                                                                                                                              (0.0009)

No. Obs.                                        202                   202                202                   202                  202
R-Squared                                    0.0781                0.1099             0.1566                0.1623               0.1644

Note: The dependent variable in all specifications is the abnormal return on November 18, 1997, controlling for the effect of stock market
and exchange rate movements on that day. "Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997" is the ratio of exports to total sales in 1997. "Foreign Tax
Rate, 1997" is the ratio of foreign taxes paid to foreign pretax income. "Interaction of Foreign Tax Rate and Export Ratio" is the product
of "Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997" and "Foreign Tax Rate, 1997." "Average Pretax Profit Margin, 1992-1998" is the average of the
annual ratios of total pretax profits to total sales from 1992 to 1998. "Interaction of Pretax Profit Margin and Export Ratio" is the product
of "Average Pretax Profit Margin, 1992-1998" and "Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997." "Ratio of NOLs to Sales, 1997" is the ratio of
net operating loss carryforwards to sales in 1997. "Interaction of NOLs and Export Ratio" is the product of "Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997"
and "Ratio of NOLs to Sales, 1997." "Ratio of Foreign Assets to Total Assets , 1997" is the ratio of foreign assets to total assets. "Interaction
of Foreign Asset Ratio and Export Ratio is the product of "Ratio of Exports to Sales, 1997" and "Ratio of Foreign Assets to Total Assets,
1997." "Log Total Assets, 1997" is the natural logarithm of total assets in 1997. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in
parentheses.
