                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         HELPING THE POOR TO HELP THEMSELVES:
                                  DEBT RELIEF OR AID

                                           Serkan Arslanalp
                                           Peter Blair Henry

                                         Working Paper 10230
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10230


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




Arslanalp is a Ph.D. candidate in the Stanford University Department of Economics. Henry is Associate
Professor of Economics at the Stanford University Graduate School of Business and a faculty research fellow
of the National Bureau of Economic Research. This article will appear in the book, Sovereign Debt at the
Crossroads, Oxford University Press 2004. We thank Jeremy Bulow, Nick Hope, Diana Kirk, Fraser Preston,
and Paul Romer for helpful conversations. Rania Eltom provided excellent research assistance. Henry thanks
the National Science Foundation’s CAREER Program, the Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research
(SIEPR), and the Stanford Center for International Development (SCID) for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Serkan Arslanalp and Peter Blair Henry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Helping the Poor to Help Themselves: Debt Relief or Aid
Serkan Arslanalp and Peter Blair Henry
NBER Working Paper No. 10230
January 2004
JEL No. F3, F4, E6, O1

                                           ABSTRACT

Debt relief is unlikely to stimulate investment and growth in the world's highly indebted poor

countries (HIPCs). This is because the HIPCs do not suffer from debt overhang. The principal

obstacle to investment and growth in the world's poorest countries is a lack of basic economic

institutions that provide the foundation for profitable economic activity. If the goal is to help poor

countries build the institutions that best suit their development needs, then the energy and resources

currently devoted to the HIPC initiative could be more effectively employed as direct foreign aid.

Serkan Arslanalp
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
serkan@stanford.edu

Peter Blair Henry
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
pbhenry@stanford.edu
Introduction

       In the world’s highly indebted poor countries (HIPCs), one in ten infants die at

birth. For those who survive, life is an uphill battle. The unholy trinity of malaria, AIDS,

and malnutrition conspire to deliver a life expectancy of 51 years—the average child born

in Mozambique will be approaching his death bed as his counterpart in the United States

enters middle age and the prime income-earning years of his life. Nor do the HIPCs’

economies offer much hope of pulling their citizens out of grinding poverty anytime

soon. Their average growth rate for the past 20 years has been negative—things are

getting worse, not better, for the indigent of the world.

       Statistics such as these are not easy to take (see Table 1). Civilized people find

talk of death and destitution rather unpleasant. Something must be to blame, and the debt

burden of the world’s poorest countries—169 billion dollars in 1999— is a highly visible

target. There have always been those who think that the debts of the world’s poorest

countries should be forgiven. But in 1996 debt relief advocates redoubled their efforts.

Catalyzed by the rock star Bono, there is an increasingly popular view—from NGOs to

the Pope to US Senator Jesse Helms—that the staggering level of debt is the primary

obstacle to improved economic growth and living standards in the HIPCs.

       Is debt relief a viable solution to worldwide poverty or a waste of time and

money? The answer to this important question depends critically on another—does debt

relief promote economic growth by improving efficiency and incentives for investment?

Debt relief promotes investment and growth in circumstances where debt overhang—a

term we later define more precisely—exerts a drag on economic performance. When a

country suffers from debt overhang, debt relief can improve economic efficiency and




                                                                                          1
make everyone better off, creditors as well as debtors.        Section 1B provides some

important facts about sixteen countries whose economies suffered from excessive debt

during the 1980s: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Costa Rica, The Dominican

Republic, Ecuador, Jordan, Mexico, Nigeria, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland,

Uruguay, and Venezuela. The debt overhang of these countries was alleviated by the

debt relief plan engineered by former US Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady. Under the

Brady Plan, the international commercial banks agreed to write down a substantial

fraction of the debt owed to them by the Brady countries.

       The major problem for the Brady countries was that they ran into temporary

difficulty servicing their debt in August of 1982. A combination of adverse economic

conditions and poor policy choices substantially increased the riskiness of the banks’ loan

portfolios in these countries. Creditors got worried and rushed to collect on their loans all

at once, but the creditors’ panic created an unmanageable short-term payment burden for

the debtors. To make matters worse, new lending also ground to a standstill. With no

new money coming in, scarce resources that would normally have funded investment

were consumed by debt servicing. Growth came to an abrupt stop. Once some of the

debt was relieved—seven years later—the path was clear for new funds to come from

other sources. These new funds provided the impetus the countries needed to stimulate

investment and growth.

       It is tempting to conclude that debt relief for the HIPCs would produce similar

results, if only relief was forthcoming more quickly and in larger quantities.

Unfortunately, the evidence does not support this conclusion. Debt relief is unlikely to

stimulate investment and growth in the HIPCs because the HIPCs lack much of the basic




                                                                                           2
infrastructure that forms the basis for profitable economic activity—things like well-

defined property rights, roads, schools, hospitals, and clean water. Since the principal

problem of the HIPCs is a lack of infrastructure, there is little reason to believe that debt

relief there will stimulate a sudden rush of private foreign capital that leads to higher

investment and growth.

       This is not an argument for leaving the HIPCs to wither on the vine. The point is

that the HIPCs should be targeted not for debt relief but direct aid that would assist their

citizens in building the institutions and infrastructure to eventually make them attractive

places for both domestic and foreign investment.

       Some argue that debt relief is equivalent to aid, but this is not right. Debt relief is

not equivalent to aid, because money is fungible. There is simply no reason to believe

that writing down a government’s debt by a billion dollars will translate into a billion

dollars of additional infrastructure development. Having said that, aid is no panacea

either, and we need to make sure that it is not wasted. The issue is not whether we should

give aid, but rather how to design aid programs that work more effectively.

       The cruel irony of the current debate is that debt relief might be most efficient in a

number of countries that are not being considered for such programs at all. These include

highly indebted (but not so poor) less developed countries (LDCs) whose social

infrastructure resembles those of the Brady countries: Colombia, Indonesia, Jamaica,

Malaysia, Pakistan, and Turkey. Given their level of infrastructure it is much more

reasonable to expect that economies such as these might respond positively to debt relief.

       The message here is ultimately a hopeful one. Debt relief works for relatively

developed but highly indebted emerging economies that suffer from debt overhang. Aid




                                                                                            3
is the most effective way of addressing the basic economic problems of the world’s

poorest countries. Our aim should be to make sure everybody gets what is most efficient.



1. Debt Relief Promotes Economic Growth When Countries Have Debt Overhang

        Economic arguments for debt relief turn on the fact that there are circumstances in

which too much debt exerts a drag on economic performance (which is called debt

overhang). When such conditions prevail, debt relief can improve economic efficiency,

making both debtors and creditors better off.


1A. Theory

        There are two principal reasons why debt relief may be economically efficient.1

First, it is good accounting practice to write off debts that cannot be collected. That way,

future loans can be given on a sounder economic basis (Summers, 2000). Advocates of

this view demonstrated that during the Debt Crisis the stock prices of US commercial

banks reflected significant expected losses on the banks’ loans (Sachs and Huizinga,

1987). Since the market had already determined that the banks would be unable to

recover the full value of their debt, Sachs and Huizinga argued that the banks should be

willing to trade their LDC debt for a safe asset with lower face value.

        Second, debt relief can make both borrowers and lenders better off when the

borrower suffers from debt overhang. A corporation suffers from debt overhang when its

existing stock of debt is so large that for a given project with positive net present value

(NPV), the NPV of the project is less than the change in the value of the debt that will

result from undertaking the project (Myers, 1977). In other words, debt overhang exists

1
 Specifically, we discuss the circumstances under which debt relief yields ex-post efficiency. The question
of whether debt relief is also ex-ante efficient is not explored in this paper.


                                                                                                         4
when there is so much debt that the entire surplus of any new investment goes to the

existing debt holders.

        When a corporation suffers from debt overhang, equity holders will not finance

new projects, even though undertaking the project would increase the value of the firm.

The reason is that debt overhang results in a transfer to existing debt holders that acts as

an implicit tax on investment. Importantly, the debt overhang argument assumes that the

corporation cannot issue new debt, which means that the cost of the project must be borne

by the equity holders. An issue of new debt that has equal seniority with existing debt

can alleviate the under-investment problem.

        The debt overhang literature in international economics extends the tax analogy to

a macroeconomic context. Because a sovereign government raises the money to service

its debt by taxing firms and households, an increase in the government’s obligation to

external creditors implicitly constitutes an increase in the private sector’s expected future

tax burden. As in all tax problems, there is an optimal level of taxation. At reasonable

levels of debt and debt servicing, increasing the face value of the debt increases its

expected value. Beyond a certain level of debt, however, the tax burden becomes so

large that it acts as a disincentive to investment. As current investment falls, future

growth decreases and government revenues decline, along with the expected value of the

debt.

        While debt overhang may arise when a country accumulates too much debt, just

as importantly, it can also occur when a previously manageable stock of debt becomes

intractable due to a change in a country’s circumstances. To see the point, consider the

net resource transfer (NRT)—the net flow of real resources into a country (debt, equity,




                                                                                           5
and FDI minus debt servicing, dividends, and profit repatriation). In theory, LDCs

should experience positive NRTs, as the rate of return in these countries should be higher

than in rich ones. However, the NRT may suddenly turn negative if adverse economic

shocks or poor economic management (1) drive creditors to call in existing loans and (2)

make potential new creditors unwilling to lend. When the country’s NRT suddenly turns

negative, the private sector’s tax burden once again increases sharply, with all of the

previously mentioned consequences for investment, growth, and the value of creditors’

claims.

          Just as an infusion of new debt can solve a corporation’s debt overhang, debt

relief can also alleviate the problem in a sovereign context. Writing down the debt

reduces the implicit marginal tax rate on expected future cash flows and raises the rate of

return to private investment. Also, by forcing all creditors to accept some losses, debt

relief removes the uncertainty associated with unresolved debt issues and paves the way

for profitable new lending.2 New lending in turn means more investment, growth, and

total tax revenues. In other words, when a country suffers from debt overhang, the

creditors can actually increase the expected value of their claims by forgiving some of the

debt (Krugman, 1988, 1989; Sachs, 1989).



1B. Facts

          The theoretical arguments suggest that the crucial test of debt relief is whether it

successfully restores positive net resource transfers to countries where international

lending is profitable (Bulow, 2002). Table 2 demonstrates that debt relief succeeded in

2
  Forgiveness will not happen without coordination, because any individual creditor would prefer to have a
free ride, maintaining the full value of its claims while others write off some debt. See chapter ?? of this
book for a discussion of how to overcome the free rider problem.


                                                                                                           6
restoring capital flows to the Brady countries. The table presents data on the average net

resource transfer to Brady countries in event time. Year “0” is the year in which the

Brady Plan was officially announced. The striking fact is that the sign of the NRT

changes twice. The years “-19” to “-8” roughly correspond to the years 1970 through

1981. These were the boom years in international lending—US commercial banks awash

with liquidity from their OPEC clients were happy to lend to whomever sought to ask

(Darity and Horn, 1988). In every one of the years from [-19, -8] the average net

resource transfer is positive for the Brady countries. In year –7, roughly the time of the

onset of the debt crisis, the NRT turns negative and remains so until after the Brady Plan.

After the Brady Plan, net resource flows become positive for the rest of the sample.

         In order to fully appreciate the significance of these data, it is important to

understand that debt relief has two effects on the debtor country— a direct effect and an

indirect effect. The direct effect of debt relief is the actual reduction in the stock of debt.

The indirect effect of debt relief is that it paves the way for new capital inflows.

         The indirect effect of debt relief is more important than the direct effect. During

the Brady Plan, approximately 60 billion dollars of debt was forgiven.                                While

significant—60 billion dollars is roughly 5 percent of the GDP of the Brady countries—

this number pales in comparison to the sum of net resource transfers that the Brady

countries received in new lending once outstanding debt problems were resolved.

         Table 2 shows that during the five-year period after the Brady Plan, there was a

total resource transfer of about $210 billion to the Brady countries.3 In the following five

years, there was an even larger resource transfer of $330 billion. The surge of capital

3
 The cumulative net resource transfer to the average Brady country during the five-year period after the
Brady Plan was $13 billion. In other words, there was a total net resource transfer of about $210 billion to
all of the sixteen Brady countries.


                                                                                                               7
following the Brady-induced resolution of the debt crisis in these countries provides

tangible support for the Dornbusch maxim that “Unresolved debt problems, not debt per

se, are an obstacle to investment”(Dornbusch, 1993).

       As a second barometer of the efficiency gains produced by debt relief, we also

look at the stock market. The rationale for examining stock prices is clear. The stock

market is forward looking—it asks what interest rates and cash flows lie ahead. The

surge in capital inflows documented in Table 2 should have reduced interest rates in the

debtor country and improved future growth prospects. If interest rates went down and

growth prospects improved, the stock market should have increased (Arslanalp and

Henry, 2003).

       Table 3 shows that the stock market did, in fact, go up in the ten countries that

have stock markets and reached debt relief agreements between 1989 and 1995. On

average, the stock market rose by 65 percent in the year prior to the official

announcement of debt relief—the period in which each country was outlining its debt

relief strategy with the anticipation of acceptance under the Brady plan. Stated in dollar

terms, the market capitalization of the Brady countries rose by a total of $42 billion in

anticipation of the Brady Plan.

       Is the stock market increase spurious? In 1966 Paul Samuelson quipped that the

“The stock market has successfully predicted 9 of the last 5 recessions.” Therefore, it is

important to know whether the stock market reactions are reliable predictors of real

economic improvement or merely short-lived “irrational exuberance.”            After all,

understanding why debt relief for the Brady countries led to a large stock market

appreciation is pivotal to understanding the mechanism through which debt relief works




                                                                                        8
and the circumstances under which it can be expected to achieve efficiency gains.

Specifically, if the Brady countries really suffered from debt overhang then, in addition to

the stock market boom, we should also see an increase in investment.

       Table 4 shows that debt relief coincided with an investment boom. In the five

years prior to debt relief, the average growth rate of the capital stock was 1.6 percent per

year. In the five years following debt relief, the capital stock grew at a rate of 3.5 percent

per year. The difference between the two growth rates—1.9 percentage points—is not

small. Assuming a standard production function in which capital accounts for about one-

third of output, a 1.9 percentage point increase in the capital stock raises growth by 0.63

percentage points per year. As a final consistency check of the stock market’s forecasting

power, we also looked at the growth numbers. In the five years preceding debt relief,

GDP per capita in the Brady countries grew at an average of 0 percent per year. In the

five years following debt relief, they grew at 1.6 percent per year.

       Debt relief produces rising asset prices, increased investment and faster growth.

Importantly, these changes seem to take place not so much because of the actual amount

of debt relief itself, but principally because of the new flow of lending to the private

sector after the debt-overhang-induced lending standstill is over.         These facts have

important implications for the efficiency prospects of debt relief efforts for the HIPCs.



2. Debt Overhang Is Not the HIPCs Principal Problem

       Debt relief worked for the Brady countries. If all else were equal, it might be

reasonable to expect current debt relief efforts in the HIPCs to produce similar results.

The problem is that all else is not equal. Debt relief worked in the Brady countries,




                                                                                            9
because it eased a debt overhang that was inhibiting private lending, investment, and

growth. But it is hard to argue that debt relief will generate investment and growth in the

HIPCs because they do not suffer from debt overhang.

       There are at least three pieces of evidence to suggest that debt overhang does not

deter capital flows to the HIPCs. First, in contrast to the Brady countries who suffered a

sharp reversal of the NRT during the 1980s, the HIPC countries have never suffered from

a negative NRT. Table 2 shows that the NRT to the HIPC countries has always been

positive. If debt overhang hinders capital flows to the HIPCs, then we would have

expected to see a reversal of the sign of the net resource transfer at some point in time.

This never happened. If the goal of debt relief is to restore positive NRTs in scenarios

where it has turned negative, then it is not clear how this policy will help a set of

countries that have experienced an uninterrupted stream of positive NRTs since 1970.

       Second, although things went sour beginning with Mexico’s default in 1982,

creditors expected to make money by lending to the Brady countries. Presumably, this is

why they did so in the first place. In contrast, there has never been any such expectation

for the HIPCs. Table 5 shows that loans to the private sector (private debt + foreign

direct investment + portfolio equity) comprised almost half of the total net resource flow

to the Brady market countries as early as 1974. On the other hand, international lending

to the private sector has never been a significant fraction of the total net resource flows to

the HIPCs. As a fraction of total inflows, loans to the private sector in the HIPCs have

never exceeded 13 percent and have been as low as 4 percent.

       Third, there has also been a shift in the composition of international lending to the

Brady countries—away from the public sector and toward the private sector. Again,




                                                                                           10
Table 5 shows that at the peak of the debt crisis (1985-89) grants plus public and publicly

guaranteed debt accounted for 73 percent of the net resource transfer to the Brady

countries. By 1994, lending to the private sector constituted the chief source of net

resource flows. No such shift has taken place in the HIPCs. In fact, the opposite has

occurred—official flows and flows to the public sector have become more, not less,

important. The role of grants has increased to the point where they now constitute the

majority of the net resource flows to the HIPCs.



2A. The HIPCs Principal Problem Is Weak Economic Institutions

         Recent advances in law and finance help explain why private capital does not

flow to the HIPCs. The degree to which a country’s law protects the legal rights of

minority shareholders exerts a significant influence on that country’s access to external

finance, (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (LLSV) 1997, 1998, 2002;

Shleifer and Vishny, 1997). Weak investor protection can lower the marginal product of

capital and eliminate the incentive for capital to flow from rich to poor countries (Shleifer

and Wolfenzon, 2002). If investors get poor protection they will stay away, outside funds

will dry up, and fewer resources will be available to finance growth (Dornbusch, 2000;

Henry and Lorentzen, 2003).

         The connection between investor protection and external finance is germane to

the present discussion. Row 1 of Table 6 shows that the median Brady country ranks

lower than the median G7 country on the LLSV index of investor protection.4 The

private capital that does flow to the Brady countries pales in comparison to what we


4
 The index is a composite measure of shareholder rights, creditor rights, efficiency of judicial system, rule
of law, and rating of the accounting system.


                                                                                                           11
would see in a world where minority shareholders in those countries enjoyed the same

legal protection as their U.S. counterparts. While the median Brady country ranks low on

the LLSV index, the HIPCs do not even make the list. If private capital trickles to the

Brady countries because they fare poorly on the LLSV index, then woe to the HIPCs

whose capital markets and investor protection laws are not sufficiently developed to even

merit a ranking.

        Having capital markets that are not sufficiently developed to make the LLSV

ranking is probably correlated with weak economic institutions in general. In turn,

economic institutions can be a crucial factor in determining the level of human capital

accumulation and the marginal product of capital (Kremer, 1993). In other words, the

rate of return to private lending in HIPCs is low because they lack the institutional

development that is necessary to create an environment where (1) entrepreneurs can earn

an economically fair rate of return on capital and (2) lenders have an incentive to extend

capital to the private sector.

        Row 2 of Table 6 investigates this claim by using the Hall and Jones (1999)

measure of social infrastructure to compare the HIPC and Brady countries. The social

infrastructure measure ranks 130 countries and attempts to capture the extent to which a

country has “an environment that supports productive activities and encourages capital

accumulation, skill acquisition, invention and technology transfer” (Hall and Jones,

1999). The median G7 country ranks 14th; the median Brady country ranks 63rd; the

median HIPC country ranks 102nd. Moreover, all of the G7 countries are in the highest

20th percentile; all of the Brady countries, except for Nigeria and Dominican Republic,




                                                                                       12
are in the highest 70th percentile; 27 of the 38 HIPC countries with available data are in

the lowest 30th percentile.

       Table 6 also compares the HIPC and Brady countries using the average value of

their score on the Heritage House Index of Economic Freedom from 1995 to 2002. The

results are similar. Out of 161 countries, the median G7 country ranks 14th; the median

Brady country ranks 59th; the median HIPC country ranks 110th. Moreover, all of the G7

countries are in the highest 20th percentile; all the Brady countries, except for Bulgaria,

are in the highest 60th percentile; 24 of 39 HIPC countries with available data are in the

lowest 40th percentile over the same period.

       It is interesting to note that six highly or moderately indebted countries that

closely resemble the Brady countries have received no consideration for debt relief. The

six are: Indonesia, Pakistan, Colombia, Jamaica, Malaysia, and Turkey. The median

LLSV score for this group of six is 4.6 out of 10. The median LLSV score for the Brady

countries is 4.9. Similarly, the median country in the group of 6 ranks 61st on the Hall

and Jones measure of social infrastructure; the median Brady country ranks 63rd. Finally,

the median country in the group of six ranks 58th on the Heritage House Index of

Economic Freedom; the Median Brady country ranks 59th. While we do not suggest that

countries should receive debt relief based solely on their resemblance to Brady countries,

the analysis does suggests that debt relief for the group of six might constitute a more

efficient use of resources than debt relief for the HIPCs.

       Put another way, the HIPCs principal problem is an inadequate provision of

public goods, stemming from the following kind of externality: It is in no individual’s

self-interest to build a road, so no one does. Yet there would be large societal gains if




                                                                                        13
someone did. In other words, in the HIPCs there are positive externalities to investing in

projects that have high social but low private rates of return. The externality that debt

relief is designed to address is quite different. When debt problems arise, the country and

its creditors would be better off if all creditors would either extend new loans or reduce

their repayment demands. But the externality—individual lenders acting in their self-

interest will not take into account the effect of their inflexibility on the country and its

other creditors—means that no rational lender will do so of their own volition.

       Distortions arising from an externality should be tackled with policy instruments

that address the externality directly. Rich country governments address the public goods

externality by collecting taxes. Poor countries, by definition, do not have the tax base to

raise the resources they need, but this is the classic economic rationale for foreign aid—

not debt relief (Bulow and Rogoff, 1988; Bulow, 2002). Undoubtedly, aid will not solve

all of the HIPCs’ problems. No amount of road building will convince entrepreneurs to

invest if inflation is high, corruption rampant, and the exchange rate misaligned. But

even in the face of sound micro and macroeconomic policy, nobody is going to invest if

they can’t get their product to market. In Section 4 we make the case for aid over debt

relief more extensively, but first we look at the effect of debt relief on the HIPCs thus far.


3. It Is Not Clear That Debt Relief for the HIPCs Has Led To Faster Growth

       We have argued that debt relief for the HIPCs is unlikely to produce the salutary

economic effects that occurred with the passage of debt relief for the Brady countries.

Table 7 evaluates the evidence to date. Row 1 shows that the HIPC countries that have

begun receiving debt relief have seen a modest improvement in their growth

performance. From 1990-95 the growth rate of these HIPCs was negative 0.5 percent.



                                                                                           14
From 1996-2000 it was 1.5 percent—an increase of 2.0 percentage points. Ostensibly,

this suggests that debt relief has worked. But there are three pieces of evidence that

suggest the improvement in growth may not be attributable to debt relief per se.

       First, Row 2 of Table 7 shows that the change in growth of those countries that

have not yet begun receiving debt relief does not differ much from those that have. The

growth rate of all the HIPCs from 1996 to 2000 is 2.1 percentage points higher than it

was from 1990 to 1995.

       Second, for the HIPC countries that have been receiving debt relief, the relief

process did not actually begin until 2000. Therefore, it is not clear that the improvement

in growth performance between 1996 and 2000 can credibly be attributed to debt relief.

The original framework of the HIPC Initiative was arranged so that countries would have

to show a track record of reform for three years before they could reach a “decision

point.” At the decision point, a suitable debt relief package would be arranged, if the

reform track record was adequate. After no more than three more years of proven policy

implementation, countries would reach the “completion point” at which time debt relief

would be provided. Under this framework, only six countries reached their completion

points from 1996 to 2000: Bolivia and Uganda in 1998, Guyana and Mozambique in

1999, and Burkina Faso and Mali in 2000. By late 1999, a consensus emerged that the

HIPC framework was providing debt relief too slowly.

       As a result, the original HIPC Initiative was enhanced at the G7 meeting in

Cologne during the Fall of 1999. Under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative, countries began

receiving debt relief as soon as they reached their decision points.       Moreover, the

enhanced framework made it easier to reach the decision point and provided more debt




                                                                                       15
relief; sixteen additional HIPC countries reached their decision points and began

receiving debt relief in 2000.5 In other words, most HIPC countries started receiving debt

relief after 2000 and there are still a number of HIPC countries that have yet to receive

debt relief.

        Third, the reforms that were required as a precondition for debt relief may be the

principal driving factor behind the modest improvement in growth performance. Perhaps

the most important contribution of the HIPC Initiative has been that it has induced HIPC

governments to institute economic reforms. As Table 7 shows, the growth performance

of the HIPC countries has improved during the period from 1996 to 2000. Since the

HIPCs did not begin receiving debt relief until 2000, it would seem that the improvement

in growth performance was mainly due to reforms.

        Having said that, even with all the reforms in the late nineties, GDP per capita has

grown by only 1.5 percent. At that growth rate it would take a country 46 years to double

its standard of living—not exactly a growth miracle. In other words, reforms have helped

replace economic contraction with slow growth, but the HIPC countries can only do so

much without addressing the principal problem of poor economic infrastructure from

which they suffer. As we have argued in Section 2, aid, not debt relief, is the best way to

tackle this problem.


4. Aid, Not Debt Relief

        Even if debt relief will not promote investment and growth in the HIPCs, isn’t it a

kind gesture to relieve the debts of the world’s poorest countries? Kind maybe, but not

5
  Under the enhanced HIPC Initiative, Benin, Cameroon, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritania, Nicaragua, Niger, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Tanzania,
and Zambia reached their decision points in 2000 and as of January 2003, four more countries have reached
their decision points: Chad and Ethiopia in 2001; Ghana and Sierra Leone in 2002.


                                                                                                      16
helpful. If the goal is to improve economic performance and reduce poverty, then aid

may provide the most constructive way forward. The emphasis on aid over debt relief

begs an obvious question: Is debt relief not a form of aid? The answer is that there are at

least two reasons why aid and debt relief are not equivalent. First, debt relief may crowd

out existing aid flows.     Second, debt relief may have undesirable effects on the

composition of existing aid flows. We now discuss each of these points in turn.



4.A. Debt Relief May Crowd Out Aid

       In an effort to increase net resource transfers to the HIPCs, proponents of the

HIPC Initiative have been pushing for a reduction in debt servicing. But ironically, the

HIPC Initiative has actually reduced the net resource transfer to the world’s poorest

countries. Table 8 displays the point. Aid flows to the HIPCs increased continually from

1970 to the mid-1990s. Since 1996, however, aid flows have decreased significantly. As

a share of GDP, the decline in aid flows is even starker. In the early nineties, aid flows as

a share of GDP were about 17 percent. Since 1996 they have been about only 12 percent.

Together, the fall in aid flows and the postponed reduction in debt service has caused a

significant decline in the net resource transfers to the HIPCs.



4.B. Debt Relief May Change the Composition of Aid

       Aid flows have declined since the beginning of the HIPC Initiative, but this is not

the only problem. Debt relief may also result in a shift in the composition of aid—away

from multilateral inflows and towards bilateral inflows. To see why debt relief may




                                                                                          17
induce this shift—which we will soon show to be undesirable—consider the net resource

transfer identity.

        By definition, the NRT is equal to capital inflows minus debt service. As we have

shown in Table 5 there are no significant private capital inflows to the HIPCs. Their

capital inflows come principally from official sources in the form of grants: either

bilateral or multilateral aid. To a first approximation, then, we can denote the NRT to the

HIPCs as:



     NRT = BILATERAL AID + MULTILATERAL AID - DEBT SERVICING


Now assume that, as a share of GDP, the NRT to the HIPC countries is constant. Table 8

shows this assumption to be reasonable. The NRT as a share of GDP has not increased

substantially in the past 30 years. This fact suggests that the developed countries are not

prepared to increase their contribution of real resources to the development of these

countries. Assume also that, bilateral aid to the HIPCs is constant as a share of GDP.

This may also be a realistic assumption, because bilateral aid is largely based on political

and strategic considerations of the donor countries and is therefore exogenous to the

current debt relief operations (Alesina and Dollar, 2000).

        Under our assumptions, a fall in the HIPCs’ debt servicing necessarily leads to a

fall in multilateral aid. This shift from multilateral to bilateral aid is undesirable. The

reason is that multilateral aid is released only when the multilateral agency pays for pre-

approved services rendered to the country. Bilateral aid, on the other hand, is like free

cash flow to the recipient government. Because multilateral aid is generally spent more




                                                                                         18
judiciously than bilateral aid, the alteration in the composition of aid could have

important efficiency consequences.

           Expressed differently, we are saying the following. Rich governments set aside a

certain fraction of their budgets for aid (bilateral and multilateral). The bilateral portion

of that aid budget will always be distributed on the basis of political not efficiency

considerations. But given that the overall amount of aid resources is fixed, writing off

the debt means that multilateral aid must fall.

           Even if we relax the first assumption and assume instead that rich country

governments are willing to increase the size of the NRT, it is still relevant to ask what is

the best way to do so—more multilateral aid or more debt relief? We think that increased

multilateral aid is likely to be more beneficial. Why? The marginal multilateral aid

dollar may go directly to building economic infrastructure (we discuss this further in the

next section). Debt relief, on the other hand, is fungible—there is no guarantee that

easing the government’s budget constraint by a dollar will lead to an additional dollar of

expenditure on infrastructure.


5. Making Aid Work

           Aid critics argue that aid programs to poor countries have often been a failure.

They point out that aid programs in general have not led to economic growth in recipient

countries in the past (Boone, 1995, 1996). More recent studies, however, have qualified

this result by showing that aid may be effective under certain circumstances. A precise

formulation of how to optimally allocate aid is beyond the scope of this paper.6

Nevertheless, we outline three basic principles that may be helpful.


6
    See Easterly (2002) for a discussion of issues in designing effective aid.


                                                                                          19
           First, aid has been effective when it was given conditional on the economic

policies of the recipient country (Burnside and Dollar, 2000).7 Specifically, aid has a

positive effect on economic growth if the recipient country has low inflation, a small

budget deficit, and a high degree of trade openness. Since aid programs work best when

implemented in countries that follow sound macroeconomic policy, it is crucial that aid

should be selective and disbursed only to the countries with a track record of good

policies. In fact, one useful aspect of the HIPC Initiative has been its emphasis on

economic policy reform. The environment that the HIPC Initiative is pushing for is the

same environment in which aid can be effective. However, even though this makes HIPC

countries more promising recipients of aid, as Table 8 shows, aid flows to the HIPC

countries have fallen since the HIPC Initiative has begun.

           Second, aid is more effective when managed multilaterally rather than bilaterally.

Multilateral aid tends to favor countries that pursue sound economic policy (Burnside and

Dollar, 2000). As we argued earlier, political and strategic interests tend to drive bilateral

aid flows. For instance, bilateral aid goes disproportionately to former colonies and

military allies (Alesina and Dollar, 2000). Given that more than half of total aid flows to

the HIPCs have been bilateral, it is not surprising that past aid flows to these countries

have been largely ineffective. Aid will be more effective if the composition of aid to the

HIPCs shifts away from bilateral to multilateral flows. Again, as we have argued in

Section 4.B., debt relief may have exactly the opposite effect.

           Third, there should be more focus on the productivity of aid projects. Aid should

be targeted towards projects where the social returns are the highest. Here are some

salient examples. According to former US Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill (2002) it
7
    Easterly (2003) and Easterly, Levine and Roodman (2003) challenge this view.


                                                                                           20
would cost $1000 to build a well for a village of 400 people. Given that there are about

10 million people in Ghana that do not currently have access to clear water, he calculates

that an aid budget of only $25 million can solve the whole problem. Another example is

the Central Visayas Water and Sanitation project in Philippines. This is a $30 million

project, which will provide 500,000 people with clean water along with related

improvements to their health.       Another highly effective aid project would be the

provision of simple bed nets for protection against malaria. For instance, when bed nets

were distributed to the people living in Rufiji, a rural district of Tanzania, infant mortality

fell by 28 percent in a year (The Economist, 2002). Yet, a bed net costs only three

dollars. Given that malaria is estimated to reduce GDP growth by 1.3 percent every year

in countries where it has a significant presence (Gallup and Sachs, 2000), providing these

simple bed nets could produce significant benefits.

       Providing access to clean water and protection against malaria are both worthy

projects whose returns would more than justify their costs. But there is still a lingering

question as to whether these projects can be established in countries where corruption is a

major problem. There are three reasons why aid-in-kind might be a good idea in order to

deal with corruption. First, corrupt governments are likely to prefer aid-in-cash over aid-

in-kind. So, insisting on aid-in-kind may help select governments that are less corrupt.

Second, aid-in-kind forces both the donor and the recipient to think harder about what

kind of aid is in the best interest of the recipient. Third, fungibility may be less of a

problem if aid is given in kind, rather than in cash.

       With rare exceptions, aid has not been effective. But the problem is not aid per

se, but the way that it has been disbursed in the past. There is much to learn from past




                                                                                            21
failures that can lead to future success. If disbursed judiciously—that is, according to the

three principles outlined above—aid can more than pay for itself through gains in

economic efficiency. That was the case with the Marshall Plan and many other aid

programs to countries such as Korea, Taiwan, and Japan (De Long and Eichengreen,

1993).

         Improving the efficiency of aid, however, is not sufficient.          One of the

Millennium Development Goals is to cut in half by the year 2015 the proportion of

people living on less than one dollar a day. In order to reach this goal, a United Nations

panel headed by the former President of Mexico, Ernesto Zedillo, estimated that the

donor countries have to double the amount of aid that they are currently giving (United

Nations, 2001).


6. Conclusion

         The world’s poorest countries are deeply ill. Suggesting that debt is not the

primary obstacle to their growth and development seems ironic, perhaps even cruel. But

“the truth is an offense, not a sin” (Marley, 1976). Since the HIPCs do not suffer from

debt overhang, they are not good candidates for debt relief. If the goal is to help poor

countries build the economic infrastructure and institutions that best suit their

development needs then aid holds more promise of achieving that goal.




                                                                                         22
References

Alesina, Alberto and David Dollar. 2000. “Who Gives Foreign Aid to Whom and Why?”
       Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 5, No. 1 (March): 33-64.

Arslanalp, Serkan and Peter Blair Henry. 2003. “Is Debt Relief Efficient?” Stanford
       Business School Working Paper.

Boone, Peter. 1995. “The Impact of Foreign Aid on Savings and Growth.” Working
       paper, London School of Economics.

Boone, Peter. 1996. “Politics and the Effectiveness of Foreign Aid.” European
       Economic Review, February, 40(2), pp. 289-329.

Bulow, Jeremy. 2002. “First World Governments and Third World Debt.” Brookings
      Papers on Economic Activity, No.1:2002, 229-55.

Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff. 1988. “Cleaning up Third World Debt Without
      Getting Taken to the Cleaners.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 4, No. 1,
      Winter 1990, pp.31-42.

Burnside, Craig and David Dollar. 2000. “Aid, Policies, and Growth.” American
       Economic Review, September, 90(4), pp. 847-868.

Cline, William. 1995. International Debt Reexamined. Washington, D.C.: Institute for
       International Economics.

Darity, William, Jr. and Bobbie L. Horn. 1988. The Loan Pushers: The Role of
        Commercial Banks in the International Debt Crisis. Cambridge: Ballinger
        Publications.

De Long, Bradford and Barry Eichengreen. 1993. “The Marshall Plan: History’s Most
      Successful Structural Adjustment Program.” In Postwar Economic Reconstruction
      and Lessons for the East Today edited by Dornbusch, Nolling, and Layard. The
      MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.

Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1993. “Investment in developing countries.” In Stabilization, Debt
      and Reform. Prentice-Hall.

Dornbush, Rudiger. 2000. “Check the laws before you invest abroad.” In Keys to
      Prosperity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Easterly, William. 2002. “The Cartel of Good Intentions.” Foreign Policy, (July/August):
       40-49.

Easterly, William. 2003. “Can Foreign Aid Buy Growth.” Journal of Economics



                                                                                       23
       Perspectives, Volume 17, Number 3, (Summer): Pages 23-48.

Easterly, William, Levine, Ross, and David Roodman. 2003. “New Data, New Doubts: A
       Comment on Burnside and Dollar's “Aid, Policies, and Growth”(2000).”
       American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Gallup, John and Jeffrey Sachs. 2000. “The Economic Burden of Malaria.” CID Working
       Paper, No. 52, July.

Hall, Robert, and Chad Jones. 1999. “Why do some countries produce so much more
       output per worker than others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114 (1): 84-116.

Henry, Peter Blair and Peter L. Lorentzen. 2003. “Domestic Capital Market Reform and
       Access to Global Financial Markets: Making Markets Work” in Robert E. Litan
       and M. Pomerleano, and V. Sundararajan eds. The Future of Domestic Capital
       Markets in Developing Countries, Brookings Press, 2003.

Kremer, Michael. 1993. “The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development.” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 108 (3): 551-575.

Krugman, Paul. 1988. “Financing Versus Forgiving a Debt Overhang.” Journal of
     Development Economics, 29 (November): 253-268.

Krugman, Paul. 1989. “Market-Based Debt Reduction Schemes.” In Analytical Issues in
     Debt edited by Jacob Frenkel, Michael Dooley, and P. Wickham. Washington:
     International Monetary Fund.

LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1997.
       “Legal Determinants of External Finance.” Journal of Finance, 52, pp. 1131-50.

LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998.
       “Law and Finance.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 106, pp. 1113-1155.

LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 2002.
       “Investor Protection and Corporate Valuation.” Journal of Finance, 57, pp. 1147-
       1170.

Marley, Robert Nesta. 1976. “Jah Live” Island Records Incorporated, Kingston, Jamaica,
      West Indies.

Myers, Stewart. 1977. “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing.” Journal of Financial
       Economics, 5, 147-175.

O'Neill, Paul. 2002. Quoted from the Washington Post, May 28, 2002. “In Uganda,
       O'Neill and Bono Disagree About Success of Aid” by Paul Blustein.




                                                                                     24
Sachs, Jeffrey. 1989. “The Debt Overhang of Developing Countries.” In Debt
       Stabilization and Development, edited by Guillermo A. Calvo, Ronald Findlay,
       Pentti Kouri, and Jorge Braga de Macedo. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Sachs, Jeffrey and Harry Huizinga. 1987. “U.S. Commercial Banks and the Developing
       Country Debt Crisis.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 555-606.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny. 1997. “A Survey of Corporate Governance.”
       Journal of Finance, Vol. 52, pp. 737-783.

Shleifer, Andrei and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2002. “Investor Protection and Equity
       Markets.” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 66, No. 1, pp. 3-27.

Summers, Lawrence. 2000. “Moving Forward with Millennial Debt Relief.” Remarks at
     Reception to Celebrate HIPC, House Banking Committee Room, United States
     Congress, Washington, DC. February 1, 2000.
     http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/ls363.htm.

The Economist. 2002. “For 80 cents more.” August 17, 2002.

United Nations. 2001. “Report of the High-Level Panel on Financing for Development.”
       Presented on 28 June 2001 at United Nations Headquarters in New York.
       http://www.un.org/reports/financing/recommendations.htm#cooperation.




                                                                                      25
 Table 1. Prospects Are Grim for the Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPCs)
      Receiving Debt Relief*                         Still Under Consideration
     Benin            Malawi                          Angola          Lao PDR
    Bolivia             Mali                         Burundi           Liberia
                                                  Central African
  Burkina Faso       Mauritania                                       Myanmar
                                                     Republic
   Cameroon         Mozambique                       Comoros           Somalia
                                                    Democratic
     Chad            Nicaragua                      Republic of         Sudan
                                                      Congo
                                                    Republic of
    Ethiopia            Niger                                           Togo
                                                      Congo
    Gambia            Rwanda                       Cote d'Ivoire       Vietnam
                   Sao Tome and
     Ghana                                            Kenya            Yemen
                      Principe
    Guinea            Senegal
 Guinea-Bissau      Sierra Leone
    Guyana            Tanzania
   Honduras           Uganda
  Madagascar           Zambia

                       Infant Mortality         Life           GDP per capita        GDP per capita
                       (per 1000 births)     Expectancy        (current US$)             growth
                                               (years)                                (1980-2000)
 HIPC Countries               100                51                  310                  -0.2
 United States                 7                 77                 34,370                 2.0
Source: World Bank HIPC Initiative document: http://www.worldbank.org/hipc/progress-to-
date/relief_and_outlook_Jan03.pdf; World Development Indicators Data Base. * As of January 2003 these
countries have reached the “decision point” status under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative.




                                                                                                    26
Table 2. Debt Relief Restores Positive Net Resource Transfers (NRTs)
to the Brady Countries; the HIPCs Have Never Experienced Negative
NRTs: Group Averages (Millions of US$)
 Year in Event            Brady Countries           Highly-Indebted
 Time                                                Poor Countries
        -19                      284                       15
        -18                      388                       41
        -17                      247                       38
        -16                      385                       45
        -15                      395                       84
        -14                      778                      108
        -13                     1197                       95
        -12                      670                      122
        -11                      819                      159
        -10                      373                      189
         -9                       73                      220
         -8                      268                      206
         -7                      -487                     219
         -6                     -1179                     183
         -5                     -1326                     166
         -4                     -1335                     182
         -3                     -1216                     213
         -2                      -433                     223
         -1                      -270                     253
          0                      147                      267
          1                     2369                      321
          2                     1664                      337
          3                     1505                      344
          4                     3625                      327
          5                     3749                      346
          6                     6412                      344
          7                     3528                      322
          8                     5215                      338
          9                     2448                      312
         10                     3166                      336
Net resource transfers are equal to net resource flows minus interest payments on long-
term loans and foreign direct investment profits. The first column lists the years in event
time. The number ‘0’ represents the year in which its Brady Plan was announced. For
Highly-Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC), 0 represents 1989. The next two columns show
the progression of net resource transfers in event time to the Brady countries, and the
HIPC countries. The data on NRT are obtained from World Bank’s Global Development
Finance Data Base.




                                                                                              27
  Table 3. Debt Relief Drives Up Stock Market Values in the Brady Countries
                                            Change in Stock        Change in Market
    Country            Date of Agreement         Market              Capitalization
                                          (Percentage Increase)   (Billions of Dollars)
    Argentina             April 1992             121.2                    19.8

      Bolivia                  March 1993                      n.a.                  n.a.

       Brazil                 August 1992                     12.6                   6.0

     Bulgaria               November 1993                      n.a.                  n.a.

    Costa Rica              November 1989                      n.a.                  n.a.

Dominican Republic              May 1993                       n.a.                  n.a.

      Ecuador                   May 1994                      59.8                   n.a.

       Jordan                   June 1993                     39.0                   0.9

      Mexico                September 1989                    58.2                   8.6

      Nigeria                  March 1991                     29.1                   0.2

      Panama                    May 1995                       n.a                   n.a.

        Peru                  October 1995                     1.1                   1.4

    Philippines               August 1989                     49.2                   1.7

      Poland                   March 1994                     215.9                  2.1

     Uruguay                November 1990                      n.a.                  n.a.

    Venezuela                   June 1990                     68.1                   0.8

   All Countries                                              65.4                   41.5
  Source: IFC, Emerging Markets Data Base; Cline (1995) and authors’ calculations.




                                                                                            28
 Table 4. Capital Stock Growth and GDP Growth Surge
 After the Brady Plan

                                   5 Years Before        5 Years After

 Investment                               1.6                  3.5

 GDP Growth                               0.0                  1.6

The second column lists the average GDP and capital stock growth five
years before each country’s Brady deal. The third column lists the average
GDP and capital stock growth five years after the Brady deal.




                                                                             29
 Table 5. The HIPCs Have Never Received a Significant Quantity of Private Capital Flows.

                             1970-74                     1975-79                      1980-84                   1985-89                    1990-94
                             Millions     Percent of     Millions      Percent of     Millions     Percent      Millions      Percent      Millions      Percent
                             of US$         Total        of US$          Total        of US$       of Total     of US$        of Total     of US$        of Total
 HIPC
 Net Resource Flows             61           100.0          172          100.0           269         100.0         305          100.0         412          100.0
 Public Debt                    39           64.6           111           64.5           176          65.4         158          51.9          120          29.2
 Private Debt                    3            4.2             3            1.8            5           1.9           -1           -0.3           0           -0.1
 FDI                             4            5.9            12            7.0            11          4.0           14           4.4           50          12.2
 Portfolio Equity                0            0.0             0            0.0            0           0.0            0           0.0            5           1.1
 Grants                         15           25.2            46           26.7            77          28.7         134          44.0          237          57.6

 Brady
 Net Resource Flows            530           100.0         1562          100.0          1938         100.0         722          100.0         2645         100.0
 Public Debt                   264           49.8          1045           66.9          1346          69.4         443          61.4          309          11.7
 Private Debt                  133           25.1           219           14.0           212          11.0         -177         -24.5         466          17.6
 FDI                           116           21.9           253           16.2           305          15.7         365          50.6          982          37.1
 Portfolio Equity                0            0.0             0            0.0            2           0.1            6           0.9          708          26.8
 Grants                         17            3.3            46            2.9            74          3.8           83          11.6          180           6.8
This table presents data on the composition of net resource flows for different groups of countries from 1970 to 2000. The first column lists the components of net
resource flows. Net resource flows are the sum of net resource flows on public debt, private debt, foreign direct investment, portfolio equity, and official grants.
The following columns display the data as averaged over intervals of five years. The HIPC countries are displayed in Table 1. The Brady countries are displayed
in Table 3. The data on net resource flows and its components are obtained from World Bank’s Global Development Finance Data Base.
 Table 6. The HIPCs Have Much Weaker Social Infrastructure
 Than the Brady Countries

                                    G7      Brady      HIPC       Group of 6

 LLSV Score                         7.5       4.9       N/A            4.6

 Hall and Jones (1999)               14       63         102           61
 Rank

 Heritage House Index of             14       59         110           58
 Economic Freedom Rank
The first row lists the median La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny
(LLSV) score of social infrastructure for the G7 countries, Brady countries,
HIPCs, and the group of six countries. The countries in the group of six are
Indonesia, Pakistan, Colombia, Jamaica, Malaysia, and Turkey. The second row
lists the median Hall and Jones (1999) rank for each country group. The third row
lists the median Heritage House Index of Economic Freedom rank.




                                                                                    31
Table 7. The HIPCs Receiving Debt Relief Have Not Grown Faster Than
Those That Have Not.

                                    1970-79         1980-89   1990-95   1996-00

HIPCs (Receiving Debt Relief)          0.6           -0.8      -0.5       1.5

HIPCs (All)                            0.8           -0.6      -0.7       1.4
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators.




                                                                                  32
   Table 8. Aid Flows to the HIPCs Have Fallen With the Onset of Debt Relief.
                                       1970-79                   1980-89                                          1990-95                          1996-00
                                Millions of Percentage   Millions of Percentage                            Millions of Percentage           Millions of Percentage
                                 Dollars     of GDP        Dollars     of GDP                               Dollars     of GDP               Dollars     of GDP
HIPCs (All)
Net Resource Transfers              90          5.8          213         6.2                                   337            9.3                320            7.1
Aid Flows                           88          5.7          247         7.2                                   436           12.0                364            8.0
Debt Service                        40          2.6          123         3.6                                   143            3.9                188            4.2

HIPCs (Receiving Debt Relief)
Net Resource Transfers                      70             6.4               213            8.6                353           12.2                352            10.3
Aid Flows                                   69             6.3               238            9.6                486           16.8                416            12.2
Debt Service                                36             3.3                94            3.8                124            4.3                146             4.3

Brady Countries
Net Resource Transfers                     505             2.0               -550           -1.1              1294            1.5               3719            3.1
Aid Flows                                  83              0.3                198            0.4               407            0.5                288            0.2
Debt Service                               926             3.7               2769            5.4              3022            3.5               7953            6.5
   Source: The data on net resource transfers and debt service are obtained from World Bank’s Global Development Finance Data Base. The data on aid flows are
   obtained from World Bank’s World Development Indicators Data Base.




                                                                                                                                                           33
