                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE GEOGRAPHY OF STOCK MARKET PARTICIPATION:
                 THE INFLUENCE OF COMMUNITIES AND LOCAL FIRMS

                                          Jeffrey R. Brown
                                           Zoran Ivković
                                            Paul A. Smith
                                         Scott J. Weisbenner

                                        Working Paper 10235
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10235


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2004




We thank Jim Cilke for assistance with the tax data and Jean Roth of the NBER for assistance with the
1990 Census data. We thank Josh Coval, Jeff Kubik, Michael Palumbo, and Mike Weisbach for helpful
comments. The analysis for this paper was completed while Paul Smith was an economist with the Office
of Tax Analysis at the U.S. Department of Treasury. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Jeffrey R. Brown, Zoran Ivković, Paul A. Smith, and Scott J. Weisbenner. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Geography of Stock Market Participation: The Influence of Communities and Local Firms
Jeffrey R. Brown, Zoran Ivković, Paul A. Smith, and Scott J. Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 10235
January 2004
JEL No. G0, G11

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper is the first to investigate the importance of geography in explaining equity market
participation. We provide evidence to support two distinct local area effects. The first is a
community ownership effect, that is, individuals are influenced by the investment behavior of
members of their community. Specifically, a ten percentage-point increase in equity market
participation of the members of one’s community makes it two percentage points more likely
that the individual will invest in stocks. We find further evidence that the influence of
community members is strongest for less financially sophisticated households and strongest
within “peer groups” as defined by age and income categories. The second is that proximity to
publicly-traded firms also increases equity market participation. In particular, the presence of
publicly-traded firms within 50 miles and the share of U.S. market value headquartered within
the community are significantly correlated with equity ownership of individuals. These results
are quite robust, holding up in the presence of a wide range of individual and community
controls, instrumental variables estimation, the inclusion of individual fixed effects, and
specification checks to rule out that the relations are driven solely by ownership of the stock of
one’s employer.

Jeffrey R. Brown                                    Paul A. Smith
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign          Federal Reserve Board of Governors
340 Wohlers Hall MC-706                             Washington, DC 20551
Champaign, IL 61820                                 paul.a.smith@frb.gov
and NBER
brownjr@uiuc.edu

Zoran Ivković                                       Scott Weisbenner
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign          University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall MC-706                             340 Wohlers Hall MC-706
Champaign, IL 61820                                 Champaign, IL 61820
ivkovich@uiuc.edu                                   and NBER
                                                    weisbenn@uiuc.edu
I. Introduction

        What influences a household’s decision to participate in the stock market? Only one-half

of U.S. households invest in the stock market, and an even smaller fraction, fewer than 30

percent, hold stocks or mutual funds outside of retirement plans.1 There are many reasons why

the determinants of stock market participation are of interest to researchers and policy makers.

The most obvious is that portfolio allocation can be an important determinant of wealth and well-

being. As a result of the significant equity premium over the past century [Mehra and Prescott

1985, Fama and French 2002], individuals who participated in the stock market, on average,

increased their risk but were able to accumulate significantly more wealth than individuals who

did not, holding fixed their level of active saving. As a result, participation in equity markets can

have a substantial effect on lifetime consumption patterns. Second, as discussed by Mankiw and

Zeldes [1991], Heaton and Lucas [2000], and Brav, Constantinides, and Gezcy [2002], the rate

of equity market participation can, in turn, affect the level of the equity premium itself.

        The rate of stock market participation is also important for public policy. For example,

the fact that a large share of households has no equity market exposure played a role in the recent

debate over the distributional effects of lowering the tax rate on capital gains and dividends

[Friedman and Greenstein 2003]. Also, proponents of including personal accounts in the Social

Security system often suggest that a benefit of doing so is to expand equity ownership to all

households. Moreover, the presence of equity market non-participants means that investing

Social Security surpluses in private investments can have real effects on the economy [Abel

2001, Diamond and Geanakoplos 2003].



1
 These figures are based on authors’ tabulations from the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances, and are consistent
with other published estimates using these sources, such as Bertaut & Starr-McCluer (2000). Moreover, Aizcorbe,
Kennickell, and Moore (2003) report similar findings.


                                                                                                                  1
       In very simple models of portfolio choice, it is easy to show that even extremely risk

averse investors should place at least a small portion of their assets in stocks [e.g., Mas-Colell,

Whinston, and Green 1995]. However, there are many cases in which non-participation may be

rational. First, given the presence of means-tested social insurance programs, many households

may find it optimal not to save at all [Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes 1995, Scholz, Seshardi, and

Khitatrakun 2003]. Second, even among those who save, there may be fixed costs of investing

in equity markets that make it rational for many individuals not to participate. For example,

Vissing-Jorgensen [1999] finds that a fixed cost of equity market participation as low as $200

would be sufficient to lead to currently observed rates of non-participation. Some of these fixed

costs may be psychological, that is, the need to educate oneself about how markets work, how to

invest, and so forth. Studies have documented that equity market participation rates do vary with

demographic characteristics. For example, it is known that stock market participation increases

with income, age and wealth, and that men are more likely to participate than women [Poterba

and Samwick 1999].

       This paper presents what we believe is the first evidence on the importance of two

geographic effects on equity market participation. The first factor, the “community effect,” is

that an individual is more likely to participate in the stock market when a higher fraction of

individuals in the local community (households residing within 50 miles) are stock market

investors. Based on a large, nationally representative panel data set of 88,000 taxpayers over a

period of 10 years (for a total of over 750,000 taxpayer-year observations), we provide a central

estimate that a 10 percentage point increase in stock ownership in the community increases the

probability that an individual participates in the equity market by 2 percentage points, or an

increase of more than 6 percent relative to baseline ownership rates. We also provide evidence




                                                                                                      2
that this effect is strongest for less financially sophisticated households, and that households are

more affected by the participation decision of individuals who are “more similar” (in terms of

age and income) to themselves.

       The second factor, the “local firm effect,” is that an individual’s propensity to buy stocks

is positively influenced by the presence of local, publicly-traded firms in the community. For

example, the mere presence of at least one publicly-traded firm in the community (that is, at least

one firm is headquartered within 50 miles) increases the likelihood of participation by one

percentage point. From there, a five-percentage point increase in the share of total U.S. market

capitalization headquartered in the community (i.e., roughly a one standard deviation change)

increases the likelihood of participation by an additional percentage point.

       Recognizing that the location of a household is not randomly assigned, we subject these

findings to a wide range of robustness checks and find that the effects are quite persistent. We

find evidence of community ownership effects and local firm effects even after including an

extremely rich set of individual and zip code level covariates, implementing an instrumental

variables strategy, and even controlling for individual fixed effects.

       There are many reasons to suspect that the equity market participation rate of one’s

community may influence one’s own decision. First, Hong, Kubik, and Stein [2004] present a

model in which stock market participation may be influenced by social interaction. Such social

interaction can serve as a mechanism for information exchange via “word-of-mouth” and/or

“observational learning” [Banerjee 1992, Ellison and Fudenberg 1993, 1995]. Put simply, many

individuals may find it easier to learn how to open up a mutual fund or brokerage account by

talking to their friends than through other mechanisms. Second, as also noted by Hong, Kubik,

and Stein [2004], individuals may simply enjoy discussing the ups and downs of stock market




                                                                                                       3
investments with their friends and colleagues and are thus more apt to participate in the stock

market if there is a high participation rate among their friends and colleagues. Third, according

to Bernheim’s [1994] model of conformity individuals may wish to maintain the same

consumption of their social group does. Thus, participation in the stock market by their social

group would have a positive influence on their own decision to do so. This effect could also be

generated by external habit formation models [Campbell and Cochrane 1999, Shore and White

2003] or the scarcity of local resources that lead investors to care about their relative wealth in

the community [DeMarzo, Kaniel and Kremer 2002].

       There is a significant body of research documenting the empirical relevance of

“neighborhood effects,” or “peer effects,” in wide variety of settings, ranging from outcomes for

disadvantaged youth [Case and Katz 1991] to crime [Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman 1996].

In the specific context of financial behavior, Duflo and Saez [2002, 2003] show how the decision

by one’s co-workers to participate in tax-deferred savings plans affects one’s own participation

decision. Hong, Kubik, and Stein [2004] show that more “social” individuals, namely those who

interact frequently with neighbors or attend church, are more likely to participate in equity

markets. While Hong, Kubik, and Stein show that the effect of “sociability” on the participation

decision is stronger in states with high rates of participation, our paper, to our knowledge, is the

first to provide direct empirical evidence on the importance of the equity market participation

rate of one’s community on an individual’s own participation decision. Furthermore, our panel

data gives us an advantage in that we can use household fixed effects to control for unobservable

household characteristics that may spuriously drive such a relation in a cross-sectional setting.

       The second effect we report in this paper, namely that a stronger presence of publicly-

traded firms in one’s community increases the probability of equity market participation, is




                                                                                                       4
motivated by a growing literature on the importance of local firm effects in other financial

contexts. Several papers provide evidence that individual investors prefer “familiar,” or local,

investments. For example, we know that, around the world, investors have a “home equity bias”

[French and Poterba 1991]. Participants in 401(k) plans show a strong tendency to overweight

own-company stock in their portfolios [Benartzi 2001, Liang and Weisbenner 2002, Mitchell and

Utkus 2002]. Huberman [2001], Grinblatt and Keloharju [2000], Zhu [2002], and Ivković &

Weisbenner [2003] document individual investor preferences for local stocks. While some of

this local preference may simply reflect a behavioral bias for “familiarity,” mounting evidence

supports the idea that some of this behavior is information-based. For example, Coval and

Moskowitz [1999, 2001] demonstrate that professional money managers lean toward local stocks

and that their local investments outperform their investments made in more distant firms. At the

individual level, Ivković and Weisbenner [2003] show that individuals investors at a retail

discount brokerage firm have a strong preference for local investment and that households

generate an additional return of 3.2% annually from their local versus non-local investments.

       This paper provides the first evidence that the presence of local firms also has a

quantitatively important influence on the probability of participating in the stock market. There

are two classes of reasons why local firm presence may matter. The first is simple familiarity.

Firms “make their presence known” in their home community in many ways, either directly (e.g.,

sponsoring community events) or indirectly (e.g., firm’s presence is learned via social interaction

with employees of the firm). Second, the presence of local firms is likely to lead to an increased

flow of information, such as stories in the local paper or television news about details of a

company’s business, as well as more attention paid to the stock market in general. In either case,

familiarity or knowledge about a particular company may make it more likely that an individual




                                                                                                    5
will choose to get involved in the stock market, particularly given the possibility that this local

knowledge may give an investor the ability to earn returns superior to those they would likely

earn from investing in non-local companies [Ivković and Weisbenner 2003].

       This paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we introduce the data set. Section 3

provides initial results on the “traditional” determinants of equity market participation such as

demographic and financial characteristics. In Section 4, we present our results showing the

effect of community stock market participation and local firm presence. Section 5 concludes.




                                           II. The Data


A. The Panel of U.S. Taxpayers

       To conduct a nationally representative study of how individual equity market

participation decisions are influenced by geographic factors such as community equity market

participation and firm presence, it is necessary to have a very large, nationally representative

dataset containing many observations for each “community.” To the extent that the “community

effect” is based on an individual’s interactions with friends, neighbors and co-workers, it is

important to choose a geographic size that is large enough to capture most of the individuals in a

person’s social group, but not so large as to completely dilute these effects. Most standard

micro data sets are not well suited for this task. For example, the Survey of Consumer Finances

(SCF), arguably the best available, nationally representative study for examining household

financial decision making, is a cross-sectional study with only approximately 5,000 observations.

The Health and Retirement Study, which offers the potential advantage of being a panel study, is




                                                                                                      6
only slightly larger than the SCF and focuses only on particular cohorts nearing or in retirement.2

Similar problems are associated with most other standard household data sets.

        Our primary source of data is a large panel of tax returns covering the years 1987 to

1996.3 The panel is based on the IRS’s annual cross-sectional sample of tax returns, which are

large samples chosen to represent the population of tax-return filers. The population of tax filers

is similar to the population of households, except that a household may comprise more than one

tax-filing unit (e.g., dependents may file their own returns), and some households do not file any

tax returns.4 For example, our data for 1994 represent about 130 million tax returns, while the

1995 SCF (covering the year 1994) represents about 100 million households. Throughout the

paper we use the terms individuals, households, and taxpayers interchangeably, but strictly

speaking, the unit of observation for this data set is the taxpayer.

        The annual IRS cross-sections are stratified samples, with the probability of inclusion

rising steeply with total income.5 Variables include most of the values from the 1040 tax form

and associated schedules, as well as data matched from Social Security records, such as the age

and gender of each individual represented on the return.6 The 1987 cross-section sample of

about 88,000 returns is the base year of the panel. The panel was constructed by matching, in

each subsequent year, the full population of tax returns for the Social Security numbers of all

taxpayers, spouses, and dependents that appeared in the 1987 sample. This method allows


2
  The original HRS survey, fielded in 1992, consisted of approximately 7,500 households with at least one member
born between 1931 and 1941. In later waves of the survey, additional cohorts have been added, but in no case does
it contain households below 50 years of age.
3
  The panel was developed as a joint effort between the Treasury Department’s Office of Tax Analysis and the IRS’s
Statistics of Income division. The panel uses confidential records and is not publicly available.
4
  Low-income households are not required to file returns (but many do so in order to claim a refund of over-
withholding or a refundable tax credit such as the EITC). In 1987, the filing threshold ranged from $4,400 to
$10,000, depending on age and filing status.
5
  We use sampling weights, defined as the inverse probability of selection, when reporting all tabulations and
descriptive statistics.
6
  Further details on the construction of the tax data are available in Amromin & Smith (2003).


                                                                                                                7
individuals to be tracked over time regardless of income changes, marriage, divorce, or

establishment of a new tax unit by a former dependent.7

         To simplify the analysis, we exclude married couples filing separate returns and restrict

the analysis to taxpayers who were primary filers in 1987. This reduces the sample to 767,295

tax returns over the ten-year period. Another important advantage of the tax data is that it

contains very precise geographical identifiers (i.e., zip codes) that can be used to create our

geographic measures of interest. We are able to match the zip code reported on the tax return

with a location (i.e., latitude and longitude) for 753,103 observations.

         While tax data has many advantages, its traditional disadvantage for many purposes is

that it contains less information about non-financial demographic characteristics, such as race,

ethnicity, occupation and industry. To address this concern, we merge a wide range of Census

data by zip code. As a result, while we do not know, for example, the race of a particular

taxpayer, we do know the racial composition of the zip code in which the taxpayer resides. The

same is true of other pertinent characteristics.


B. Measuring Equity Ownership


         Naturally, to conduct a study on the determinants of equity market participation, it is

necessary to have a good measure of whether an individual owns stock. Because it is not

necessary for the IRS to know stock ownership for tax purposes, the tax return does not provide

direct information about stock ownership. Nevertheless, we are able to proxy for equity


7
  As a result of this sampling methodology, our sample is not subject to sample attrition bias that sometimes afflicts
panel studies using survey data. There is, however, attrition from the population of tax filers that occurs when a
filer’s income drops below the filing threshold. This source of attrition is non-random – older and lower-income
workers are more likely to drop out of the filing population than middle-aged, higher-income workers. Using data
from the Survey of Consumer Finances, we have found that the fraction of non-filers who own equities in a non-
retirement account is only 2-4% over the period 1989-1998.



                                                                                                                     8
ownership using the appearance of dividend income and/or capital gains on the tax return. Given

our reliance on tax return data to infer stock market participation, we will miss people who only

invest in stocks or equity mutual funds in non-taxable (i.e., retirement) accounts. Thus, when we

refer to equity market participation throughout the paper, we are specifically referring to stock or

equity mutual fund ownership in one’s taxable account (i.e., outside of retirement plans).

         The dividends measure will capture all dividends paid out on stock and dividends paid

through taxable mutual funds. There are two reasons why this proxy is imperfect. First,

dividend income as reported on a tax return includes payouts from any mutual fund, even if the

fund is exclusively invested, for example, in fixed-income assets. Second, while dividends will

capture equity ownership for those who invest in dividend-paying firms, it may miss those who

invest primarily in non-dividend paying firms, such as those in the technology sector that became

increasingly important during the 1990s. A second measure is realized capital gains. This would

capture stockholders who sell shares of a stock or a mutual fund, whether at a gain or a loss. Of

course, capital gains will also capture the gains from the sale of other, non-stock assets, such as

investment real estate or collectibles. The third potential measure of stock ownership is to

combine the first two, defining someone as a stockowner if they report dividends and/or capital

gains.

         Because of the potential for both type 1 and type 2 errors in defining equity ownership, a

natural first question to ask is whether our measures really are reasonable proxies for actual

equity ownership. The Survey of Consumer Finances allows us to address this concern, and the

results clearly indicate that they are good proxies. Table 1 reports the correlation between actual

equity ownership (i.e., equity ownership outside of retirement plans) as reported by SCF

respondents and whether these same households reported dividends and capital gains on their tax




                                                                                                      9
return in the previous year. The correlations are quite high, averaging 0.62 for dividends, 0.47

for capital gains, and 0.63 for the combined measure. While there is a slight downward trend in

the correlations over time (more for dividends than the combined measure), the overall decline is

not large and can be easily controlled for in a regression framework by using year fixed effects.

       Table 2 reports the trends of equity ownership in our tax panel as measured by our

reported dividend and capital gains proxies, as well the actual equity ownership rates reported in

the SCF over this period. We report the SCF equity ownership rates among tax-filers to facilitate

direct comparison across these two sources of data. From 1987 to 1996, the fraction of the

population reporting dividends and/or capital gains rose from just over one-quarter to just over

one-third of the taxpaying population. We see similar trends among dividends and capital gains

separately. This is consistent with the trend in actual equity ownership, as reported in the SCF

over a similar period (from 1989 to 1998, actual equity ownership rates rose from 22.2 percent to

30.5 percent). Figure 1 illustrates the growth rates in actual equity ownership as well as the

equity ownership proxy (report dividend and/or capital gains on the tax return). Over the

overlapping period (1989–1996), our proxy for equity ownership increased by 22%, comparable

to the 20% increase in actual equity ownership.


C. Defining “Community”


       We define the geographic span of a community as a circle around a household with a 50-

mile radius. We choose this distance for several reasons. First, we believe that 50 miles will

capture the vast majority of one’s social interactions, including those that are employment based.

According to the 1990 Census, 88% of the population lives within 25 miles of work (98% live

within 50 miles). Of course, if two co-workers each live only 25 miles from work, the may live

as many as 50 miles from one another. In considering firm locality effects, it is especially


                                                                                                   10
important not to choose an area that is too small. In essence, it is important that any firms that

are likely to be prominent in the local news market and other forms of interaction with the

community be included in a measure of firm locality, and 50 miles is a reasonable cut-off to

capture this effect.8

         Table 3 reports summary statistics for our key variables of interest, including equity

market participation rates and measures of local firms. As in Table 2, the mean value of equity

ownership (defined here using the combined dividend and/or capital gains measure) is

approximately 30 percent. The second row of Table 3 shows the distribution of equity

ownership by the 50-mile radius communities for each of our households. Note that for each

individual i the 50 mile radius variable is constructed by determining what fraction of households

within a 50 mile radius of individual i, but excluding individual i, own stock. At the 10th

percentile of the distribution, about 1 in 5 community households own stock, whereas this ratio

rises to nearly 2 in 5 community households at the 90th percentile.

         Nearly 92 percent of households have at least one publicly-traded firm headquartered

within 50 miles.9 However, the share of total U.S. firm market value residing (i.e.,

headquartered) in that 50-mile radius differs substantially. To help place this in context, over the

period from 1987 to 1996, 0.7% of U.S. firm market value was located within 50 miles of

Kansas City, MO on average (this is roughly the median value across communities), 5.6% was

located within 50 miles of Dallas, TX, 8.3% was located within 50 miles of Chicago, and 25.8%

was located within 50 miles of New York City. At the 10th percentile of the distribution, less

than 1/1000th of one percent of firm value is located within 50 miles. At the 90th percentile, 7.7


8
  We ran most of our base specifications using a 25-mile radius definition, and found similar, significant results.
9
  Compustat provides the location of a firm’s headquarters, allowing us to compute the distance between each
individual taxpayer and each firm. Thus, all references to the location of a firm refer to the firm’s headquarters, and
not the location of its individual factories or plants.


                                                                                                                    11
percent of total market value is located within 50 miles. The final row of Table 3 reports the

distribution of population, which, not surprisingly, is significantly less concentrated than the

population of firms.




         III. Demographic and Financial Determinants of Stock Market Participation


         Before testing our hypotheses of interest, it is useful first to examine how equity market

participation varies with standard demographic and financial measures. Not only are these

measures of potential interest in their own right, but they also serve as a rich source of controls in

the specifications in which we test for geographic effects of participation and local firms.

         Table 4 reports the coefficients from a simple linear probability model of individual i’s

stock market participation on characteristics of the individual taken from the tax return and on

characteristics of the household’s zip code for variables unavailable on the individual-level

because they are not reported on the tax return (e.g., race).10 We use rich controls for age and

income, including dummy variables for various age and income categories, as well as entering

income, income squared, age, and age squared. As expected, equity ownership is strongly

increasing with income and age. It is also increasing with wealth proxies. For example,

households who claim a mortgage interest deduction (a proxy for home ownership), receive

income from rental real estate, royalties, partnerships or S-corporations (file a schedule E), or

own a defined contribution plan through work are all more likely to own equity in their non-

retirement account. We also find that equity ownership is higher for the self-employed (file a

schedule C) and those who are subject to the Alternative Minimum Tax. Equity market

10
  Throughout this paper, we report results using a simple linear probability model, so the coefficient estimates can
be directly interpreted as marginal effects. An examination of the marginal effects from a non-linear probit model
yields very similar results.


                                                                                                                   12
participation is lower for single households and for those who file as a head of household

(generally signifying a single parent family). Families with more dependents are also less likely

to own equity, although the effect is not economically large (e.g., four additional children lowers

the probability of stock ownership by only one percentage point).

       We use averages across a zip code when individual-level data is not available, and these

zip-code-level characteristics are also quite significant. Households in more highly educated zip

codes are more likely to own stock. Households in zip codes with a higher concentration of

African-American, Hispanic, or Asian households are also less likely to own stock. The mean

house price in the zip code is insignificant. We also find lower levels of ownership for

households in zip codes with a higher proportion of clerical workers, craftsmen, operators, and

similar fields, relative to professionals. Finally, we find that a larger concentration of private

sector employees is correlated with higher equity ownership, whereas households in zip codes

with many local, state, and federal government employees are less likely to own stock.




                               IV. Testing for Geographic Effects


       We seek to test two primary hypotheses. The first is that an individual’s equity market

participation decision is influenced by the equity market participation of other individuals in the

community. The second hypothesis is that this decision is affected by the proximity of publicly

traded firms. We test for both of these effects in a regression specification that conditions on all

of the variables discussed in Section 3. We are looking for community effects and local firm

effects after conditioning not only on a rich set of individual demographic and financial

characteristics, but also on zip-code-level controls for race, ethnicity, occupation, employment

sector, and housing prices.


                                                                                                     13
A. Initial Results for Community Ownership Effects


        Table 5 presents the first set of results for community effects. Columns (1) through (3)

present results for regressions in which we define equity ownership as one if an individual

reports dividends and/or capital gains. Columns (4) through (6) report results defining equity

ownership solely based on dividends, while columns (7) through (9) use the capital gains

measure. For each of these three alternative proxies for equity ownership, we first report, in

columns (1), (4), and (7), our basic specification that includes all the variables from Table 4, year

dummies, controls for the population of the community, and the six variables of interest whose

coefficients are reported in this table. Because our sample consists of pooled observations across

all years in the panel, in all regressions we adjust the standard errors for clustering on the

taxpayer ID to account for correlation of the same taxpayer’s equity ownership over time.

        The coefficient on equity ownership in the rest of the community is highly statistically

significant.11 It is also economically significant, suggesting that a 10 percentage point increase

in the fraction of one’s community that owns equity (e.g., moving from the 10th percentile to the

median or the median to the 90th percentile) increases one’s own probability of owning equity by

1.6 to 2.4 percentage points, depending on which equity proxy is used. From a base of 30

percent equity market participation, this is roughly a 6 percent increase over the baseline.

        Despite the fact that we already have more than 50 additional control variables on the

right-hand side of our regression to control for income, wealth and demographic effects, one

might still argue that the community effect coefficient simply reflects the fact that people prefer

to live near people who are like them. Even after controlling for own characteristics, it might be


11
  In all cases, the definition of community equity ownership is based on the same definition as individual
ownership. Equity ownership in individual i’s community is computed exclusive of individual i’s own equity
ownership.


                                                                                                             14
the case that higher income people like to live near other high-income people, and both like to

own stock. To test for sensitivity to this critique, in columns (2), (5), and (8) we add as

additional covariates a richer set of controls for the individual’s zip code, including average

income, age, filing status, number of dependents, self-employment status, and so on, among

households in individual i's zip code. We find that the inclusion of these additional regressors

has virtually no effect on our primary coefficient of interest. Thus, even after controlling for own

characteristics and the characteristics of other individuals in the zip code, we still find a

significant and robust relation between equity market participation of individuals and other

residents in their community.12

         Columns (3), (6), and (9) take even further these concerns about the simultaneous

determination of the equity market participation of an individual and his or her community.

Here, we employ an instrumental variables strategy whereby we instrument for the equity market

participation rates of individuals in the 50-mile radius using the average income, age and other

financial characteristics of households in the 50-mile radius. The logic of these instruments is

that, conditional on own financial and demographic characteristics, and conditional on

characteristics of the household’s zip code, there is little reason to expect that the age or income

distribution of households in the larger community should directly influence stock market

participation rates of a particular household. In other words, our identification assumption is that

these broad community characteristics, while highly correlated with ownership rates of the




12
  In Appendix Table 1, we report the coefficients on all of our individual-level and zip-code-level control variables
from the regression in column (2) in Table 5. Note that, while the average income across the household’s zip code is
significant, the estimated effect is fairly small. For example, while having household income between $50-150k
increases the probability of ownership by 8.1 percentage points and having household income over $150k increases
the probability 27.3 percentage points relative to a household with low income, the comparable zip-code level
controls have an effect that is only 1/10th as large.


                                                                                                                  15
community, will not be correlated with individual i’s equity market participation except through

the stock market participation of these other individuals.13

         As the instrumental variable (I.V.) results in columns (3), (6) and (9) suggest, the I.V.

approach makes virtually no difference in our coefficients of interest. If anything, the I.V.

strategy increases the coefficient slightly when using capital gains as our equity ownership

proxy, but the effect on the other proxies is minimal. Given that our I.V. results closely mirror

our un-instrumented regression results, for the rest of this paper, we will use the middle

specification (no instrumental variables, but including the full set of zip-code-level

characteristics) as our base case.


B. Initial Results for Local Firm Effects


         Several local firm effects are also significant. First, individuals who have at least one

publicly-traded firm headquartered within 50 miles are approximately one percentage point more

likely to own equities. Furthermore, as the share of the total U.S. market capitalization within an

individual’s community increases, the probability of owning equities increases further. For

example, a five percentage point increase in the share of firm value headquartered within 50

miles, which corresponds roughly to a one standard deviation change, increases the probability

of owning stocks by an additional percentage point. To put this increase in perspective, a move

from Kansas City, MO (a community with roughly the median share of U.S. firms) to Dallas, TX

would increase the equity ownership of a household’s community by 5 percentage points (and


13
  Recall that our concern is that people with similar tastes for stock market participation might sort and live in the
same area. Our regression already controls for demographic and financial characteristics of an individual’s zip code.
Thus, our I.V. strategy relies on the assumption that the effect of any sorting of similar households into the same
neighborhood is picked up by the zip-code-level controls (e.g., zip-code level age and income), and with the
inclusion of these finer community controls, the broader community (i.e., 50-mile radius) characteristics will not be
correlated with an individual’s equity ownership except through the stock market participation of other individual’s
within the 50-mile radius.


                                                                                                                   16
thus would increase the likelihood that the household owns equity by 5*0.2 = one percentage

point). Similarly, a move from Kansas City to Chicago would increase the equity ownership of a

household’s community by 8 percentage points (and thus would increase the likelihood that the

household owns equity by 1.6 percentage points), while a move from Kansas City to New York

City would increase community equity ownership by 25 percentage points (and thus would

increase the likelihood that the household owns equity by five percentage points). Since the

regressions also include controls for the population of the community, the local firm effect is not

simply reflecting a big community effect.

        The equally weighted average rate of return on local firms is not significant in most of the

specifications. The exception is with the dividend regressions, in which case it has a small

negative effect. Given that growth stocks (which are less likely to pay dividends) outperformed

value stocks (which are more likely to pay dividends) seven of the ten years from 1987–1996,

local investment opportunities of the communities whose firms had a higher stock return are

more likely to be comprised of growth firms. If individuals surrounded by growth stocks are

more apt to own non-dividend paying growth stocks themselves, there will be a negative

correlation between the return of local firms and dividend ownership of individuals in the

community.14

        The share of firm value in the community comprised of technology companies is

negatively correlated with stock market participation. There are at least two plausible

explanations for this negative relation. First, if stock market investors in such areas own

primarily technology stocks, the regressions may simply be picking up the fact that these

technology firms over the sample period are less likely to pay dividends. In addition, because

14
   Data on stock returns of growth and value stocks was obtained from Ken French’s web site
(http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html) plus authors’ calculations.



                                                                                                         17
capital gains are recorded only upon sale, our proxies may accurately capture equity ownership

in the technology sector only if the individual sells stock over the period. Second, many of the

individuals in this area may be employees of these technology companies, which suggests that

part of their compensation package may come in the form of stock option grants. If an individual

has a large portion of their compensation tied up in stock options, they may rationally choose to

keep the rest of their portfolio in safer (i.e., non-equity) investments. Prior research [Heath,

Huddart, and Lang 1999] suggests that most people, upon exercising their employee stock

options, immediately sell the underlying stock, and, as a result, these proceeds would show up as

ordinary income. We will address the issue of company stock ownership more generally in later

specification checks.


C. Results over Time


       Table 6 explores how the relations hold up over time. The community ownership

variable and the share of firms within 50 miles coefficients are reliably significant in all years,

including years of economic downturns (early 1990s) as well as years of rapid economic growth.

There does appear to be a decline in the importance of community effects beginning in 1995,

with the coefficient falling by about one-third. One possible explanation is that, to the extent that

community effects arise from the exchange of information, the rise of the internet and/or the

explosion in financial market news sources (e.g., CNBC) in the mid-1990s could have served as

a substitute for word-of-mouth learning.


D. Ruling Out an Alternative Hypothesis: Is It Just Owning Company Stock?


       Thus far, we have presented very robust estimates of a strong relation between an

individual’s equity participation propensity, the equity market participation rate of the


                                                                                                      18
individual’s community, and the presence of local firms. However, a potential criticism of these

basic results is that they could be driven by the role of company stock. Many companies

encourage employees to purchase company stock, even subsidizing the offering through

employee stock purchase plans. It is possible that our findings are at least partially contaminated

by the tendency that “local” firms encourage employees to buy company stock, and that this is

confounding our estimates of both the community effects (e.g., individual i’s neighbors all work

for the same company) and firm locality effects (the local firm is the firm at which individual i

works).

        Our data allow us to test this alternative hypothesis directly in two ways. The first test,

presented in column (1) of Table 7, provides results for the sub-sample of the population that is

self-employed,15 a group that, by definition, will not be affected by the company-stock

explanation. Using the combined dividend/capital gains proxy for stock ownership, we find that

the effect of equity ownership in the community is still both statistically and economically

significant. It suggests that a 10-percentage point increase in equity ownership in a community

increases a self-employed individual’s probability of stock ownership by 1.1 percentage points.

This effect is about two-thirds of what it was in Table 5, suggesting that, at most, the company

stock explanation accounts for one-third of the correlation. The local firm effects are also

significant, and, in fact, are larger among the self-employed than the population as a whole.

Assuming the self-employed are more financially sophisticated than the general population, then

the local firm result could reflect that more financially savvy people are better able to collect

value-relevant information about local firms, and thus are more apt to act upon this information




15
  Our definition of self-employed is that they report schedule C income (positive or negative) and have income
from an employer of less than $10,000.


                                                                                                                 19
(i.e., buy stock of any good local firm(s) they discover). Indeed, the larger the share of firms

local to the household, the more likely it is that there will be a local firm worth investing into.

       A second test of the company stock hypothesis is to limit the sample to the approximately

10 percent of our sample that has no firms within 50 miles. Again, we see that there is still a

significant correlation between individual and community equity market participation.

Naturally, the local firm effects are not identified for this sample. These two sets of results

together clearly suggest that our results are not attributable solely to a company stock

phenomenon.


E. Differential Effects by Degree of Financial Sophistication


       The first result we report in this study is that an individual’s decision whether to invest in

the stock market is influenced by the participation decision of others in the household’s

community (see Section 4.1). It is reasonable to hypothesize that this effect might be weaker

among more financially sophisticated individuals. In short, we might expect that those familiar

with basic principles of finance already understand the risks and rewards of equity market

participation, and therefore make a decision to participate independently of what their peers do.

Alternatively, those with very little exposure to finance may be much more influenced by what

their co-workers and neighbors do. The extent to which this is true probably depends on the

underlying cause of the community effect. For example, it is quite possible that conformity or

external habit influences could be equally strong for financially savvy and less financially savvy

households, whereas the provision of information about how to invest may be stronger among

less financially savvy households.

       Our second result is that equity market participation is influenced by the presence of local

firms. Whether this effect should vary by financial sophistication is ambiguous. If the presence


                                                                                                      20
of more local firms means that there is more information flowing about these firms, which in

turn individual investors seem to have been able to use to generate returns superior to returns

from investments into non-local firms [Ivković and Weisbenner, 2003], then one might expect

that more financially sophisticated individuals would be more influenced by this factor. In other

words, as the number of local firms increases, there is a greater chance a financially savvy

individual, able to collect value-relevant information about stocks, will find a local firm in which

it is worth investing.16 On the other hand, if the local firm effects do not provide profitable

value-relevant information, but only serves to increase familiarity with the stock market, then

one might expect the effect to be declining with financial sophistication.

         Because we cannot directly observe financial sophistication, we proxy for it by

examining how our effects differ across income groups, the implicit assumption being that higher

income individuals, on average, are more financially sophisticated. The top panel of Table 8

shows that the effect of community ownership is indeed much stronger for lower income

households. While this effect is statistically significant for all income groups, the community

ownership effect among those earning less than $150,000 per year is about three times stronger

than the effect among those earning $150,000 or more. The results also suggest that the local

firm effect is strongest for high-income individuals, a finding consistent with the notion that a

higher concentration of local firms provides information that can be utilized most effectively by

higher income individuals.17

         Arguably a better proxy for financial sophistication might be education. While our tax

data does not allow us to observe the educational attainment of the taxpayer, we do know the

16
   Ivković and Weisbenner (2003) report that roughly one in five households invest in only local stocks, suggesting
that the presence of local firms may effect not only the household portfolio composition, but also whether the
household owns equity.
17
   In results not presented here, we confirm that the finding that the local firm effect is strongest for high income
individual holds true even when the high-income sample is restricted to the self-employed.


                                                                                                                   21
distribution of educational attainment in the household’s zip code. The bottom panel of Table 8

divides the sample into thirds by the share of households in the zip code that have a college

education, where college education is defined as obtaining a bachelor or graduate degree. We

find a pattern similar to that of income, namely that the community ownership effect is

somewhat stronger in less financially sophisticated areas, while the local firm effect is somewhat

stronger in more financially sophisticated areas. Relative to income, the effect is less

pronounced, which is to be expected given that our education measure is a zip-code-level, rather

than an individual-level variable.



F. Household Fixed Effects

       Up to this point, the results have rested upon the critical assumption that individual and

zip-code-level controls are sufficient to control for different individual propensities to invest in

stocks. However, an individual’s location is not randomly assigned. As such, if individuals

differ according to some unobservable characteristic Z (e.g., risk aversion, financial

sophistication, etc.) and if individuals with similar values of Z tend to live together, then our

community ownership effect may simply be picking up the effect of this omitted Z variable.

       Given the rich panel structure of our data, we are able to control for household fixed

effects in our regressions. The inclusion of fixed effects means that we are identifying our

relations of interest solely off of differences over time. As such, any fixed differences across

individuals, be they observable (e.g., race or gender) or unobservable (e.g., risk aversion), will be

differenced out of the results.

       In addition to differencing out individual fixed effects, we continue to control for all the

variables from Table 4 that vary over time. Thus, for our community effect, we are identifying




                                                                                                       22
solely off of differences in own equity market participation, and differences in community equity

market participation, that are orthogonal to differences in all other controls. Where does any

such variation come from? The most significant source of variation will come from individuals

who change residences during the sample period; other variation comes from changes within a

given community over time. Thus, one interpretation of these results is what happens to an

individual’s equity market participation if the individual moves to an area with a different

community participation rate.

       Results are shown in Table 9. In the full sample (panel A), the effect of community

equity ownership is statistically significant and is largely unaffected by the inclusion of firm

controls, demographic controls, and zip code controls. Interestingly, when the fixed-effects

regressions are ran separately by income group, we find that the effect is concentrated among the

individuals earning between $50,000 and $150,000 over the entire sample period. Indeed, within

this income group, the magnitude of the community ownership effect is comparable to what we

initially found in Table 5, that is, a 10 percentage point difference in community equity

ownership leads to a 2 percentage point difference in the probability of owning stocks. It is not

surprising that there is no relation between community equity ownership and an individual’s own

stock ownership in the high-income sub-sample, given our earlier cross-sectional results. One

reason that the community effect is stronger in the middle-income group relative to the low-

income group in the fixed-effects framework is that there is more variation in the covariates of

interest within this group. For example, comparing points in the distribution of differences in the

maximum and minimum equity ownership in an individual’s community over the sample period,




                                                                                                   23
we find larger differences for the middle income group, suggesting more of the middle income

individuals are moving, allowing the community effect to be more easily identified.18

        Given earlier results in the pooled cross-sections, it is not surprising that changes in the

share of firms local to a high-income individual is associated with an increase in the high-income

individual’s propensity to own stock. The estimated effect from the fixed-effect regression

suggests a five percentage point increase in the share of U. S. firms local to the individual boosts

the likelihood of stock ownership by a high-income individual by 1.2 percentage points, a figure

comparable to results obtained in the cross-sectional analysis.

        In Panel B of table 9, we re-run our fixed effects specification focusing on a sample that

consists entirely of movers. Specifically, we define a taxpayer as a mover if they spend at least

two years in the same zip code, then move to another zip code that is at least 100 miles away,

and remain there for at least two years after the year of the move. The 100-mile distance was

chosen so that there is no overlap between the old and new community definitions.19 In the three

columns, we report results for the full sample, still using fixed effects. The magnitude of the

coefficients are nearly identical to the full sample results, although the standard errors go up

substantially because our mover sample is only 4% of the total population. In the remaining

columns, we repeat our break-down of the sample by income group, and find patterns quite

similar to the full sample fixed effects results, namely, that the effect is concentrated among

those households in the middle income group. Thus, when a middle income individual moves

from one community to another, a 10 percentage point increase in the fraction of the community


18
   For example, the difference in the maximum and minimum equity ownership of an individual’s community over
the sample is less than five percentage points for one quarter of the individuals in the low-income group. By
contrast, only one tenth of the individuals in the middle-income group has such a small difference in their
community’s equity ownership over the sample.
19
   Based on this definition, we have a sample of 4382 movers. Because we observe these individuals, on average,
for 7-8 years, we have over 32,000 mover-year observations. Conditional on moving more than 100 miles, the mean
distance of the move is 848 miles and the median is 713 miles.


                                                                                                            24
that owns equities leads to a 5 percentage point increase in the probability that the mover will

subsequently enter the equity market. Importantly, this effect is strongest when we control for

changes in demographic characteristics, such as income, providing support that the mover effect

is not being driven off of large changes in income that are concurrent with the move.20



G. Refining the Community Ownership Hypothesis – Peer Groups Matter

         Obviously, not all individuals in a 50-mile radius community associate with one another.

Individuals tend to associate more frequently with other individuals of similar income, age, or

other characteristics. As such, if our community ownership variable is really picking up peer

effects, then we ought to find that people are more influenced by similar individuals than by less

similar individuals.

         To investigate this, we assign each observation in our sample to one of nine groups based

on income and age. We then run a regression that allows us to test for within group and across-

group community effects. Specifically, we are interested in whether the equity market

participation rate of “middle income, middle aged” individuals in a community has a larger

effect on other “middle income, middle aged” individuals in the community than it does on other

income and age groups in the same community.21

         Table 10 reports the results. For 7 of the 9 groups, the “own group” community

ownership effect is larger than the “cross-group” community ownership effect, and the results are

statistically significant for 6 of these 7 groupings. The bottom row of Table 10 reports a



20
   In additional results not shown, we confirm that this finding is not being driven solely off of large income changes
by further limiting the sample to movers for whom the difference between their maximum and minimum income
over the period implied an annual change of less than 8 percent. The neighborhood effect is slightly larger and still
statistically significant.
21
   Duflo and Saez (2003) used a similar identification strategy to identify peer effects in retirement plan
participation.


                                                                                                                    25
weighted average difference between “own group” effects and “cross group” effects of 6.8

percentage points. This suggests that a 20 percentage point increase in equity market

participation by a particular age/income group in a community will raise the likelihood of equity

ownership of a household in this group by 1.36 percentage points more than the equity

ownership likelihood of a household from a different age/income group. The difference is highly

significant. These results are very consistent with our overall interpretation that individuals are

influenced to participate in the stock market by the actions of their peers.



                                          V. Conclusions

       This paper is the first to provide evidence regarding the role of two geographic effects

that influence equity market participation. The first geographic effect is that individuals are

influenced by the investment behavior of members of their community. This is true after

controlling for a wide range of individual and zip-code-level financial and demographic

characteristics, using instrumental variables, restricting the sample to self-employed individuals

and to individuals with no publicly-traded firms in their community, and controlling for

individual fixed effects. We also provide evidence that this effect is strongest for the least

financially sophisticated households. Finally, we also show that the influence of community

ownership is strongest within age and income groups. In other words, the equity market

participation rate of individuals in the same income and age category has a stronger effect on an

individual’s own stock market participation relative to the participation rate of households

belonging to other age and income groups. This is consistent with the hypothesis that “peers

matter.”




                                                                                                  26
       The second geographic effect is that proximity to publicly-traded firms also increases

equity market participation rates. In particular, the presence of publicly-traded firms within 50

miles and the share of U.S. market value located within the community are positively correlated

with equity ownership of individuals. In contrast to the community ownership effects, the local

firm effects appear to be stronger among higher income individuals. This result is consistent

with a hypothesis that proximity to local firms may provide a pool of potentially profitable

investments that is easier for more financially sophisticated individuals to discover, which in turn

influences their decision to own stock.




                                                                                                    27
                                          References

Abel. Andrew B., 2001. “The Effects of Investing Social Security Funds in the Stock Market
When Fixed Costs Prevent Some Households from Holding Stocks,” American Economic
Review v91, n1 (March): 128-48.

Aizcorbe, Ana, Arthur Kennickell, and Kevin Moore (2003) ''Recent Changes in U.S. Family
Finances: Evidence from the 1998 and 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances'', Federal Reserve
Bulletin, vol. 89 (January 2003), pp. 1-32.

Amromin, Gene and Paul Smith, 2003. “What Explains Early Withdrawals from Retirement
Accounts? Evidence from a Panel of Taxpayers,” National Tax Journal v56, n3 (September):
595-612.

Banerjee, A., 1992, “A simple model of herd behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107,
797-817.

Benartzi, Shlomo, 2001, Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of 401(k) accounts to
company stock, Journal of Finance 56, 1747-64.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “A Theory of Conformity” Journal of Political Economy v102, n5
(October 1994): 841-77.

Bertaut, Carol and Martha Starr-McCluer, “Household Portfolios in the United States,” Finance
and Economics Discussion Series, 2000-26, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Bertrand, M., Luttmer, E. and Mullainathan, S., 2000, “Network effects and welfare cultures,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 1019-1055.

Brav, Alon; Constantinides, George M.; Geczy, Christopher C. “Asset Pricing with
Heterogeneous Consumers and Limited Participation: Empirical Evidence” Journal of Political
Economy v110, n4 (August 2002): 793-824.

Campbell, John Y.; Cochrane, John H. “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation
of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior” Journal of Political Economy v107, n2 (April 1999): 205-
51.

Case, A. and Katz, L., 1991, “The Company You Keep: The Effect of Family and Neighborhood
on Disadvantaged Youths,” NBER working paper 3705, May.

Coval, Joshua D.; Moskowitz, Tobias J. “The Geography of Investment: Informed Trading and
Asset Prices” Journal of Political Economy v109, n4 (August 2001): 811-41.

Coval, Joshua D.; Moskowitz, Tobias J. “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preference in
Domestic Portfolios “ Journal of Finance v54, n6 (December 1999): 2045-73.




                                                                                                28
DeMarzo, Peter M., Ron Kaniel and Ilan Kremer, 2002, “Diversification as a Public Good:
Community Effects in Portfolio Choice,” Stanford University working paper.

Diamond, Peter; John Geanakoplos, 2003, “Social Security Investment in Equities” The
American Economic Review v93, n4, (September 2003): 1047 - 1974.

Duflo, Esther; Saez, Emmanuel, “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Retirement
Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment” Quarterly Journal of Economics
v118, n3 (August 2003): 815-42.

Duflo, Esther; Saez, Emmanuel, “Participation and Investment Decisions in a Retirement Plan:
The Influence of Colleagues' Choices” Journal of Public Economics v85, n1 (July 2002): 121-
48.

Ellison, G. and Fudenberg, D., 1993, “Rules of thumb for social learning,” Journal of Political
Economy 101, 93-126.

Ellison, G. and Fudenberg, D., 1995, “Word of mouth communication and social learning,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 93-125.

Fama, Eugene F.; French, Kenneth R. “The Equity Premium.” The Journal of Finance v57, n2
(April 2002): 637-59.

French, Kenneth R.; Poterba, James M. “Investor Diversification and International Equity
Markets” American Economic Review v81, n2 (May 1991): 222-26.

Friedman, Joel and Robert Greenstein, “Exempting Corporate Dividends from Individual Income
Taxes,” Report from the Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, January 23, 2003.

Glaeser, E. L., Sacerdote, B., and Scheinkman, J., 1996, “Crime and social interactions,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics CXIV, 502-548.

Grinblatt, M. and Keloharju, M., 2000, “The investment behavior and performance of various
investor-types: A study of Finland’s unique data set,” Journal of Financial Economics 55, 43-67.

Heath, Chip, Steven Huddart, and Mark Lang, 1999, “Psychological Factors and Stock Option
Exercise,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 601-627.

Heaton, John; Lucas, Deborah, “Stock Prices and Fundamentals,” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 1999 (Volume 14): Cambridge and London: MIT Press, 2000: 213-42.

Hong, Harrison; Kubik, Jeffrey D.; Stein, Jeremy C., 2004, “Social Interaction and Stock-Market
Participation,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Hubbard, R. Glenn; Skinner, Jonathan; Zeldes, Stephen P. “Precautionary Saving and Social
Insurance ” Journal of Political Economy v103, n2 (April 1995): 360-99.



                                                                                                  29
Huberman, Gur, “Familiarity Breeds Investment,” Review of Financial Studies v14, n3 (Fall
2001): 659-80.

Ivković, Zoran, and Scott Weisbenner, (2003), “Local Does as Local Is: Information Content of
the Geography of Individual Investors’ Common Stock Investments,” Working Paper.

Liang, Nellie and Scott Weisbenner, “Investor Behavior and the Purchase of Company Stock in
401(k) Plans – The Importance of Plan Design,” NBER Working Paper No. 9131, August 2002.

Mankiw, N. Gregory; Zeldes, Stephen P. “The Consumption of Stockholders and
Nonstockholders” Journal of Financial Economics v29, n1 (March 1991): 97-112.

Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael D. Whinston and Gerry R. Green, Microeconomic Theory, Oxford
University Press, 1995.

Mehra, Rajnish; Prescott, Edward C., “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary
Economics v15, n2 (March 1985): 145-61.

Mitchell, Olivia S. and Stephen P. Utkus, “The Role of Company Stock in Defined Contribution
Plans,” NBER Working Paper 9250, October 2002.

Poterba, James M.; Samwick, Andrew, “Taxation and Household Portfolio Composition: U.S.
Evidence from the 1980s and 1990s,” NBER Working Paper: 7392 October 1999.

Scholz, John Karl, Ananth Seshadri and Surachai Khitatrakun, “Are Americans Saving
Optimally for Retirement?” University of Wisconsin-Madison working paper, September 2003.

Shore, Stephen H. and Joshua White, “External Habit Formation and the Home Bias Puzzle,”
working paper, 2003.

Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, “Limited Stock Market Participation and the Equity Premium
Puzzle,” University of Chicago working paper, 1999.

Zhu, Ning, “The Local Bias of Individual Investors,” Yale ICF Working Paper No. 02-30,
October 2002.




                                                                                            30
                                        Table 1
     Correlation Between Actual Equity Ownership and Stock Ownership Proxies,
Conditional on Filing Tax Return, Using Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) 1989 – 1998


Stock Ownership Proxies    1989       1992        1995       1998       1989 – 1998

Report Dividends           0.66       0.65        0.63        0.57          0.62

Report Capital Gains       0.44       0.46        0.47        0.49          0.47

Report Dividends and/or
                           0.66       0.63        0.63        0.61          0.63
Capital Gains




                                                                                   31
                                       Table 2
               Equity Ownership Proxies (in percent), 1987 – 1996 Pooleda
                                                  Report
                            Equity Ownership                           Report          Report
                                             Dividends and/or
                             (SCF estimates)                          Dividends     Capital Gains
                                              Capital Gains
                                  22.1%
Full Sample                                           29.6%             25.6%           17.9%
                                 1989-98

By Year

 1987                                                  25.7              21.9            15.2

 1988                                                  27.1              23.2            14.7

 1989                              19.0                28.1              24.2            15.8

 1990                                                  28.0              24.2            15.3

 1991                                                  28.6              24.7            16.2

 1992                              20.0                30.1              26.1            18.2

 1993                                                  31.4              27.3            20.4

 1994                                                  32.5              28.2            21.0

 1995                              21.5                33.2              28.9            21.9
                                   26.9
 1996                                                  34.4              30.0            23.7
                                 in 1998
 a
  Notes: Sample is all individuals that file tax returns. Statistics are weighted by population
  weights.




                                                                                                  32
                                        Table 3
    Summary Statistics for Equity Ownership (in percent) and Presence of Local Firms,
                                   1987-1996 Pooleda


                                  Mean                         Percentiles
                               (Std. Dev.) 10th     25 th
                                                             50th    75th    90th   Maximum
                                  29.6
Own Equity?
                                 (45.7)

Equity Ownership within 50       29.8
                                           20.9     25.5     30.1    34.1    38.3    100.0
miles                            (7.5)

                                  91.9
Firms within 50 miles?
                                 (27.3)

Share of total U.S. firm          3.0
market value within 50 miles               0.000   0.005     0.6      3.2    7.7      27.3
                                 (5.9)

Population within 50 miles        4.0
                                            0.4      0.8     2.2      5.5    12.9     17.7
(in millions)                    (4.6)
    a
     Notes: Statistics are weighted by population weights.




                                                                                             33
                                        Table 4
Regression of Stock Ownership (in percent), Focus on Income and Demographic Controls,
                                      1987 – 1996

Income and Age Controls for Household             Race/Ethnicity across Household’s
(Income 0 – 50K and Age < 40 omitted)             Zip Code (White omitted)
    Income negative?                     -5.0 ***
                                                      Black                                 -3.5 ***
    Maximum (0, Income) in $000s      0.0002 ***      Indian                                -3.1
    Maximum (0, Income) squared       -8e-10  ***
                                                      Asian                                 -7.8 ***
    Income 50 – 150K                      8.5 ***     Other race                            -4.0
    Income 150K+                         28.1 ***
                                                      Hispanic                              -6.0 ***
    Age (in years)                       0.65 *** Mean house price in zip ($000s)        -0.002
    Age squared                       0.0002 Occupation in Household’s zip
                                                  (Executive / Manager omitted)
    Age 40 – 64                           1.2 ***     Professional / Specialist              1.6
                                              ***
    Age 65+                               3.7         Technician                           11.9
Filing Status/Deductions taken by HH                  Sales                                  5.5
(Married omitted for Filing Status)
    Claim mortgage                        5.8 ***     Clerical                            -21.6 ***
    Single filing status – male          -4.5 ***     Private                             -32.8 ***
    Single filing status – female        -3.9 ***     Protective                             4.8
    Head of Household – male             -9.4 ***
                                                      Service                                7.2 *
    Head of Household – female          -11.0 ***     Farming                                4.8
    Number of Dependents                -0.27 ***
                                                      Crafts                              -21.4 ***
    Self-employed                         3.6 ***     Operators                           -26.8 ***
    Schedule E                           24.6 ***     Transportation / Materials          -43.3 ***
    Alternative Minimum Tax               8.1 ***     Laborers                             12.0
                                              ***
    DC Plan                               5.0 Sector in household’s zip
                                                  (For Profit omitted)
Education across Household’s Zip Code                 Not For Profit                         8.8 ***
  st    th
(1 – 8 Grade Education omitted)
    Start high school                   -13.6 ***     Local Government                      -9.6 **
    Graduate high school                  3.7         State Government                    -21.4 ***
    Some college                         -4.9         Federal Government                  -21.1 ***
    Associate degree                     -2.6         Self-Employed                         -1.8
                                              ***
    Bachelor degree                      18.5         Nonpaid                               -3.4
                                              *     2
    Graduate degree                       8.2 R = 0.416                       # of obs. = 753,103
***       ** *
      ,    , Significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                 34
                                                               Table 5
               Regression of Stock Ownership (in percent, various proxies for stock ownership), 1987 – 1996 Pooleda
                                     Dividend income and/or         Dividend income used as proxy   Capital gains used as proxy
                                    capital gains used as proxy
                                      (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)       (9)
Equity Ownership within 50 miles           16.2 ***      15.1 ***     15.7 ***     24.1 ***     22.9 ***     25.8 ***     20.6 ***     20.4 ***     28.1 ***
                                           (1.5)         (1.5)        (2.3)        (1.8)        (1.8)        (2.8)        (1.7)        (1.7)        (2.7)
Firms within 50 miles?                     1.17 ***      1.08 **      1.07 **      1.32 ***     1.21 **      1.14 **      1.61 ***     1.52 ***     1.47 ***
                                         (0.45)        (0.45)       (0.45)       (0.50)       (0.50)       (0.50)       (0.41)       (0.41)       (0.41)
Share of total U.S. firm market            20.5 ***      20.0 ***     19.9 ***     33.7 ***     33.5 ***     33.2 ***     28.6 ***     28.0 ***     27.2 ***
value within 50 miles                      (3.5)         (3.5)        (3.5)        (3.9)        (3.9)        (3.9)        (3.2)        (3.2)        (3.3)
Equally-weighted average return of        -0.12         -0.15        -0.15        -0.37 *      -0.40 **     -0.40 **      0.20         0.16         0.13
firms within 50 miles                    (0.19)        (0.19)       (0.19)       (0.20)       (0.20)       (0.20)       (0.19)       (0.19)       (0.19)
                                                 ***
Share of firm value within 50 miles       -1.55         -1.45 **     -1.46 **     -1.77 ***    -1.68 ***    -1.72 ***    -1.46 ***    -1.35 **     -1.52 ***
in technology sector                     (0.62)        (0.62)       (0.62)       (0.68)       (0.67)       (0.67)       (0.56)       (0.56)       (0.56)
Firm employees*1,000 /                     0.59          0.35         0.28        -0.07        -0.33        -0.66        -1.15        -1.54        -1.87
total population within 50 miles         (1.31)        (1.31)       (1.32)       (1.43)       (1.43)       (1.45)       (1.17)       (1.17)       (1.18)
Year dummy variables?                      Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Demographic controls?                      Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Zip code controls?                         No             Yes          Yes         No            Yes        Yes           No           Yes          Yes
IV for equity own within 50 miles?         No             No           Yes         No            No         Yes           No           No           Yes
R2                                        0.417          0.418        0.418       0.353         0.353       0.353        0.440        0.441        0.441
Number of observations                  753,103        753,103      753,103      753,103      753,103      753,103      753,103      753,103      753,103
     a
      Notes: Instruments for equity ownership of the area within 50-miles of the household include income controls, age controls, deductions taken
     (i.e., mortgage interest and number of dependents), filing status, income/forms filed (self-employed, Schedule E, Alternative Minimum Tax,
     defined contribution plan contributions), education, race/ethnicity, house price, and occupation and sector shares of the people within 50 miles
     of the household. Zip code controls include income controls, age controls, deductions taken (i.e., mortgage interest and number of
     dependents), income/forms filed (self-employed, Schedule E, Alternative Minimum Tax, defined contribution plan contributions), and filing
     status of the household’s zip code.
     *** ** *
        , , Significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                          35
                                                           Table 6
           Regression of Stock Ownership (in Percent, Report Dividend Income and/or Capital Gains Used as Proxy),
                                                    1987 – 1996 by Yeara

                                 1987         1988         1989         1990        1991         1992         1993         1994         1995         1996
Equity Ownership                 17.5 ***     16.7 ***     15.7 ***     20.1 ***    12.8 ***     12.6 ***     14.4 ***     15.5 ***     10.3 ***      9.5 ***
within 50 miles                 (2.5)        (2.5)        (2.6)        (2.5)       (2.5)        (2.5)        (2.5)        (2.5)        (2.4)        (2.5)
                                 1.03 *      -0.02         1.01         1.71 *** 1.10            0.76         1.45 **      0.55         1.09         1.47 **
Firms within 50 miles?
                               (0.62)       (0.64)       (0.69)       (0.69)    (0.71)         (0.73)       (0.70)       (0.72)       (0.75)       (0.78)
Share of total U.S. firm         15.1 ***      9.0 *       17.2 ***     20.6 ***    22.9 ***     17.9 ***     23.1 ***     24.1 ***     25.4 ***     19.2 **
market value within 50 miles    (4.5)        (4.8)        (5.0)        (4.8)       (4.5)        (4.7)        (5.1)        (5.5)        (5.5)        (5.6)

Firm Controls?                    Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes

Demographic controls?             Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes

Zip code controls?                Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes

Adjusted R2                      0.461        0.438        0.432       0.425       0.414         0.411        0.402        0.399       0.393         0.386

Number of observations          84,228       80,969       79,104       77,493      75,702       74,000       72,509       71,119       70,072       67,907
a
 Notes: Regressions include local firm controls, demographics controls, and zip-code-level demographic controls. See appendix for
details.




                                                                                                                                                          36
                                                             Table 7
                            Robustness Checks of Stock Ownership Results to Company Stock Effect
                             (in percent, report dividend income and/or capital gains used as proxy)

                                                                                                          NO Publicly-Traded Firm
                                                                                 Self-Employed
                                                                                                              within 50 miles
Equity Ownership within 50 miles                                                        10.9 ***                     8.8 ***
                                                                                       (3.3)                       (2.5)
Firms within 50 miles?                                                                 1.63 *
                                                                                     (0.99)
Share of total U.S. firm value within 50 miles                                          35.1 ***
                                                                                       (8.2)
Adjusted R2                                                                            0.320                         0.379
Number of observations                                                                102,518                       47,977
Regressions include local firm controls (excluded in no publicly-traded firm within 50 miles regression), demographic controls, and
zip-code-level demographic controls.
*** ** *
   , , Significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                      37
                                                             Table 8
                              Stock Ownership Regressions by Proxies for Financial Sophistication
                             (in percent, report dividend income and/or capital gains used as proxy)

                                                                         Regression by Income Groups (in $000s)
                                                            0 – 50                      50 – 150                     150+
Equity Ownership within 50 miles                              21.3 ***                       19.8 ***                  6.6 ***
                                                             (2.2)                          (3.4)                    (1.8)
Firms within 50 miles?                                        0.43                          1.25                      1.47 ***
                                                            (0.61)                        (0.98)                    (0.59)
Share of total U.S. firm value within 50 miles                 8.5                           16.5 **                  32.6 ***
                                                             (6.2)                          (7.9)                    (3.5)
Adjusted R2                                                 0.349                        0.204                       0.086
Number of observations                                     276,188                      194,482                     282,433
                                                                         Regression by Percent of Individuals in
                                                                       Taxpayer’s Zip Code with College Education
                                                       College < 16.5%          16.5% < College > 33.8%       College > 33.8%
Equity Ownership within 50 miles                              17.5 ***                      12.7 ***                12.7 ***
                                                             (2.2)                         (2.6)                   (3.6)
Firms within 50 miles?                                        0.94 *                        0.05                      0.57
                                                            (0.57)                        (0.81)                    (1.69)
Share of total U.S. firm value within 50 miles                 8.8                           25.5 ***                 20.4 ***
                                                             (8.0)                          (7.0)                    (5.1)
Adjusted R2                                                  0.383                      0.371                      0.316
Number of observations                                      251,105                    251,061                    250,937
Regressions include local firm controls, demographic controls, and zip-code-level demographic controls. College education is defined
as having obtained a bachelor or graduate degree.
*** ** *
   , , Significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.


                                                                                                                                 38
                                                                 Table 9
                              Regression of Stock Ownership with Household Fixed Effects, 1987 – 1996 pooleda

                                                                   Panel A: Full Sample
                                                                              Income $0 – 50K          Income $50 – 150K          Income $150K+
                                                   Full Sample
                                                                             throughout sample          throughout sample        throughout sample
                                            (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)       (5)             (6)        (7)           (8)       (9)
                                             3.3 *** 3.3 ***       3.7 ***     1.5          1.6          20.1 ***     19.0 ***      0.5       1.0
Equity Ownership within 50 miles
                                           (1.2)     (1.2)       (1.2)       (2.0)        (2.0)         (5.1)        (2.9)        (2.2)     (2.3)
                                                      0.27       0.20                   -0.61                         0.60                   0.94
Firms within 50 miles?
                                                    (0.37)     (0.38)                  (0.56)                       (1.70)                 (0.79)
Share of total U.S. firm market                        0.4         1.3                  -16.2                        -24.0                   24.8 ***
value within 50 miles                                (4.8)       (4.9)                 (10.5)                       (28.7)                  (7.3)
Year dummy variables?                       Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes
Firm controls?                              No        Yes         Yes          No          Yes           No           Yes          No        Yes
Demographic controls?                       No         No         Yes          No          Yes           No           Yes          No        Yes
Zip code controls?                          No         No         Yes          No          Yes           No           Yes          No        Yes
R2                                         0.759     0.759       0.762        0.766       0.766         0.615        0.618        0.472     0.475
Number of observations                    753,253 753,253 753,103            157,894   157,811         72,076       72,074       168,314   168,301
a        ***       ** *
Notes:         ,    , Significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                              39
                                                           Table 9: Continued
                              Regression of Stock Ownership with Household Fixed Effects, 1987 – 1996 pooleda

                                     Panel B: Households that move by at least 100 miles (exclude year of move)
                                                                             Income $0 – 50K           Income $50 – 150K        Income $150K+
                                                   Full Sample
                                                                            throughout sample           throughout sample      throughout sample
                                            (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)       (5)              (6)        (7)         (8)       (9)
                                             3.1       3.1         4.9        6.4         8.2            33.5 *     50.0 ***      4.2      7.7
Equity Ownership within 50 miles
                                           (3.6)     (3.7)       (3.8)      (8.0)       (8.8)          (18.8)     (18.1)        (5.2)    (5.8)
                                                     -0.46     -0.93                    -3.09                      -2.22                  2.33
Firms within 50 miles?
                                                    (1.24)    (1.32)                   (2.81)                     (5.38)                (1.86)
Share of total U.S. firm market                        4.9       6.1                    -30.7                       58.4                   6.0
value within 50 miles                               (11.0)    (12.3)                   (39.6)                     (81.0)                (16.9)
Year dummy variables?                       Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes
Firm controls?                              No        Yes         Yes         No         Yes              No        Yes          No       Yes
Demographic controls?                       No         No         Yes         No         Yes              No        Yes          No       Yes
Zip code controls?                          No         No         Yes         No         Yes              No        Yes          No       Yes
R2                                         0.714     0.714       0.717       0.706      0.711           0.580      0.596       0.412     0.421
Number of observations                    32,301     32,301      32,289      4,646      4,642           2,507      2,507       6,081     6,081
a        ***       ** *
Notes:         ,    , Significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                           40
                                                        Table 10
                         Importance of Equity Ownership of Households in Same Age-Income Group
                                                  Effect of Average Equity        Effect of Average Equity
Age-Income Group                                Ownership of this Group Upon   Ownership of this Group Upon     Difference
                                                 Individuals in THIS Group     Individuals in OTHER Groups
Age < 40, Income 0 – 50K                                     -0.0                          2.6                     -2.7
                                                            (3.3)                        (1.8)                    (3.6)
Age < 40, Income 50 – 150K                                    6.5 ***                      2.7 ***                  3.8
                                                            (2.4)                        (0.7)                    (2.4)
Age < 40, Income 150K+                                       14.7 ***                      0.4                    14.3 ***
                                                            (1.0)                        (0.3)                    (1.0)
40 ≤ Age < 65, Income 0 – 50K                                16.3 ***                      3.3 ***                13.0 ***
                                                            (2.7)                        (1.2)                    (2.7)
40 ≤ Age < 65, Income 50 – 150K                               5.5 ***                      1.6 *                    3.9 **
                                                            (2.1)                        (1.0)                    (2.0)
40 ≤ Age < 65, Income 150K+                                   4.4 ***                      1.0 *                    3.4 ***
                                                            (0.7)                        (0.5)                    (0.8)
Age ≥ 65, Income 0 – 50K                                     33.0 ***                      0.7                    32.3 ***
                                                            (1.8)                        (0.8)                    (1.6)
Age ≥ 65, Income 50 – 150K                                   16.3 ***                     -0.5 *                  16.8 ***
                                                            (1.3)                        (0.3)                    (1.3)
Age ≥ 65, Income 150K+                                       -5.0 ***                      0.4                     -5.4 ***
                                                            (0.7)                        (0.3)                    (0.8)
Average Effect Across Households                              8.4 ***                      1.6 ***                  6.8 ***
                                                            (0.9)                        (0.3)                    (0.9)
                      Adjusted R2 = 0.429                                          Number of Observations = 680,317
Regressions also include local firm controls, demographic controls, and zip-code-level demographic controls.
*** ** *
   , , Significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.


                                                                                                                              41
                   Figure 1: Growth in Equity Ownership and Reporting of Dividends
                    and/or Capital Gains on Tax Returns Relative to 1989, 1987-1998

             40


             30


             20
   Percent




             10


              0
                    87    88        89       90       91        92       93       94        95       96       97        98
             -10
                                                                   Year

                               Equity Ownership (SCF)                Report Dividends &/or Capital Gains

Equity ownership estimates are provided by the SCF for 1989, 1992, 1995, and 1998. Equity ownership estimates for years between
surveys are obtained by a linear interpolation.




                                                                                                                              42
Appendix Table 1: Regression of Stock Ownership (in percent), Focus on Income and Demographic Controls, 1987 – 1996
Income and Age Controls for Household                              Associate degree                       -6.2           State Government                                      -20.0 ***
(Income 0 – 50K and Age < 40 omitted)
   Income negative?                                -5.1 ***        Bachelor degree                        12.6 ***       Federal Government                                    -18.1 ***
   Maximum (0, Income) in $000s                 0.0002 ***         Graduate degree                         0.9           Self-Employed                                           0.6
   Maximum (0, Income) squared                   -7e-10   ***   Race/Ethnicity across Household’s                        Nonpaid                                                -7.1
                                                                Zip Code (White omitted)
   Income 50 – 150K                                 8.1   ***
                                                                   Black / Indian                         -2.5   ***   Income and Age Controls for HH’s ZIP CODE
                                                                                                                       (Income 0 – 50K and Age <40 omitted)
   Income 150K+                                    27.3 ***        Asian                                  -6.5 ***        Average zip code income negative?                      0.8
                                                          ***
   Age (in years)                                  0.69            Other Race                             -0.6           Maximum (0, Average Income) in $000s                 0.0013 ***
   Age squared                                  -0.0002            Hispanic                               -4.9 ***       Maximum (0, Average Income) squared                  -2e-08 ***
                                                          ***
   Age 40 – 64                                      1.5         Average House Price in zip ($000s)       0.001           Income 50 – 150K (share for zip code)                   0.9 ***
   Age 65+                                          3.2 ***     Occupation in HH’s Zip                                   Income 150K+ (share for zip code)                       2.9 ***
                                                                (Executive / Manager omitted)
Filing Status and Deductions taken by                              Professional / Specialist               9.2 **        Average Age (for zip code, in years)                  -0.17 ***
Household (Married omitted for Filing Status)
   Claim mortgage                                   5.2 ***        Technician                             13.4 *         Average Age (for zip code) squared                   0.0017 ***
   Single filing status – male                     -4.5 ***        Sales                                   7.2           Age 40 – 64 (share for zip code)                       -1.3 ***
   Single filing status – female                   -4.3 ***        Clerical                              -17.8 ***        Age 65+ (share for zip code)                           1.6 **
   Head of Household filing status – male          -9.5 ***        Private                               -31.1 ***     Filing Status and Deductions taken for HH’s ZIP
                                                                                                                       CODE (Married omitted for Filing Status)
   Head of Household filing status – female       -11.1 ***        Protective                              4.2            Claim mortgage (share for zip code)                    2.2 ***
   Number of Dependents                           -0.04            Service                                 3.9           Single filing status – male (share for zip code)       -0.2
                                                          ***
   Self-employed                                    3.5            Farming                                 2.5           Single filing status – female (share for zip code)      0.8 *
   Schedule E                                      24.6 ***        Crafts                                -19.7 ***       Head of Household filing status – male (zip)            0.9
                                                          ***                                                    ***
   Alternative Minimum Tax                          7.7            Operators                             -22.5           Head of Household filing status – female (zip)          0.6
                                                          ***                                                    ***
    DC Plan                                         4.4            Transportation / Materials            -36.5           Number of Dependents (average for zip code)            -1.0 ***
Education across Household’s Zip Code                              Laborers                                7.9           Self-employed (share for zip code)                      0.4
(1st – 8th Grade Education omitted)
    Start high school                             -13.2   ***   Sector in HH’s Zip                                       Schedule E (share for zip code)                        -0.4
                                                                (For Profit omitted)
   Graduate high school                            -1.4            Not For Profit                          4.9           Alternative Minimum Tax (share for zip code)            4.1 ***
   Some college                                    -6.5 **         Local Government                      -13.0 ***       DC Plan (share for zip code)                            2.6 ***
                                                                       ***       ** *
Coefficients from specification (2) of Table 5 reported.                     ,    , Significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.


                                                                                                                                                                                         43
