NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE DESIRABILITY OF FISCAL
CONSTRAINTS IN A MONETARY UNION
V.V. Chari
Patrick J. Kehoe
Working Paper 10232
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10232
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by V.V. Chari and Patrick J. Kehoe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

On the Desirability of Fiscal Constraints in a Monetary Union
V.V. Chari and Patrick J. Kehoe
NBER Working Paper No. 10232
January 2004
JEL No. F3, F4, F41, F42, F33, E5, E58, E63
ABSTRACT
The desirability of fiscal constraints in monetary unions depends critically on whether the monetary
authority can commit to follow its policies. If it can commit, then debt constraints can only impose
costs. If it cannot commit, then fiscal policy has a free-rider problem, and debt constraints may be
desirable. This type of free-rider problem is new and arises only because of a time inconsistency
problem.

V.V. Chari
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
Patrick J. Kehoe
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55480-0291
and NBER
pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us

In the last decade, the subject of how best to design monetary unions has been attracting
more academic interest. A central issue in designing such unions is whether constraints should
be imposed on the fiscal policies of the member states. Here we address this question using
standard economic models with benevolent policymakers. Our answer is that the desirability
of fiscal constraints depends critically on whether the union’s monetary authority can commit
to its future policies. If this authority can commit, then fiscal constraints on member states
will not increase welfare, but if it cannot commit, then such constraints will increase welfare.
The driving force behind our results is that a time inconsistency problem in monetary
policy leads to a free-rider problem in fiscal policy. The time inconsistency problem arises
because the monetary authority has an incentive to inflate away nominal debt. Without
commitment to future policy, a benevolent monetary authority’s optimal policy is to set high
inflation rates when the inherited debt levels of the member states are high and low inflation
rates when they’re low. The cost of inflation is borne by the residents of all the member
states. When a fiscal authority in a member state is deciding how much debt to issue, it
recognizes that as it increases its own debt, the monetary authority will increase the inflation
rate. The fiscal authority takes account of the costs of the induced inflation on its own
residents, but ignores the costs this induced inflation imposes on other member states. This
free-rider problem leads to ineﬃcient outcomes, each fiscal authority will issue too much debt,
and the inflation rate will be too high. Imposing constraints on the amount of debt that each
fiscal authority is allowed to issue can thus make all the member states better oﬀ.
If some way can be found to solve the monetary union’s time inconsistency problem,
then the free-rider problem disappears, and imposing fiscal constraints will typically reduce
welfare. In our simple model, the only way to solve the time inconsistency problem is to
assume that the monetary authority can commit. In richer models, even without commitment, reputational benefits can solve the time inconsistency problem, eliminate the free-rider
problem, and make debt constraints unnecessary and possibly harmful.
The idea that groups of various forms, such as members of a monetary union, may
have a variety of free-rider problems in either static models or models with commitment is not
new. What we find here, though, is new: we identify a new type of free-rider problem, one
which arises only because there is a time inconsistency problem. We show that this free-rider

problem can be solved by the appropriate choice of fiscal constraints on debt. Moreover, the
type of problem we identify is clearly relevant for policy. The logic of how these constraints
prevent the problem seems to capture well the arguments made for fiscal constraints by the
framers of the agreements which established the European Monetary Union (EMU).
We illustrate our results in the simplest possible framework, a reduced-form twoperiod benchmark model. In the first period of this model, fiscal authorities of states in a
monetary union issue nominal debt to risk-neutral lenders who live outside the union; in
the second period, the union’s monetary authority decides the common inflation rate. We
assume that second-period output is a decreasing function of the inflation rate, so that the
monetary authority balances the benefits of devaluing nominal debt against the costs of
reducing output. The larger the debt the monetary authority inherits, the higher it wants
to set the inflation rate and, without some mechanism to prevent that, the higher it sets the
inflation rate. Thus, without monetary policy commitment, when one of the fiscal authorities
issues more debt, the others are made worse oﬀ. This free-rider problem implies that the level
of debt in a noncooperative equilibrium is diﬀerent from that in a cooperative equilibrium.
If the monetary authority instead commits to its policies, then the union has no free-rider
problem.
In the Appendix, we show that the results from our benchmark model do not depend
on government default to lenders who live outside the monetary union. We describe a slightly
modified model in which governments borrow from their own consumers, and we show that
in it results similar to the benchmark’s hold. In this modified model, the monetary authority
trades oﬀ reduced output from higher inflation against the need for each fiscal authority to
raise revenue through distorting taxes. Notice that in both models, the monetary authority
trades oﬀ the costs of higher inflation against its benefits. In our benchmark model, the
benefit of inflation is defaulting on foreign debt. In the modified model, it is reducing the
need to levy distorting taxes.
Our theory provides a new lens through which to analyze existing monetary unions.
The most high-profile union lately, of course, is the EMU, and the most controversial aspect
of that union is the fiscal policy constraints embedded in the agreements which set it up, the
Maastricht Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact.
2

Our theory provides a rationale for those fiscal policy constraints. One reading of the
EMU agreements is that, notwithstanding the solemnly expressed intent to make price stability the monetary authority’s primary goal, in practice, monetary policy is set sequentially
by majority rule. In such a situation, the time inconsistency problem in monetary policy is
potentially severe, and as our analysis shows, debt constraints are desirable. Our analysis is
consistent with the view that the EMU framers thought that committing to monetary policy
would be extremely diﬃcult and therefore wisely made debt constraints an integral part of
the agreements.
An alternative reading of these agreements, of course, is that the primacy of the
goal of price stability and the independence of the monetary authority eﬀectively ensure
commitment to future monetary policy and thereby solve the time inconsistency problem. If
one accepts this reading, then as our analysis with commitment indicates, debt constraints
are unnecessary and possibly harmful. (For a forceful argument that debt constraints are
harmful, see Buiter et al.’s 1993 work.)
Our theory also provides a new lens through which to analyze monetary policy in countries in which individual state governments have considerable freedom in setting their fiscal
policies. Our theory suggests that in such monetary unions, unresolved time inconsistency
problems in monetary policy lead to high inflation and profligate fiscal policy.
Argentina is a good example of such a country. It apparently has a serious time inconsistency problem with its monetary policy and, regardless of its good intentions, is unable
to set eﬀective constraints on its provincial governments. These provincial governments routinely run budget deficits that end up being financed by the central bank (Nicolini et al.
(2002)). Expectations of bailouts have increased the provinces’ incentives to behave in a
financially profligate manner. Indeed, one rationale for Argentina’s 1991 convertibility law,
which linked the peso to the dollar, is the hope of restraining that sort of behavior. Jones
et al. (2000) find some evidence that fiscal deficits among these Argentine governments fell
after the imposition of convertibility, though the recent collapse of the currency board suggests that the time inconsistency problems in monetary policy were not solved by the legal
changes. (For related discussions of Argentina, see the work of Cooper and Kempf (2001a
and b) and Tommasi et al. (2001).)
3

The United States is another example of a country which can be viewed as a monetary
union. It, however, appears to have solved the time inconsistency problem in monetary policy,
so that there is no free-rider problem among the states.
Beyond these examples, of course, are many others. Von Hagen and Eichengreen (1996)
have assembled data on fiscal policy restrictions in 49 countries, each of which can be viewed
as a collection of subcentral governments, constituting a monetary union. Von Hagen and
Eichengreen find that 37 of these countries impose restrictions on the fiscal policies of their
subcentral governments. This finding suggests that, in practice, policymakers are concerned
with what we study here: the desirability of constraining the fiscal behavior of members of a
monetary union.
Our research here is related to a literature on fiscal policy in monetary unions, including
the work of Sibert (1992), Beetsma and Uhlig (1999), Dixit and Lambertini (2001), Uhlig
(2002), Ching and Devereux (2003), and Cooper and Kempf (forthcoming). The studies of
Uhlig and Cooper-Kempf are the most closely related to our work here. Uhlig develops a
reduced-form model in which fiscal policy has a free-rider problem. In his model, that problem
ends up reducing welfare, but not raising the inflation rate. Cooper and Kempf focus mostly
on the gains to a monetary union with commitment by the monetary authority and show
that without commitment, the monetary union itself may be undesirable.
An extensive literature has discussed the gains from international cooperation in setting fiscal policy. This literature shows that cooperation is desirable if a country’s fiscal
policy aﬀects world prices and real interest rates. (For details on this result, see the work of
Chari and Kehoe (1990) and Canzoneri and Diba (1991).) The kind of desirable cooperation
that this literature points to applies to the relationship between, for example, Germany and
Canada as well as to that between Germany and Italy; it is not especially related to countries
being in a monetary union. Because the issues raised in this literature are well understood,
we abstract from them here. We do so by considering models in which the fiscal policies of
the cooperating countries taken as a group do not aﬀect world prices and real interest rates.
In such models, there can be no gains to cooperation of this sort.

4

1. The Basic Economy
Consider a two-period model with a monetary union consisting of I identical countries, each
of which is small in the world economy. In period 0, the countries start with an identical
price level p0 , which is given. Each country issues nominal debt in period 0 to lenders who
live outside the monetary union. There are a large number of such lenders, each of whom
is risk neutral and has a discount factor β. In period 1, the monetary authority sets the
monetary policy for the union. We model monetary policy by simply letting the monetary
authority directly choose the price level in period 1, p1 . In all countries, in period 0, output
is a constant given by ω, while in period 1, output y(π) is a decreasing and concave function
of the common inflation rate from period 0 to period 1, denoted by π = p1 /p0 .
The budget constraints of the government in country i are
(1)

p0 ci0 = ω + bi

(2)

p1 ci1 = p1 y(π) − xi

where ci0 and ci1 denote consumption of the residents of country i in the two periods, bi is
nominal debt sold to foreign lenders by country i, and xi is the nominal repayment associated
with country i’s debt. Let (bi , xi ) denote the debt contract of country i. Clearly, the gross
nominal interest rate on debt implicit in this contract is Ri = xi /bi . In equilibrium, the
nominal interest rate is the same across countries.
The model starts with p0 given, so for convenience, we set p0 = 1. We can then
write (2) as ci1 = y(π) − xi /π. The government in country i maximizes the welfare of its
representative consumer, given by
(3)

U(ci0 ) + βU (ci1 ).

We will assume that ω (output in period 0) is suﬃciently smaller than y(1), so that the
governments have an incentive to borrow. The monetary authority’s objective function is an
equally weighted average of the objective functions of the governments in the union. The
profit of a lender who agrees to accept a debt contract (bi , xi ) is given by −bi + βxi /π. Let
b̄ = (b1 , . . . , bI ) and x̄ = (x1 , . . . , xI ) summarize the debt contracts.

5

2. Equilibrium Without Commitment
We model lack of commitment in monetary policy by having the monetary authority choose
the inflation rate after the governments and the lenders have chosen their debt contracts. Of
course, when choosing a debt contract, each government recognizes that its choice will aﬀect
inflation by influencing monetary policy. Specifically, the model’s timing is that governments
choose their debt contracts simultaneously at the start of period 0. Then the lenders decide
whether to accept the contracts. Finally, in period 1, the monetary authority chooses the
common inflation rate π as a function of the repayments x̄ in the contracts.
We consider two regimes: a noncooperative regime, in which the governments simultaneously choose their debt contracts to maximize their own objective functions, and a cooperative regime, in which the governments choose the debt contracts to maximize the equally
weighted average of their objective functions.
In both regimes, we solve the model by starting at the end. Consider first the monetary authority and the lenders. Their problems are the same in both regimes. Taking the
repayments x̄ in the debt contracts as given, the monetary authority chooses π to solve
(4)

max
π

I
1X
U (y(π) − xi /π ).
I i=1

Let π(x̄) denote the resulting monetary policy rule. Consider next the lenders. Profit maximization implies that the lenders will accept any contract that yields nonnegative profits.
Thus, any debt contract must satisfy this:
(5)

−bi + βxi /π(x̄) ≥ 0.
In the noncooperative regime, the government of country i, taking the debt contracts

of other governments (b̄−i , x̄−i ) as given, chooses a debt constraint to solve
(6)

max U(ω + bi ) + βU (y (π(x̄)) − xi /π(x̄))
bi ,Ri

subject to the constraint (5) that lenders accept the contract. A noncooperative equilibrium
(N) is a monetary policy rule π(x̄) that solves (4) and debt contracts (b̄N , x̄N ) that solve (6).
In the cooperative regime, the debt contracts (b̄, x̄) are instead chosen to solve
(7)

max
b̄,R̄

I h
i
1X
U (ω + bi ) + βU (y (π(x̄)) − xi /π(x̄))
I i=1

6

subject to (5). A cooperative equilibrium (C) is a monetary policy rule π(x̄) that solves (4)
and debt contracts (b̄C , x̄C ) that solve (7).
Notice that the monetary policy rule is identical in the two equilibria. The equilibrium
inflation rates and interest rates diﬀer because the noncooperative and cooperative debt and
repayment levels diﬀer.
We restrict consideration to symmetric equilibria in which the debt contracts are the
same in all the countries. We then have
Proposition 1. Welfare measured by (3) in the symmetric cooperative equilibrium is
greater than welfare in any noncooperative equilibrium.
Proof. The noncooperative equilibrium allocations are feasible choices for the governments in the cooperative regime. Thus, if the cooperative equilibrium allocations diﬀer
from those in the noncooperative equilibrium, then welfare in the cooperative equilibrium is
greater than welfare in the noncooperative equilibrium.
We show that the allocations in the two equilibria diﬀer by showing that the firstorder conditions evaluated at the equilibrium allocations must diﬀer. In both equilibria, the
first-order condition for the monetary authority is given by
(8)

I
X

U 0 (ci1 )(yπ + xi /π2 ) = 0.

i=1

In a symmetric equilibrium, the monetary authority’s first-order condition reduces to yπ +
x/π 2 = 0. Notice that in both equilibria, utility maximization implies that (5) holds with
equality. Thus, in both, we can substitute for bi using (5) with equality and then maximize
only with respect to xi .
The first-order condition for government i in a symmetric noncooperative equilibrium
is given by
(9)

[U 0 (c0 ) − U 0 (c1 )] +

x 0
∂π
U (c0 )
= 0.
π
∂xi

The analogous first-order condition in a symmetric cooperative equilibrium is that
(10)

[U 0 (c0 ) − U 0 (c1 )] +

x 0
∂π
x
∂π
U (c0 )
= (I − 1) U 0 (c0 )
.
π
∂xi
π
∂xi
7

To show that (9) and (10) diﬀer, we need only show that ∂π/∂xi is nonzero. To do so, we
diﬀerentiate the monetary authority’s first-order condition with respect to xi to obtain this:
µ ¶

∂π
1 U 00 (c1 )/π − U 0 (c1 )/π 2
=
∂xi
I U 0 (c1 )(yππ − 2x/π3 )
which is clearly positive since y is concave. Q.E.D.
We now show that if we add fiscal constraints in the noncooperative regime, we can implement the cooperative allocation. These constraints take the form of limits on the amount of
debt a government can issue. Assuming that the first-order conditions for the noncooperative
equilibrium are suﬃcient for optimality, we have the following proposition:
Proposition 2. If each country i = 1, . . . , I in the noncooperative regime faces the
constraint bi ≤ bC , then the cooperative allocations are also a noncooperative equilibrium.
Proof. In the noncooperative regime, the increment to welfare of a small increase in
xi is given by the left side of (9). Consider evaluating this increment at the cooperative
allocations. From (10) and the result that ∂π/∂xi is positive, we have that the left side of
(9) is positive. Thus, at the cooperative allocations, a noncooperative government has an
incentive to increase xi and also bi , since bi = βxi /π. Q.E.D.
When the number of countries I in the monetary union is large, the first-order conditions in the noncooperative equilibrium are suﬃcient for optimality because ∂π/∂xi goes to
zero as I goes to infinity, and the resulting problem is necessarily concave.
Thus, we have shown here that without monetary policy commitment in a monetary
union, fiscal constraints are desirable.

3. Equilibrium With Commitment
So far, we have assumed that the monetary authority cannot commit to its policy. This lack of
commitment turns out to be crucial for our result that debt constraints improve welfare. We
show now that when the monetary authority can commit, the noncooperative and cooperative
equilibria coincide, so that debt constraints can, at best, leave welfare unaﬀected.
We change the timing of our model to allow for commitment by the monetary authority.
Specifically, now the monetary authority chooses the inflation rate first, and the governments
8

then choose debt contracts. Clearly, in this scenario, the inflation rate cannot depend on the
debt contracts. Profit maximization implies that lenders will accept any contract that yields
nonnegative profits, so that any debt contract with country i must satisfy this:
(11)

−bi + βxi /π ≥ 0.
In the noncooperative regime, then, the government of country i solves

(12)

max U(ω + bi ) + βU (y(π) − xi /π )
bi ,xi

subject to (11). Let (bi (π), xi (π)) denote the debt-contracting rule in the noncooperative
regime for i = 1, . . . , I. The monetary authority takes as given the debt-contracting rules for
each government and solves
(13)

max
π

I
1X
[U (ω + bi (π)) + βU (y(π) − xi (π)/π)].
I i=1

Here a noncooperative equilibrium is a monetary policy π that solves (13) and debt contracts

(b̄N (π), x̄N (π)) that solve (12).
In the cooperative regime, the debt contracts (b̄, x̄) are chosen to solve
(14)

max
b̄,R̄

I
1X
[U (ω + bi ) + βU (y(π) − xi /π)]
I i=1

subject to (11). Inspection of (12) and (14) makes clear that the debt-contracting rules are
the same in the two regimes. And the problem of the monetary authority in the cooperative
regime is again given by (13). A cooperative equilibrium is a monetary policy rule π(x̄) that
solves (4) and debt contracts (b̄C (π), x̄C (π)) that solve (14).
Since the debt-contracting rules are the same in the two regimes, this follows:
Proposition 3. With commitment by the monetary authority, the noncooperative
and cooperative equilibria coincide.
Propositions 2 and 3 taken together imply that the question of whether debt constraints are desirable is intimately connected to whether the monetary authority can commit
to future monetary policy. Proposition 3 says that, with commitment, binding constraints
on issuing debt reduce welfare unless they are chosen to be exactly equal to the debt levels
in the cooperative equilibrium. Proposition 2 implies that as long as such commitment is not
possible, appropriately chosen debt constraints strictly improve welfare.
9

4. Conclusion
Here we have shown that the desirability of debt constraints in a monetary union depends
critically on whether the monetary authority can commit to its policies. If it can commit,
then debt constraints are not desirable; they can only impose costs. But if the monetary
authority cannot commit, then the time inconsistency problem in monetary policy produces
a free-rider problem in fiscal policy, and debt constraints are desirable.

10

Appendix: An Economy With Domestic Lenders
For simplicity, we have assumed above that all debt of the monetary union is held by
foreigners. Here we sketch the analysis in a related model in which all debt is instead held by
residents of the monetary union. To establish that our results do not depend on foreigners
holding the union’s debt, we assume throughout that all the government debt of a country
in the union is held by consumers in that country.
Consider first the preferences of country i:
U(ci0 ) + V (gi ) + βU(ci1 )
where ci0 and ci1 denote private consumption in the two periods, gi is government consumption
in period 0; U (·), the utility from private consumption; and V (gi ), the utility from government
consumption. In each country i, output in period 0 is a constant given by ω, while output in
period 1 is given by y(π, Ti ), where π denotes the common inflation rate and Ti denotes tax
revenues in period 1. To ensure that real interest rates are unaﬀected by policy, we assume
that consumers have access to a linear saving technology with exogenous gross return 1 + r.
Consider next the budget constraints of the government and the consumers. For
simplicity, assume that government consumption is financed entirely by debt issue. The
debt contract of government i is denoted by (bi , xi ), where bi is the amount of nominal debt
and xi is the nominal repayment on the debt. The budget constraints of the government in
country i are bi = gi and Ti = xi /π. The budget constraints of the consumer in country i
are ci0 = ω − ki − bi and ci1 = y(π, Ti ) + (1 + r)ki + xi /π − Ti , where ki denotes savings in
the storage technology. Notice that we have assumed that all the debt of the government
of country i is held by the consumers of that country. We assume throughout that ω is
suﬃciently small so that the equilibrium is interior, in the sense that both ki and bi are
positive. Let b̄ = (b1 , . . . , bI ) and x̄ = (x1 , . . . , xI ) summarize the debt contracts.
The timing of this model without commitment is as follows. In period 0, the governments choose their debt contracts (bi , xi ) and government consumption levels gi (= bi ) simultaneously. Then consumers make saving decisions si which, given bi , determine the amount
stored ki . In period 1, the monetary authority chooses the common inflation rate π as a

11

function of the repayments x̄ in the debt contracts and the stored amounts k̄ = (k1 , . . . , kI ).
Finally, the governments choose tax revenues Ti to satisfy their budget constraints.
To set up the equilibrium, we work back from the end of period 1. Given π and xi , the
government decision in period 1 is determined by Ti = xi /π. The monetary authority chooses
π to solve
(15)

µ µ

¶

¶

I
1X
xi
max
U y π,
+ (1 + r)ki .
π I
π
i=1

In (15) we have used the budget constraint of the government in period 1. Let π(x̄, k̄) denote
the resulting monetary policy rule.
Now consider the saving decisions of the consumers. Clearly, in any interior equilibrium, the real rates of return on storage and government debt must be equal, and the
first-order condition for savings is given by U 0 (ci0 ) = β(1 + r)U 0 (ci1 ).
In the noncooperative regime, the government of country i, taking other countries’
debt contracts and the saving decisions as given, solves
(16)

Ã Ã

!

xi
max U(ω − bi − ki ) + V (gi ) + βU y π(x̄, k̄),
+ (1 + r)ki
gi ,bi ,xi ,ki
π(x̄, k̄)

!

subject to the period 0 budget constraint of the government and the first-order condition for
consumer savings.
In the cooperative regime, (ḡ, b̄, x̄, k̄) solve
(17)

"

Ã Ã

!

I
xi
1X
U(ω − bi − ki ) + V (gi ) + βU y π(x̄, k̄),
+ (1 + r)ki
max
π(x̄, k̄)
ḡ,b̄,x̄,k̄ I i=1

!#

subject to the period 0 of government budget constraint and the first-order condition for
consumer savings in each country.
A noncooperative equilibrium is a monetary policy rule π(x̄, k̄) that solves (15) and
allocations (ḡN , b̄N , x̄N , k̄N ) that solve (16). A cooperative equilibrium is a monetary policy
rule π(x̄, k̄) that solves (15) and allocations (ḡC , b̄C , x̄C , k̄C ) that solve (17).
The analogs of Propositions 1, 2, and 3 can easily be shown to hold for this model.

12

References
Beetsma, Roel and Harald Uhlig. 1999. An Analysis of the Stability and Growth Pact.
Economic Journal 109 (458, October), 546—71.
Buiter, Willem, Giancarlo Corsetti, and Nouriel Roubini. 1993. Excessive Deficits: Sense
and Nonsense in the Treaty of Maastricht. Economic Policy: A European Forum 8
(16, April), 57—100.
Canzoneri, Matthew B. and Behzad T. Diba. 1991. Fiscal Deficits, Financial Integration,
and a Central Bank for Europe. Journal of the Japanese and International Economy
5 (4, December), 381—403.
Chari, V. V. and Patrick J. Kehoe. 1990. International Coordination of Fiscal Policy in
Limiting Economies. Journal of Political Economy 98 (3, June), 617—36.
Ching, Stephen and Michael B. Devereux. 2003. Mundell Revisited: A Simple Approach to
the Costs and Benefits of a Single Currency Area. Review of International Economics
11 (4, September), 674—91.
Cooper, Russell W. and Hubert Kempf. 2001a. Dollarization and the Conquest of Hyperinflation in Divided Societies. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review
25 (3, Summer), 3—12.
. 2001b. On Dollarization. Manuscript. Boston University.
. Forthcoming. Overturning Mundell: Fiscal Policy in a Monetary Union. Review
of Economic Studies.
Dixit, Avinash and Luisa Lambertini. 2001. Monetary-Fiscal Policy Interactions and Commitment versus Discretion in a Monetary Union. European Economic Review 45 (4-6,
May), 977—87.
Jones, Mark P., Pablo Sanguinetti, and Mariano Tommasi. 2000. Politics, Institutions, and
Fiscal Performance in a Federal System: An Analysis of the Argentine Provinces.
Journal of Development Economics 61 (2, April), 305—33.
Nicolini, Juan Pablo, Josefina Posadas, Juan Sanguinetti, Pablo Sanguinetti, and Mariano
Tommasi. 2002. Decentralization, Fiscal Discipline in Sub-National Governments, and
the Bailout Problem: The Case of Argentina. Research Department Working Paper
R-467. Inter-American Development Bank.
13

Sibert, Anne. 1992. Government Finance in a Common Currency Area. Journal of International Money and Finance 11 (6, December), 567—78.
Tommasi, Mariano, Sebastian Saiegh, and Pablo Sanguinetti. 2001. Fiscal Federalism in
Argentina: Policies, Politics, and Institutional Reform. Economia: Journal of the
Latin American and Caribbean Economic Association 1 (2, Spring), 157—200.
Uhlig, Harald. 2002. One Money, But Many Fiscal Policies in Europe: What are the Consequences? Discussion Paper 3296. Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Von Hagen, Jurgen and Barry Eichengreen. 1996. Federalism, Fiscal Restraints, and European Monetary Union. American Economic Review 86 (2, May), 134—38.

14

