NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BUREAUCRATS OR POLITICIANS?
Alberto Alesina
Guido Tabellini
Working Paper 10241
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10241
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004

For useful comments we thank Philippe Aghion, Timothy Besley, Alessandro Lizzeri, Oliver Hart, Tom
Romer, Andrei Shleifer, Charles Wyplosz and participants in seminars at Harvard, Princeton, Geneva, the
CIAR meeting in Toronto, March 2003, and the Wallis Conference in Rochester in October 2003. This project
was initiated while Alesina was visiting IGIER at Bocconi University; he is very grateful for the hospitality.
Tabellini thanks CIAR for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Alberto Alesina and Guido Tabellini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Bureaucrats or Politicians?
Alberto Alesina and Guido Tebellini
NBER Working Paper No. 10241
January 2004
JEL No. H0, H1
ABSTRACT
Policies are typically chosen by politicians and bureaucrats. This paper investigates the e fficiency
criteria for allocating policy tasks to elected policymakers (politicians) or non elected bureaucrats.
Politicians are more efficient for tasks that do not involve too much specific technical ability relative
to effort; there is uncertainty about ex post preferences of the public and flexibility is valuable; time
inconsistency is not an issue; small but powerful vested interests do not have large stakes in the
policy outcome; effective decisions over policies require taking into account policy
complementarities and compensating the losers. We then compare this benchmark with the case in
which politicians choose when to delegate and we show that the two generally differ.
Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu
Guido Tabellini
IGIER Bocconi University
Via Salasco 5
20136 Milano, Italy
guido.tabellini@uni-bocconi.it

Bureaucrats or Politicians?∗
Alberto Alesina and Guido Tabellini
Harvard University and Bocconi University

First Draft: May 2003;

This draft: December 2003
Abstract

Policies are typically chosen by politicians and bureaucrats.
This paper investigates the eﬃciency criteria for allocating policy
tasks to elected policymakers (politicians) or non elected bureaucrats. Politicians are more eﬃcient for tasks that do not involve
too much specific technical ability relative to eﬀort; there is uncertainty about ex post preferences of the public and flexibility is
valuable; time inconsistency is not an issue; small but powerful
vested interests do not have large stakes in the policy outcome;
eﬀective decisions over policies require taking into account policy
complementarities and compensating the losers. We then compare this benchmark with the case in which politicians choose
when to delegate and we show that the two generally diﬀer.
JEL classifications: H1 E00 K00.
Keywords: politics, delegation, bureaucracies.

1

Introduction

Policies are chosen and implemented by both elected representatives
(politicians) and non elected bureaucrats. The idea that politicians
choose policies and bureaucrats simply implement them is simplistic;
∗

For useful comments we thank Philippe Aghion, Timothy Besley, Alessandro
Lizzeri, Oliver Hart, Tom Romer, Andrei Shleifer, Charles Wyplosz and participants
in seminars at Harvard, Princeton, Geneva, the CIAR meeting in Toronto, March
2003, and the Wallis Conference in Rochester in October 2003. This project was
initiated while Alesina was visiting IGIER at Bocconi University; he is very grateful
for the hospitality. Tabellini thanks CIAR for financial support.

1

in fact the boundaries between decision and execution are a grey area
and in many cases bureaucrats do much more than executing either de
jure or de facto. In most countries non elected central bankers conduct
monetary policy, with much independence. Regulatory policies are normally the result of both political and bureaucratic intervention. Fiscal
policy is, instead, by and large chosen by elected representatives (governments and legislatures); bureaucrats are involved in important aspects
of auditing and implementation, but they do not choose tax rates or
the amount of spending for their department. Foreign policy decisions
are made by politicians, sometimes after consultation with diplomatic
or military personnel.
What criteria are used to allocate decision power amongst politicians
and bureaucrats? We explore this question both from the point of view
of economic eﬃciency and from the positive point of view of what politicians would choose. First we ask what is the socially optimal allocation
of tasks, that is the allocation that would be chosen by every member
of this society behind a veil of ignorance at a constitutional table, or,
equivalently, by a social planner. Then we discuss the positive question
of whether and how politicians interested in reelection would find it in
their interests to delegate certain tasks (and which ones) to bureaucrats.
Economists have emphasized one specific argument in favor of dele-

2

gation of policy to a non elected bureaucrat: time inconsistency in monetary policy. Rogoﬀ (1985) pointed out how an independent and inflation
averse central banker not subject to ex post democratic control would
improve social welfare.1 But, as political scientists know well there is
much more to think about. For instance, even fiscal policy is marred with
a host of time inconsistency problems, but societies seem reluctant to
allocate this policy prerogative to independent bureaucrats. Note, however, that Blinder (1997) argues that some aspects of fiscal policy could
be allocated to an independent agency operating like an independent
Central Bank2 . An interesting question is why this never happens. An
ability to commit to a course of action may even be desirable in foreign
policy, which however is always the prerogative of appointed politicians,
at least in the more relevant phase of choosing the general strategy.3
The raise of the regulatory state has made the bureaucracy a key player
in both the decisions and the execution of a large amount of legislation.
Our starting point is the premise that the main diﬀerence between
1

See Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Barro and Gordon (1983) for the ”classic” statement of the time inconsistency problem. Walsh (1995) and Persson and
Tabellini (1993) discussed ”contractual” arrangements between popular representatives and independent central bankers. For an empirical discussion of the benefits
of independent central bankers see Grilli Masciandaro and Tabellini (1991), Alesina
and Summers (1993) for OECD countries and Cukierman (1992) for a larger sample
of countries.
2
. Also the Business Council of Australia (1999) proposed that tax policy in
Australia be set by an independent agency within limits imposed by the legislature.
3
See Putnam (1988) for a discussion of the role and benefits of commitments in
international relations.

3

politicians and bureaucrats lies in their motivations. Politicians are motivated by the goal of winning elections. Bureaucrats are motivated by
”career concerns”, that is they want to fulfill the goals of their organization because this improves their professional prospects in the public or
private sector.4 In addition, by appearing competent, the bureaucrat can
guarantee his autonomy and independence.

5

Armed with this premise,

we analyze both a normative and a positive model of task allocation.
In the former a social planner would optimally assign tasks in order to
maximize eﬃciency and by optimally using the diﬀerent incentives of bureaucrats and politicians. In a positive model the politicians themselves
choose when to delegate and the opportunistic motivation of politicians
determines what is delegated. As we show below, the normative and
positive implications for task attribution do not coincide.
We analyze many diﬀerent types of policies, trying to be reasonably
exhaustive. From a perspective of economic eﬃciency, politicians are
preferable for tasks that have the following features: i) diﬀerences in
performance are due to eﬀort, rather than individual talent or technical
ability; ii)the preferences of the public are unstable and uncertain, so
that flexibility is valuable, a case that may be especially relevant for
4

For a discussion of how bureaucrats are motivated by prospect of career enhancement and this leads them to internalize the goals of the organization, see the classic
treatment in Wilson (1989) especially Chapter 9.
5

See Carpenter (2001) for a discussion of this point.

4

changing and complex policy environments; iii) time inconsistency is
unlikely to be a relevant issue; iii) the nature of the polciy is such that
politicians cannot strategically distort policy choices in favor of short
term objectives and against long term welfare; iv) the stakes for organized interest groups are small, or the legal system is poorly designed
so that corruption is widespread; v) side payments to compensate the
losers are desirable and relevant, or bundling of diﬀerent aspects of policy
management and a comprehensive approach is important. The reverse
applies to the attribution of prerogatives to bureaucrats.
When politicians (rather than social planners) choose what to delegate, the results are quite diﬀerent. Politicians want to retain those
tasks that are likely to generate large rents, large campaign contribution or bribes. They are instead more inclined to delegate tasks that are
”risky”, in the sense that they may lead to policy failures: blame shifting
to bureaucrats shields the politician from the risk. Politicians also never
delegate redistributive tasks, because those allow politicians to construct
winning coalitions of voters and lead more easily to electoral victory.
A few examples may clarify some of our points. Monetary policy
involves fairly sophisticated skills, has relatively few distributional consequences (compared to say to fiscal policy) and social preferences on
what is the appropriate goal of monetary policy are quite stable: at least

5

ex-ante most people would agree that monetary policy ought to control
inflation with some room for output stabilization.6 Moreover, politicians can blame (as they often do) the central bank for downturns in the
economy. Hence, delegation to an independent Central Bank seems desirable and politically attractive. Incidentally, these arguments provide
a rationale for independent central bankers even for those who do not
believe that time inconsistency of monetary policy is a major problem,
such as Blinder (1999). On the contrary, foreign policy is an area where
it is very diﬃcult to describe ex ante reasonably precise and fixed policy
goals; in a changing world the preferences of the public may change substantially. Just think of how preferences for foreign policy changed in
the US before and after September 11, 2001. Hence, from a perspective
of economic eﬃciency, it should remain under political control. Finally,
much of fiscal policy has a redistributive nature and could be a source of
political rents. Our positive analysis predicts that politicians will prefer
6

Obviously monetary police has redistributive consequences as well

(think of debtor and creditors) but at least in recent decades the main
goal of monetary policy is inflation control and output stabilization.
Often the redistributive consequences of monetary policy are either unexpected or a source of time inconsistency (think of devaluation of the
public debt).

6

to maintain control over fiscal policy, as we normally observe in practice.
Our paper is of course related to the vast political science literature
asking the positive question of why legislative powers are delegated in
practice, what the eﬀect of delegation is, the ”bureaucratic drift” etc.
- see Epstein and O’ Halloran (1999). This literature, mostly focused
on the US, is filled with interesting controversies. Some authors (Lowi
(1969) amongst others) argue that delegation is deleterious, an abdication of the legislators’ responsibility and a way of favoring special
interests (Stigler (1971)). Other authors (Mc Cubbins, Noll and Weingast (1987, 1989)) instead claim that the legislators can, at least up to
a point, control the bureaucratic agencies by means of procedural rules.
Carpenter (2001) dissents and argues instead that the rise of the regulatory state has given a large latitude to many bureaucracies to decide
in addition to implement legislation.
But then, if the control of politicians over bureaucrats is imperfect,
that is if the agencies can act following their own motivations, why
delegate at all? One answer is ”optimistic” and relates to the need
for division of labor, reduction of eﬀort for the legislators etc.. Others
are more cynical: Epstein and O’ Halloran (1999) argue that the type
of delegation chosen is the one that maximizes the benefits for elected
politicians rather than social welfare; this is precisely what we model

7

in the positive part of our paper. Fiorina (1977) points out the blame
shifting role of delegation: politicians delegate to agencies in order to
blame them when things go badly and claim responsibility when success
occurs. We derive this result formally but we point out a trade oﬀ
between using bureaucrats as scapegoat and rent extraction.
Our paper is also related to several recent contributions that have
investigated the role of career concerns rather than explicit contracts.
Dewatripont, Jewitt and Tirole (1999a,b) discuss the foundations of
this approach and apply it to study the behavior of government agencies. They focus on some issues related to ours, namely the nature and
”fuzziness” of the agencies mission, but they do not contrast bureaucratic and political accountability. Dewatripont and Tirole (1999) study
the role of advocates that provide information and opinion to policymakers, and discuss how the career concerns of advocates may improve
policymaking. Maskin and Tirole (2001) investigate the attribution of
responsibilities between accountable and non accountable agents. The
latter have intrinsic motivations, while the former seek to please their
principals because of implicit rewards (career concerns). In our set up,
instead, we neglect the role of intrinsic motivations: both bureaucrats
and politicians need to be kept accountable with implicit incentives; but
the implicit incentive schemes can be of two kinds: those that define a

8

politician (striving for re-election), and those that define a bureaucrat
(career concerns). Schultz (2003) contrasts direct democracy, representative democracy and bureaucratic delegation. Like Maskin and Tirole
(2001), he views bureaucrats as unaccountable and focuses on the tradeoﬀ between ideological polarization and accountability: bureaucrats are
less polarized than partisan politicians, but are more inflexible since
they are unacountable and cannot be removed after shocks to the voters’ policy preferences. Besley and Gathak (2003) also study intrinsically motivated agents, and focus on how to combine intrinsic motivation with implicit rewards. Besley and Coate (2003) contrast appointed
and elected regulators of public utilities; both policymakers’ types are
intrinsically motivated, but direct election allows the voters to unbundle
policy issues.
Another related question is that of privatization of government activities. Hart, Shleifer and Vishny ((1997) in particular discuss when it
is preferable to delegate the provision of public goods to private enterprises and when to keep it under control of politicians. Issues regarding
incompleteness of the contract between politicians and private providers
have close analogies with some of the questions we address below.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the simplest
case of our model and justifies its assumptions. Sections 3 and 4 discuss

9

cases of policies with a ”public good” nature and with no redistribution.
Section 5 reviews the role of bureaucrats in solving time inconsistency
problems and in keeping politicians’ short termism under control. Sections 6,7 and 8 deal with redistribution and with the role of organized
interest groups. Section 9 discusses the positive aspects of our model.
The last section concludes.

2

The Model

Consider a society that has to decide whether to assign a certain policy
to an elected oﬃcer or to a bureaucrat. With the generic term ”policymaker” we indicate who chooses policy, so he or she can be either a
politician or a bureaucrat. In the simplest possible case we consider a
single policy, the result of which is determined by the eﬀort put in by the
policymaker and by his ability. Thus, the policy outcome y is defined as
follows:
y =θ+a

(1)

where a represents the eﬀort of the policymaker and θ ∼ N(θ̄, σ 2θ ) is his
random ability. Ability and eﬀort are additive.7 Citizens care about the
policy outcome according to a well behaved, concave utility function,
7

Alternatively they could be multiplicative leading to more compli-

cated algebra but similar results. See Dewatripont, Jewitt and Tirole
(1999b).

10

U(y). For the moment we consider linear preferences, U(y) = y, since
the strict concavity of the utility function does not aﬀect the nature
of the results and simply makes the notation more cumbersome. We
introduce strict concavity later when it matters.
Eﬀort is costly, and the strictly convex and increasing cost is labelled
C(a). The reward for the policymaker is labelled R(a) and it diﬀers
depending on whether the policymaker is a politician or a bureaucrat.
Both of them maximize their utility defined as:
R(a) − C(a)

(2)

with Ca > 0, Caa > 0 and R(a) to be defined below (subscripts denote
partial derivatives). Note that our model can be restated in terms of
rent extraction instead of eﬀort. That is define a = −r where r > 0
are rents and V (r) (with Vr > 0 Vrr < 0 ) as the utility of rents which
would be of course added to R(.). So every time we say below that the
policymakers ”chooses how much eﬀort to put in” we can reinterpret the
statement as choosing ”how much rent to extract.” The marginal cost
of eﬀort would then play the same role of the marginal benefit of rents
in the first order conditions. We mostly use the eﬀort terminology and
notation which is the one most commonly used in the career concern
literature.
The timing is as follows. At the ”Constitutional Table” society
11

chooses who has control rights over the policy (in the simplest case there
is only one, there will be multiple policies later). Then the policymaker
chooses eﬀort, a, before knowing his ability, θ. Finally nature chooses
θ, outcomes are observed and the reward is paid. Irrespective of who
has control rights, only the outcome y is observable by the principals,
not its composition between eﬀort and ability. Hence the agent’s reward
can only be based on the policy outcome, y. Note that control over a
policy con only be given either to a bureaucrat or to a politician: we do
not allow for joint control over policies, or for some checks and balances
between the two. We return to this issue below, in section 5.

2.1

The bureaucrat

We posit that bureaucrats are motivated by career concerns. That is,
they are concerned with the perception of their ability θ in the eyes of
those that may then promote them or oﬀer them alternative job opportunities in the private sector. Therefore the bureaucrat’s reward is (the
suﬃx B stands for Bureaucrat):
RB (a) = E(E(θ | y)) = E(y − ae ) = E(θ + a − ae )

(3)

where ae is the public’s perception of a.
Equilibrium behavior of the bureaucrat is obtained as follows. First,
compute the first order condition with respect to eﬀort, a, taking the
expected level of eﬀort ae as given. Then, impose the equilibrium re12

quirement, that ae = a. By (3) and (2), we obtain:
1 = Ca (aB )

(4)

where aB indicates the equilibrium eﬀort of the bureaucrat.
How does this model of bureaucratic behavior diﬀer from that induced by an optimal contract between the voters and the bureaucrat?
Section 1 of the appendix shows that, in this simple environment, it does
not diﬀer at all (except for the neglect of the bureaucrat’s participation
constraint, which throughout the paper we assume is always satisfied).
But as the policy environment gets more complicated, as in the following sections, career concern incentives do diﬀer from those of an optimal
contract. Thus, our model of bureaucratic behavior contains some implicit restrictions on the design of bureaucratic institutions. We are not
too apologetic about it, for two reasons. First, as a matter of fact,
bureaucrats are typically not motivated by sharp pecuniary incentives
and complicated contractual arrangements with society. As others have
argued before us, the implicit rewards and the contractual incompleteness oﬀered by career concerns seem a better approximation of observed
arrangements, compared to the purified world of optimal contracts see Wilson (1989) and Dewatripont, Jewitt and Tirole (1999a,b). Second, if indeed society could write unrestricted optimal contracts with
its policymakers, then the question of whether political or bureaucratic
13

delegation is better for the voters would be utterly unininteresting, since
bureaucratic arrangements would always dominate.

2.2

The politician

The politicians’s goal is to be reelected and he accomplishes this goal if
y is above a threshold W. We do not allow any career concerns for the
politicians, other than to be reelected. Normalizing to 1 the benefits of
oﬃce holding we have (the suﬃx P stands for Politician):
RP (a) = Pr(y ≥ W ) = 1 − P (W − a)

(5)

where P (W − a) = Pr(θ ≤ W − a). We impose rationality of the voters,
so that they expect that the alternative to reelecting the incumbent is
to get another one with average talent, who in equilibrium will put the
same amount of eﬀort as the current one. In fact every period is identical
and the politician’s eﬀort choice is made before he observes his talent.8
8

Note that the model could be easily generalized to several periods,

if the politician’s ability today is a signal of his ability tomorrow but
some random element of ability is present every period so that it can
never be fully learnt in advance. A widely studied case in the political
business ccycle literature is that of a MA (1) process for abiity. Persson
and Tabellini (2000) discuss the implications of this political model more
extensively.

14

It follows that:
W = θ̄ + ae

(6)

With a normal distribution for θ, equilibrium eﬀort by the politician,
aP , is defined implicitly by the first order condition:
n(θ̄) = Ca (aP )

(7)

√
where n(θ̄) = 1/σ θ 2π is the density of the normal distribution of θ
evaluated at its mean.
How does the eﬀort of the politician compare with that of the bureaucrat? Comparing (4) and (7), we see that the answer is ambiguous and
depends on parameters’ values. Note that aP > aB does not automatically imply that the politician unambiguously dominates the bureaucrat
from the voters’ perspective, however. The reason is that the equilibrium
eﬀort of the bureaucrat here coincides with the first best. Hence, the
bureaucrat can be worse than the politician only if it earns rents (i.e., if
the bureaucrat’s participation constraint does not bind, as discussed in
section 1 of the appendix). In this case, and if political delegation does
not violate the incentive constraint, then whenever aP > aB the voters
are better oﬀ under the politician than under the bureaucrat.

2.3

Discussion

It is important to pause to discuss how these strawmen ”politicians” and
”bureaucrats” relate to real world cases. Probably the most compelling
15

example of a ”bureaucrat” as modelled here is a Central Banker. His
incentives to fulfill his ask are mostly driven by the desire to appear
competent, even though even a Central Banker occasionally may bend
to the electoral needs of a ”politician”. Like our ”bureaucrat”, a Central
Banker sets policy without political interferences and his tasks are set by
a clear mandate to keep inflation low. An American President is instead
the quintessential example of a politician, seeking reelection for himself in
his first term and for his party in his second.9 The paper can be viewed
as asking the following questions: from the point of view of economic
eﬃciency, should institutional arrangements such as those relating to
monetary policy with an independent Central Bank be extended to other
areas of policymaking? And when are such arrangements likely to be
chosen by opportunistic politicians?
In practice bureaucrats in charge of important agencies may be preparing a leap into politics, so they may worry about their popularity and
not only their competence per se. On the contrary, politicians may look
ahead to a career in the private sector. While these caveats point to a
large gray area and intermediate cases between our ”politician” and our
9

See Alesina and Spear (1988) for a formal discussion of how a party

may create incentive for a second year President to behave as if he were
interested in reelection and avoid a ”last period” problem.

16

”bureaucrat”, it is useful as a first step to clearly identify how career
concerns and electoral incentives lead to diﬀerent result depending on
the nature of the policy in question.

3

Imperfect monitoring

We now move to the case of imperfect monitoring, that is a situation in
which performance is not perfectly observable. Thus, we add noise, ε,
besides talent (θ) and eﬀort (a) :
y =θ+ε+a
with ε ∼ N(0, σ 2ε ), uncorrelated with θ and unobservable. Only performance y is observed and can be the basis of rewards.
In this case the reward for bureaucrats can be rewritten as:
RB (a) = E(E(θ | y)) = θ̄ + βE(θ + ε + a − ae − θ̄)

(8)

where β = σ2θ /(σ 2θ + σ 2ε ) < 1. Given our assumption of normality of the
distributions, we obtain a well known signal extraction result. Now the
perception of talent is ”discounted” by a term β which reflects the signal
to noise ratio. In equilibrium the choice of the bureaucrat is given by:
β = Ca (aB )

(9)

Not surprisingly, the bureaucrat puts in less eﬀort the lower is the signal
to noise ratio.
17

Note that, with imperfect monitoring, the career concern contract no
longer induces the optimal amount of eﬀort. Given risk neutrality, the
optimal contract (under the assumption that the principal only observes
y) would still induce the same amount of eﬀort as in (4) above - see also
section 1 of the appendix. That is, imperfect monitoring would not add
any distortions. But if the bureaucrat can only be rewarded implicitly
through career concerns, as we assume, then imperfect monitoring entails
a loss of welfare for the voters.
We now turn to political delegation. The politician’s reward is given
by the same expression as above, except that now the distribution from
which the probability Pr(y ≥ W ) can be computed has a larger variance,
that reflects both the variance of θ and of ε. It is immediate to derive
the first order condition of the politician as follows:
n(θ̄, 0) = Ca (aP )
p
√
where n(θ̄, 0) = 1/( σ 2θ + σ 2ε 2π) is the density of the random variable
θ + ε, evaluated at the mean of both θ and ε.

We are now ready to establish the following
Proposition 1 The comparison between aP and aB is ambiguous. Imperfect monitoring (high σ 2ε ) reduces eﬀort for both types of policymakers. Higher σ 2θ increases aB but decreases aP .

18

Therefore, less monitoring does not favor one or the other type of
policymakers. This result is related to those obtained by Dewatripont,
Jewitt and Tirole (1999b), who also point out that performance less
closely tied to talent or eﬀort weakens the incentives of agents motivated
by career concerns. But note that the same conclusions also apply to
a politician. Hence, imperfect monitoring reduces the performance of
both policymaker types (relative to an optimal contract), but it does
not provide an argument for preferring a politician to a bureaucrat at
the constitutional stage.
More uncertainty about the policymaker ability, however, does favor the bureaucrat over the politician. With imperfect monitoring a
larger variance of θ actually increases eﬀort of the bureaucrat, while
it has the opposite eﬀect on the politician. Intuitively, an increase in
the variance of θ increases the signal-to-noise ratio and implies that observed performance (y) is a better indicator of ability (θ). This makes
the bureaucrat work harder, since by assumption he fully internalizes the
benefit of higher expected ability.10 The politician, instead, only wants
10

Here the bureaucrat is risk neutral, which means that his compensa-

tion is a linear function of expected ability (conditional on performance).
A risk averse bureaucrat would put in even more eﬀort with more uncertainty over θ, if his marginal utility was convex (eg. with iso-elastic
utility function, as in the literature on precautionary savings). This
19

to overcome the re-election threshold (giving the voters more than their
reservation utility is a waste). If ability is more uncertain (if σ 2θ is high),
then re-election prospects are less sensitive to eﬀort, since more of the
policy outcome is due to randomness. Hence his incentives are weakened.
This result has a practical and sensible implication: bureaucrats are
better than politicians in tasks requiring special abilities or technical
competence, that not everyone is likely to have. The reason is not that
bureaucrats are more gifted than politicians, but rather that they have
stronger incentives to pretend that they are gifted.11 This implication is
strengthened if evaluating the performance of a bureaucrat also requires
would further increase his attractiveness relative to the politician. But
the opposite would be true if the bureacrat’s marginal utility was concave (in this case more uncertainty over θ could weaken the bureaucrat
incentives, if the eﬀect on marginal utility outweighs the eﬀect on the
signal to noise ratio).
11
This result would be reinforced if the extent to which bureaucratic
ability is rewarded was also allowed to vary. Tasks where technical abilities matter more are also those for which rewards for ability are higher.
For instance, being a good central banker also entails ability in forecasting; if this talent is highly rewarded in the market place, this is an
additional reason to delegate monetary policy to a bureaucrat (since it
gives a stronger incentive to appear a talented bureaucrat).

20

special technical abilities - that is, if the extent of imperfect monitoring
also depends on who does the monitoring. In the case of politicians, the
ultimate judges of performance are the voters at large. The performance
of bureaucrats, instead, is mainly evaluated by their professional peers.
Hence, imperfect monitoring is less of a problem if politicians are given
simple tasks, since bureaucrats can more easily be held accountable by
their peers for more technically demanding tasks. Maskin and Tirole
(2001) and Epstein and O’ Halloran (1999) reach a similar conclusion in
diﬀerent models.

4

Policy tasks in an uncertain world

We now add an element of uncertainty in tasks. In particular, suppose
that at the Constitutional Table voters are not sure of how their preferences will evolve. We return to the case of perfect monitoring and we
assume that there are two possible policies, that is two diﬀerent directions in which eﬀort can be devoted to: yi = θ + ai , with i = 1, 2.12
With multiple tasks, which will be our focus from now on, one
needs to specify a general cost function with multiple arguments, C =
12

For a general discussion of multi task functions in a principal- agent

relationship see Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991). They analyze situations in which incentive schemes need to account for the optimal allocation of eﬀort in diﬀerent tasks.

21

C(a1 , a2 ). Instead of using the general formulation, we simplify to either an additive case (C = C(a1 + a2 ), where eﬀort in the various tasks
is perfectly substitutable in the cost function, or to a separable case
(C = C(a1 ) + C(a2 )), where the marginal cost of eﬀort in one task
is totally independent of eﬀort devoted to the other tasks. We choose
the simplest formulation that does not produce knife-hedge or ”trivial”
results. The more general specification of costs generates qualitatively
similar results. We begin in this section by considering additive costs,
so that C = C(a1 + a2 ).
At the Constitutional Table the (identical) voters are uncertain about
their ex post preferences over alternative policies, so that voters utility
is now given by the following concave function:
U(λy1 + (1 − λ)y2 )

(10)

with λ = 1 with probability q > 1/2, λ = 0 with probability (1 − q).
Thus, society does not know ex ante what it will like ex post; but there
is no disagreement ex post amongst members of society. Disagreements
and redistribution will be analyzed below. The timing is now as follows.
First, at the Constitutional Table the voters choose whether to assign
this policy to a bureaucrat or to a politician, then nature chooses λ,
that is social preferences are determined. Then the policymaker chooses
[ai ] , then nature chooses θ, and finally policy is determined and rewards
22

paid. We assume that λ is observable but not verifiable.13
Choosing a non-elected bureaucrat means that voters decide at the
Constitutional Table to assign a task to the bureaucrat. Given that at
the Constitutional Table preferences are not yet known, one can only
assign to the bureaucrat an unconditional task defined as follows:
y = δy1 + (1 − δ)y2

(11)

where δ is a parameter specified by the Constitution. A crucial assumption is that the parameter δ cannot be contingent on the realization of
the random variable λ : the mission for the bureaucrat cannot be contingent on the realization of ex post voters’ preferences. This element
of contract incompleteness is plausible: A bureaucrat is somebody who
is not appointed through the political process, and therefore he will not
follow the ebb and flows of changing voters’ preferences. The independence of the Central Bank, for instance, means that the central banker
does not have to respond to the voters or even their representatives for
his policy choices, other than for how he fulfills the goals assigned by
the law to the central bank. But these goals can only be formulated in
a simple and general way, like keep inflation under control; the central
13

Aghion Alesina and Trebbi (2002) also study of constitutional design

in a case in which social preferences are not fully revealed ex ante. Their
model and their emphasis is however quite diﬀerent.
23

bank objectives cannot be changed with electoral results, or with the
stage of the business cycle.14
Under these assumptions, the rewards of the bureaucrats are:
RB (a) = E(E(θ | y)) = E(θ + δa1 + (1 − δ)a2 − δae1 − (1 − δ)ae2 ) (12)
Given additive costs and q > 1/2, it is optimal to set δ = 1.15 The first
order conditions for the bureaucrat imply:
−1
aB
1 = Ca (1),

aB
2 = 0

(13)

That is the bureaucrat focuses all his eﬀort on the ”main” activity of his
mandate because that is more helpful in signaling his ability. Thus, the
voters’ utility in equilibrium is given by:
U B = qEU (θ + aB
1 ) + (1 − q)EU(θ)

(14)

The key here is that by choosing a bureaucrat who is non responsive to
the ebb and flows of society’s preferences, citizens are ”stuck” with the
14

See Alesina and Gatti (1995) for an explicit discussion of insulation of

the missions assigned to the central bank form changes in the preferences
of the electorate.
15
If costs were separable, then the optimal δ would be increasing with
q, at a rate that is decreasing with the curvature of U (.) for obvious
reason having to do with risk aversion. The qualitative nature of our
result would not change.
24

risk that eﬀort is misallocated and the bureaucrat pursues the wrong
goals, those that ex-ante seem more likely to be relevant.
This is what diﬀerentiates the politician from the bureaucrat. The
politician’s goals always depend on the realization of λ (i.e., on the
preferences of the voters). Thus, knowing λ the politician will devote
eﬀort only to the task preferred ex post by the voters according to a first
order condition similar to (7) above. The following proposition follows.
Proposition 2 The politician always chooses the right task from the
voters’ perspective. This advantage of the politician is more important the more risk averse are the voters and the more uncertain
are their ex-post preferences.
Delegation to bureaucrats is safe when society’s preferences are well
known and stable. But when they change, the ”rigidity” of a bureaucrat’s behavior makes the latter much less attractive. This helps us to
understand why monetary policy is often delegated to an independent
central bank, while foreign policy is typically under the control of politicians. Few would disagree with the statement that the appropriate goal
for monetary policy is to keep inflation under control with some room
for stabilization policy; and this goal is unlikely to change over time.
But preferences regarding foreign policy are unlikely to be stable and
unchanged, and as a result an appropriate simple bureaucratic goal can25

not be stated once and for all. The politician, instead, always finds it
optimal to follow the ebbs and flows of voters’ preferences. In a changing
world, this feature of political accountability may be superior to a fixed
and unchangeable bureaucratic mission. This is consistent with Wilson’s
(1989) view that it would be impossible to delegate foreign policy to a
non political agency because it would be too complicated to specify tasks
in such an area of policymaking so much aﬀected by unexpected contingencies. Hart, Shleifer and Vishny (1997) make a similar argument to
clarify why it would be close to impossible to privatize foreign policy.
In these situations, a combination of politicians and bureaucrats
could be welfare improving. In fact, a natural remedy to the ”narrowmindedness” of bureaucrats pursuing the wrong task is to let the politician decide the mission of the bureaucrat. Specifically, the constitution
could prescribe that policy be delegated to a bureaucrat, but the bureaucrat’s mission (the parameter δ in (11) above) be chosen by a politician.
If the politician observes the contingency λ and if he is held accountable
by the voters as described in the previous section, he would always choose
the socially optimal mission for the bureaucrat. This division of tasks
(the politician assigns the bureaucrat some goals and the latter chooses
the instruments with which to pursue them) is observed in a variety of
real world arrangements. An example is the inflation targeting regime

26

in the UK, where the government periodically assigns an inflation target
to the Bank of England and then it does not interfere with the central
bank decisions of how to pursue that target. Of course, the precision and
frequency with which the goals of the bureaucrat are defined can vary
from case to case, and determine the extent to which an independent
bureaucrat is really in charge of policy decisions, (rather than taking orders from the politician). In some cases it may be impossible to delegate
in any meaningful way simply because the contingencies to specify in
the principal agent relationship between politician and bureaucrats are
simply too complex.

5

Time inconsistency

The benefit of flexibility associated with political delegation has a cost,
when society’s preferences are time inconsistent. The rigidity of bureaucratic control, instead, oﬀers protection against time inconsistency.
Delegation to an independent agency to gain credibility is extensively
used in monetary policy (as captured by Rogoﬀ (1985)). Our model
oﬀers a diﬀerent formalization of this point.
Suppose, again, that there are two tasks, i = 1, 2, say fighting unemployment (task 1) and fighting inflation (task 2). Citizens care about
both tasks, with simple linear preferences:
U (y1 , y2 ) = y1 + y2
27

(15)

Eﬀective inflation control depends on the policymaker’s eﬀort and ability,
y2 = θ + a2 . But equilibrium unemployment also depends on unexpected
inflation, ae2 . Specifically, suppose that the policy outcome in task 1
(fighting unemployment) is given by:
y1 = θ + a1 − (a2 − ae2 )

(16)

Thus, low unemployment is brought about by ability and eﬀort in choosing the right labor market policies (a1 +θ), but it is also facilitated by an
unexpectedly high level of inflation. Other examples can be thought, but
whatever the precise economic interpretation, in this model the final outcome depends on the interaction between the policymakers’ decisions and
the private sector expectations, and this creates a time inconsistency.
Suppose throughout that policy commitments are unavailable, meaning that first private expectations are formed, and then eﬀort in both
tasks, a1 and a2 , are chosen. One can show (see the Appendix for the
derivation) that politicians are much more likely to fall into the traps of
time inconsistency, compared to bureaucrats. The goals of a politician
are unavoidably linked to the ex-post welfare of voters, through reelection motives. The bureaucrat instead can be given an explicit mission,
possibly diﬀerent from whatever is ex-post optimal for the voters. This
possibility of strategic delegation enables society to overcome credibility problems. This conclusion is essentially the same as Rogoﬀ (1985).
28

But our framework shows more clearly another benefit of bureaucratic
delegation: it allows separation of tasks. By holding the central bank
accountable only for inflation, and by giving the politician the responsibility to fight unemployment, the time inconsistency no longer distorts
the policymakers’ incentives. In the Appendix we show more precisely
the following:

Proposition 3 Under time inconsistency, the bureaucrat generally does
better than the politician, for two reasons: first, the mission of a
bureaucrat can be narrowly defined to avoid time inconsistent goals;
second, even if this cannot be achieved because tasks cannot be split
among separate agencies, the mission of a bureaucrat can be defined
strategically to influence private sector expectations, irrespective of
what is ex-post optimal for society.

A related issue has to do with the time dimension of the flow of costs
and benefits of diﬀerent policy tasks.16 Bureaucrats tend to care more
about the long run consequences of policies, compared to politicians,
for two reasons. First, often bureaucrats are appointed for longer than
16

Rogoﬀ (1990), Rogoﬀ and Sibert (1988) and Persson and Tabellini

(1990 and 2000) model myopic electoral cycles in monetary and fiscal
policy with rational voters.

29

electoral cycles, precisely to avoid short termist policies.17 Second, even
when bureaucrats have short terms of oﬃce, the blame for myopic policies may reach them and hurt them later on. This gives bureaucrats a
strong incentive to focus on the long term goal. A politician instead is
often interested in winning the next elections and is less worried about
repercussions later on in his career. In future elections the main issues
at hand may be diﬀerent and the voters may forget past policy mistakes.
Thus, there is an argument for assigning to bureaucrats policy tasks that
imply short term costs and/or delayed benefits.18
When the short termism of politicians is an issue, the interaction
between bureaucrats and politicians can yield welfare improvements. To
achieve this, we don’t need to put the bureaucrat in charge of policy
decisions. It is enough that he knows something about what the politician is doing and acts as a watchdog, conveying his information to the
17

Long terms of oﬃce for the Chairman of the Central Bank are con-

sidered a necessary tool to insure independence and a long term horizon
in the conduct of monetary policy.
18
Besley and Coate (2003) find evidence that, in US states, elected
regulators tend to keep lower electricity prices compared to appointed
regulators. If, as likely, lower prices come at the expenses of lower investments, this finding is consistent with the prediction of short-termism
by elected (as opposed to appointed) regulators.

30

voters. The voters’ behavior will then endogenously adjust to induce an
opportunistic politician to pursue long term goals. In our framework,
the voters do not deliberately punish the politician if he acts myopically.
But they do so indirectly, when they exploit the bureaucrat announcement to better understand what the politician is really doing and use
this information to reappoint the incumbent only if he is competent
enough.19
Watchdogs of this type are especially useful to check the government budget. Issues of creative accounting, or unsustainable fiscal policy
”hiding” mounting deficits in the social security account, are common
examples of short termist behavior that could be flagged by watchdogs.
The Stability and Growth Pact, which puts limits on budget deficits of
governments of the European Union and is ”enforced” by the EU Commission, exploits this role of bureaucrats. Even though national governments may have violated the deficit ceilings without incurring in the
fines envisaged by the Pact, the bureaucrats’ indications of a violation
has raised the voters’ attention to issues of excessive deficits. European
bureaucrats do not control national deficits, but by raising ”flags” they
nevertheless exert a strong influence on national policies.
19

In a previous version of this paper we work out this argument more

formally. The derivation is available from the authors.

31

6

Lobbying and bribing

We now turn to policies which imply conflicts amongst diﬀerent members of society, broadly speaking redistributive policies with winners and
losers. In this section we consider the case of lobbies that can influence
the choice of policies with bribes or campaign contributions. Thus here
”redistribution” is intended as favors towards powerful minorities. The
minority will seek to influence policy decisions to obtain favors. Both
the politician and the bureaucrat can be captured by the interest group,
but with diﬀerent mechanisms. This diﬀerence can give raise to a constitutional preference for one or the other type of policymaker, depending
on the circumstances.
There are two tasks, i = 1, 2, both aﬀected linearly by eﬀort and
ability, with no spillover eﬀects across tasks: yi = θ + ai . The cost of
eﬀort is non-separable: C = C(a1 + a2 ). Task 1 benefits the voters at
large, while task 2 only benefits a small but organized interest group.
Voters influence policy only through elections. The organized interest
group can influence policy either through bribes, b, or through campaign
contributions, f . Thus, the preferences of voters are just y1 , while those
of the interest group can be written as:
(1 + γ)y2 − b − f

(17)

where γ is a parameter capturing the intensity of the group’s preferences
32

for task 2.
Bribes can be oﬀered to both the politician and the bureaucrat, but
are illegal. Thus, if a policymaker accepts a bribe, with some exogenous
probability q he is caught and pays a fine Z (the interest group is not
fined). Campaign contributions are legal and can only be oﬀered to the
politician. The eﬀect of campaign contributions is to increase the incumbent’s chances of winning the elections. We model this by saying that
the voters’ reservation utility is a decreasing function of the campaign
contributions collected by the incumbent:
W = θ̄ + ae1 − H(f )

(18)

where the function H(.) captures the eﬀect of campaign contributions.
It is natural to assume that H(0) = 0, Hf > 0, Hf f < 0. Note that we
are assuming that the lobby group is very small and therefore irrelevant
from a vote counting point of view. Under these assumptions, we can
write the policymaker’s preferences as:
R(y1 , y2 ) − C(a1 + a2 ) + (1 − φ)b − qZ

(19)

where R(y1 , y2 ) are the policymaker’s rewards (RB (y1 , y2 ) = E(θ/y1 )
for the bureaucrat, RP (y1 , y2 ) = Pr(y1 ≥ W ) for the politician), and
1 > φ > 0 denotes transaction costs that reduce the value of the bribe
for the recipient relative to the amount paid by the interest group. The
33

policymaker’s eﬀort devoted to task 2 is observable by the interest group,
so that bribes and campaign contributions can be contingent upon the
policymaker eﬀort: b = B(a2 ), f = F (a2 ). The timing of events is as follows. First the Constitution allocates control rights over policies. Then
the organized group commits to bribes and or campaign contributions,
as a function of eﬀort. Next, the policymaker allocates eﬀort between
the two tasks. Nature then chooses a realization of θ. Finally, rewards
are paid.
This is a common agency game, with two types of principals: the interest group and the representative voter. The interest group has all the
commitment power and can either influence the agent directly (through
bribes), or indirectly (through campaign contributions). The distinction between the politician and the bureaucrat is that the latter can
only be influenced by the interest group through bribes. We want to
know whether the voters are better oﬀ with the bureaucrat or with the
politician, and what influences this comparison.

6.1

Bribing the bureaucrat

If the constitution gave all control rights to the bureaucrat we would
have a standard common agency game, with a single active lobby. If
bribes are positive, then the equilibrium must be jointly optimal for the

34

organized group and the politician. This immediately implies:
aB
1 = 0,

−1
aB
2 = Ca (1 + γ)

(20)

Moreover, restricting attention to truthful contribution (here bribing) schedules, the equilibrium bribing schedule has the following simple
form:20
B(a2 ) = B̄ +

1+γ
a2
1−φ

(21)

where the constant B̄ is chosen by the organized group so as to leave the
bureaucrat indiﬀerent between accepting or rejecting the bribe. Given
the bureaucrat’s preferences, this implies:
B
B
B
B̄ = C(aB
2 ) − C(a1 ) + a1 − (1 + γ)a2 + q̄Z

(22)

−1
where aB
1 = Ca (1) denotes the equilibrium policy if no bribe is accepted.

Finally, the organized group must also prefer to pay the bribe rather
than be passive. This in turn puts an upper bound on the constant B̄
that the organized interest group is willing to pay. Taking into account
(22), an equilibrium with positive bribes exists only if the following condition is satisfied:
¤
(1 − 2φ)(1 + γ) B £
B
B
a2 − C(aB
2 ) − C(a1 ) + a1 ≥ q̄Z
1−φ

(23)

If instead this condition is violated, then the equilibrium with the bureaucrat delivers the optimal policy for the voters. Equation (23) makes
20

See Grossman and Helpman (2001).
35

it clear that an equilibrium in which the bureaucrat is bribed is more
likely if the stakes for the organized group are high (γ is large), or if the
legal system works poorly (qZ and φ are small).

6.2

Lobbying the politicians

Next, suppose that the politician is in charge of the policy decision. A
condition very similar to (23) above determines the existence of an equilibrium with bribes (the expression is not identical because the politician’s reward occurs through reappointment). In particular, it remains
true that bribes would be zero if the legal system is strong, so that transaction costs are high or the probability of being caught is high. But now,
besides bribes, the organized interest group can also resort to campaign
contributions.

He will choose to do so if campaign contributions are

suﬃciently eﬀective in swaying the voters.
Specifically, in an equilibrium with campaign contributions, the allocation of eﬀort must be jointly optimal for the politician and the organized group. Thus, the equilibrium must solve the following optimization
problem by choice of a1, a2 and f, subject to non-negativity constraints
on the three choice variables, and taking voters’ expectations ae1 as given,
as before.
Max

©

Pr(θ ≥ θ̄ + ae1 − a1 − H(f )) + (1 + γ)a2 − C(a1 + a2 ) − f

ª

(24)
36

The properties of the solution to this problem depend on the slope
of the function H(f ), i.e., on how eﬀective campaign contributions are
in swaying the voters. In the Appendix we consider two cases:
First, if Hf (0) < 1/(1 + γ), then the equilibrium has zero lobbying
(f = 0) and the outcome is optimal for the voters (aP2 = 0). In this case,
campaign contributions cannot be productive enough, and the organized
group will not seek to influence the politician: the group’s stakes are
too low relative to how much he would have to pay into the electoral
campaign of the politician.
The opposite extreme occurs if Hf (f ∗ ) > 1/(1 + γ), where f ∗ denotes equilibrium campaign contributions, to be defined below. In this
case, campaign contributions are very eﬀective at the margin. Eﬀort
is allocated so as to please only the organized group, as in (20) above.
And equilibrium campaign contributions are defined implicitly by the
optimality condition:
n(θ̄ − H(f ∗ )) · Hf (f ∗ ) = 1

(25)

where n(x) is the normal density of θ evaluated at the point x. For this
to be an equilibrium, the organized group must benefit relative to the
option of not lobbying at all, and this also requires: (1 + γ)aP2 ≥ f ∗ .
We summarize this discussion in the following:
Proposition 4 Political lobbying can be an equilibrium, even if bribes
37

to the bureaucrat are not. This is more likely if campaign contributions are eﬀective in influencing the voters, but the legal system
is strong and eﬀective in discouraging bribes.

Thus, politically appointed policymakers are more easily captured by
organized interests compared to bureaucrats, particularly in advanced
democracies with a well functioning legal system. The reason is that,
to influence a politician, the interest group needs to convince the voters
that the politician is doing a good job and deserves to be reelected. The
politician will then automatically respond with policy favors to the interest group, since this will help his chances of reelection. To influence
a bureaucrat, instead, the organized group needs to engage in illegal or
semi-legal activities, and fight against possibly deeply entrenched professional goals and standards of a technical bureaucracy. Policies where
the stakes for organized interests are very high, or where redistributive
conflicts concern small but powerful vested interests against the voters
at large, may thus be more safely left in the hands of the bureaucrat.
The regulation of public utilities is a typical example: the long run interests of consumers are easy to identify and the stakes for the utilities’
supplier are very high, so that a politician may be more easily captured
than an independent regulator.21
21

This eﬃciency argument in favor of bureaucrats is mitigated if they

38

Note that this result points to an important diﬀerence between advanced and less advanced societies. In advanced societies with a well
functioning judicial system, it is relatively easy to enforce the no bribe
equilibrium, but campaign contributions may still be very eﬀective at
buying policies; hence, bureaucratic delegation works well. In developing countries, instead, stopping bribes might be close to impossible and
politicians are likely to do as good a job as bureaucrats.22

7

Compensation of losers

One critical task for politicians is to form coalitions in favor of certain
policies, compensating losers either with direct transfers or by bundling
several policies into one package. To illustrate this point, we need a
conflict of interest between voters (or groups of voters) and the possibility
of side payments and of bundling policies with complementarities.
Voters’ utility now depends on the policy outcome and the transfer
(positive or negative) received by the government. We have two voters
(or homogeneous groups of voters of equal size) with concave utility
are easier to bribe than the politician., however. And bureaucrats with
technical expertise may be more easily bribed than politicians through
a "revolving door policy" - i.e. at the end of their public services policymakers are oﬀered lucrative jobs in the private sector.
22
Glaser and Shleifer (2003) reach a similar conclusion, using a diﬀerent analytical framework.
39

defined over private consumption, U(ci ), i = 1, 2 and where:

c1 = y1 + t,

c2 = y2 − t,

y2 ≥ t ≥ −y1

(26)

Therefore t is a direct lump sum transfer between voters and the government budget is balanced; there are no tax distortions. Each group
benefits from diﬀerent tasks requiring specific and uncorrelated abilities,
θi , i = 1, 2. Let the distribution of θi have the same densities n(.) and cumulative distributions N(.) (not necessarily normal). There are random
negative spillovers between the two tasks, such that:
y1 = θ1 + a1 − λκa2 ,

y2 = θ2 + a2 − (1 − λ)κa1

(27)

The parameter 0 < κ < 1 denotes the strength of the negative spillover
eﬀects. Who is hurt by the spillovers is ex ante uncertain. Thus, λ is
a random variable that can equal 1 or 0 with equal probabilities. As
in section 4, we assume that λ is observable but it is not verifiable, so
that the bureaucrat’s mission cannot be defined contingent on λ. Thus,
the policymaker maximizes its usual payoﬀs, with diﬀerent rewards for
the two types of policymakers, except that now we assume that the cost
function is additive in the two eﬀorts:

R(a1 , a2 ) − C(a1 ) − C(a2 )

40

(28)

Timing has the usual structure. First nature sets λ and this determines which group is hurt by the spillover eﬀect. Then the policymaker
chooses ai and t, nature sets θi and rewards are paid.
Consider the politician first. He maximizes reelection probabilities,
which means that he has to win the favor of a strict majority of voters.
Here this means winning the votes of both groups (as it will be clear below, nothing of substance hinges on the fact that in this simple example
reelection requires pleasing all voters). Therefore:
RP (a1 , a2 ) = Pr ob(U(c1 ) 1 W1 ) ∗ Pr ob(U (c2 ) 1 W2 )

(29)

where Wi is the reservation utility of group i.
Suppose for concreteness that λ = 1. If the two reservation utilities
are equal, then the politician sets transfers t so that:
n(x1 )
n(x2 )
=
1 − N(x1 )
1 − N(x2 )

(30)

where x1 = U −1 (W )−t−a1 +κa2 and x2 = U −1 (W )+t−a2 . That is, the
politician equalizes the ”hazard rates” of losing votes from either group.
In this context, the hazard rate measures the elasticity of the probability
of winning with respect to transfers. Thus, this optimality condition is
similar to the Ramsey rule of optimal taxation: transfers are allocated
between groups so as to equalize this elasticity across groups.

If the

hazard rate is monotonically increasing in x, and given the assumption
41

of the same distribution for θi , i = 1, 2, equation (30) implies c1 = c2 .23
That is, the politician implements full insurance, fully compensating
the losers from the negative externality (remember that compensations
are costless, if they entailed a transaction cost or a tax distortion the
equalization of utilities would no be complete).
Exploiting (30), the optimality conditions for the allocation of eﬀort
to the two tasks imply:
n(1 − N2 ) = Ca (aP1 )

(31)

n(1 − N1 )(1 − κ) = Ca (aP2 )
Thus, the politician allocates eﬀort ”correctly”, in the sense of devoting
more eﬀort to the task that does not have negative spillovers: aP1 > aP2
if λ = 1. Comparing (31) with (7) in section 2, however, we see that the
politician is induced to put less eﬀort also in the task with no negative
externality (task 1), relative to the simple case of only one task. The
reason is that bundling of two tasks requiring diﬀerent abilities weakens
his incentives. His likelihood of reelection now depends on his success in
both tasks. Even if he puts a lot of eﬀort in task 1, he could still loose
the election because he happens to be unable in task 2. His awareness
of this risk (captured by the term (1 − N2 ) on the left hand side of (31)),
23

A uniform distribution of θ satisfies the assumption of a monotoni-

cally increasing hazard rate, for instance.
42

dilutes his incentives.24
Let’s now turn to the bureaucrat. By assumption, the measure of
performance that he is assigned (and on the basis of which is careerincentives are determined) cannot be contingent on λ and has to be
stated at the Constitutional Table. The natural measure of performance
in this context is total output, (y1 +y2 ). If given this goal, the bureaucrat
allocates eﬀort eﬃciently, taking the negative externality into account:
1 = Ca (aB
1)

(32)

1 − κ = Ca (aB
2)
Nevertheless, compensating transfers will be set to zero.25
Comparing the politician and the bureaucrat, we thus have:

Proposition 5 The politician provides side payment to compensate losers
but has weaker incentives than the bureaucrat; the latter, however, does
not compensate losers.
24

Persson and Tabellini (2000) and Seabright (1996) elaborate further

on this point comparing centralized vs decentralized arrangements.
25
Implicitly, therefore, we are also assuming that social welfare
(U (c1 ) + U(c2 )) cannot be specified as the bureaucrats’ mission because
it is too vague a concept, or cannot be observed by outsiders to infer the
bureaucrats’ talent.

43

This result relies on the fact that bureaucrats cannot be given state
contingent missions, and if their goal is formulated in terms of aggregate eﬃciency, they will neglect the distributional consequences of their
actions. A politician instead can take advantage of relatively complex
and evolving spillovers between issues and build majorities with complex side payments schemes. Compensating the losers makes it easier
to pass legislation while at the same time providing insurance against
bad luck. Imagine a policy that favors a large majority, say a badly
needed highway, but that creates losers, say the property owners. Under
democratic choice, the losers might be able to block the project. But the
politician can put together a package of compensation for the property
owners, with large benefit for the majority. In a sense this is almost
what describes the job of a politician. Instead, it is hard to imagine how
a bureaucrat might do that. How can one write on paper what a bureaucrat is allowed to do or not do, to create bundling and compensation? A
bureaucrat can be delegated the task of building the best possible highway and he may potentially do a better job than the politician; but he
may not have the ability, interest or authority to provide compensation
to the local owners. Note also that ”writing some checks” to compensate
groups of losers does not require any particular technical competence,
another reason why it may be diﬃcult to generate the correct incentives

44

for career-concerned bureaucrats. This observation leads us directly into
the next section.

8

Splitting the cake

We now consider a purely redistributive policy, ”cake splitting”. Consider three voters, the minimum number required to make the problem
interesting. The policy task delivers a ”cake” that can be divided between the three voters, therefore:

y = θ + a = c1 + c2 + c3

(33)

The utility function of the voters is concave, U (cJ ), J = 1, 2, 3. We start
with risk neutrality, U(cJ ) = cJ , and comment below on how the results
would change with risk averse voters.
The key diﬀerence between a politician and a bureaucrat is, once
again, that the former needs a majority to win and the latter simply
wants to signal talent. Consider the bureaucrat first. At the constitutional stage, the bureaucrat can either be given no redistributive tasks,
in which case redistribution is entirely arbitrary - we call this an "unfair"
bureaucrat. Alternatively, behind a veil of ignorance he can be assigned
the task of redistributing equally, that is y/3 for all three voters - we
refer to this case as a "fair" bureaucrat. But irrespective of whether he
is ”fair” or "unfair" (i.e., of how he splits the cake), his talent is still

45

judged by the aggregate measure of performance, y, not by how he redistributes. His first order conditions are thus identical to those in (4),
section 2.
Next, consider the politician. Since he only needs to please a majority, he gives y/2 to two voters and zero to the third one. Hence, his
reward is:
RP (a) = Pr ob(y/2 ≥ W )

(34)

where W is the reservation utility of individual voters. Implicit in (34) is
the assumption that voters expect that the incumbent, if re-elected, will
maintain the same redistribution observed today - i.e he will split the
cake in half between the voters who re-elect him. With forward looking
and rational voters, W equals the average expected utility they can get if
the opponent is elected. If the hypothetical redistribution implemented
by the opponent is unknown, then W = 1/3(θ + ae ). Going through the
usual steps, of maximizing with respect to eﬀort for given expectations
and then imposing rational expectations, in equilibrium the politician’s
optimality condition implies:
µ

2θ − aP
n
3

¶

= Ca (aP )

(35)

where n(x) denotes the normal density evaluated at the point x. Comparing (35) with (7) in section 2, we see that once the politician is also
in charge of redistribution, he can get away with less equilibrium eﬀort,
46

compared to the case of no redistribution. The reason is that here he
only needs to please two voters out of three. He can thus reduce eﬀort,
and still please two voters with the portion of the cake taken away from
the minority.26 Note the asymmetry: voters expect the incumbent to
preserve the observed redistribution over time, but they are uncertain
about how the opponent would redistribute. This asymmetry creates an
incumbency advantage and dilutes the politician’s incentives: the voters
are more willing to reappoint the incumbent even if he is incompetent,
because they benefit from his redistribution.27 Here we assumed a very
stark asymmetry: no uncertainty at all about how the incumbent will
redistribute, and maximal uncertainty about the opponent. But the nature of the results would be preserved with less stark assumptions, as
long as the voters are more uncertain about the redistributive policies
of the opponent compared to those of the incumbent.
26

This result is similar to that obtained in Ferejohn (1986) and Persson

and Tabellini (2000). But since here voters are forward looking, we rule
out the Bertrand competition among voters that instead features in the
backward looking voting equilibrium of Ferejohn (1986).
27

Indeed, if the voters’ reservation utility was W = (θ + ae )/2 (i.e

if they were certain to be included in the winning coalition by the opponent), then the eﬀort of the incumbent would coincide with (7) and
there would be no dilution of eﬀort due to redistribution.
47

Given these results, who is better for the voters behind the constitutional veil of ignorance, the bureaucrat or the politician? If voters
are risk neutral, and given that they ignore the redistribution chosen
by the politician, they only care about aggregate performance, y. This
makes the bureaucrat more attractive for the voters for a larger range
of parameter values, compared to the case of simple non-redistributive
tasks in section 2. With risk averse voters, the comparison between bureaucrat and politician also depends on whether the bureaucrat is "fair"
or "unfair". A "fair" bureaucrat is even more attractive compared to
the politician, not only because he is likely to put more eﬀort, but also
because he is less risky - the politician exposes the voters to the risk of
being in the minority.28 But the result may be reversed if the bureaucrat is "unfair" and implements a totally arbitrary redistribution. In this
case, political redistribution is less risky, since two voters out of three
are always included in the winning majority. The case of an "unfair"
bureaucrat seems more plausible, since in a complex world it is diﬃcult
to precisely assign redistributive task to a bureaucrat.
28

Maskin and Tirole (2001) also point out the ”tyranny of the ma-

jority” or the expropriation of minorities is one reason why politicians
may do worse than non-elected oﬃcials (unaccountable ”judges” in their
context).

48

We can summarize this discussion in the following:

Proposition 6 The possibility of redistribution reduces the equilibrium
eﬀort of the politician, but not that of the bureaucrat. Risk aversion
makes the bureaucrat more or less desirable ex-ante depending on how
easy it is to impose fair treatment of all voters in his task description.

9

Positive analysis

So far we asked what is the optimal task allocation from the voters’ point
of view. We now turn to the positive question of how tasks are likely to
be allocated in practice. Bureaucratic institutions, although stable over
time, are not typically spelled out in the constitution. They are chosen
in the course of the regular legislative process by the politicians in oﬃce.
Hence, criteria of political expediency dominate this choice. What does
this imply for actual (as opposed to optimal) task allocation? Do electoral considerations push politicians to design eﬃcient institutions (i.e.
institutions that are optimal for the voters)? And if not, are there systematic deviations from optimality? A voluminous ”positive” and empirical
literature in political science investigates whether or not and why the
American Congress delegates; it discusses when delegation is in the electoral interests of politicians, and when it also maximizes social welfare.
The answer generally depends on how the voters evaluate the politician
who has appointed a bureaucrat to perform a certain task. The results
49

that follow shed light on several of the point discussed informally in this
literature.
In the formal analysis, we let the politicians choose what to delegate
and what not. In reality, bureaucracies themselves ”fight” for more and
more autonomy, and sometimes are successful even against the will of
politicians. (Carpenter 2001). But the determination of politicians to
retain control varies across tasks. Our results help us understand why
politicians are more willing to fight for some tasks than for others.

9.1

When do politicians delegate?

We start by asking what are the general criteria that induce politicians
to delegate tasks to independent agencies. To preserve comparability
with the previous results, we retain the same theoretical framework.
Specifically, suppose that there are two tasks, i = 1, 2, requiring task
specific abilities (θi ) and eﬀorts (ai ) :
yi = θi + ai
The two task-specific abilities, (θ1 , θ2 ), are independently distributed
according to a normal distribution with mean θ̄ and variance σ2θ . The
costs of eﬀort are additively separable (C(a1 ) + C(a2 )) and there are no
spillover eﬀects, so that voters’ utility is U (y1 + y2 ). We start with the
simpler case of risk neutral voters: U(y1 + y2 ) = y1 + y2 - this assumption is relaxed below. Remember that we can interpret the eﬀort costs
50

identically as the utility of rents with a simple redefinition of variables.
The timing of events is as usual: first tasks are allocated at a constitutional stage, then the policymaker in charge chooses eﬀort (without
knowing his own abilities), then performance is observed, rewards are
paid and elections take place. The only diﬀerence is that now, at the
constitutional stage, task allocation is chosen by the politician rather
than by a benevolent planner. The term ”constitutional stage” is not
quite appropriate in this case, but we retain it for the sake of a clear
comparison with the analysis of eﬃcient arrangements. For simplicity,
and without loss of generality, we assume that, at the constitutional
stage, the politician faces a binary choice: either he delegates task 2 to
an independent bureaucrat, or he keeps it for himself; task 1 is instead
restricted to always remain with the politician.
The voters’ behavior is a crucial determinant of the constitutional
choices. This in turn depends on what the voters know. We assume
throughout that voters observe the constitution and fully understand
its implications (alternative assumptions are discussed below). Thus,
constitutional choice is equivalent to a choice amongst equilibria, except
that the perspective is that of the politician rather than the voters.
With rational voters, we also need to spell out whether the constitution is expected to remain in place only in the current period, or also

51

in the future. In line with the observation that bureaucratic institutions
can be changed through ordinary legislation, we assume no constitutional commitment: the constitution in place today could be changed
after the elections. Thus, an equilibrium constitution is defined as a
task allocation that meets two requirements: first, it is optimal for the
incumbent politician at the constitutional stage, given the voters’ expectation of the constitution in place after the elections. Second, the
voters’ expectations are fulfilled.
Section 3 of the appendix proves that:
Proposition 7 If voters are risk neutral, then in equilibrium the probability of reelecting the incumbent politician is always 1/2, irrespective of
the constitutional choice. Hence, the politician chooses the constitution
that minimizes his equilibrium costs - or more generally, that maximizes
the equilibrium rents from being in oﬃce.
Proposition 7 makes clear that electoral concerns do not drive constitutional choice in this framework with risk neutral voters. The reason is
that voters condition re-election on policy performance, but not on constitution design. This in turn follows from the assumption that voters
are rational and understand the implications of alternative constitutions,
while they are imperfectly informed about the policymaker’s ability in
carrying out his policy tasks. Given this assumption, policy (but not
52

constitutional choice) reveals the policymaker’s ability. Given that the
probability of re-election is always 1/2 irrespective of the constitutional
arrangement, the only criteria governing constitutional choice by the
politician concern the costs of eﬀort (or more generally the rents associated with each task). Specifically, if performing task 2 according to the
voters’ expectations is costly, then the politician prefers to delegate it
away. If instead retaining control of task 2 allows the politician to grab
political rents in equilibrium, then he prefers not to delegate it. Note
that equilibrium eﬀort by the politician in each task is lower (rents are
higher) if he retains two tasks rather than with a single one. The intuitive reason is that the politician is less accountable: with two tasks there
is a ”bundling” problem, and voters cannot punish poor performance in
only one of the two tasks. Since ex-ante the politician is uncertain about
his abilities in both tasks, his incentives to please the voters are weaker
than if he has control of only one task.29
Alternative assumptions would deliver diﬀerent results relative to
Proposition 7. In particular, if voters were un-informed about task allocation, or if institution design also signalled the politician’s ability, then
the result in Proposition 7 need not hold. But the assumption that voters
only hold politicians responsible for the tasks that they have retained,
29

Proof of this result is available upon request.

53

and adapt their expectations to what politicians in the opposition would
deliver (i.e. to what is ”politically feasible”) seems reasonable to us. The
implications of this result are far reaching: if constitutional choice does
not influence the election outcome, then voters’ welfare is not a relevant
determinant of constitutional choice. Politicians will get rid of tasks that
require attention and costly eﬀort, while they will retain tasks that allow
them to grab political rents. The issue of what is in the voters’ interests
simply does not enter the political calculus of costs and benefits.
What does this argument imply about delegation in general? Is there
a political bias towards too much or too little bureaucratic delegation,
relative to the optimum? The general answer is that politicians will try
to retain ultimate control (so as to appropriate rents), but delegate execution (so as to get rid of eﬀort and costs). In other words, bureaucrats
stay up at night and do the hard work, while politicians grab the rents.
Thus, the model predicts that we should observe extensive delegation to
bureaucrats directly controlled by politicians, but too little delegation
to really independent bureaucrats.

9.2

Redistribution

Many policies have redistributive implications: would politicians delegate those? Suppose that there are only two tasks and the politician is
constrained to keep one task for himself and to delegate the other one to

54

an independent bureaucrat; but he gets to choose which task to retain
and which one to delegate. Task 1 is a simple task, that gives all voters
the same utility: y1 = θ1 + a1 . Task 2 also gives the policymaker the
ability to choose the allocation of benefits among three groups of voters
indexed by J, as in the cake splitting example of section 8; thus voter
J utility from this task is cJ , and the policymaker is constrained to set
P

cJ = θ2 + a2 .

J

Our question is which of these two tasks is kept by the politician,

and which one is delegated. As in the previous subsection, we assume
that voters know the constitution and hold the politician accountable
only for the policy task under his control. It is easy show that:
Proposition 8 The politician always retains control of the redistributive
task
This result is really a direct implication of the analysis carried out
in section 8. As shown in that section, and under the same assumptions
about the political system, the redistributive task allows the politician
to increase the equilibrium probability of re-election above 1/2, while
putting less eﬀort to please the voters. Hence it is always preferred compared to a non-redistributive task. The intuitive reason is that redistribution gives the incumbent an advantage, because the redistributive
policies of the opponent are unknown, or less well known than those of
55

the incumbent. This seems reasonable in practice. An incumbents has
had an opportunity to credibly build coalitions; an opponent can make
promises while out of oﬃce, but he does not have the same credibility.
What about tasks that touch the interests of organized groups? Here
too, the politician has a preference to retain them. As shown in section 6,
if the politician is in charge of these tasks, in the equilibria with political
lobbying he receives campaign contributions, which increases his probability of re-election above 1/2 (see (25)). Hence, the model predicts a
reluctance of politicians to delegate tasks that aﬀect powerful economic
interests, particularly if they are likely to generate campaign contributions.30 Here there is a stark contrast between what is socially optimal
and what is optimal for an opportunistic politician. If illegal bribes
can be prevented, bureaucratic delegation would be socially optimal,
but would be opposed by politicians interested in extracting campaign
contributions from lobbies.
30

In the equilibrium in which the politician receives bribes (rather than

campaign contributions), he is strictly indiﬀerent between delegating to
a bureaucrat or not (since the optimal bribe by the lobby would leave
him indiﬀerent). But with more than one organized group, the politician
can extract rents from the lobbies, and he would strictly prefer to retain
control rather than delegate.

56

9.3

Risk averse voters

Proposition 8 above was derived under the assumption that voters are
risk neutral. We now consider risk averse voters, and ask what this
implies for the politician’s incentives to delegate to an independent bureaucrat. In particular, we ask whether the politician is more keen to
delegate risky or safe tasks (a risky task is one in which performance is
also determined by nature, and not just by the policymaker’s eﬀort and
ability).
There are two tasks and the politician has to choose which one to
delegate to an independent bureaucrat (i.e., for simplicity we restrict his
choices so that he cannot retain control of both tasks). Task 1 is ”safe”
and gives voters utility y1 = θ +a. Task 2 is ”risky”, in that performance
(and voters’ utility) also depends on a random exogenous component:
y2 = θ + a + ε; as in the case of imperfect monitoring of section 3,
voters only observe y1 and y2 , but do not observe ε. For simplicity, the
required ability, θ, is the same in the two tasks. We only consider the
case in which voters expect that, after the elections, the constitution
will give the safe task to the politician. The opposite case (of a future
constitution that gives the politician control over the risky task) yields
the same conclusions.
Suppose that, at the constitutional stage, the politician retains the

57

safe task and delegates the risky one. His ability θ is then fully revealed
to the voters when they observe y1 . At the election, the voters thus
anticipate that re-electing the incumbent gives them utility U(θ + ae ).
Voting for the unknown opponent, instead, gives the voters an expected
utility of EU(θ+ae ), where the expectations operator is over the random
variable θ. The equilibrium probability of re-appointment is thus:
Pr [U(θ + ae ) ≥ EU(θ + ae )]

(36)

where now the probability refers to the random variable θ (since the
incumbent still ignores his own ability when setting policy and when
choosing the constitution). If U(.) is strictly concave, the probability in
(36) is clearly above 1/2, the more so the greater is the uncertainty over
θ and the more concave is the utility function.31 In other words, when
voters are risk averse, the incumbent enjoys an electoral advantage. The
reason is that the voters know more about the incumbent than about
the opponent, and this makes them more reluctant to switch. But the
size of the incumbency advantage depends on which tasks are retained
by the politician.
Specifically, suppose that, at the constitutional stage, the politician
delegates the safe task and retains the risky one. Now, the voters can no
£
¤
31
This can be seen by noting that Pr U (θ + ae ) ≥ U(θ̄ + ae ) = 1/2,
and that EU(θ + ae ) < U(θ̄ + ae ) by strict concavity of U(.).
58

longer infer the incumbent ability from their observation of y2 . Reappointing the incumbent thus gives the voters an expected utility of
E(U(θ +ae ) | θ +ε), where the expectations operator refers to the expectation over θ, conditional upon observing θ + ε. The expected utility of
voting for the opponent, instead, is unchanged (by the assumption that
there is no constitutional commitment and after the election the politician retains the safe task for himself). Hence, the equilibrium probability
of reappointment is:
Pr [E(U(θ + ae ) | θ + ε) ≥ EU(θ + ae )]

(37)

where now the probability refers to the random variable θ + ε. By strict
concavity of U(.), and since the unconditional mean of ε is 0, we have that
U(θ+ae ) > E(U(θ+ae ) | θ+ε) for all values of θ. Thus, the probability in
(37) is strictly smaller than that in (36) - i.e. the incumbency advantage
is smaller if the politician retains the risky task rather than the safe one.
We cannot conclude from this comparison that the politician prefers
to retain the safe task for himself, however. The reason is that equilibrium eﬀort is generally higher under the safe task: since the politician
faces less uncertainty, he finds it optimal to put more eﬀort into the safe
task than in the risky one. This can be seen by adapting the analysis of
section 3 to the case of risk averse voters.
We summarize the foregoing discussion in the following:
59

Proposition 9 The constitutional choice between the safe and the risky
task entails a trade-oﬀ between votes and rents (or eﬀort). By keeping the safe task and delegating the risky one, the politician increases
his incumbency advantage but reduces equilibrium rents (equivalently, he
increases equilibrium eﬀort).

Thus, when voters are risk averse, electoral concerns do influence
constitutional choice, contrary to the case of risk neutral voters. But
this does not push the constitution towards greater eﬃciency for the
voters. It simply makes the politician more willing to delegate risky
tasks. Intuitively, the politician is aware that risk averse voters punish
bad luck more harshly than they reward good luck. He thus prefers
to leave this risk to the bureaucrat. In a sense, the bureaucrat acts as
a ”scapegoat” for the politician, as suggested by Fiorina (1977). This
incentive is tempered by the opposite considerations concerning rents (or
eﬀort), however, since more risky tasks are also associated with greater
rents.
Sometimes scapegoats for politicians can be welfare improving, since
they take the blame for ”unpopular” but needed policies. In Europe,
national politicians often publicly blame bureaucrats in the European
Commission that tie their hands, but in private they sometimes welcome these constraints and may even suggest to the Commission how
60

to formulate its recommendations. A similar role may be served by
other international bureaucracies, such as the IMF, when it prescribes
”unpopular” policies to macroeconomically unstable countries (Vreeland
2003).
Proposition 9 is also relevant for other institutional choices besides
delegation, and in particular for the design of more or less transparent
procedures for policy formation. Transparency of public policy is an
important dimension of institutions and it a choice variable. Politicians
can make a policy process more or less transparent. In this choice, they
are likely to face a trade-oﬀ similar to that summarized in Proposition
9. More transparency has the benefit of increasing the incumbency advantage, because the voters are better able to assess the qualities of the
incumbent, while they know less about the opponent. But more transparency is also likely to reduce equilibrium rents, because the punishment for rent extraction is more severe. Depending on which incentives
are likely to prevail, politicians will choose more or less transparent procedures. An interesting application of this idea is to the budget process.
In many countries the government budget is very non transparent and
this is considered a ”problem” from the point of view of optimality of
institutions. But the degree of budget trasnparency. is entirely endogenous and it is the result of politicians’ strategic choices. In fact the

61

government budget is the primary source of rents broadly defined for
politicians. Otherwise there would be no reason not to simplify the
budget documents and the budget process.32

10

Conclusions

Our analysis rests on two fundamental assumptions. The first one concerns the motivation of diﬀerent types of policymakers. Bureaucrats
want to signal their competence for career concerns, politicians for reelection purposes. The second assumption is that the tasks for bureaucratic agencies have to be specified ex ante and cannot be contingent
on the realization of too many shocks on the environment and/or on
the public’s preferences. If one accepts these two hypotheses, the nature of our results is quite robust to variations on other less important
assumptions.
From an eﬃciency perspective, these diﬀerences between bureaucrats
and politicians imply that some policy tasks, but not others, ought to be
delegated to independent agencies. Consider first policies with few re32

See Alesina and Perotti (1999) for a survey of the literature on

budget institution and of transparency. Alesina and Cukierman (1991)
discuss a diﬀerent model in which also the degree of transparency can
be chosen endogenously by politicians who would not always choose the
maximum level of this variable.

62

distributive implications, such as monetary policy or foreign policy. Bureaucrats are likely to be better than politicians if the criteria for good
performance can be easily described ex-ante and are stable over time; if
good performance requires special abilities and performance evaluation
presupposes some technical expertise; if political incentives are distorted
by time inconsistency or short-termism. Monetary policy indeed fulfills
many of these conditions, and the practice of delegating it to an independent agency accords with some of these eﬃciency results. Foreign
policy does not, because the criteria for good performance are unstable
and more vague, and the benefit of insulating policy from the political
process are smaller.
Next, consider policies that have redistributive implications, such as
trade policy, regulation, or fiscal policy. Here, bureaucrats perform well
if the policy consequences touch narrowly defined interest groups, if criteria of good performance can be easily formulated and assessed in terms
of eﬃciency, and if the legal system is strong. Politicians instead are better if the policy has far reaching redistributive implications, if criteria
of aggregate eﬃciency do not easily pin down the optimal policy, and if
there are interactions across diﬀerent policy domains (so that a single
measure of performance is aﬀected by several policy instruments and policy packaging is important). Regulation of public utilities or of specific

63

industries are examples of policies that lend themsleves to bureaucratic
delegation, since they pit special interests against those of consumers
as a whole, do not have large spillover eﬀects, and policy performance
can be evaluated on the basis of eﬃciency or other semi-technical criteria. Trade policy might fall in this cathegory too, although here the
redistributive implications are more pronounced. Welfare state policies,
instead, have such broad redistributive implications that it seems risky
to subtract them from the political process, as suggested by our example on cake splitting. But there are specific aspects of fiscal policy that
would certainly meet our eﬃciency criteria for bureaucratic delegation:
for instance, detailed tax policy provisions, or intertemporal fiscal policy
choices where time inconsistency or political myopia is an obvious issue,
as suggested by Blinder (1997).
Overall, the analysis from the perspective of economic eﬃciency suggests that there is ample scope for bureaucratic delegation to improve
over political delegation, particularly if politicians remain in charge of
defining and correcting the general mission of independent agencies. But
these conclusions are not likely to be reflected in observed institutional
arrangements. There is no reason why opportunistic politicians should
internalize these eﬃciency criteria. Actual institutions are more likely
to be designed so as to deliver maximal rents at the lowest risk for the

64

incumbent politician. This argues for retaining under political control
policy tools that are useful to build winning coalitions or to generate
campaign contributions, such as trade policy or much of fiscal policy. It
also means that politicians might want to get rid of tasks that expose
them to risk, such as monetary policy. But this "risk shielding" is possible only if bureaucratic delegation is complete, so that the blame for
policy failure lies with the independent agency and not the politician.
This might explain why it is politically so diﬃcult to exploit delegation
to independent agencies in fiscal policy. Full bureaucratic delegation of
fiscal policy is inconceivable, for eﬃciency and positive reasons. But
partial delegation of narrowly defined technical tasks in fiscal policy is
politically unfeasible, no matter how desirable. The reason is that voters
would still hold the politician accountable, as long as he retains some
control (i.e. unless the delegation is complete). And if he is held responsible, then the politician loses any incentive to delegate control.

Appendix
1. Optimal contracts with bureaucrats
Consider the model of section 2. It is easy to show that the first order
condition (4) also implicitly defines the first best level of eﬀort in a contract between voters (the principals) and the bureaucrat (the agent) in

65

which eﬀort is observable and contractible. Since voters and bureaucrat
are risk neutral, this first best can be achieved with an optimal contract
even if eﬀort and ability are not separately observable. Such optimal
contract would reward the bureaucrat with a simple linear payoﬀ:
R(y) = y − b
where the constant b is defined by the agent’s (ex-ante) participation
constraint, namely by the condition that
E(R(y)) − C(a) ≥ 0

(38)

Under the optimal contract, the participation constraint must bind, and
given (1) and (38), this implies: b = θ̄ + a∗ − C(a∗ ) where a∗ denotes
first best eﬀort as defined in (4).
Thus, in this simple model of section 2, the implicit reward oﬀered by
career concerns induces the same level of eﬀort as the optimal contract,
but there is no guarantee that the participation constraint on the agent
binds or is even satisfied. Throughout, we assume that θ̄ ≥ C(a∗ ). Given
the reward function in (3), this insures that the participation constraint
for the bureaucrat is satisfied. Of course, if the above inequality is strict,
then the bureaucrat enjoys some positive rents under the career concerns
contract, that he would not enjoy under the optimal contract (i.e. the
voters ought to tax the bureaucrat when he is appointed).
66

2. Time inconsistency
There are two tasks, i = 1, 2, and:
U (y1 , y2 ) = y1 + y2

(39)

For task two y2 = θ + a2 . But y1 depends also on private sector expectations, ae2 .
y1 = θ + a1 − (a2 − ae2 )

(40)

Suppose throughout that policy commitments are unavailable, meaning that first private expectations are formed, and then eﬀort in both
tasks, a1 and a2 , are chosen. In order to stress the diﬀerence between
the bureaucrat and the politician, suppose now that costs are additive:
c = C(a1 ) + C(a2 ). The politician allocates eﬀort so as to maximize:
Pr(y1 + y2 ≥ W ) − C(a1 ) − C(a2 )

(41)

taking the voters’ reservation utility, W, and the private sector expectations, ae2 , as given. In equilibrium, W = 2θ̄ + ae1 + ae2 . Taking the
first order optimality conditions for the politician and imposing rational
expectations, yields the following result:
1
n(θ̄) = Ca (aP1 )
2
aP2 = 0
67

(42)

Equilibrium eﬀort on task 1 is determined by the same condition as in
section 3, except that the left hand side is divided by 2 because now
task 1 only contributes 50% to improve the politician’s chances for reelection. But the politician exerts no eﬀort at all on task 2 because
ex-post the benefit for the voters from this policy outcome are exactly
oﬀset by the negative eﬀect on the performance of task 1. Since voters
assign equal weights to both tasks, and eﬀort is costly, the politician
ex-post prefers to do nothing. Of course, this is suboptimal from an
ex-ante perspective: only unexpectedly high a2 hurts the performance of
task 1, and under rational expectations the voters would be better oﬀ
if the politician could commit to exert high eﬀort also in task 2, and
expectations were formed accordingly. Overall voters’ utility under the
politician is thus:
U P = 2θ̄ + aP1

(43)

Next, consider the bureaucrat, and suppose that his ability is evaluated according to a composite measure of performance, y = δy1 + (1 −
δ)y2 , as in (12) above. Repeating the same steps, and still taking expectations as given, we now obtain:
δ = Ca (aB
1)

(44)

(1 − 2δ) ≤ Ca (aB
2)

(45)

Like the politician, and for the same reasons, the bureaucrat too exerts
68

less eﬀort in task 2 than in task 1, because under discretion he perceives
a cost from unexpectedly high eﬀort. In fact, for δ ≥ 1/2, (45) implies
aB
2 = 0. But now, the constitution gives a tool to overcome this incentive
problem: tilting the bureaucratic mission towards task 2, with δ < 1/2,
B
induces the bureaucrat to reduce aB
1 and increase a2 . Since costs are
B
convex, at least over some range aB
2 increases by more than a1 is reduced.

Moreover, if expectations are formed after the constitutional stage, this is
e
reflected into expectations, and aB
2 = a2 , so that the loss in performance

in task 1 is more than oﬀset by the improved performance in task 2.
Hence, the voters’ expected utility is:
B
U B = 2θ̄ + aB
1 + a2

(46)

Unless eﬀort by the politician in task 1 is very high, the voters are likely
to be better oﬀ under the bureaucrat.
In fact, voters would be even better oﬀ if tasks 1 and 2 could be split
between two distinct bureaucrats (or between a politician in charge of
task 1 and a bureaucrat in charge of task 2). The bureaucrat in charge
of task 2 could be given a mission defined only on y2 as a basis of performance, and someone else could be in charge of task 1. This would get rid
entirely of the time inconsistency, since the bureaucrat in charge of task
2 would now disregard completely the negative impact of unexpectedly
high a2 in the performance of the other task. The proposition in the
69

text follows.

3. Lobbying
As stated in the text, the equilibrium with lobbying must solve the
following optimization problem by choice of a1, a2 and f, subject to nonnegativity constraints on the three choice variables, and taking voters’
expectations ae1 as given, as before.
Max

©

Pr(θ ≥ θ̄ + ae1 − a1 − H(f )) + (1 + γ)a2 − C(a1 + a2 ) − f

ª

(47)

The first order conditions for a1 , a2 and f evaluated at the point
ae1 = a1 imply respectively:
n(θ̄ − H(f )) − Ca (a1 + a2 ) + µ1 = 0

(48)

1 + γ − Ca (a1 + a2 ) + µ2 = 0

(49)

n(θ̄ − H(f ))Hf (f ) − 1 + µ3 = 0

(50)

where µi , i = 1, 2 are the lagrange multipliers on the non-negativity constraints for ai , while µ3 is the lagrange multiplier on the non-negativity
constraint for f.
Consider first the case Hf (0) < 1/(1 + γ). Since Hf f < 0, here
lobbying is ineﬃcient, and the first order conditions can only be satisfied
if f = a2 = 0 and a1 is at an interior optimum defined by (48) with µ1 = 0
in it.
70

Next, consider the case Hf (f ∗ ) > 1/(1 + γ). This is the opposite
extreme, in which lobbying is very eﬀective. In this case a1 = 0 and
a2 and f ∗ are at an interior optimum defined by (49) and (50) with
µ2 = µ3 = 0 in them.
In the intermediate case, in which Hf (0) > 1/(1 + γ) but the returns
to campaign contributions fall rapidly, an equilibrium with lobbying does
not always exist. A special knife edge case is given by the case in which
Hf (0) > 1/(1 + γ) and Hf (f ∗ ) = 1/(1 + γ) = n(θ̄ − Hf (f ∗ )). Here a1
and a2 can both be positive, and are defined by
1 + γ = Ca (a1 + a2 )
and by the condition that the politician is indiﬀerent between this equilibrium and the one with no lobbying.

4. Equilibrium constitutions
Proof of Proposition 8
Consider four cases: delegation vs no-delegation today, given that
the voters expect no-delegation after the elections; and delegation vs nodelegation today, given that voters expect delegation after the elections.
Suppose that the voters expect that, after the election, the politician
will retain both tasks. Consider each of the two possible constitutional
arrangements for the current period.

Under bureaucratic delegation

(i.e.. the politician is in charge of task 1 while the bureaucrat is in
71

charge of task 2), the probability of reappointment is: P r(y1 ≥ W ) (since
the ability of the incumbent politician in the second task is unknown,
it cannot influence the election outcome). If voters are rational and
fully understand the institutions in place, then their reservation utility
is: W = θ̄ + ae . The equilibrium is then exactly as in section 2 above.
In particular, the probability of reappointment is: P r(θ + aP1 ≥ θ̄ +
ae1 ) = 1/2. If instead the politician keeps the second task for himself, and
given that the voters understand it, the probability of reappointment is:
P r(y1 + y2 ≥ W ) = P r(θ1 + θ2 ≥ W − a1 − a2 ), where the reservation
utility is now given by: W = 2θ̄ + ae1 + ae2 . In equilibrium (i.e., with
aPi = aei , i = 1, 2), the probability of reappointment is thus: P r(θ1 +θ2 ≥
2θ̄) = 1/2.
Now suppose that the voters expect that, after the election, the
politician will delegate task 2 and only retain task 1. Here, the relevant reservation threshold imposed by rational voters is: W = θ̄ + ae1 ,
since voters know that task 2 will not be controlled by the politician after the elections. Hence, the equilibrium probability of reappointment is
P r(y1 ≥ W ) = P r(θ1 ≥ θ̄) = 1/2, irrespective of whether the politician
delegates or not before the elections.33
33

Note that we have implicitly assumed that voters separately observe

y1 and y2 ; but this does not matter. If this was not the case, and in the
case of no-delegation voters only observed y1 + y2 , then the equilibrium
72

References
[1] Aghion, P. A. Alesina and F. Trebbi (2002) ”Endogenous political
institutions” NBER Working Paper.
Alesina A.and Cukierman, A. (1991) ”The politics of ambiguity.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 105: 829-850.
Alesina A. and R. Gatti (1995) ”Independent Central Banks: Low
inflation at no costs?” American Economic Review, 85:196-200.
Alesina A. and R. Perotti (1999) ”Budget defcits and budget institutions” in J. Poterba and J. Von Hagen (eds.) Fiscal Institutions
and Fiscal Perfomance Chicago University Press and NBER.
Alesina A. and S. Spear (1988) ”An overlapping generation model
of political competition” Journal of Public Economics.
Alesina A. and L. Summers (1993) ”Central bank independence and
macroeconomic performance: Some comparative evidence.” Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking 25: 151-62.
Barro R. and D. Gordon (1983) ”Rules, discretion and reputation
in a model of monetary policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics
12: 101-121.
Berglof E, B Eichengreen, G Roland, G. Tabellini and C Wyplosz
2
probability of reappointment under no-delegation would be P r( θ1 +θ
≥
2

θ̄), which is still equal to 1/2.

73

(2003) Built to last: A political architecture for Europe CEPR, London
Besley T. and S. Coate (2003), "Elected versus Appointed Regulators: Theory and Evidence", Journal of the European Economic
Association, forthcoming.
Besley T. and M. Gathak (2003)” Competition and Incentives with
motivated agents” unpublished.
Blinder A. (1998) Central Bank in Theory and Practice. MIT Press.
Blinder A. (1997) Is government too political? Foreign Aﬀairs
Business Council of Australia (1999) Avoiding boom/bust: macro
econbomic reforms for a globalised economy Discussion Paper, October
Carpenter D. (2001) Reputations, Negotiations, and Polciy Innovation in Executive Agencies 1862-1928 Princeton University Press,
Princeton NJ
Cukierman A. (1992) Central Bank Strategy Credibility and Independence MIT Press Cambridge Mass.
Dewatripont, M., Jewitt, I., and Tirole, J. (1999a). ”The economics
of career concerns, part I: Comparing information structures.” Review of Economic Studies 66, 183—198.
Dewatripont, M, Jewitt, I., and Tirole, J. (1999b). ”The economics

74

of career concerns, part II: Application to missions and accountability of government agencies, Review of Economic Studies 66, 199—
217.
Dewatripont M.and J. Tirole (1999) ’Advocates” Journal of Poltical
Economy, 107: 2-39
Epstein D. and S, O Halloran (1999) Delegating Powers Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge UK
Ferejohn, J. 1986. ”Incumbent performance and electoral control.”
Public Choice 50: 5-26.
Fiorina M. (1977) Congress: the Keystone of American Democracy
Yale University Press, New Haven CT
Glaser, E. and A. Shleifer (2003) "The rise of the Regulatory State",
Journal of Economic Literature
Grilli, V., Masciandaro, D., and Tabellini, G. (1991).”Political and
monetary institutions and public financial policies in the industrial
countries.” Economic Policy 13: 342—392.
Grossman E. and G. Helpman (2001) Special Interest Poltics MIT
press Cambridge Mass.
Hart O., A Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1997) ”The proper scope of
government: theory and application to prisons” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 1127-61

75

Holmstrom B.(1999) ”Managerial Incentive Problems: A dynamic
Prespective” Review of Economic Studies, 66.
Holmsrom B. and P. Milgrom (1991) ”Multitask Principal Agent
analysis: Incentive contracts asset ownership, and job design” Journal of Law and Economics, 24-52.
Kydland, F., and Prescott, E. 1977. ”Rules rather than discretion:
the inconsistency of optimal plans.” Journal of Political Economy
85: 473-490.
Lowi T.(1969) The end of liberalism: the second Republic of the
United States Norton, New York
Mc Cubbins M. R. Noll and B. Weingast (1987) ”Administrative
Procedures as Instruments of Poltical Control” Journal of Law Economic and Organization” 3:243-77
Mc Cubbins M. R. Noll and B. Weingast (1989) ”Structure and
Process Poltics and Policy: Administrative Arrangements and the
Poltical Control of Agencies” Virginia Law Review, 75:431-82.
Maskin E. and J. Tirole (2001) ”The judges and the politicians”
unpublished.
Persson T, and G. Tabellini (1990) Macroeconomic Policy Credibilty
and Politics Chur: Arwood Academic Publishers
Persson T, G. Roland and G. Tabellini ( 1997) ”Separation of pow-

76

ers and political accountability.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
112: 1163—1202.
Persson T. and G. Tabellini (1993) "Designing institutions for monetary stability" Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy 39: 53-89.
Persson T. and G. Tabellini (2000) Political Economics. Explaining
Economic Policy, MIT Press.
Putnam R. (1988) ”Diplomacy and Domestic Politics: The logc of
two level games” International Organizations 427-81
Poterba, J., and von Hagen, J (eds.). (1999). Fiscal Rules and Fiscal
Performance.Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rogoﬀ, K. (1985). ”The optimal degree of commitment to an intermediate monetary target.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 100:
1169-1190.
Rogoﬀ K. (1990) ”Equilibrium Political Budget Cycles” American
Economic Review,80:21-36
Rogoﬀ K and A. Sibert (1988) ”Elections and Macroeconomic Policy
Cycles” Review of Economic Studies 55: 1-16.
Seabright, P. 1996. ”Accountability and decentralization in government: An incomplete contracts model.” European Economic Review
40: 61-89.

77

Schultz, C. (2003) "Information, polarization and delegation in
democracy", University of Copenhagen, mimeo
Stigler G. (1971) ”The Theory of Economic Regulation” Bell Journal of Economic and Management Science 2: 3-21.
Vreeland J. 2003 The IMF and Economic Development, Cambridge
University Press
Walsh, C. 1995. ”Optimal contracts for central bankers.” American
Economic Review 85: 150-167.
Wilson J.Q. (1989) Bureaucracy Basic Books, New York.

78

