                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE THEORY OF EXCESS BURDEN
                       AND OPTIMAL TAXATION




                         Alan J. Auerbach




                      Working Paper No. 1025




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                          November 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #1025
                                                      November 1982




                 The Theory of Excess Burden and Optimal Taxation

                                    Abstract



     The purpose of this paper is to present the chronological development of

the concept of excess burden and the related study of optimal tax theory. A

main objective of this exercise is to uncover the interrelationships among

various apparently distinct results, so as to bring out the basic structure

of the entire problem.

     The paper includes a discussion of various measures of excess burden,

focusing on issues of approximation, informational requirements, aggregation

over individuals, and the effects of technology. Included in the presentation

of optimal tax theory is a section on tax reform, as well as an application

of the theory to the case where uncertainty is present.




Alan J. Auerbach
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
(617) 495—3934
 1.    Introduction


       The theory of excess burden and optimal commodity taxation is one of the

 oldest subjects of study- in public finance, dating back to Dupuit (i844), and

yet is also closely associated w.th the rapid analytical development of the

 field which commenced in the early l970s. Perhaps more than in most areas of

economics, there has been a tendency to overlook contributions nade in earlier

decades. As a result, much of the "new" public economics of the last decade

amounts to little more than a restatement and extension, perhaps in less arcane

language and terminology, of previously proven propositions. In some cases, the

modern effort is less general in scope than the original.

      Probably the most celebrated example of such "rediscovery" is that of Ram-

sey's (1927) derivation of optimal comndity tax formulae, now referred to as

the Ramsey rule. The lapse here is even harder to understand in that Ramsey's

results were succinctly described in Pigou's classic public finance text (1947)

and rederived by Boiteaux (1956). However, this is not an isolated event. The

deadweight loss "triangles" nE.de popular by the work of Harberger (1964) were

considered by Hotelling (1938), and appear implicitly in Dipuit (i844):

      It follows that when the change in consumption brought about by a
      tax is known, it is possible to find an upper limit to the amount
      of the utilitr lost by multiplying the change in consumption by
      half the tax.

Indeed, the generalization of such excess burden formulae by Boiteaux (1951) and
                                       2
Debreu (1951, 1954) has until recently been almost entirely ignored in the sub-

sequent literature. Even the "Laffer curve", popular among noneconomists, might

more appropriately be called the "Dupuit curve":

      If a tax is gradually increased from zero up to a point where it
      becomes prohibitive, its yield is at first nil, then increases by
      small stages until it reaches a naximum, after which it gradually
      declines until it becomes zero a€ain. It follows that when the
      state requires to raise a given sum by means of taxation, there are
      always two rates of tax which would fulfill the requirement, one
                                     —1.2—


     above and one below that which would yield the maximum. There may
     be a very great difference between the amounts of3utility lost
     through these taxes which yield the same revenue.

One can only imagine how recent U.S. history would have been altered-had Ilipuit

written this on a napkin.

     The purpose of this chapter is to present, absent lateral or backward

steps, the chronological development of the concept of excess burden and the

related study of optimal tax theory. A main objective of this exercise is to

uncover the interrelationships among various apparently distinct results, so as

to bring out the basic structure of the entire problem.



1.1 Outline of the Chapter

     Any discussion of welfare economics inevitably begins with the problem of

welfare measurement, which in the present context involves a treatment of Mar-

shall's consumers' surplus and its relationship to Hicks' (l92) notions of com-

pensating and equivalent variations. These are discussed in Section 2, where

special attention is paid to the distinction between the measurement of the wel-

fare effects of price changes and the distortionary impact of tax changes. Sec-

tion 3 develops the various measures of excess burden, focusing on issues of

approximation, informational requirements and aggregation over individuals, and

the effects of a more general technolo than the commonly supposed one with

fixed producer prices. Section 1 reviews some of the empirical attempts to

estimate various deadweight losses. Section 5 presents and interprets the basic

rules for optimal commodity taxation, including a discussion of the role of pro-

fits taxation and the desirability of production efficiency. The analysis in

Section 6 concerns the relative desirability of direct and indirect taxation and

the structure of individual preferences. Section 7 presents some applications
                                          —1.3—


of optimal   tax   theory to questions such as the provision of public goods, cor-

rection of externalities, and the allocation of risk.     Finally, in Section 8, we

explore the issue of tax reform, as distinct from de novo tax design. This

literature dates back to Corlett and Hague (1953—it), and asks whether specified

local movements away from an initial suboptimal equilibrium will improve social

welfare. In general, movement of prices in the direction of their optimal

levels does not guarantee such an improvement.
2.     Measures of Surplus and Excess Burden


2.1 Consumers' Surplus and the Hicksian variations

       We begin with Marshall's (1920, p. 811) diagram, in Figure 2.1, depicting

consumers' and producers' surplus. The consumers' surplus is defined, somewhat

vaguely, to be the amount that consumers would pay in excess of the amount they

are paying, p0x0, for the amount they are purchasing, x0. Interpreting the

demand curve as an expression of willingness to pay, we obtain area A as such a

measure. Similarly, interpreting producers' surplus as the level of profits

received in supplying the quantity sold, and assuming that competitive supply

causes the marginal social cost to coincide with the supply schedule S, we ob-.

tam the area B. The sum A + B is maximized when price equals marginal cost,

as one would hope, and changes in each measure following from a price change are

easily calculated. For example, if the price rises from p0 to p1, the change in

consumers' surplus is the area of a trapazoid which equals

                              p1
                S =       1        x(p) dp                                                    (2.1)
                      p0

where x() is the demand function with respect to the good's own price, holding

other prices fixed.

       The basic     problem with consumers'                 surplus as a welfare measure is that if

more   than   one price changes, the order in which the trapezoids in (2.1) are cal-

culated matters. That is, if we let x1 and p' be the quantity demanded and

price in the th market, the sum of individual consumers' surpluses AS1, i.e.

the line integral:


               s =            s'   =
                                       I   ''
                                           p
                                                1
                                                    x1 dp1                                    (2.2)
                      i
                                    Figure 2.1

                         Consumers' and Producers' Surplus




            p
                               Consumers'
                 N             Surplus

                                                             S

                     A




            p0




Producers
  Surplus

                                                             D



                                       xo                        x
                                                                      —2.3—

takes on different values according to the path of integration from the initial

price vector             to the ultimate price vector
                                                                                           .    To see this, consider a simple

example with two          markets.                 If we change the price in market 1 first, the change

in surplus is:
                                    1                                                  2
                                p                                                  p
              A S1 =                     x                            +
                          1f                  (p ,      p0)dp                 2'           x (p1, p dp                        2.3a
                         p0                                               p0



while if we change the price in market 2 first, we obtain:


              A S2 =
                          p0
                                         x1(p1, p)dp1 +                    21 x2(p, p2)dp2
                                                                          p0
                                                                                                                          (2.3b)



Subtracting A S1 from A S2, we obtain:
                                         1
     A S2 —        A   S1 =
                                                  ri
                                                  Lx
                                                     1
                                                     (p ,
                                                                 2
                                                                          —   x11
                                                                                (p ,
                                                                                     2              1
                                                                p1)                         p0)ldp
                               p0
                                     2
                          —
                                                  2, 1 2j— 2, 1                            2i   2                         /
                                                                                                                          2.
                                             LX
                                                  p1,                                  P ijdp
                           p0


For this term to equal zero, it imist generally be zero over all subintervals

between        and .            In      particular, for small changes in p1 and p2, with

p = p     +   dp       and p1 =
                                        p0
                                              +    dp   ,   (2.1)         becomes:




                                 1,1 2
                               3x 'po,
                                                                                   21 2
                                                                                  3 (p0,
     A        — A S1 =                                      1         2                                 1    2
                                           2            dp dp —                             1       dp dp                      (2.5)
                                         ap

which equals zero only if the cross price derivative                                                         and —- are   equal.
                                                                                                        ap       ip
Such symmetry          holds    for compensated demands: the Slutsky matrix is symmetric

(Hicks 196). However, ordinary demand derivatives also possess income effects.

For the income effects to be equal, it is straightforward to show, budget shares

must be constant, i.e., preferences must be homothetic.
         One solution to this ambiguity,         then,   is to define a. surplus measure in

 terms   of   the compensated commodity demands for which the symmetry property

 holds. Here, however, we face a different question: since utility does change

 with the change in prices, which utility level should be used as a reference

 level for the compensated demand functions? The problem is one of index nuni—

bers, and two       natural    candidates are the levels of utility prevailing before

and after the price changes. Following Hicks (191.42), we define the compensating

variation of a price change to be that amount of income the consumer must

receive to leave utility unaffected by the price change, and the equivalent

variation     as the amount     of income the consumer would forego to avoid the price

change. By definition, the compensating variation of a price change from

to       equals the equivalent variation of a change from
                                                                    p to . Using      the

expenditure function, defined by the minimization of expenditure at given prices

to satisfy a given level of utility:


        E (p, )      mm   (p     x)   subject to U(x) ) 0                             (2.5)

we may    express    concisely the equivalent and compensating variations as

E (p, 0)
               E(p     0),    where 0   is   the pre—change utility level in the case of the

compensating variation, and the post—change utility level in the case of the

equivalent variation. Letting y be the consumer's actual income, we can express

these two measures as functions of prices and income alone through use of the

indirect utility function, V(p, y), defined by


              V(p, y) = max U(x) subJect to p •          xy                           (2.6)


Substituting    (2.6) into      (2.5), we obtain for the compensating variation of a

price   change from     to
                                                   —2.5—



             cv(,    p)
                          =
                              E(,     v(, y) )       —
                                                         E(,       v(, y)

                          =
                              E(,     v(, T)) —                                            (2.Ta)

and for the corresponding equivalent variation:



             Ev(, ) = E(,             v(, y)) -          E(,       v(, y))

                          =   y -   E(,     v(, y))                                       (2.m)


(where we use the identity y =             E(p,    V(p, y) ))


These   measures may    be depicted graphically. By the envelope theorem (Shepard's

Lemma),   the   derivative of the expenditure function with respect to an individual

price p1 is simply the Hicksian or compensated demand x(p, U).                      Thus, either

of the Hicksian variations my be expressed (for the appropriate value of U)                       as:


     E(, U)      - E(,    U)   =f           1(p,     U) .dp            x(p, U)dp              (2.8)




Since the cross—price derivatives are symmetric for compensated demands, these

measures are path—independent. For the case of a single price change, they

may be easily compared to the simple change in consumers' surplus, which is

then well—defined. This is shown in Figure 2.2, where D(U) is the compensated

demand curve corresponding to the compensated demands x(p, U), drawn irre

steeply than the ordinary demand curve D under the assumption of normality.

The ordinary consumers' surplus changes by the area A + B with an increase

in price from p0 to p1. The compensating variation of the change equals

the area A + B + C, while the equivalent variation equals the area A. The

bracketing of the Marshallian measure by the two Hicksian measures was

emphasized   by Hicks   (1912)      and   Wilhig    (19T6)    in   their attempts at rehabilitation
                   Figure 2.2

     Compensating and Equivalent Variations




            DcOl(P]. y))         Dc(V(po, y))


p



p1




        A



                       I
p0




                                     k


                                                 I



                      x(p1, y)                  x(p0, y) x
                                       —2.7—


 of consumers' surplus as a welfare measure. However, their argument becomes

 weaker when more than one price changes, for then consumers' surplus is not even

 single—valued. Moreover, for estimating the excess burden of a tax, it is not

 the entire loss to the consumer in which we are interested but rather the loss

 in excess of revenue collected. It turns out that in such a case, the felici-

tous outcome with respect to the relative size.s of the three measures no longer

holds.




2.2 Definitions of Excess Burden

      The deadweight loss from a tax system is that amount that is lost in excess

of what the government collects. Unfortunately, while this definition makes in-

tuitive sense, it is too vague to permit a single interpretation.

      Beginning again with the basic Marshallian approach, we can see the effects

of a tax t in Figure 2.3. By raising the consumer price from p0 to p1 + t, the

tax reduces consumers' surplus by the area A + B. Producers' surplus is reduced

by C + D, by the drop in producer price to p1, but tax revenues amount only to

A + C, yielding a social loss of B + D, or approximately 1/ t(x0 —         =   —l,   t   x,
                                                                     x1)
as suggested by Dupuit.

     A key aspect of this measure is that it is greater than zero whether the

tax is positive or negative. The case of a subsidy at rate s is depicted in

Figure 2.4. Here, there is an increase in consumption to x1, and consumers'

surplus and producers' surplus both rise, by the areas H + I and F + G, respec—

tively. But the amount of the subsidy exceeds those gains by the area J, equal

to 1/2 S   x or, again, _1/2 t z x for t   —s being the algebraic value of the tax.

The loss comes from the distortion of a Pareto optimal allocation, not simply

the reduction in output.
                  Figure 2. 3
            Excess Burden of a Tax




        p




po.+ t




   p1




                      _.L.
                                     x
                      xo
               Figure 2.L

        Excess Burden of a Subsidy




   p




                                 ,,1'       Si

   p1




p1 —s




                     I                  D




                    xo      xl              x
                                             —2.10—


      For the case where a tax already exists, we may ask what additional excess

 burden would be caused by a tax increase. In this case, we subtract the change

 in government revenue from the change in producers' and consumers' surplus,

 since revenue is positive at the initial point. The resulting rrasure is shown

 in Figure 2.5.

       By raising the consumer price from             +        to        +         the tax causes a
                                                 p1       t1        p2       t2,
 loss in consumers' surplus of A + B.        Producers' surplus declines by C + D, and,

as before, the government collects additional revenue on the purchases
                                                                                            x2 equal
to (t2 —            x2, or areas A + C.
            t1)                            However, the goverrinient loses the revenue it

was collecting on the purchases in excess of x2, equal to area E. Thus, the

welfare loss of the tax increase equals the trapezoidal area B + E + D, or

approximatej..y —    (t   x + 1/2   t     x).. Thus, even if             t is very siiall, the addi-

tional excess burden need not be, unlike in the case where no tax exists

initially: there is now a first order welfare loss resulting from marginal tax

changes.

      Unfortunately, we have already seen that consumers' surplus possesses

problems as a welfare measure, so it is not clear how inforrative these results

are, particularly if we wish to consider the effects of several taxes at once.

It turns out that more sophisticated asures based on the 1-ticksian variations

offer results which do not qualitatively differ from the ones we have already

obtained.     However, this renins to      be demonstrated. For the remainder of this

subsection,   we focus on   the case of a single consumer facing fixed producer pri-

ces. These restrictions are relaxed in Section 3.

      Using                                                  that the excess
              the equivalent variation, Mohring (l9Tl) suggests

burden of a tax is the amount in excess of taxes being collected that the con-
sumer would give up to return to a no—tax state; that is, how much more could be
collected from the consumer (and thrown away) than is currently being collected,
                     Figure 2.5

         Excess Burden with a Preexisting Tax




p2+ t2                                          —-S


p1+ t1

   p0
   p1
                                          N
   p2




                                                 x
              x2        x1
                                               —2.12—


with no loss in utility, if the Collection method was lump sum taxation. In the

terminolor used above, we may write this measure as:


     EBE =     E(,    v(, y))   -
                                    E(,      v(p, y)J -   R(,     y)



           =   y -   E(,   v(, y)) -        (-          x(p, y)                    (2.9)

where B (, y) is the tax revenue collected when prices are at                 and the con-

sumer's income equals y.

     Alternately, Diamond and McFadden (19Th) suggest the use of the compen— -

sating   variation by defining excess burden to be that amount, in addition to

revenues collected, that the government must supply to the consumer to allow him

to maintain the initial utility level. That is, how much must come from "out-

side" the system to compensate for the tax distortion. To avoid double—

counting, we include in the government's revenue the additional amount it col—

lects because the individual is compensated and (for a normal good) demands more

of the taxed commodity. Thus, the Diamond—McFadden measure may be written:


     EBc =     E(,   v(, y)) —      E(, v(, y)) — R(,           E(, v(, y)))

          =
               E(,   v(, y))    —   y   —
                                            ( — ) x(, E(, v(, y) ID
          = E(, v(, y))         —   y   —
                                            (—)              v(, y))              (2.10)


(where the last step uses the identity x(p, E(p, ) )            = x(p, Ufl.
     For a single price change, these two measures of excess burden may be

graphically compared to the Marshallian nasure shown in Figure 2.3. The three

measures together are shown      in     Figure 2.6. To obtain the equivalent variation

measure or the consumers' surplus measure of excess burden, we subtract the

revenue actually collected at x(p, y) from the respective measures shown in

Figure 2.2. For the compensating variation measures, we subtract the revenue
                  Figure 2.6

     A Comparison of Excess Burden Measures




                               Dc(V(po, y))
               Dc(V(pi, y))

p




p1




p0



                                                          \ ND



                   x(p1, y)          xc(pi    V(p0, y))
                                                   _2.l1_
that   would be collected if utility were kept at V(p, y). This yields the areas

A, A + B, and C for the three respective rasures. Note that the two Hicksian

measures no longer bracket the Marshallian one.6 If the taxed good is normal,

the latter is necessarily larger than each of the former, and the discrepancy

may be quite large.

       Other logical measures of excess burden involving the equivalent and corn-

pensating variations may be conceived.7 In addition, it is easy to adapt the

two measures already derived to the case where the initial equilibrium is not

Pareto optimal but is already distorted by taxes. The equivalent variation

measure of additional excess burden would then be the amount, in excess of addi-

tional tax revenues, that the consumer would pay to avoid the latest price

increase from p to p


       EBE =
                 E(,     V(p, y))
                                     —
                                         EIp., V(p, y))
                                                              —
                                                                  ER(p,y)
                                                                            —
                                                                                R(p, E(p,   V(p, y)))1

            =   y -     E(,   T(p,   y))   -   (   - p)   .
                                                              (p2,   y) +   x(p,     v(,    y))


          =     y   —
                        E(,   v(, y))      —
                                               (. ) x('              y) + (p     —   p)

                 (L1, v(, y) ) — x(, y)))                                                         (2.11)


Comparing       (2.11)   with (2.9), we find that (2.11) contains an additional expression

representing the reduction in tax revenues as demand declines with the new rise in

price, with utility held. constant at v(, y). This additional term corresponds to

that found for the basic consumers' surplus measure in Figure 2.6. Likewise, the

compensating variation rrasure would be the amount in excess of the change in reve-

nues that would be required to to maintain the initial utility level, or:
                                               —2.15—




     EBc =   E(,   v(, y))
                             —
                                 E(,      v(j,   y)J    -
                                                            [R(,      E1,       y)))   —
                                                                                            R(,     y)]


         =
             E(, V(:1,   y)) — y -         —
                                                                  v(, y))   +   (-             ,(p,       y)


                             - -           -
         =
             E(,   v(,                                  22' v(, y))
         +   (—                  y)   —
                                          x(p,    v(,         y) ))                        (2.12)


where the additional term compared to (2.10) is the revenue lost as demand

declines with utility held constant at v(,              y).
 3.    Evaluating the Measures of Excess Burden


 3.1 Taylor Approximations and Informational Requirements

       For purposes of explosition, it is sometimes easier to express the dead-

 weight loss calculations above in terms of second—order Taylor approximations.

 For example, if we expand the exact measure EBc around the initial price vector

      we obtain:




      EBc =
              dEB

                 dp     •
                                  -)       +   1/2    ( -
                                                                       dEB
                                                                       dp'
                                                                                       -     + ...   (3.1)


 which, ignoring all terms beyond the second order, yields:




      EB0   [-(-)' .1                          ()
                                      dx                     d2x
            + 1/2   /
                        —     \r —c        —          —      ____            —
                                  I

                                                                 dp                                      3.2




where x., is evaluated at p and V(p               ,   y).    If we make a further approxi—
                                                                                                     2
mation ignoring the cuature terms of the compensated demand inction
we obtain:



      EBc
              — (t' S       t +   1/2      t' S       t) =   —
                                                                 (t'     x   +   1/2       t x)      (3.3)



where t =

and =S t.
             (   — ),         t   =
                                      (    — ),       S =          is   the Slutsky matrix, and




This is of a form similar to the single market measure derived above for simple

consumers' surplus, but the changes in demand are now compensated changes rather
                                         —3.2—


than ordinary ones. The approximation in (3.3) is that originally derived by

Harberger (1964), although the procedure used to derive it here is somewhat
           8
simpler.

     From (3.3), we may observe a number of additional characteristics of tax—

induced excess burden. First of all, when there are pre—existing taxes in other

markets, the introduction of another tax need not worsen things. We must weigh

the strictly positive term —(      t)2S..   for the new tax in market i against the

cross effects -.t S t in each other market j, which represent the loss in

revenue from the tax t. due to the drop in demand resulting from the price

increase in market i.      Since S.. may be positive or negative, so may each of

those terms.    In general, if pre—existing taxes are on goods substitutable for

good i (S.. >   0),   the new tax is more likely to lessen the total excess burden

of the tax system.

     A second observation to make from (3.3) is that excess burden is a non-

linear function of tax rates. Consider, for example, a single tax t. imposed

upon a state without taxes. The excess burden is approximately — 1/2 tS.., so

that it increases with the square of the tax. This suggests that to raise a

certain amount of revenue, we should use several small taxes rather than few

large ones, perhaps tilting toward those with smaller own substitution effects

for which the scale of excess burden is lower. However, once several taxes are

used, the cross effects just discussed need also be evaluated. How these

aspects fit together will become clearer in Section 5 when we formally consider

the optimal tax problem.

    Aside from expositional purposes, the use of a ylor approximation can

only be justified on grounds of insufficient information. If we know the

consumer's expenditure function, we can calculate either of the exact measures

of excess burden explicitly. Even if we know only the consumer's ordinary
                                       —3.3—


 demand function, we can solve for his indirect utility function and hence his

 compensated demand function (in principle) using the system of partial differ-

 ential equations generated by Roy's identity:9


                      dtJ/d
                  —
      x(p, y) =                                                            (3.1)
                      dU/dy

 Thus, we imist know less than the consumer's demand function if we are to justify

 the use of an approximation; perhaps only its local properties. However, even

 in this case, it is probably preferable to construct an exact measure to the

 extent of one's limited knowledge of demand characteristics away from the ini-

tial equilibrium, and use confidence bounds based on the precision of our    under-
lying parameter estimates.

     A second defense of the use of approximations or even of simple consumers'

surplus measures is that the demand function as estimated is not integrable, so

that we cannot use the procedure suggested above to derive the associated com-

pensated demand function. However, lack of integrability is synononus with the

violation of the laws of demand.    If such laws are violated, what interpretation

can we give any measure we use?



3.2 Variations in Producer Prices

     The assumption made thus far in this section that producer prices are fixed

is a common one in the literature, but may do violence to our representation of

the actual situation prevailing in the econormj-. For example, we know that a tax

on a good in absolutely fixed supply is equivalent to a lump sum tax and    there-

fore nondistortionary, regardless of how elastic the demand for the good   is.

Our preliminary examination of excess burden using consumers' surplus in Sec-

tion 2 suggested that the excess burden of a tax is proportional to the reduc-

tion in the output of the taxed good, taking account of both demand and supply
                                           —3. 1 —




    conditions.   It would be useful to extend the Hicksian measures in the same

    direction.

         The complication that arises in doing so is that it is no longer sufficient

    to posit a certain money value of compensation: since producer prices change,

 the form of compensation matters. For example, to extend the compensating vari-

 ation measure of excess burden, we rmist specify the form in which the coxnperisa—

 tion from "outside" the system, in excess of collected revenue, will come.

        To develop a compensating variation measure of the additional excess burden

caused by an increase in taxes, starting at a distorted equilibrium, we let a

be the compensation vector of the elements of x, normalized so that at initial

prices ct has a cost of unity, and 8 the scalar that determines how much of the

compensation bundle the consumer receives, 8a .        If we denote producer prices by
q and consumer prices by p, then the compensating variation measure of excess

burden 8 can be defined implicitly by the equation



        Y(2, y2
                       -    +      a8) =
                                           V(, y1)                                 (3.5)


where       is the initial consumer price vector,      the distorted price vector,
      and    the corresponding producer price vectors, y1 and       the lump sum
income in the two states, and       =   (—           x(p,   y1) and R2 =   (—
.
            V(, y1))   the revenue in the two states. The values of y are indexed

by their respective states because they may vary when producer prices change.

For example, if the econoimj's production function exhibits decreasing returns to

scale in the consumer goods x, then the pure profits from competitive production

are positive and change with the change in producer prices. Letting zbe the

vector of goods produced, total profits are y = q        z. Note that production and

consumption differ by the infusion of additional compensation, 8

       It is not generally possible to find a closed form solution for 8 from its

implicit definition in (3.5). However, we can consider the change in 8 result-

ing from an increase in taxes starting at the initial equilibrium
                                                                           by calculating
                                                          -.3.5—



the total differential of (3.5), evaluated at that point and then solving for

 d. Doing so, we obtain:

              dp +
                         4             dq +         dq + d8cz        q +      t.       dx +     x      dtl         0    (3.6)



wheret=(p—q).
Again using the evelope theorem, one can show that                                     =   z.        Using this and
                                                                                  dq
Roy's identity ((3.I) above), we obtain from (3.6):

            [—x .       dp + z   .   dq + $c   .   dq +   dci   .   q +   t   •    dx + x        .   dt]     = 0                (3.7)



But since x =           y +   8a and          0, and by the normalization q • a = 1, (3.7)

simplifies to
                    •
            = —t         dx                                                                                            (3.8)


which is precisely the form of the first—order effect derived above in (3.3).

However, here dx is the change in x as taxes rise, holding utility constant and

compensating with the bundle                   •   Because the choice of a affects the equili-

brium,    it affects dx and hence d. For example,                          consider the case in which

there    are two goods, one of which is taxed. Let the untaxed good serve as nu—
rneraire,   so that its price does not change. Then we can represent the effect of

the compensation bundle in a graph showing the demand for the taxed good. This

is done in Figure 3.1. The supply curve S represents the relative producer

price of x, and depends only on the amount of x produced. The demand curve tra-

ces out the compensated demand for the taxed good, which is a function of the

good's own price alone in this two—good case. With the introduction of a tax t

to a previously undistorted equilibrium, the change in x depends on whether the

compensation is in the numeraire good or the taxed good. In the former case, x

declines to x2. In the latter case, less of the taxed good is produced because
                            Figure 3.1

            Excess Burden with Changing Producer Prices




    p




  + t                                                            s,

q + t




                                                 NN
        N
                                                          Dc(V(pi,


                      ND
                            N
                                N
                                                             x
              x2 x                  xl
                                               —3.7—


of the excess burden. This can be represented by a second supply curve S',

which accounts for the fact that total supply exceeds production. (Note that S'

will lie to the right of S except at the undistorted price.) The result is a

smaller decline in x, to x. Thus, with producer prices changing, an additional

ambiguity is added to the measurement of excess burden.

       We can also derive the second—order effect on                 of a change in the tax vec-

tor t by taking the total differential of (3.7). This yields


               —dt • dx —     da    dq —   t dx
which, even if we ignore the last curvature term, has an additional term, com-

pared to the second—order effect in (3.3), caused by the changing value of the

normalized compensation bundle. If all compensation is in the form of the

numeraire good, or if there are no taxes initially, this term also vanishes and

we   are left with the more familiar second order effect.1
       Another familiar       expression for the second—order effect may be derived from

(3.9). Again ignoring          the last curvature term, we use the fact that x =             z

to   obtain:


                        • dx +
               —
                   dp          dq   dz =   —dp S dp +   dq   H   d                        (3.10)



                                                         d2y         dz
where H is the Hessian of the profit function
                                                         —f       =—.
                                                         dq


This expression for the second—order effect of a change in taxes on welfare was

first developed by Boiteaux (1951), although his derivation was limited to the

case where the initial equilibrium is undistorted and the first—order effect

d vanishes.
                                                   —3.8—



     Using the notion of equivalent variation, we can construct a measure by
asking what level of resources can be extracted from the consumer in excess of

additional revenue to avoid an additional tax increase. This yields the follow-

ing implicit definition of :


     v(,     y2)
                   =
                       v(, 1   —
                                   (R2
                                         —
                                             R1)
                                                   —                         (3.11)

where, in this case, state 2 is the actual state with taxes at t, whereas

state 1 is the hypothetical state in which taxes do not rise from         but income

is reduced to yield the same level of utility as prevails in state 2. Here,

(i—s) is related to Debreu's (1951) coefficient of resource utilization, which

he defines to be the proportion of society's resources that would be necessary

to maintain each individual's current level of utility if all distortions were

removed. Our measure differs in that we consider the marginal change, rather than

removal of a distortion, and let the vector a be arbitrary. (Of course, Debreu's

measure is defined relative to all kinds of distortions leading to an inefficient

allocation, not just tax—induced changes in the prices of consumer goods.) As

before, we cannot solve for         explicitly, but we can calculate the first—order and

second—order effects d and d2 at the initial distorted point. We leave further

discussion of this measure to the next subsection, which deals with aggregation over

consumers.



3.3 Aggregation and Welfare Comparisons

     Thus far, we have defined all our measures of excess burden for the case of

a single individual. They are easily generalized to the case of several identi-

cal individuals. However, matters become more complicated if we wish to allow

for differences in individual tastes, or even differences in income among other-

wise identical individuals.
                                                                      —3.9—



     Except under very strict conditions on preferences, any measure of aggre—

gate excess burden will depend on the initial distribution of income. Consider

the case of fixed producer prices examined in Section 2, and define a measure of

aggregate excess burden, using the compensating variation, as the amount that

must come from outside the system to maintain each consumer at his pre—tax level

of utility. For two individuals, this measure equals (compare to 2.10):


     L       Elc ,      V
                            1
                                (,     y
                                           1
                                               )j—y1 +           E
                                                                     2,
                                                                      (p1, V (p0,
                                                                                    2            2
                                                                                             y )j — (y +y
                                                                                                          1   2




         —
             (-)                                     V
                                                      1
                                                           (, 1)j 2r
                                                                  y           +              V
                                                                                                 2(p, 2y )              3.l2
where superscripts index the consumers 1 and 2.
     Suppose now that the initial income distribution is changed by a small
reduction in 1 and an equal size increase in y. The change in L would be:


               3E1              3V1                  3E2        av2




                                                      3x1        av1          ax2       i2
         —i—(—)                                                                                                       (3.13)


which, using the fact that x r

can be rewritten:
                                                     CL,                   yI) -        x, E,
                                                                                        r
                                                                                                              y1 j,


                            3V1                      3V2
              3E1
                                  + aE2
     dL-----                          ---

                                               ax1          1             1       ax2        2        2
         —          —
                                      (—
                                                     . -— .                   +         . --— . --—)                           3. 1
                                                                     -—
                                                           —3.10—



Since E[, v(, y) ) = y, we may rewrite (3.1I) as:



     dL =
                "1

              —-(1          —
                                (P    —
                                          o)         ) (i
                                                     dx1
                                                                   —
                                                                        Pi   —
                                                                                  P0)
                                                                                           dx2




                    i                                              i
          1   3E                  1         1         1   dE                      1         1
              -— , V
                        (
where i =                             (ps, y ) ) and ii = ——                  V       (ps, y )   are the marginal
expenditures needed per unit of increased utility at base utility level

v1(, y1) and price levels                            and , respectively.                Thus, dL will equal zero,

in general, only if two conditions are met:


     (1)                equals some common function of prices alone (not income) for
              lii
                        the two individuals; and

                                                               1
                                                             dx
     (2)      the vector of income effects ----                        equals some common function of
              prices alone.


     Condition (2) implies that ordinary demand functions take the form:
      1        i             1,                  1
     x (p, y ) = p) + O(p)y                                                                              (3.16)


for some functions (.) and e(), the latter common across individuals. (The

laws of consumer demand imply, in turn, that 41() is homogeneous of degree 0 in

prices and (.)          is      homogeneous of degree —l in prices, since a proportional

change in and y can't affect x1().) The demand function specified in (3.16)

corresponds to the well—known Gorman (1953) "polar form", which plays a central

role in the theory of exact aggregation.

     Condition (1) implies that, for a suitable transfoimation of the utility

function, consumer i's expenditure function can be written:

    E1(p,     tJ') =ô'(p) +               i(p)                                                          (3.17)
                                             —3.11—


 (with &() and y() homogeneous of degree 1 in prices). This is the expendi-

ture function corresponding to the Gorman polar form (see Muellbauer 1976), so

that conditions (1) and (2) are each satisfied if and only if preferences satis-

 fy this very restricted pattern that allows variations from identical homothetic

preferences only through individual—specific displacements through the "basic

needs" function of zero—income consumption, 41(.)•

     Note that even identical preferences, if not homothetic, will suffice. For

example, suppose individuals have an inelastic demand for a commodity at high

incomes but an elastic demand at low incomes. Then the excess burden of a tax

on this good will be increased if we transfer income to the poorer individual,

for this will increase the overall demand elasticity for the taxed good. Thus,

any measure of excess burden we envisage is not independent of the income

distribution. Similarly, if we required not that each individual's utility be

kept constant, but that individual 1 receive one dollar less than would be

necessary, this, too, would affect the aggregate measure for the same reason.

     Of course, it is still possible to define measures of excess burden for the

multi—individual case. For example, we nay implicitly define a compensating

variation measure analogous to (3.5)        by the identities:


     v'(, (y2 +
                       -
                           R1
                                 +        ) = V1(p,    Wy1)
                                                                  Vi           (3.18)


where i indexes the individual,           is individual i's actual profit share, and

   is the share needed to maintain each individual on the same indifference

curve as prices rise to         and the extra compensation vector      •
                                                                           "enters" the
system. For the equivalent variation, the measure for            corresponding to (3.11)

for several individuals is


            Wy2) =   V1(,w(y1        -
                                         R2 + R1.-      ))                     (3.19)
                                            —3.12—


Again, it      is   not generally possible to solve explicitly for     in either case,

but   we can    derive expressions for the first—order and second—order effects

d and d28 by totally differentiating (3.18) or (3.19) for each i and then

adding over i, making use of the adding—up constraint on the profit shares w

While the resulting expressions for the compensating variation measure are

essentially the same as those described in Subsection 3.2 (with aggregate

demands replacing individual ones), an        interesting   result occurs in the second—

order effect derived from the measure defined by (3.19). It contains an addi-

tional term reflecting the indirect impact of taxes on excess burden through the

change in the income distribution in state 1 (Debreu 195k). Since for an equiv-

alent variation measure state 1 is simply a hypothetical state based on the

utility levels in state 2, changes in taxes, even starting at a no tax position,

influence the distribution of real income in state 1.          Indeed, it should not be

surprising that the condition required for this extra term to vanish is the same

one required above for excess burden to be independent of the initial income

distribution.

      There    is a temptation to respond to this dependency of excess burden on the
distribution of income by conceptually separating questions of allocation and
distribution,       following Musgrave's (1959) framework for the different "branches"

of government: let the distribution branch worry about distribution, and the

allocation branch concern itself with minimizing excess burden. However, there

are two problems with this approach. First, if the distribution branch is not

in operation, we cannot obtain well—behaved social welfare prescriptions by coim-

paring levels of excess burden in different allocations through the device known

as the compensation principle: one state being preferred to another if winziers

could compensate losers. Unless such compensation actually occurs, the

orderings coming out of such a procedure need not be well—behaved or consistent
                                       —3.13—


with any particular social welfare function. This is the essence of the criti-

que of the Hicks (191O)-Kaldor (1939) approach to welfare economics (Samuelson,

19b7).

     A second response might be that we are only interested in efficiency, not

distribution, and so will assign equal distributional weights to individuals,

thereby allowing the interpretation of the aggregate measures derived above as

"efficiency—only" social welfare measures. Such is the approach suggested by

Harberger (1971). Unfortunately, this won't work either. We can certainly ima-

gine a social welfare function of the form:

                           H
        1
     w(U ,   ..., u)   =                                               (3.20)

and can even choose a normalization for the individual utility functions so

that, in the initial state, the marginal utility of income and hence the social

marginal utility of income for each individual is one. However, once prices

change, as they will when taxes are introduced, the changes in real income, and

hence the marginal utility of income, will generally be different. Thus, for

our measure of excess burden to correspond to a social welfare function, it

would require price—dependent individual weights, even if the weights were ini-

tially equal. Only when preferences satisfy the Gorman conditions will weights

initially set equal reqniain equal in all cases (Roberts 1980). Thus, we are

free to consider our aggregate measures of excess burden to be measures of effi-

ciency. However, it will generally not be possible to make welfare comparisons

on the basis of such measures, no matter what our attitude is about the relative

importance of equity and efficiency.
. The Empirical Measurement of Excess Burden
     The ultimate value of the theory developed in Sections 2 and 3 is in its

application to measuring real world distortions. This section offers a brief

review of some of the research that has been done in this popular area of

investigation. No attempt will be made to provide an exhaustive summary of the

empirical literature on the measurement of excess burden.



4.i Measurement with Taylor Approximations

     The earliest empirical work on the measurement of excess burden was done by

Harberger, in a series of papers. In each case, he applied the second order

Taylor approximation (3.3), implicitly derived from the compensating variation

measure of excess burden, for the case in which there are no pre—existing taxes.

An example of this research may be found in Harberger (1961), which considers

the welfare cost of a progressive tax on labor income by- individual income

classes. Treating capital as a factor supplied by households in static model,

Harberger (1966)   considered the deadweight loss from the production distortion
caused by differential taxation of the return to capital in the corporate and

noncorporate sectors. Nontax distortions, such as those caused by monopolistic

pricing, can also be analyzed using standard excess burden formulae (Harberger

l95)-). One can also analyze the intertemporal allocation distortion caused by

capital income taxes by thinking of consumption in different periods as dif-

ferent comnditjes (Feidstein 1978).

     Aside from the use of the Thylor approximation, a weakness typical of most

of this early work (excluding, of course, Harberger's piece on the corporate

income tax) was the assumption of fixed producer prices. With a convex produc-

tion frontier, changes in production prices would normally act to lessen the
excess burden caused by a tax increase. An example of the sensitivity of

assumption about production parameters may       be   found in Chamley (1981) with

respect to the excess burden of capital income taxation.



1.2 Exact Measures

     As stressed in Section 3, there is rarely a situation in which Taylor ap-

proximations    need be used in place of exact measures based on the Hicksian vari-
ations. This     point is stressed by a number of authors (including Auerbach and

Rosen   1980 and Hausman 1981a). For marr      systems   of denEnd functions (such as the
linear expenditure system discussed    in Section 6)     it   is easy to recover the par-
ameters of   the expenditure function from estimated ordinary demand functions.
Moreover,    one can also use the standard errors of such estimates to place con-

fidence bounds on the excess burden measures themselves (Hausman 1981a).

     Several recent studies have used exact measures to calculate the excess

burden of taxation. For example, Rosen (1978) considered the excess burden of

wage taxation using a linear expenditure system estimated from a            cross—section.
     One of the additional benefits of the "exact" approach to measuring dead-

weight loss is that it can readily be generalized to allow for changes in

income. That is, we can deduct from changes in the expenditure function not

only changes in revenue, but changes in income, to calculate the excess burden

of a tax system that changes individual incomes as well as the prices of some

commodities. For example, the compensating variation measure (2—10) would

become:


     EBc =   E(,   v(, y0) )   —y   — (p   —   p)     4:(:l v(, r0)     )         (li..l)

where y0 is income in the undistorted state and y is income in the distorted

state. This tool is particularly useful for the analysis of progressive taxes,
                                         —4.3—



where individuals behave as if they faced a proportional tax equal to the actual

marginal rate, with the inframarginal excess in collections that results being

assigned to lump sum income. For example, consider the case of a progressive

labor income tax in a two—good model. The individual's before—tax and after—tax

budget lines are represented in Figure .l. If the individual chooses point A,

we may pretend that he did so in response to a proportional tax at rate
    —           and lump sum income of
        w)/w0                               If he chooses point B, we could imagine

a proportional tax of (w0 —                                      This technique has
                              wB)Iwo and lump sum income of
been used in labor supply estimation and excess burden calculation by Hausnian

(l981b). King (1982b) has used the equivalent variation analogue of (4.l), which

he calls the "equivalent gain," to evaluate the effects of changes in housing

policy in the U.K.

     An additional extension possible with exact measures is the case of

discrete choices, such as the decision to work or to purchase a durable good.

Suppose there are two regimes among which a consumer must choose. The general

rnethodolor for calculating excess burden is, as before, to equate utility

changes from distortionary and lump sum taxation, and conare the tax revenue.

However, the changes in utility take account of switches in regime that may

occur in each case. This is a straightforward calculation when the consumer's

indirect utility function is known, for it is simple to identify the regime cho-

sen in any situation. However, if one wishes to use approximation formulae, one

must take expelicit account of the effect of taxes on the probability of switch-

ing regimes. (See Small and Rosen 1981). An example of excess burden calcula-

tions with discrete decision variables is the analysis of housing subsidy pro—

grams by Venti and Wise (1982), in which indivudals must decide whether to nve

or stay, and face different budget constraints in the two situations.
                            Figure 1.i

           Progressive Taxes and Virtual Income




                                                  Goods


               Before tax




        t ax




                    B



                                                           = - WB

                                         A
                                                          lope =   — WA




Labor
                                          —1.5—


4.3 Simulation     Methods

     Ultimately,    there   are limitations on the extent to which we can obtain

closed form solutions for excess burden. This is particularly true of general

equilibrium calculations, for we must solve explicitly for the changes in pro-

ducer prices consistent with changes in consumer behavior. A solution to this

problem    is the simulation model, in. which explicit parameterizations of pre-
ferences and technolor are mde and actual equilibria calculated. It is then
straightforward   to estimate changes in utility caused by a change in tax regime,

or the resources one could extract or must add to compensate for a given change.

The latter type of calculation corresponds to the price—varying excess burden

measures   cited in Section 3.    An early example of the use of simulation tech-

nique is Shoven's (1976) reconsideration of the excess burden caused by the cor-

porate income tax. In more recent work, Auerbach, Kotlikoff and Skinner (1981)

use a perfect foresight, overlapping generations growth model to analyze the

effect on different cohorts of individuals of various dynamic tax changes, such

as an unannounced switch from income taxation to consumption taxation.
 5. The Theory of Optimal Taxation

        xes distort   behavior and cause excess burden. How can this excess burden
 be   kept to a minimum while   government simultaneously raises the revenue it

 requires for public expenditures? This is the optimal tax problem, solved in

 its basic form by Ramsey (1927).

       Of course, there do exist nondistortionary taxes, at least hypothetically.

Taxes on pure profits are just one form of such taxation. The optimal tax prob-

lem, in a sense, embodies the concession that such ideal taxes may be difficult

to institute in practice. One might cite a number of reasons for this, includ-

ing the political constraints on nonuniform taxation dependent on personal

characteristics. For example, we might succeed in having a nondistortionary and

progressive tax system by taxing according to genetic characteristics associated

with ability, but such schemes are typically proscribed.

       In the next subsection, we present and interpret the basic, single individ-

ual optimal tax results, paying particular attention to the role of the

"untaxedt' numeraire commodity that is often a confusing part of such analysis.

In Subsections 5.2 and 5.3, we show how the results can be extended to allow for

profits and changing producer prices, and interpret the classic results of

Diamond and Mirlees (1971) and Stiglitz and sgupta (1971) concerning the

desirability of production efficiency in the presence of distortionary commodity

taxes. Subsection 5. discusses the relationship of the optimal tax solution to

the   measures of excess burden described above.


5.1 Basic Optimal Tax Results

      We imagine a representative consumer who has exogenous income y, and faces

consumer prices p= (p0, p1, ••              for   the commodities 0, 1, ..., N, which

have fixed producer prices q =
                                   (q0,   q1, ...,   q).   Without any loss of general-

ity, we may choose good zero as the numeraire and set           =   1.
                                              —5.2--

       The government may use unit excise taxes t =
                                                            t0, t1 o..       t
0, 1, ..., N, to raise a certain amount of required revenue, R. (We will relax
                                                                                 on the goods



this ignorance of the expenditure side below.) Assuming               the   consumer maximizes

utility U(x) in the goods x, subject to the prices p and income y, we may ex—

press the optimal tax problem by:


       max   [max U(x) subject to p     x =   y]    subject to (p —   q)    x= R      (5.1)




or, using the definition of the indirect utility function V():


       max V(p, y) subject to (p - q)         x = R                                   (5.2)




Note that we specify the price vector, p, as our control rather than t,
                                                                                      butd
this is a trivial distinction when the social cost vector q is fixed since                    =   I
the identity matrix of order N + 1.

       The first-order conditions for the Lagrangian


       V(p, y) -         - (p- ) xl                                                  (5.3)


are

                         dx
       - Xx. +   i[Et —-+ x.l     = 0
           1
                      idp  1
                                               V.
                                                1                                    (5.1)


where A =        is   the consumer's rginal utility of income. Condition (5.) may

be rearranged in a number of ways. Perhaps the most useful involves splitting
                        dx
the cross price effects —j-- using the Slutsky equation, and defining



                          dx
         = A+         E t. —-

to   be the marginal social utility of income (Diamond 1975), to obtain:
                                                       —5.3—




         —st               =
                                 ; a) x.                                                      (5.6)

where     the S1s are          components     of the Slutsky matrix S. The       term   a differs   from

 A because, in the presence of taxes, a dollar given to the individual increases

his utility directly by A and indirectly by the increased revenue. Since we can

interpret       the Lagrange multiplier of             the revenue constraint, 1.1,   as the shadow

cost in terms of utility of raising an additional dollar of revenue, the indi-

rect gain of revenue added by increased expenditures out of an additional

dollar of income equals                            the
                                         E
                                             t ,          second term in the definition of a

         The   term ( — a)        represents the difference between raising a dollar of

revenue at the actual margin and raising it through a direct taking of income

from the concern: the marginal excess burden of the tax. This term is always

non—negative (see section 8) and hence the terms —                    E   S.1Jt. are
                                                                                 3
                                                                                     also non—
negative.
         There is one potential solution to (5.6)               that would   be particularly attrac-

tive, for it involves no distortion. If we choose equal proportional ad valorem

taxes, or


      t. =                                                                                     (5.7)
         1        1               1
for   some constant 0, we obtain

      —0     E S..         =   ( —1 a)
                13     j                 1         1
                                                                                              (5.8)


But E S. p4 equals ---J = 0            for all i. (This is simply a statement of the
      ii           p. u      1
envelope       theorem.) Therefore, the system of equations in (5.8) is satisfied

for .i   = a and      hence no excess burden. Thus, proportional excise taxes would

appear to be the solution.
                                                   —5. 1—



     The reason such taxes are nondistortionary, however, is the key to their
                                                         q
limited applicability.   Since p = q +   =   +       =1t       Hence, the con—o•

sumer's budget coritraint becomes:


         q
               • x =
                       y   or q •   x =   y(l   — 0)                                           (5.9)


where 0 is chosen to satisfy 0 =            R/y.       A system of equal excise taxes is nothing

more   than a tax on       the consumer' s exogeneous income, and hence a lump sum                tax.
If   y = 0, then no finite value of 0 will satisfy the revenue constraint,                       so we

must ask when y will be nonzero.
       First of all, y will be nonzero in general if                there   are decreasing returns
to   scale in production (in a more general model not assuming fixed producer

prices). Even in the absence of pure profits, y will be nonzero if we interpret

it   as "full incon" and the x vector as consumption rather than demand. For
example, suppose the x vector consists of two comndities, consumption, C, and
leisure,     2., and that the consumer has a labor endowment, L. Without pure pro—

fits, the consumer's budget constraint in the absence of taxes ny be written

either as


           C + (2. — L) = 0                                                                    (5.lOa)
or

         C + £ = L                                                                             (5.lob)

where labor is the riuxneraire and C            and        are the amount and      relative   price of con-

sumption. Interpreting         the    labor comndity we can tax as net purchase of

leisure, (2. —   L),   we have no income y to tax through proportional excise taxes.

Interpreting    the    commodity as consumption of leisure, 2., we can use the propro—

tional tax solution on        C and    £ to tax L indirectly. Hence, the inability to use
                                              —5.5—


proportional taxes to raise revenue is equivalent to the restriction to taxing

flows, rather than total consumption. Under this restriction, a proportional

tax raises no revenue (Baumol and Bradford 1970). Based on examples of this

sort, various authors have equated the need to use distortionary taxes with the

inability to tax leisure, but this is somewhat misleading on two counts: we can

tax leisure purchases (labor supply), and this restriction applies to any com-

modity in which the consumer has an endowment.

      Once we do restrict our taxes to net purchases, it is easiest to interpret

the vector x to be such flows rather than total consumption. In exchange for

the loss of a nondistortionary tax scheme, we gain an additional free norinali—

zation. Since the consumer's indirect utility function is homogeneous in prices

and income, and is now simply V(p) ,          it   is also homogeneous of degree zero in

prices. So is the revenue constraint, since, for any constant 4),


     (4)p —   q)   x =   ( — 1)p   x +   (p   —    q)   x = (p — q)   x          (5.11)

Thus, we may choose any scale for p. It is customary to set p0 = 1,            thereby

making the nurieraire also the arbitrarily "untaxed" good. ¶Lrpically, in models

where there is a single factor supplied, labor, and several commodities

purchased, labor is chosen as this numeraire. While such a normalization is

innocuous and in no way affects the real characteristics of the outcome, it can

be very confusing: the untaxed good, labor, just happens to be the only good

with an endowment, L, that we can't tax independently of its consumption, 2.;

hence the loss of distinction between untaxable and untaxed goods. If we chose

corn as the untaxed good, labor would still have the untaxable endowment. This

distinction is important when one interprets the various rules now derived.
                                                 —5.6—


     We now have only N first—order conditions, from (5.6), having dropped that

corresponding to P. Hence, the strater of equal proportional taxes at rate

0 (with a zero tax on good zero, of course) now gives us the terms


     — e   z s. p.       =    0 S.                                                      (5.12)
           ij   j
on the left—hand side of (5.6).               This will stand in constant proportion to x over
i, as required for a solution, only if the compensated cross—elasticity of demand

                                                                     =
for each good i with respect to the price of good 0, cj                  S0   p0/x. =   S0/X•
is the same for all i * 0. Thus, equal proportional taxes on all taxed goods

satisfy the first order conditions only if all goods are equally conlementary

(in the sense of Hicks l946) to the untaxed good. .turally, if these con-

ditions are satisfied for a given choice of untaxed good, they will not general-

ly work for another.

      Our   analysis     of (5.6) has now generally ruled out uniform taxation. But

how should the taxes diverge from uniformity? A clue comes from considering the

prescription given by (5.6) for the case of sniall taxes. Suppose that the gov-

ernment is currently raising its revenue through lump sum taxes, and nnist now

shift over some of the revenue collection to distortionary taxes. From above,

we know that there is no first—order effect on utility of introducing distor—

tionary   taxes from a Pareto optimum, so that the effects on demand of this small
change in   prices will be coiensated effects. Thus, to a first—order ¶Lrlor

approximation, the reduction in the demand for good i will be


     —     x.1 =   — E S.        p =       s. t
                     j   ii          j
                                         —E
                                          j 1j j
                                                                                         (5.13)


so that (5.6) calls for an equiproportional reduction in demand for each taxed

good. As suggested by Dix it (1970), this makes intuitive sense in light of

the excess burden formulae calculated above. From (3.3), the introduction
                                                          —5.7—



of   small      taxes       t starting from      a    Pareto optimum induces an excess burden of

approximately:


       L =           1/2 E        t.
                                   1
                                       x. = — 1/2 E t.
                                        1                 1
                                                              x.
                                                               1
                                                                                                   (5.lIi.)
                        1                             1


so that each small tax t. will induce an excess burden proportional to t x,. On
the other hand, the revenue raised by such a tax is tx.,. Thus, holding

t   x1/x.   constant across goods results in a constant ratio of excess burden to

revenue for each tax. This is precisely the sort of marginal condition one

would expect from minimizing total excess burden subject to a revenue constraint.

       The actual taxes that lead to this result may be obtained by stacking con-

ditions (5.6) to obtain:


       "
       St =      C           )x                                                        (5.15)


where S in the Slutsky matrix excluding good zero, and t                                           and
                                                                                (t1, ...,   tN),
xmitiplying          through by S

                t = (              )x S x                                                     .5.1



This yields no neat general expressions for t, though for various special cases

one can go a little further.

       If there are only three goods, two taxed, then (5.16) yields the two                        equations:


            =                           —                                                     (5.l7a)
                (Y ; )(S22x1                 S12x2)



            =                               + S11x2)                                          (5.1Th)
                                                       —5.8—


where A =                     —                Since S10 +          +          = 0 for i =   1,2, we may
                S11S22             S12S21.                   p1S1       p2S2
divide (5.lTa) by (5.lTb) and                    substitute   to obtain:



        t1 1(s
             2 20+s 1)x  -S 12x2
           =          21 1
        t2 —1S + p2s121x2 — s
                      1
                          '
                              i                                                                   (   18)


or, defining 0. =                 tO/p.    and dividing the numerator and denominator of the right—

hand side of (5.18) by x1x2, we obtain (Harberger 196I)


        0
        i_ 20
                          +c21 +c12
            2    10           21          12

                                                                                      p.
where, as before,                       is the compensated cross elasticity                  As 'we disco-

vered above, 1 = 82 is an optimal solution only if the cross—elasticities

       and c20 are equal.

        If the cross effects c12 and c21 are zero, then (5.19) calls for a higher

tax on the taxed good that is the relative complement to the numeraire (e0 is

smaller). This has generated the somewhat misleading explanation that we

"can't" tax good zero, so we minimize distortions by taxing more heavily its

relative complement. Recall that the choice of untaxed good is arbitrary, and

that (5.19) applies for any numbering of the three goods. If the cross—

elasticities between goods 1 and 2 are nonzero, we may                         even observe the anona—
bus result that the relative complement to good zero should receive a lighter

tax.

        For     a larger number of commodities, a simple result obtains if we assume
that the matrix S                 is   diagonal: all cross effects except with respect to good
zero are zero. Since E S Pj = 0,                      this implies that, for i = 1, ..., N,



       sp+S0=0                                                                                   (5.20)
                                                   —5.9—


Thus, this restriction does depend on the choice of untaxed commodity. With

such a simplification, (5.16) yields the expressions:


              =   - (;                                                      (5.21)

or       e.
          1
              -el/c.,
                   11


where         =              —            >   0.
                  S11S22         S21S12
This    is the celebrated "inverse elasticity" rule that calls for higher propor-

tional taxes on goods with relatively new own price elasticities. By (.20),

this rule is equivalent to


              —
                  1/c0                                                       (5.22)

as derived above for the three good case.

       Since the inverse elasticity rule results from a restriction on preferen-

ces, the choice of untaxed good becomes relevant in that the restrictions may

make more sense to assume no cross—effects among taxed goods if labor is

numeraire and the other goods are commodities than to do so if one of the com-

modities serves as the untaxed good.

       The inverse elasticity rule of (5.21) is expressed in terms of compensated

elasticities. Yet in various places in the literature (Diamond and Mirrlees

1971; Bradford and Rosen 1976), it is expressed in terms of uricompensated elas-

ticities. This is the result neither of a revision of demand theory nor an

assumption of zero income effects. Rather, it comes about because of a differ-

ent, and equally arbitrary, restriction on preferences. We can express the

optimal       tax formulae in terms of ordinary uncompensated demands by rearranging
(5.3):

                   dx
       - Et
          j jdp          =   ( A)x.
                               j 1                                          (5.23)
                                                            —5.10—




which, assuming                            = 0 unless i = 0 or j, yields:


                 0.
                  1
                          i/n..
                             11
                                                                                             (5.211.)


where rj.. =                   —p—dx
                                   — is        the uncompensated own elasticity of demand for good i.
                                    i pi
Expressions (5.21) and (5.21) differ because they result from different restric-

tions on the structure of preferences: different matrices are being assumed

diagonal.



5.2 Changing Producer Prices

                 The simple relaxation of the fixed producer price assumption has, perhaps

suprisingly, no effect at all on the optimal tax formulae in (5.16) as long as

producer prices result from competitive behavior and there are no pure profits

that are not taxed away by the government.

                 In place of the fixed producer price assumption of Subsection 5.1, we

assume                that production is governed by the production function

                 f(z) =         0                                                             (5.25)

where, as in Section 3, z is the production vector in the commodities

0, 1, ..., N.                       By the assumption of competitive behavior, we know that the pro-

ducer prices q are proportional to the vector of derivatives of f, df = (f0,

f
    1'
             •        '   fN   ).   Without any loss of generality, we may set this proportionality

constant equal to one and, as before, choose good zero as numeraire, i.e.,

         =       1.

                 The government's revenue requirement must now be specified in terms of

individual commodities (as as the case of the compensation vector in Sec-

tion 3),                  since relative producer prices can change. We refer to this as the
                                                       —5.11—


revenue vector, R. Thus, z= x+ R, where x is the household's vector of net

purchases.

     Once production has been generalized to this stage, the possibility arises

of pure profits coming from decreasing returns to scale. We will consider this

more general case after first solving the optimal tax problem when f() embodies

constant returns to scale, i.e., is hornogenous of degree zero in all corn—

modities. By Euler's Theorem, profits are q • z = 0.                    Thus, the government's

optimization problem becomes:


     max V(p) subject to f(x + R) = 0                                                   (5.26)




where, because pure profits are zero, we can set p0 =                     = 1 without any   loss   of

generality, and choose only p1, •••                   p.    To use P rather than tas the control

variables, we must insure that arbitrary changes in tcan be brought about by

changes in p. This is accomplished by noting that


     dp =    dt   + dq =   dt    +   d(df)   =   dt   + H(dx + dR)                      (5.27)


where H is the Hessian d2f of the production function, as before. Since dR = 0

and dx may be characterized by the Slutsky equation, we have:


                            dx
     dp= dt + H(S                                                                       (5.28)
                       —x')dp

or

     dp
                           dx
             [I -H(S- xYl dt
                                -      I-i
where S is the Slutsky matrix. Moreover, since the changes in t are constrained

to keep revenue constant, and hence, in the neighborhood of the optimum, utility

as well, the changes in x are compensated and (5.28) simplifies to:
                                                              —5.12—



       dp =    [I   —    HS1dt           = 2 dt                                                   (5.29)


As long as          is of full rank, we may control t indirectly through p.

       The Lagrarigian corresponding to (5.26)                         yields   the first order conditions:


                                    dx
       — A x. —           E f.              = 0                             i =   1,   ..., N
               1
                          j    J p1
                                                                                                  (5.29)


where A =            and      ii   is   the Lagrange multiplier on the production constraint.
Since p •      x     0,




                     +         =0                                                                 (5.30)
           P
Using this and the fact that q =                        df,   we mar express (5.29) as:



       A x. +       [E t                +   xj    = 0                                             (5.31)




which is precisely condition (5.li). This result is due to Diamond and Mirrlees

(19'rl).

       In the more general case where f() is not homogeneous of degree zero,
                                                        •
there may be pure profits, y = q                            z > 0.   In this case, we know from before,

equal taxes on all commodities amount to a profits tax on y, giving us N + 1

rather than N independent instruments. Hence, if we cannot tax one good, this

represents a restriction unless we can tax profits directly. For expositional

purposes, it is easiest to let the N + 1 instruments be the taxes on goods

1, ..., N and the profits tax, keeptirig t0 =                          0.   We let the the rate of profits

tax.

       The Lagrangian now is:

       V(p, (i—t)y) —              ii f(x+       R)                                              (5.32)
                                                      —5.13—


 Using     the fact that p •         x = (i—t)y, we may arrange the N first—order conditions
 with respect to the taxes t1, •••,
                                    tN to be:
        — A x. + A(1—t)                + u[Z          + x.
                                                                        f— I = 0
                                                              — (1—i)
                                fr.—            t                                            (5.33)


It is straightforward to show that if t                 n.y    be freely- varied, then the N + 1

first—order conditions are solved for t = 0 and A = i.':                    no excess burden, with

profits taxes being used to raise all revenue. However, if I                       is    constrained, we
must solve the N conditions in (5.33), given r.                     Unless profits taxes just hap-

pen to equal q             B, we again face an optimal tax problem.

        If t   = 1,     so that all profits are taxed away, then (5.33) reduces to the

previous optimal tax program, (5.31). Thus, pure profits do not change the pic-

ture unless they accrue at least partially to the household (Stiglitz and

Dasgupta 1971). If r is fixed at some value not equal to one, the formulas dif-

fer.

       Since producer prices, and hence profits, change with                  ,    the   derivatives
dx
       in (5.33) include the indirect effect of                   on profits through changes in

production:


       dp.
               =   dx
                   dp. q
                           +   - (i
                               dy'
                                         — r)
                                                dp.                                         ()
where y' = (1—t)y.

       Using (5.314), the Slutsky equation, and the definition of ;the social

marginal utility of income, from (5.5), we may rewrite (5.33) as:



       z           =                   — (l—t)                                              (5.35)


which differs from (5.6) only through the replacement of x. with (x. — (1—t>).
                                                         —5. iii—



One can interpret these terms as the net increase in resources needed to main-

tain a given level of utility with respect to an increase in p in the two res-

pective cases.

           If the profits tax I = 0, and if good zero is the single production factor

and the sole good in which revenue is extracted, then one can show that (5.35)

yields the result obtained above for fixed producer prices, that to a first—

order Thylor approximation, substituting optimal taxes for lump sum taxes causes

an equiproportional reduction in the output of all taxed commodities. A for—

tiori, the outcome also holds •for the constant returns case Just examined.

            This result is due to Stiglitz and Dasgupta (1971), who in turn attribute

it to Ramsey (1927), though the exact equivalence is obscured by differences in

methodolor.

            The key to the single—factor assumption is that, since the production

function may be written:


           f(x) =
                       f(x1,    ...,   x)   —
                                                x0                                 (5.36)


the Hessian H =             d2f   is block diagonal in the untaxed good and all other goods

(H. =        H        = 0 for i * 0). Thus, the product of H and the substitution matrix S
     10          01
                  .




is

                      H O S                 '        H   S 10
          HS =
                      (_29-4_—)(_924__2) = (_22_924_._)                              (s.3'r)
                       0 IH S0 1S                        0    1HS

where             =
                      Ql'      ..., SON) and H and S are the blocks of H and S for goods 1

through N. This means that the changes in consumer prices of the taxed goods,

p =
          (p1.    ...,   N'     can be expressed (using 5.29) in the neighborhood of the op—

timum as:
                                                              —5.15—



        dp =      ti — HS]               dt = dt                                                     (5.38)


where t =                                         That is, dp doesn't depend on the demand for x0. From
                  Ct1, ...,          ta).
(5.38), we may express the first—order change around t= 0 in x, the vector of

taxed goods, as:

             A     A        A        AA       A       A*A     AA               AA
                                                                               St                    (5.39)


The elements of the vector S t are described in (5.35). By the envelope theorem

and the fact that q0 = 1, we may solve for the term-i:



              =                      =                        =
        dp.
                   E   z
                           j dp.         j>
                                              z
                                               j kE   H S
                                                      jk ki
                                                                    E z.
                                                                  j>o .j
                                                                               E H. S
                                                                            k>O jk   ki              (5.1o)


where      the last step relies on the assumption that H0 = 0 for j * 0. Stacking

these terms, we obtain:

                                                                                                 (5.i)
        dp


where         =             ...,               But by assumption, Zis zero, except in good zero, so
                  (z1,               ZN).
z =   x.      Since, also by assumption, t =                      0,   it follows from (5.Ii) that



              =   — ( a)(ISH)X                                                                   (5.12)

Substituting (5.142) into (5.39), we                        obtain:

      -                     (1J;c&)SS_l(ISH)X
                                                                                                       (s.')
                  =    -        — a)              —i;_i =          — a)
                                                                           -
                                ii                                 p


as required.
                                                      —5.16--



      In the special case where both H and S are diagonal (i.e., there is no

joint production and conunodity demands are independent except with relation to

the numeraire), the expression (5.141) for                       simplifies to




      d
         Pj
               =   z.H.
                    i   ii ii
                          .S.                                                              (5.1i1)



which,    if we again asume that all revenue raised is spent on the numeraire

(z. = x. for i >            0),   allows us to rewrite (5.35)           as

      —
          st           = (P _ a)(1 —
                                          (1_T)Hs1)                                        (5.145)



or                                        .L +
                                p—as Cii               ii
                   1
                                           1 + (l—t)---—


where     c.. = — S. .—-
                          lix.' a..
                                11    =
                                          H..       and 8. =    t./p.
                                                                 11     are the demand and supply elas—
          11
                             2.            ii x.1        1

ticities       and ad valorem tax for good i.                (See Stiglitz and tsgupta 1971 for a

slightly different formulation. Also see Atkinson and Stiglitz 1980.)



5.3   Production Efficiency
      •Thus far, we have assumed production to be efficient, with the only distor-

tions imposed by taxes to be with respect to household decisions. However, gov-

ernment can induce distortions in production, either through differential taxa-

tion of factors in different uses or through the use of different shadow prices

in public enterprises than those generated by coexisting competitive private

markets. Should these extra                 policy   instruments be used? Under certain well—

defined conditions, they should not.

      To consider the desirability of such distortions, we follow Diamond and

Mirrlees (1971) and suppose there to be two production sectors, each efficient
                                                           —5.17—


in its own      production       behavior. We shall refer to these as the private and

public sectors, though in some cases it may be more useful to think of them both

as subsectors of the private sector. The results are easily extended to several

sectors.

        As before, e let f() and z be the production function and output of the

private sector, and introduce g(') and sas the corresponding variables for the

public sector. The use of distortions in the allocation of resources between

the two sectors may be thought of as the direct choice of public inputs, s.

Thus, the government's expanded choice problem is:


        max   V(p,
                —
                     (l—t)y) subject to f(x + B — s) = 0 and g(s) = 0
                                                          ——                     —
                                                                                                  (5.16)
        p,S                                                      &_,




where y is private sector profits. Attaching the Lagrange multipliers ii and

     to the production constraints, we obtain the same first—order conditions as

before with respect to p. With respect to swe get:



        A   (i-i)             P (E f              (1-t)   _    f1) -    g. = 0                    (5.T)

Using the normalization q =                  df   and the consumer's budget constraint, we rewrite

this as:



        A (i-i) 4_ C—
                                       t           (i—r)   -+   (1—i)   4_ f1)       -   g. = 0


or                                                                                                  (5.8)
       g. =
              f.     —
                         (U


where,      as before, c =       A   +   i   dy
                                                  is   the social marginal utility of income. Thus,
                                                                                                  f g.
there are two important cases in which efficient overall production                                 =

will result: constant returns to scale in the private sector (Diamond and
                                                         —5.18—


Mirrlees 1971) and decreasing returns with 100 percent profits taxation
(Stiglitz and Dasgupta 1971). Otherwise, inefficient production will be part of
the   optimal solution. The basic intuition is that as long as we can tax all but

one of the commodities, we can bring about any possible configuration of rela-

tive prices consistent with a given level of revenue. When after—tax profits

(l—t)y equal zero, these prices are the sole determinants of the consumer's de—

cisiori.      Thus, any attainnnt of a set of relative prices using a production

distortion could also be obtained without one, with the simple result that the

consumer could be made better off. Note that this logic only holds if all the

taxes t1 through tN can be adjusted. With some of these held fixed, production

inefficiencies may be helpful in imposing indirect taxes on the goods that                                can-
not be freely taxed directly. We return to this point below in our discussion

of tax reform.

       For the case where profits are not zero, we may simplify (5.18) for the

case of independent production. Considering , we have (using the envelope

theorem and independence assumption):


           = E
       ds.1 j zj dz
                                       ' (1—t) —         z.1   —
                                                               dz.1
                                                                                                      (5.49)
                            j    dy'        ds.
                                                 1


which, using the facts that q =             df and dq =               H,   and the assumption that all
government         expenditures are on the numeraire commodity, (x =                     z)   we may solve as:



              =   —
                                xH1                  =   —
       ds.1                                                     r                                      5.50
                      1 — (1—r)    E
                                   j       dy'


where a.. is the supply elasticity for good i, and r imist be positive for a

stable solution. Thus (5.18) yields:

                         1+ k/n.
                                   ii)
       j      =       . (
                  f 1+k/fl
                                                                                                      (   51)
                                                   —5.19—

where k =      (i_r)(        )/l > 0.    This result says that, relative to production

efficiency, private sector production should be subsidized in that commodity in

relatively inelastic supply.



5.1k Minimizing Excess Burden Through Optimal Taxation

       By its definition, excess burden ought to be minimized when taxes are chos-

en to maximize utility. However, even for the fixed producer price case, we

have at least two candidates for measuring excess burden, and they will

generally take on different values. It turns out that only one, that based on

the equivalent variation, satisfies the desirable duality property of being min-

imized by optimal taxes (Kay 1980).

       Recall from (2.9) that the equivalent variation measure of the excess bur-

den of a tax is:

       EBE =   E(,      V(, y)) —      E(,     v(, y)) -    R


           =   y   —
                       E(,   V(p, y)) —   B                                      (5.52)


Thus, minimizing this for a given value of R amounts to maximizing E(, V(p,               y) ).
But,   for a given price vector, expenditure increases monitonically with the

level of utility. Thus, we are maximizing v(, y), Just as in the optimal tax

problem. This is easily verified by differentiating the Lagrangian


       E(, v(, y)) + it (R         —    (p —   )                                 (5•53)

For the compensating variation measure, which (from (2.10)) equals:


       EBc = E(p1, V(p0, y)) —                v(, y)) —     R
                                    E(p,
           =                     -
               E(p1, v(, y)) - y          B
                                                     —5.20—


minimizing excess burden amounts to minimizing E(p.,V(p,                    y)):    choosing

taxes to minimize          the   expenditure necessary to achieve the pre—tax utility

level. This need not be the same price vector as the one dictated by optimal

taxation. The appropriate tagrangian here is:



     E(,        v(, y)      )
                                —
                                    (R —         —                                          (5.55)

which yields first—order conditions:

                             dx
                      [Et            x.]
                       j j—-+
     —   x.1   + ir                        = 0                                              (5.56)
                           P          i


which looks like the one derived from (5.53).                  However, the value of xhere is

at the hypothetical point at higher prices but with compensation. In the pre-

vious case, it        is   at the actual optimal tax point.

     This problem with the compensating variation also nans that we cannot cox-

pare two       hypothetical alternatives to a given tax situation by comparing their
marginal       excess burden measures. Only if            preferences   are homothetic (Chipman

and Moore 1980) will this problem disappear. Of course,                    for   pairwise

comparisons ,where the ?tinitialI point is not well—defined, the equivalent

variation and compensating variation are symmetrically defined, so there can be

no a priori benefit of using one versus the other.
6.       Optimal   Taxation and the Structure of Preferences


         This section considers the implications of the tax formulae derived above

for actual tax rates under different assumptions about the structure of prefer—

ences, and       for   the more general case where there are several individuals and

hence distributional objectives to be satisfied. Although the results already

presented       express the optimal taxes in terms of the demands and substitution
matrix of the representative consumer, these terms are not generally constant,
so we have little insight into the general conditions on consumer pref-
erences required for either uniform taxation or any other specific tax structure

to be optimal. In exploring this question, we will also be able to investigate

more easily the impact of distributional objectives on the optimal tax struc—

tur e.


         Before we continue our analysis, we note that equation (5.6), which expresses

the optimal taxes t= Ct1, ...,            t)       in terms of the substitution matrix S and

the purchases              in th commodities 1, ..., N, may be extended to include the un-

taxed riumeraire good, zero. Obviously, adding a term multiplied by t0 to each
                                                                                           11
of the N first—order conditions has no effect, since t0 = 0.                Moreover, since


         N
       ES.t.E(—EpS.)t.—Ep
     i=O 01 1 k0 k ki 1
                       N
                              ZS.t.
                              N

                        i=o k 1=0 ki 1
                                                N        N




                   =
                       k=O
                           N _i jx)            =     ____
                                                                                     (6.1)



we may rewrite (.6) as


         st =   —(                                                                   (6.2)

This means that the optimal tax formula may be interpreted as calling for the

proportional redution in the purchases of all goods, not just taxed goods.
                                     —6.2—


This symxitry is required by the fact that the numeraire is arbitrarily

chosen.




6.1 Optimal Taxation from the Dual Perspective

     To consider the role of preferences in determining optimal tax rules, it is

helpful to derive such rules using the direct utility function rather than the

indirect utility function. Though the derivation is less straightforward, the

results are in terms of the characteristics of the utility function and, hence,

preferences. This approach is taken by Atkinson and Stiglitz (1972, 1976,

1980). However, a simpler and more elegant way of arriving at their results is

by transforming the optimal tax formulae thenselves using duality theory. The

technique described by Deaton (l979a, 1981a, l981b) makes use of the "distance"

function, sometimes referred to as the "direct" expenditure function (Cooter

1979). Our analysis here will generally follow that of Deaton. Because con-

sumer preferences are defined with respect to consumption, rather than purchases,

it is useful to separate these concepts by letting the vector of purchases x

equal x— where xis the consumption vector and the endowment vector. Thus,

we may rewrite the indirect utility function v(p), which implicitly holds xas

fixed, as V(p, p ), which does not. This allows us to consider the effects
of changes in the consumer's lump sum income.

     In words, the distance function is the solution to the following problem:

consider a consumption bundle x, and also all the combinations of price vector

p and total endowment income y such that V(p, y) equals (strictly speaking, at

most equals) some constant utility level U.   Choose the vector of prices that

minimizes p*/, given x. The resulting value is the distance function D(x, U).

Algebraically, the problem is:
                                                —6.3—



      mm (*— '
       p
                     ')/y     subject to V(p*, y) '                                (6.3)

It   is explained diagrammatically in Figure 6.1, for the case of two goods. For

simplicity, we assume that x is on the indifference curve corresponding to the

utility level J, although only the scale of D() and not the price vector chosen

would be affected by increasing or decreasing x along the ray shown. This is

easily verified from inspection of (6.3), since minimizing (* x)/y is

equivalent to maximizing (* )/y for any A > 0.                  By choosing x to be just

feasible, given U, we will obtain a value D(x, u) = 1.

      The figure depicts two different combinations of p and y, indexed 1 and 2,

that satisfy V(p*, y) = tJ.         Since the price vector p results in a tangency away

from x, purchase of x would require a greater expenditure than y2. This is not

the case with p, since it is tangent to the indifference curve at x,.              (A

flatter budget line would          again   necessitate an increase in expenditure to pur-

chase x.) Thus, the price vector chosen, given xand U, is tangent to the in-

difference curve corresponding to             at point x (or, more generally, if x is not

on the indifference curve, at the point on the indifference curve on the ray

through        x from the origin). Just as the indirect expenditure function chooses

consumption, given prices and utility, the distance function chooses prices,

given consumption and utility. Since these prices are based on the consumer's

indirect utility function, we may           interpret   them as points on the consumer's

inverse compensated demand curve, expressing willingness to pay. By the enve-

lope theorem, the partial derivatives of the distance function with respect to

the elements of ,       are   those inverse demands:


      3D               —       *
               =       u)
                            =-                                                     (6.)
      ax.
           1
      Figure 6.1
The Distance Function




                   U




     y22?C              xl
                                                         —6.5—


 The Hessian of the distance function is referred to as the Antonelli matrix

 A =       12
             (a.).
              Now, consider the actual price vector that prevails, p, and choose x such

 that x =
                     x(p,   U). Then, by construction, p = p and y = E(p, U) solve (6.3),

 and we have the identity (from (6.I))

                       -    -            pi
             a.1 [x(p, U), u) =                                                             (6.5)
                                     E(p,t)


Multiplying (6.5)               through     by E(p, ii), and differentiating with respect to each

price, we obtain conditions which can be stacked to yield:


             E(p, ) AS =        I                                                      (6.6)


where a =                                Evaluated at U =   V(p, p ), this yields:
                  (aO...,aN).

             (p )As =       I   —   ax(p,     p )                                            (6.7)


Multiplying both sides of (6.2) by (p )A, and using the fact that since a is

homogeneous of degree zero with respect to x, Ax= 0, we obtain:



             t= a(x+    x)'t-            u-a         -      -
                                     (         )(p   x)A(x- x)

                                                                                         (6.8)
              =a(R+t ) +                 (u-a)(. )A
where R =        t     x is tax revenue. Using the fact that
                                                                      t0
                                                                           0 to eliminate

 (Ii
       — a) we obtain (Deaton 1981b):
       1.1
                                                                        -6.6—




                 t.         R+tx
                              -                                (Aj).     a
         1       p.1                 •
                                             -    ')(i—          —   10)
                                                                       a.1
                                 p           x                 (Ax)0

                                                                                                          (6.9)

             =   ,(1_Ji
                             x           3ina./3x
                                              1
                                                           i)
                             E       x 9 in a /9
                            ji                     0       J



which,       in turn, implies that, for any i and j,



        0. —
         1
                 0
                  j
                       =    v'
                                 j
                                     E x
                                         —



                                                       J
                                                           ii
                                                 3 in (a Ia.)
                                                                                                           (6.10)




where v' =           v/(E            d in a0/dx). From                   (6.10),   we see that a sufficient condi-

tion for the taxes to be the same is that the ratio of marginal valuations

(a./a.) be independent of the consumption of commodities in which the consumer

has an endowment. This is equivalent to the distance function being separable,

or capable of being expressed as:

     D(x, ) =              f(x1, 2'                               0))                                      (6.11)


where         are the commodities in which there is an endowment and                                  are the goods

on which taxes are uniforrn)3 It also follows that the normal or indirect

expenditure function is separable in the corresponding prices (Gorinan 1976).

This separability of the expenditure function is referred to as implicit separ-

ability and differs from the separability of the direct and indirect utility

functions. Indeed, they are the same only if the utility function is homnogen—

eous in           as well (Deaton 1981a), and it is easy to construct counter examples
 for the case where preferences are just weakly separable (Auerbach 1979a).

        In the special case where the consumer's only endowment is in the nuineraire

commodity (presumably leisure), the sufficient (and now necessary, as well) con-

dition for uniform taxation of commodities is implicit separability from leisure

(Sandmo l9'fl.).            It is also possible in this case to say more about which goods

will be taxed more heavily if weak separability but not homogeneity is

satisfied. We begin by rewriting (6.10) as:


                                        3 ln(a./a.)
        0. —    0. =      v'
        1                        °                                                         (6.12)



where    v' =
                    v/(x0      a00/a0).
     By the convexity of D(.), v' has the opposite sign of V and hence is nega-

tive (since ('                      >   0:   irgina1 excess bUrden is positive). Since

a./a. =               =
            pa/p.         Uj/Ui,

     dln(IJ/tJ.)
                    j 1                 dln(a./a.)            31n(a/a.)
                                                                     1  3ln(a/a.)
                                =                13       =           +         1   • dU
                                                                                           (6.13)
                dx0                          dx0                 3x


(Deatori 1981a). Thus, when utility is separable into goods and leisure, (6.12)

becomes:

                                        3 ln (a la,)
     e.
        1
            —
                j
                o    = —v'
                                 0
                                                      1   •
                                                                                     (6.i)
                                             dO



so that taxes will be higher on those goods that are necessities, as defined by

those whose valuation by the consumer declines relatively with an increase in

real income. This is particularly important if we use empirical den.nd estirna—

tes based on restricted functional forms to estimate optimal taxes. For

example, the linear expenditure system:
                                                —6.8—



                                    b.   (px —.pc)
     (p, p00) =                 (E)
                                jJ                 1
                                                                      (6.15)




often   used in empirical work comes from the Stone—Geary utility function:

                               b.
                                1
     u() =             — a.)                                             (6.16)
                   1      1

which is strongly separable, but not homogeneous unless the terms a equal zero
(in which case it is simply Cobb—Dou1as).



6.2 Distributional Objectives

     Once we allow for the presence of several individuals with different tastes

or income, distributional considerations become an issue.1 As stressed in

Section 3, these consideratoris must be represented by the specification of an

explicit social welfare function based on individual utilities. This cannot

normally be achieved by the direct choice of distributional weights on indivi-

dual income unless the weights are allowed to change with prices in a compli-

cated fashion. There are two problems we consider in this subsection. First,

when and how are the previously derived optional tax rules influenced by equity

considerations? Second, if we choose leisure as numeraire and admit lump sum

taxes that cannot vary across individuals, when ill uniform commodity taxes be

optimal? That is, when will linear income taxation be optimal?

     We begin by specifying a social welfare function of the form


     w =   w(u',   ...,                                                  (6.17)
which, maximized subject to the usual revenue constraint under the assumption of

zero profits in the private sector, yields the following N first—order conditions

for'optimal commodity taxes t =
                                         (t1,   ...,    tN):
                                                               —6.9—


                                                    h
          zw
          h h            1
                                 + [Et E+ = 0              1              i=1,...,N                 (6.i8)
                                            ihdp1

                                        h
 where w =                   A'   =           and
          h h                                       x. =
                                                        1 h-   E
                                                                       Defining       as before, to be the

 social n.rginal utility of individual h's income:


      ah =Wh Ah ÷                  dR
                                                                                                   (6.19)
                                   dy

we may express the conditions (6.18) as:




          t. s =          _(            )x.                              i1,...,N                  (6.20)



where S.       =   E    s?        and
          iJ       h ij
                    h
                   x.
           =
               E()           ah
                                                                                                   (6.21)



is the average value of a, weighted by individual consumption shares of good 1.

This neat formulation (due to Diamond 1975) shows that the "equal proportional

reduction" rule is amended to call for a greater proportional redution in the

purchase of commodities for which a. is small. The implication of this result

is more clearly seen if we note (following Feldstein 1972) that

                             h
          = Coy                       ah) +    E ah
      1                  X                    h                                                      (6.22)


so that . exceeds the unweighted mean of                               if and only if purchases of commod-

ity i are positively correlated with a over individuals. Normally, this would

define a necessary good, whose budget shares fall with Income and hence rise
                                                  —6.10—


with .      Note, however, that (6.20) applies to proportional reductions in pur-
chases of different commodities, and does not offer an explicit solution for

individual tax rates, unless we assume aggregate commodity demands to be inde-

pendent (s.. = 0 for i * j). This yields



      iJii
     e.


     0.
      j
             €.

             c..
                   (         1)
                       ii— ci.
                                                                              (6 2)



which says that the normal inverse elasticity rule is changed by the addition

of a second term expressing distributional concerns. Note that as marginal

excess burden, and hence the size of i' relative to ,      increases,   efficiency con-

siderations come to dominate these optimal tax rules (Feldstein 1972).

     The addition of the possibility of lump sum taxation increases the general-

ity of the problem without nuch additional complexity. If individuals have

one source of income, then the combination of N commodity taxes and a lump sum

tax may be thought of as a linear income tax plus N—i additional commodity

taxes. The ability to use lump sum taxation simply adds a constant tax term T

to each consumer's indirect utility function and a term HT to the revenue con-

straint. Differentiating the expanded tagrangian with respect to T, we obtain

the additional first order condition
                                        h
                                      dx
    — w h +                       E
                                      —. — HI   = 0                          (6.21L)
          h h               ihdy

to be added to the N condition in (6.18). This new condition simplifies to


          = 1 E h =                                                          (6.25)
                                             —6.ii—


 Thus,       (6.20) becomes


                         rXi h
                       COV),
         E
              tS                    x1                         i=1,...,N   (6.26)



 Now, there should be reductions in commodity purchases only to the extent that

the good in question is consumed relatively more by people with low values of

With equal distributional weights, h each of these reductions would be zero,

and hence pure lump sum       taxation   would be optimal.

     An interesting question to ask here is under what conditions proportional

taxes e =
         ,'
                 l
                 ti
                (—,      t will
                    ..., —)       be equal? In other words, since such uniform taxes

are equivalent to a single, proportional tax on the nurneraire, labor, when is a

linear income tax optimal? A sufficient condition (Deaton 1979b) is that each

individual h have a utility function weakly separable into goods and leisure,

with the subfunction in goods possessing linear Engel curves with common slopes

across individuals. The intuition behind this result is that the restriction on

goods is that preferences obey the Gorman polar form required for exact aggrega-

tion of commodity demands. If we can perform such aggregation, then we cannot

use differential taxation to distinguish among individuals for purposes of re-

distribution: a linear income tax exhausts our capacity in this regard.

     Note the similarity of this result to that of the case of non—linear income

taxation (Atkinson and Stiglitz 1976), where weak separability alone is suffi-

cient for the optimality of income taxation. There is a clear relationship here

between the relaxation of the restriction on the linearity of taxes, on the one

hand, and that on the linearity of preferences, on the other.

     Empirical studies of optimal taxation are not veiy common, perhaps because

the information needed concerning various cross—substitution terms is difficult
                                      —6.12—


to obtain without a restriction on preferences that prejudges the result. Two

studies, by Atkinson and Stiglitz (1972) and Deaton (1977), utilize the linear

expenditure system, which causes higher taxes on necessities in the single con-

sumer case (as discussed above) and, in the xa1lti—consumer case with lump sum

taxes available, calls for no differential commodity taxes at all, since the

Gorman conditions are satisfied. Nevertheless, these calculations are still

instructive. Deaton, for example, calculates the optimal taxes on commodities

under the assumption that labor is fixed and there are no lump sum taxes.

Obviously, with fixed labor supply, uniform taxes on comn1odities are nondistor—

tionary, but may   have undesirable distributional effects. For a demand system
estimated for the U.K., he calculated optimal tax rates for eight groups of com-

modities under various assumptions about the degree of inequality in the social

welfare function. Perhaps the imst interesting result obtained was that optimal

tax rates do not behave monotonically with respect to the degree of inequality

aversion implicit in the social welfare function.
 1.       Further Topics    in Optimal   Taxation
          There are a number of particular problems involving taxation generally to

which optimal tax theory has been applied. This section presents some of these.



7.1 Public Goods Provision

          The classic conditions for efficiency in the provision of public goods were

derived by Samuelsori (195).). Aside from the standard requirement that, for pri-

vate (rival) goods, each consumer's marginal rate of substitution between two

goods should equal the social marginal rate of transformation, there was the new

condition that, between a private and a public good, the marginal rate of trans-

formation should equal the sum of individual marginal rates of substitution.

This is because every consumer partakes of each additional unit of the public

good.

          Pigou (l9i7) argued that in considering the benefits of a new public pro-

ject, the government should recognize that its undertaking may require the

introduction of additional deadweight loss through the tax system. The implica-

tion that this increases the social cost of public goods has been addressed by a

number of authors, including Diamond and Mirrlees (1971), Stiglitz and Dasgupta

(1971) and Atkinson and Stern (197i).

          Even to examine the question of public goods, we nust allow for the pre-

sence of several individuals. Since we are not directly interested in distribu-

tional issues here, we assume all H individuals to be identical in all respects.

If we let G be a public good on which all government revenue is spent and which

all consume, then each individual's indirect utility function becomes:


          V(p; G) = max   U(x;   G) subject to p • x = 0                             (7.1)
      -
                      x     —                       p•4




with      -=      x
                      =
                          x(p;   G). The production function is f(x; G) = 0.   The

government maximizes the welfare of the representative individual by maximizing
                                                                —7.2—

the sum    of   individual utilities, since all individuals are the same. This gives

rise to the Lagrangian:

     L = HV(p; G) —             ii f(x;          G)                                                       (1.2)


with first order conditions with respect to each price (except that of the

untaxed numeraire):

                                            dx
     — H    A x      —   .' E   f                = 0                                                      (r.)
              1            •        j       p1
                                                                                          i=l,...,N


where A and .i       are defined in the usual way. As in Subsection 5.2, we use the
fact that p • xh = 0 for each individual h to obtain:


                                              dx.
            A x. + i.'
                 1
                           I
                                E       t
                                            jdp.
                                                      +   xi
                                                          1
                                                               = 0                            i=l,...,N



where x. =
       1        h1 = Hx
                E xtl
                                1
                                        .    As before, this may be rewritten:



     st=— (P;a)                                                                                           (7.5)


where S is the aggregate Slutsky matrix and a is the social marginal utility of
each individual's income.

     The first—order condition with respect to the choice of public good G is:


                 i [
                         Ef.+ G1 =0                                                                       (7.6)


which yields (since A dU/dx, q = f0                                  = 1 and p   x1 =   0):

       dU/dG —           (l(G               dB
     h dU/dx0 LA)Lf                         dG                                                            (




where R is the revenue collected (equal to the public goods purcahsed, in eq.ui—

libriuin). This result says that the appropriate social cost of the public

good G in terms of the numeraire, x0, to which the sum of marginal rates of sub-

stitution should be set equal, differs from the marginal rate of transformation
                                              —7.3—

 f
    for two reasons. First, if public goods are complementary to taxed goods,
  0
 increasing G may reduce excess burden by increasing consumption of taxed goods,

making      >    0 (Diamond and Mirrlees 1971). The other term, -, equals the ratio

of the marginal disutility of raising a dollar of revenue divided by the margin-

al utility of income, and exceeds one to the extent that an increase in revenue

increases excess burden. This corresponds to the point raised by Pigou. How-

ever, it need not be the case that            exceeds one. Again, there is an income

effect at work.

       This possibility is demonstrated (following Atkinson and Stern) by xilti—

plying both sides of (7.5) by the vector t to obtain



       t'st=     -   (
which, by the negative semi—definiteness of S, implies that I > a for positive
                                                                                       (7.8)




revenue. But         a)   X(see   equation 5.5) only   if   is positive. If taxed goods

are, on average (weighted by tax rates) inferior,              < 0   and A > a   .   Hence,    A

may   actually   exceed i, meaning that raising an additional dollar to pay for pub-

lic goods may        actually   lessen excess burden by causing a shift toward the con—

suinption of taxed goods.



7.2 Externalities

      Referring again to Pigou, we know that the appropriate response by the gov-

ernment (under conditions of perfect information) to an externality is the iinpo—

sition of a tax that causes producers of the externality to internalize the

additional social cost (or benefi't) of their action. Suppose, however, that all

commodities, including the one possessing the externality, are subject to dis—

tortionary taxation.        How is the Pigouvian prescription affected? Following
Sandmo   (1975),     we assume identical individuals, fixed producer prices and let
                                                             —T.4—


the externality be a symmetric consumption externality related to total                               corisunip—

tion of good N. Thus, individual utility for the representative individual h is

                  where XN =
U(xh;    XN                              Hx   The paial derivative of U with respect to XN may

be positive or negative. Assuming                          for    convenience that each individual taxes xN




                                         '
as given (as will be approximately true for H large), we may express the corres-

ponding indirect utility function as V(p; xN), parallel to the public good example,

with-s =l(;
     Maximizing the sum of utilities with respect to P subject to the need to

raise revenue B through                   distortionary       taxes yields the N first—order conditions:



     — Ax. +                 •           + .i[x.   +   E
                                                           t-] =        0       (i1,...,N)            (7.9)


or


                                           dx.
     —   A   x. +
              1
                     i[x.    1 jj+   E
                                         *
                                         t —-1
                                             Pi
                                                =0                (i=l,...,N)                (7.10)


where t. =
       1
                   tY1                        i=    1,     ...,   N—i




                   t1
                         —   IIau             i=   N



Equation (7.10) is the standard optimal tax result, but it applies to the vector
t' rather than t. The difference between them implies that the optimal tax on

good N equals that dictated by the standard formula pius the externality imposed

by additional consumption of the good: the Pigouvian tax. Thus, the optimal tax

and Pigouian taxes are separable, in a sense; we may imagine choosing the two

independently. However, this independence is only present analytically, since

the actual level of the externality, and hence the Pigouvian tax, depends on the
                                                         —7.5—


actual equilibrium and hence the optimal tax rates; the same is true in the

other direction.




7.3    Pre—existing Distortions
        If the government faces pre—existing distortions (of which the preceding

example of externalities is a specific kind), it may wish to alter its choice of

optimal taxes. Following Green (1961), let us assume that lump sum taxes are

available, but certain prices are distorted and cannot be influenced directly.

This could be the result of nonconipetitive behavior, but we shall assume it to

be due to some tax that iust be maintained, perhaps for political purposes.

Assuming that the representative individual's only lump sum income is from the

government, we have the problem


       max     V(p,   —T) subject to (p—q)               x + T   .R              (7.11)
      p* ,   T

where p is the subset of p that may be adjusted. Note that unless at least

two prices are fixed, equiproportional, nondistortionary taxation is possible.

       Differentiating the Lagrangian corresponding to (7.11) with respect to

   and T yields:


       — X x. +               E
                                  t- +      xi      =0
                                                                      p p             (T.12a)



                              dx
       —     A +      E
                      j jy
                          t        +   i]   =   0                                     (7.12b)



which may be written as:


                   =—(                                                  p. c p       (7.13a)




                                                                                      (7.1 3b)
                                               —7.6—


for ct defined as above. These conditions are quite familiar, and yield the
requirement that
       E s5t       = o
                                                                          p c                (7.1k)

This does not result in uniform taxes unless at rxst one tax is fixed (in which

case the zero degree homogeneity of S allows us to choose any level of propor-

tional taxes). In particular, suppose all taxes but t1 are fixed, and t0 =
                                                                                                 t3
=    ••• t = 0.          Then there is one condition, corresponding to the choice of t1.

                                           =
Using compensated elasticities                 —S      —i, we may     express    this as:


       o =                                                                                  (7.15)
              _02 dl2'€ll

where 0 =         tjp.   is the proportional tax on good i.          Since C11    < 0,   this calls

for a tax on good 1 (assuming 02 >         0),   t'       >   0,   and a subsidy if c12 < 0.          If

the distorted good is a substitute to good 1, a tax on good 1 will shift con—

sumption into good 2, lessening the original distortion. xing a complement,

however, would worsen the distortion. (Compare butter and margarine vs. left

shoes and right shoes.)

       In the wider case in which there are several pre—existing distortions and a

single free instrument, t1, the condition is:

       81 =   —
                                                                                              (7.16)

so   that the complement—substitute rule now           applies     to the tax—weighted commodity

average. More generally, when several instruments can be set, the results are

more complicated.

       Several other authors have considered particular restrictions on commodity

taxation and profits taxation (for example, 1.sgupta and Stiglitz 1972 and

Mirrlees 1912) and the effect of such restrictions on the desirability of pro-

duction efficiency. P1uerbach (l979b) considers the particular production
                                     —7.7—


distortion of differential capital income taxation, obtaining a result about

separability of factors in production that closely parallels those on the con-.

sumption side already discussed in Section 6.



7. Taxation   and Risk

     There are many interesting questions that concern the interaction between

taxes and risk—bearing. A particular one that fits into the current discussion

is the optimal taxation of risky assets. This problem was first examined by

Stiglitz (1972) and extended by Auerbach (1981). The basic insight is that the

optimal tax results already derived can be applied directly to the case of risky

assets by imagining the commodities being taxed to be Arrow—Debreu state—

contingent ones. The differences that arise come from the fact that we normally

make different assumptions about the structure of utility functions and the corn-

pleteness of markets when we deal with risk.

     The basic model we consider, following Stiglitz (1972), is a two—period

model in which the representative individual may consume a certain good

(leisure) out of some endowment, and may purchase one of two linearly indepen-

dent assets yielding returns in two states at date 1.   Because the two assets

span the states of nature, the consumer may purchase any combination of state—

contingent commodities at date 1, and there is a well—defined ilicit price for

each. A corollary of this is that there is a unique pair of tax rates on com-

modities in the two states corresponding to each tax regime that applies to the

assets themselves. This is helpful, because though our optimal tax results

apply to the former, actual tax rules normally apply to the latter.   In the

more general case without asset spanning, the optimal tax problem becomes more

complicated, just as it would if individual commodities in a riskiess world

could not be purchased independently. Stiglitz (1972) obtained his main result
                                                                     —7.8—



concerning              the relative taxation of a risky and a riskiess asset from a direct

consideration of the effects of taxation on asset demands. It is, perhaps,

easier to see the connection with previous results, and the effects of particu-

lar assumptions, if we begin with the state—contingent commodities themselves

(following Auerbach 1981).

       Letting the good consumed in period 0 be good zero, and the other two corn-

modities be labelled 1 and 2, and taking good 0 to be nunieraire, we have

the basic optimal tax rule (5.19), which we write here for convenience


       &
         1
                    C12 +C21 +C20
                                                                                                           7.17
         2          12+ C21+ 10
                    C        C




This result can be simplified if we adopt the axioms necessary for the consumer

to engage in expected utility maximization. In this case, the consumer's objec-

tive function becomes



       U(x0, x1, x2) = 1T1TJ1(x0, x1)
                                                             +
                                                                 ir2U2(x0,        x2)                       (7.18)

where U .')
           1,           = U2,') and                   and £20 may be expressed as

                                         x.              d in(&/U1)
                                                                 2
                =         —
                                     j        +
                                                  jj            dx:
                                                                                        1=1,2, j=2,1        (7.19)

                                   U2
                              -




where M is a positive constant and U. and U. are first and second derivatives of
                                                                 1           ij
utility. The second term in brackets in (7.19) is familiar from Section 6,                                      and
equals     zero         if preferences are weakly separable between periods. If this is so

(in   which case,                 utility is also strongly separable, since it is already assumed

separable between states), then the tax on ood 1 should be higher than that on

good 2 if and only if                             —    ______        >   — U22x2             but these are just the
                                                                              2
                                                        U2                   U2
                                               —7.9—


 Arrow (19G5)—Pratt (l96) measures        of   relative risk—aversion in the two states.

 Intuitively, as an individual becomes more risk—averse, his behavior becomes

 less responsive to differences in rates of return. Thus, a tax is less distor—

 tionary.

         That taxes should be equal when relative risk aversion is constant is

 not surprising, even without knowledge of the basic optimal tax results. It

 is for this class of preferences that the basic results of Saxnuélson (1969) and

 Merton (1969) concerning the separation of portfolio and savings decisions

 apply. If we can't influence the amount of savings, and hence leisure consumed,

by inducing portfolio shifts, then such a relative distortion has no benefit.

       To convert these results to the taxes on the two assets themselves, which

we label A and B, we use the fact (see Auerbach 1981) that



         0A — 0B   = sgn     12 21
                            rA rB — rA rB sgn 61 — 02                           7.20


where r is the return in state i of asset j. Assuming one asset, which we take

to be asset A without loss of generality, is risk—free, then the tax should

be greater (smaller) on the risky asset B if relative risk—aversion is higher

(lower) in the state with the higher (lower) return.          In other words, the risky

asset should face a higher or lower tax than the safe asset according to whether

relative risk aversion is increasing or decreasing (Stiglitz 1972). More gener-

ally, if both assets are risky, then one can apply any standard notion of

increasing risk (Rothschild and Stiglitz 1970) to argue that if asset B is

risker than asset A, its return will be more dispersed and hence (r r —

will be positive. This will yield asimilar result for taxation of the riskier
                                                                                 r     r)

asset.

       It is important     to recognize that these results assume complete, competi-
tive   markets. While a comn assumption without risk, it is less acceptable
                                           —7.10—


    when the commodities concerned are state—contingent. (The same critique also

    applies to intertemporal problems with date—indexed goods.) In particular, we

    are implicitly assuming that the government cannot increase the diversification

    of risk by collecting risky taxes and pooling them. In a real world context

    where many assets are not traded, this may be a highly questionable restriction

    to impose.

           A second issue of taxation and risk concerns the question of whether the

    government can increase the welfare of the representative individual by inducing

    risk through the tax system. Normally, risk averse individuals are made worse

    off by being forced to bear risk. However, the optimal taxation equilibrium is

    a distorted one, and the famous dictum of Lipsey and Lancaster (1956—7) applies

    here: once one condition for a I.reto optimum is violated, there is no reason

    to expect that the violation of others will necessarily worsen matters.

           There are to general strands in the literature that deal with the use of

    induced risk as a policy tool. Weiss (1976) shows that a random tax system, or

    one in which there is tax evasion with a probability of detection, may be

    superior to a certain tax system because, under specified conditions with

    respect to individual preferences, such risk may lessen the labor supply distor-

    tion of the income tax.    (Also see Sandmo 1981 on the subject of tax evasion.)

           A second issue relates to the case of several individuals, and arises from

    the possibility that in the presence of indirect taxation, the utility possibi-

    lity frontier may be nonconvex. Even with identical individuals, then, we might

•
    wish to tax the consumption of the same good by different individuals at dif-

    ferent rates (Atkinson and Stiglitz 1976, 1980). This is depicted in Figure

    7.1.    Suppose two individuals, 1 and 2, have identical preferences and consume
                    Figure 7.1
       ptima1   Taxation with Nonconvexities




U2
                                       /
       A

                          /
                            /

     /                             B




     u'-                      UH
                                       U1
                                            —7.12—


goods and leisure. If we seek to maximize (U1 +
                                                       u2) by choosing individual—
specific excise taxes on consumption, the first—order condition will be zero

with equal taxes at U1 =          = tJE, by the symmetry of the problem. But this may
                           U2

represent a local minimum, as shown. Social welfare may be improved by choosing

either point A or point B. This represents an unequal treatment of equal indi-

viduals and may- violate proscriptions against such horizontal equity. However,

suppose the tax system were randomized so that point A were chosen half the

time, and point B the other half. This would give the same expected utility to

each individual. ?vbreover, it would yield the same value of the social welfare

function, defined on individual expected utilities, as before at either A or B:



    EU1 + EU2 = 1I2EUL +   t]']   +   V2Et] +     =   + tJ-                     (7.21)

Thus, randomization may be desirable.
 8.   Tax Reform


      All of the optimal tax problems analyzed thus far share in common the fact

that global optima are sought. There are a number of new issues arising from a

consideration of tax reform, rather than tax design.

      One problem of tax reform derives from the existence of an initial alloca-

tion. Though a new tax system may be more efficient and more equitable than the

existing one, the transition from old to new may cause a redistribution of

resources to occur than in itself is undesirable. For example, it has often

been suggested in the U.S. that the tax subsidy for state and nrunicipal bonds be

removed. If this were done unexpectedly, it would cause a capital loss for the

holders of such bonds, but not for other, otherwise identical individuals. Such

treatment may be thought of as a violation of horizontal equity (Feldstein 1976)

which may be explicitly accounted for in an expanded social welfare function (King

1982a). This problem undoubtedly is one of the reasons why tax reform is so dif-

ficult to achieve.

      A second general problem of tax reform, which shall be the main focus of

this section, is that the direction in which to ive from the current system is

not always evident. Even if all distortions can be reduced somewhat, this may

not increase economic efficiency. The basic difficulty is that we can only be

sure that movennt in the direction of a global optimum will improve matters if

we are sufficiently close to that optimum initially. A related problem is

whether one can increase economic efficiency in a piecemeal fashion, by remain-

ing distortion, one at a time. In general, such a scheme for tax reform may

decrease welfare along the transition path to a global optimum. Restrictions on

preferences and production sufficient to prevent this are extremely restrictive

(Boadway and Harris 1977).
                                              -8.2—


8.1 Moving to Lump Sum Taxation

     Lump sum taxes are nondistortionary, but it need not follow that partially

reducing distortions and replacing them with lump sum taxes will improve effi-

ciency. One case in which it will is when the distortioriary tax rates are set

at each point of the transition at the optimal tax rates for the revenue being

collected by non—lump sum taxes. That is, if a certain amount of revenue, R, is

collected initially by the distortionary taxes, and a lump sum tax T is intro-.

duced, the new taxes should be those optimal for collecting R —         T.   As T

increases, this sequence of optimal tax rates insures a monotonic increase in

utility. This result is due to Atkinson and Stern (1974), and demonstrated as

follows. Consider the optimal tax problem:


     max     V(p,     — T)   subject to (p — q)       x + T ) R
     T ,p      —                         ——           —
                                                                               (8.1)



where T is the lump sum tax faced by the individual. Differentiating the cor-

responding Lagrangian with respect to T yields the effect of an increase in T on

utility,    given that p     is chosen optimally:


                                  dx
                 x+                        = ( — a)
     dT
             —           [_E t
                                 jy    +                                      (8.2)


where A,    a and ii   are defined in the usual   way to be the marginal utility of

income, the social marginal utility of income and the Lagrange multiplier on the

revenue    constraint. However, we know from expression (i.8) that M > ci, so util-

ity must increase as T does: when the tax vector t is chosen optimally, there

is always a positive marginal excess burden to revenue collection.

     Unfortunately, this is not a very realistic assumption to make in the

current context. The taxes we may wish to reform may cause unnecessarily
                                                                  —8.3—


large    distortions, and we may                 be      restricted to a proportional reduction formula,
or some   other constraint on how they are to be lowered.

      Consider the case of an arbitrary change                                in the levels of excise taxes t
and   lump sum     taxes T          for the case of a single individual and fixed producer

prices. (This latter assumption can 'be                               relaxed.      See Dixit 1975.) We have

(following Atkinson and Stiglitz 1980):



      dU = f dt.                —          dT = — A Cx            '   dt   + dT)                        (8.3a)




and dR =     d(t       x + T) =        x        dt   +    t   •
                                                                  dx +     dT = 0                      (8.3b)



which yields


      dU Xt dx                                                                                         (8.b)


Utility is increased by the tax change if consumption changes to increase

revenue from the existing taxes, thereby reducing the associated excess burden.

      From the Slutsky equation, we have:



             dx            dx                        dx
      dx=dt—dT=Sdt--'(x'dt+dT)                                                                         (8.5)



which,   combined with (8.3b) and (8.1)                           yields

      dU =                           tJS   dt                                                          (8.6)
             1—    t   .   dx
                           dy
                                         _8.14_


     This    holds for any change in t and T, and can be useful in ana]yzing par-

ticular kinds of tax reforms. For example, suppose all distortions are reduced

proportionally, i.e., dt = —bt.    Then because S is negative semi—definite,
                                 dx
dU   0 if and only if (1 —   t           0 (Dixit 1975). This condition says that

a dollar increase in income causes the consumer to pay less than a dollar in

additional excise taxes. Since p = q +      t,    it is equivalent to the requirement

that q •    x increase with y: as the consumer spends more, the social cost of the

goods purchased also increases. If this condition is violated, then it is

possible that multiple equilibria exist, and the tax reduction my move the eco—

nonr away from the undistorted optimum (Foster and Sonnenschein 1970).

     This my be demonstrated graphically (following Hatta 1977) for the simple

case in which there are only two goods. Suppose that a certain revenue B

(measured in units of commodity 1) must be raised, and that the consumer has an

endowment        The possible equilibria lie along the social production

constraint M in Figure 8.1. Superimposed on this constraint are a series of

indifference curves, the highest feasible one passing through point A, the un-

distorted optimum. Normally, we would expect that as we travel along M from

point A toward either axis, decreasing the feasible utility level, the marginal

rate of substitution between x1 and x2 changes monotonically. (This is true,

of course, for movements along an indifference curve and, hence, for local

movements away from A along M, where there is no first order income effect.) If

this is the case, then a revenue—preserving reduction in the divergence between

the relative price of x2 and its social cast, in terms of x1, must increase uti-

lity, for it will induce a movement along M toward point A. However, there may

be cases in which there is no such monotonicity, and a given slope may be had by

an odd number of different points on M, not just one. In this case, distortions

in the price reduction may   actually   move the consumer away from point A.
         Figure 8.1

     Prices and   Utility




x2




                    x1-R    x1   x1
                                                —8.6—


        That this possibility is equivalent to the condition derived from (8.6) is

demonstrated graphically in Figure 8.2, where an increase in lump sum income

above       causes the consumer to shift from point B to point C, inside the pro.-.

duction constraint M. Since the indifference curve slopes at B and C are the

same, the slope at D must be flatter than at B. Thus, a steepening of the

consumer's budget line resulting from a reduction in the price distortion will

cause a movement away from B, along M, toward the x1—axis rather than toward D

and A, thereby lowering the consumer's utility.

        A particular aplplication of this result is that when equilibrium is uni-

que, a consumption tax is superior to a wage tax in the presence of pure rents,

since the former tax is equivalent to the latter in conjunction with a lump sum

rent tax (Helpman and Sadka 1982).

        Another result that follows from (8.6) is for the case where the tax dis-

tortion is zero for one good (arbitrarily, good zero) and equiproportional for

other goods. That is•, in our previous notation, t = 8 p •            Since p'S = 0,

(8.6) may be rewritten

                    A
        dU=—                     S0dt                                                (8.7)

                         dy



where      =
                   O2         '      SON).
                                             A sufficient condition for this to be
                        dR
positive    (assuming —       < i)   .
                                     is that taxes be decreased on substitutes for good

zero (s0 > 0) and increased on complements (Dixit 1975).



8.2 Reform Without Lump Sum Taxation

     This problem is harder, because there is no obvious "first—best" looming in

the distance to guide our movement. General characterization of the direction

in which taxes should be changed is a difficult problem, and while progress has
                   Figure 8.2
         Multiple Equilibria with Taxes




    x2

M




            D




                                          N
                                 -R
                                              N.
                                              x
                                                             —8.8—


been made (Guesnerie 1977, Diewert 1978), there is little we can say of a con-

crete nature without further assumptions.

         One approach that sidesteps this problem is to characterize observable

changes in equilibrium that will result if welfare is improved. Following

Pazner and Sadka (1981), we can use revealed preference theory to evaluate a

                                                                                           — q be the initial
balanced budget change in distortionary taxes. Let t, =
                                                                                       p
set of taxes (with producer prices fixed) and t =                               — q.   be the prospective

change. If                       >          •
                                                 x   (where x and      are the purchases in the two

situations), then                     is preferred by the consumer. Hence, utility has

increased. }bwever, since d(t                           x) = 0,   q x =    ci   x, so that t        •
                                                                                                        x
>   t       •
                , or                  x >   0.       (Note the similarity of this discrete condition
                                                 •
to (8.4).) Likewise, if                                x <   0, the original situation is preferred.
Unfortunately, there is an indeterminate range in which neither of these condi-

tions is satisfied.

            If we assume producer prices to be fixed (here this restriction is neces-

sary) and that all goods but the nunieraire are taxed uniformly, then we can

characterize a utility increasing tax change. The three—good case was analyzed

by Corlett and Hague (1953—4), with a generalization provided by Dixit (1975),

whose anlaysis we follow. Note that (8.4) still is valid in determining whether

a tax change icnreases utility. However, since lump—sum taxes are unavailable,

t •     x       0. Using (8. 5), for dT = 0, we have:


            O =   d(t )                  dt+ t d= x dt+ '

                = ('   +   t,' ) dt                                                                     (8.8)
                                                              —8.9.—




where      = 1 —     t             •      For the case where t0 = 0 and t = e p, we use the homo—

geneity    of S to rewrite this as:


        (x' —            dt,   = 0                                                                   (8.9)


which,   using the definition of compensated elasticities t =
                                                                                          S1    -
       ji
        E x. (1 —     — c.
                          iO
                               )       dt.1   = 0



From (8.I), we have (for dT =                       0):

       dU =   —A         dt                                                                           (8.10)

If we assume that x (i —
                                              - c.0)      =     is   positive, and make   the   related assump-

tion that           is positive, then (comparing (8.9) and (8.10)), in changing two

taxes,   we should decrease the one for which


       x.(1 —— c.
        1       10
                                                                                                     (8.11)
              x.
                1

is   smaller, or              is larger ——             increase   the tax on the relative complement.

This extends in an obvious way if we choose pairs of taxes successively.
Footnotes


 1. tpuit (i8).
 2. See, for example, Diewert (1981).

 3.   ]..tpuit,  cit, p. 278. For this particular rediscovery, I am indebted to
      the historical analysis of Atkinson and Stern (1980).

 4.   See Hotellirig (1938) for the original statement of this result.

 5. We use here the identity x(p, E(p,u)) =
                                                  x(p,   u).

 6. This was pointed out by Hausx!lan (1981a), among others.

 7. See Auerbach and Rosen (1980) for further discussion.

8. One can also derive higher order approximations of        For a comparison
                                                       EBc.
    of second and third order approximations, see Green and Sheshinski (1979).

9. See Hausman (1981a).

10. This may be seen by substituting (3.8) into (3.9), and considering the 'Iy—
     br approximation of the change in 8:
                 d8
                 dt
                      •t—
                            + 1/2
                                        d24
                                    t' (—)
                                        dt    t
      which yields

             8— (t'    x(i+ 1/2 a q) + 1/2           t' x)
      In deriving a similar measure, Diamond and McFadden (1976) assumed all com-
      pensation to be in the form of the numeraire good, in which case a •   q = 0.

11. This uses the facts that             = 0 and p •     x=    0, and equation (5.15).
                                k_Okki
12. See Deaton(1979a) for further discussion of the properties of the function
     D(') and the matrix A.

13. Because D() is homogeneous of degree 1 in ,           f
                                                   must be homogeneous of
     degree 1 in     and   and  homogeneous of degree 1 in x.

iL Indeed, even if all individuals are identical, the optimal tax system need
     not dictate identical treatment. This is discussed in Section 7.
References


K.   Arrow. 1965. Essays in       the Theory of Risk—Bearing. Amsterdam: North
       Holland.

A.B. Atkinson and N.H. Stern. l97I. "Pigou, Taxation and Public Goods." Review
        of Economic Studies 141, 119—128.

__________ and _________.          1980. "Taxation and Incentives in the UK." Lloyds
        Bank Review, 143_46.

A.B.   Atkinson and J.E. Stiglitz. 1972.   "The Structure of Indirect Taxation and
       Economic Efficiency." Journal of Public Economics 1, 97—119.

___________ and __________. 1976. "The Design of Tax Structure:             Direct Versus
     Indirect Taxation." Journal of Public Economics 6, 55—75.
___________ and    __________. 1980. Lectures on Public        Economics. New York,
       N.Y.   and Maidenhead, England: MoGraw—Hill.

A.J.   Auerbach. 1979a. "A Brief Note on a Non—Existent Theorem About the
       Optimality of Uniform Taxation." Economics Letters 3, 149—52.
__________        1979b. "The Optimal Taxation    of Heterogeneous Capital." Quarterly
        Journal   of Economics, 93, 589—612.
__________     1981. "Taxes, Firm Financial Policy and the Cost of Capital: An
       Empirical Analysis." HIER Working Paper No. 915, August.

__________ and H. Rosen. 1980. "Will The Real Excess irden Please Stand               Up?"
     HIER Working Paper No. 767.

__________ L.J. Kotlikoff and        J.
                                 Skinner. 1981. "The Efficiency Gains from
Dynamic Tax Reform." HIER Working Paper No. 870, December.

B. Baumol and D. Bradford. 1970. "Optimal Departures from Marginal Cost
     Pricing." American Economic Review 60, 265—283.

R.   Boadway and H. Harris. 1977. "A Characterization of Piecemeal Second Best
      Policy." Journal of Public Economics 8, 169—190.
M. Boiteaux. 1951.     "Le 'Revenue Distribuable' et les Pertes Econoxniq,ues."
       Econometrica 19, 112-133.
__________     1956.    "Sur le gestion des monopoles     publics astreints a l'equilibre
       budgetaire."    Econometrica 214, 22—140. Thanslated and     reprinted   in 1971,
       Journal of Economic Theory- 3, 219—140.

D. Bradford and H. Rosen. 1976. "The Optimal Taxation of Commodities and
       Income." AER    Papers   and Proceedings 66, 914—101.

J.5.   Chipman and J.C. Moore. 1980. "Compensating Variation, Consumer's
       Surplus, and Welfare." AER TO, 933_QILO.
                                               -R •   2-

References     (Continued)


B. Cooter. 1979. "A New Expenditure Function." Economics Letters 2, 103—110.

W.J. Corlett and D.C. Hague. 1953_It. "Complementarity and the Excess &rden of
     Taxation." Review of Economic Studies 21, 21—30.

P.S.   L.sgupta and J.E. Stiglitz. 1972. "On Optimal Taxation and Public Produc-
       tion." Review of Economic Studies 39, 87—103.

A.S. Deaton. 1977. "Equity, Efficiency and the Structure of Indirect Taxa-
     tion." Journal of Public Economics 8, 299—312.

___________       1979a.     "The Distance Function in Consumer Behaviour with Applica
       tions   of Index     Numbers and Optimal Taxation." Review of Economic Studies
       16, 39l—O6.
__________.       1979b.     "Optimally   Uniform Commodity Taxes." Economics   Letters 2,
       357—361.

__________. 1981a. "Optimal          Taxes   and the Structure of Preferences." Econo—
      metrica 19, 121i5—126O.

_________ 1981b. "Numeraires and Endowments in Optimal Tax Formulae: A
    Note," University of Bristol Discussion Paper No. 81/113, September.

G.Debreu. 1954. "A Classical Tax—Subsidy Problem." Econometrica 22, 114_22.
___________  1951.          "The Coefficient of Resource Utilization." Econometrica 19,
     273—92.

P.A. Diamond. 1975. "A Many—Person 1.msey Rule."             Journal   of Public Economics
        1, 335—42.

__________ and        McFadden. l97L. "Some Uses of the Expenditure Function in
                   D.L.
       Public Finance." Journal of Public Economics 3, 3—21.
__________ and  J. Mirrlees. 1971. "Optimal Taxation and Public Production I:
       Production Efficient and II: Tax Rules." American Economic Review 61,
       8—27 and 261—278.
W.E. Diewert. 1978.           "Optimal Tax Perturbations." Journal of Public Economics
10, 139—177.
__________     1981.       "The Measurement of Deadweight Loss Revisited." Econometrica
       9, 1225—124.
A.K. Dixit. 1970. "On the Optimum Structure of Commodity Taxes." American
Economic Review 60,             295—301.

__________   1975. "Welfare Effects of Tax and Price Changes." Journal of
     Public Economics , 103—123.
                                             -R •   3-

 Dupuit, J. 181&it. "Dela Mesure de l'Uti1it des Travaux Publics," Annales des
      Ponte et Chaussees 8. Translated and reprinted in K. Arrow and T. Sci—
      tovsky (eds.), 1969, AEA Readings in Welfare Economics, 255—283.


M.S. Feldstein. 1972. "Distributional Equity and the Optimal Structure of
     Public Prices. American Economic Review 62, 32—36.

__________• 1976.         "On the Theory of Tax Reform." Journal of Public Economics
     6, 77—104.

_________• 1978. "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation." Journal of
     Public Economics 86, S29—51.
E. Foster and H. Sonnenschein. 1970.           "Price    Distortion and Economic Welfare."
Econometrica      38, 281—297.

W.M. Gorrnan. 1953. "Community Preference Fields." Econometrica 21, 63—80.

_________•     1976. "Tricks with Utility Functions." In Essays in Economic
       Analysis, M.J. Artis and A.R. Nobay (eds.), London: Cambridge University
       Press.

H.A.J. Green. 1961. "The Social Optimum in the Presence of Monopoly and
     Taxation." Review of Economic Studies 29, 66—78.

J. Green and E. Shoshinsni. 1979. "Approximating the Gains from Welfare
     Reforms." Journal of Public Economics 11, 179—195.

R.   Guesnerie. 1977. "On the Direction of Tax Reform."              Journal of Public
       Economics   7,   179—202.

A. Harberger. 1954. "Monopoly and Resource Allocation." American Economic
       Review 42, 77—87.

__________     19614.  "Taxation, Resource Allocation and Welfare." In The Role
       of Direct and Indirect Taxes in the Federal Reserve System, Princeton:
       Princeton University Press for the NBER and Brookings Institution.
__________.    1966. "Efficiency- Effects of Taxes on Income From Capital." In
       Effects of Corporation Income Tax, J. Krzyaniak (ed.).

__________        1971, "Three Postulates for Applied Welfare Analysis." Journal of
       Economic   Literature 9,    785—97.

T.   Hatta. 1977. "A Theory of Piecemeal Policy Recommendations." Review of
      Economic Studies 44, 1—21.

J.A. Hausman. 1981a. "Exact Consumer's              Surplus   and Deadweight Loss." American

      Economic Review 71, 662—676.

__________   1981b. "Labor Supply." In How Taxes Effect Economic Behavior,
     H. Aaron and J. Pecbman (eds.). Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution,
     pp. 27814.
                                                -R .


E. Helpman and E. Sadka. 1982. "Consumption Versus Wage Taxation." Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 97, 363—372.

J.Re Hicks. l91O. "The Valuation of Social Income." Economica 26

__________• 1912. "Consumers' Surplus and Index Numbers." Review of Economic
     Studies 9, 126—37.

__________•        1916.   Value and Capital. 2nd edition. Oxford University Press.

N. Kaldor.     1939.       "Welfare Propositions in Economics." Economic Journal 49,
       5149_552.

J.A.   Kay. 1980. "The Deadweight Loss             From a Tax System."         Journal of Public
       Economics 13, 111—120.

M.A. King.  1982a. "An Index of Inequality: With Applications to Horizontal
     Equity and Social Mobility." Econometrica 50, forthcoming.

__________• 1982b. "Welfare Analysis of Tax Reforms Using Household t.ta."
     Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

R.G. Lipsey and R.K. Lancaster. 1956—7. "The General Theory of Second Best."
       Review of Economic Studies 214, 11—32.

A. Marshall. 1920. Principles of Economics. London: ?.cmillan.

R.C. Mertori. 1969. "Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under Uncertainty: The
     Continuous—Time Case." Review of Economic Statistics 51, 2147—57.

J.A. Mirrlees. 1972. "on Producer Taxation." Review of Economic Studies 39,
       105—111.

H. Mohring. 1971. "Alternative Welfare Gain & Loss Measures." Western Economic
       Journal 9, 3149_368.

J.N.J. Muellbauer. 1976.      "Community Preferences and the Representative
       Consumer." Econometrica 1414, 979—999.

R.A. Musgrave. 1959. The Theory of Public Finance. New York: McGraw—Hill.

E.A. Pazner and E. Sadka. 1981. "Welfare Criteria for Tax                      Reforms:   Efficiency
     Aspects." Journal of Public Economics 16, 113—122.

A.C. Pigou.        19147. A Study in Public Finance. 3rd edition. London: Macmillan.

J.W. Pratt. 19614. "Risk Aversion in the Small and in the Large." Econometrica
      32, 122—36.

F.P.   Ramsey. 1927.        "A   Contribution to the Theory of        Taxation."     Economic
       Journal 37, 147—61.
                                            —R.5—


K.W.S. Roberts. 1980. "Price—Independent Welfare Prescriptions." Journal of
     Public Economics 13, 277—297.

H. Rosen.    1978. "The Measurement of Excess Burden with Explicit Utility Func-
       tions."   Journal of Political Economy 86, No. 2, Part      2, S121—136.
M. Rothschild and J.E. Stiglitz. 1970. "Increasing Risk I: A Definition."
     Journal of Economic Theory 2, 225—243.

P.A. Samuelson. 191.11'.      Foundations of Economic Analysis. Cambridge: Harvard
     University Press.

                 1969. "Lifetime    Portfolio Selection by Dynamic Stochastic Program—
                 Review of   Economic Statistics 51, 239—46.

A.   Santhno. 1974. "A Note on      the   Structure of Optimal Taxation." American
       Economic Review 64,     701—706.

__________   1975. "Optimal Taxation in the         Presence of   Externalities."
     Swedish Journal of Economics 77, 86—98.

__________   1981. "Income Tax Evasion, Labour Supply, and the Equity—
     Efficiency Tradeoff." Journal of Public Economics 16, 265—288.

J.B. Shoven. 1976. "The Incidence and Efficiency Effects of Taxes on Income
     from Capital." Journal of Political Economy 84, 1261—1284.

K.A. Small and H.S. Rosen. 1981. "Applied Welfare Economics with Discrete
     Choice Models." Econometrica 105—130.

J.   Stiglitz. 1972. "Taxation, Risk Taking and the Allocation of Investment in
      a Competitive Economy." In Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets,
      M. Jensen (ed.).
__________ and P.S. Dasgupta. 1971. "Differential Taxation, Public Goods and
      Economic Efficiency." Review of Economic Studies 38, 151—1974.

S.F. Venti and D.A. Wise. 1982. "Moving and Housing Expenditure: Transactions
     Costs and Equilibrium." Paper presented at SSRC/NBER Conference on
     Microdata and Public Economics, Oxford, June.

L. Weiss. 1976. "The Desirability of Cheating Incentives and Randomness in the
     Optimal Income Tax." Journal of Political Economy 84, 1343—1352.

R.E. Willig. 1976. "Consumer's Surplus Without Apo1or." American Economic
      Review 66, 589—597.
