                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             A SEARCH FOR MULTIPLE EQUILIBRIA
                              IN URBAN INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE

                                            Donald R. Davis
                                           David E. Weinstein

                                          Working Paper 10252
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10252


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




The authors want to thank Kazuko Shirono, Joshua Greenfield, and Heidee Stoller for research assistance.
Richard Baldwin, Andrew Bernard, Steven Brakman, Harry Garretsen, James Harrigan, and Marc Schramm
made helpful suggestions. We are grateful to the National Science Foundation for its support of this research.
We appreciate the financial support of the Center for Japanese Economy and Business at Columbia
University. Weinstein also wants to thank the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science for funding part
of this research, and Seiichi Katayama for providing him with research space and access to the Kobe
University library. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Donald R. Davis and David E. Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
A Search for Multiple Equilibria in Urban Industrial Structure
Donald R. Davis and David E. Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 10252
January 2004
JEL No. D5, J1, N9, R1

                                           ABSTRACT

Theories featuring multiple equilibria are now widespread across many fields of economics. Yet

little empirical work has asked if such multiple equilibria are salient features of real economies. We

examine this in the context of the Allied bombing of Japanese cities and industries in WWII. We

develop a new empirical test for multiple equilibria and apply it to data for 114 Japanese cities in

eight manufacturing industries. The data provide no support for the existence of multiple equilibria.

In the aftermath even of immense shocks, a city typically recovers not only its population and its

share of aggregate manufacturing, but even the specific industries it had before.

Donald R. Davis
Columbia University
Department of Economics
1038 Intl. Affairs Building
420 West 118th St.
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
drd28@columbia.edu

David E. Weinstein
Columbia University
Department of Economics
420 W. 118th Street
MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
dew35@columbia.edu
                           A Search for Multiple Equilibria
                            in Urban Industrial Structure

                           I. Multiple Equilibria in Theory and Data

         The concept of multiple equilibria is a hallmark of modern economics, one whose

influence crosses broad swathes of the profession. In macroeconomics, it is offered as an

underpinning for the business cycle (Russell Cooper and Andrew John 1988). In development

economics it rationalizes a theory of the “big push” (Kevin M. Murphy, Andrei Shleifer, Robert

W. Vishny 1988). In urban and regional economics, it provides a foundation for understanding

variation in the density of economic activity across cities and regions (Paul R. Krugman 1991).

In the field of international economics, it has even been offered as a candidate explanation for

the division of the global economy into an industrial North and a non-industrial South, as well as

the possible future collapse of such a world regime (Krugman and Anthony J.Venables 1995).1

         The theoretical literature has now firmly established the analytic foundations for the

existence of multiple equilibria. However theory has far outpaced empirics.2 The most important

empirical question arising from this intellectual current has almost not been touched: Are

multiple equilibria a salient feature of real economies? This is inherently a difficult question. At

any moment in time, one observes only the actual equilibrium, not alternative equilibria that exist

only potentially. If the researcher observes a change over time, it is difficult to know if this

change reflects a shift between equilibria due to temporary shocks or a change in fundamentals

1
  A simple indication of the flood of work in these areas is that the Journal of Economic Literature has featured
three surveys of segments of this literature in recent years (see Matsuyama 1995, Anas, Arnott and Small 1998, and
Neary 2001). Recent major monographs in economic geography include Masahisa Fujita, Paul R. Krugman and
Anthony Venables (1998), Fujita and Jacques Thisse (2002), and Richard Baldwin, et al. (2003).
2
  Cooper (2002) discusses issues of estimation and identification in the presence of multiple equilibria as well as
surveying a selection from the small number of papers that seek to test empirically for multiple equilibria in specific
economic contexts. We view these as welcome contributions to understanding a difficult problem, but also believe
that are perhaps not yet well understood by the researcher. If a cross section reveals

heterogeneity that seems hard to explain by the observed variation in fundamentals, it is hard to

know if this may be taken to confirm theories of multiple equilibria or if it suggests only that our

empirical identification of fundamentals falls short.

        Testing for multiple equilibria is also difficult for other reasons. The theory of multiple

equilibria relies on the existence of thresholds that separate distinct equilibria. In any real

context, it is difficult to identify such thresholds or the location of unobserved equilibria. In

addition, a researcher may look for exogenous shocks, but these need to be of sufficient

magnitude to shift the economy to the other side of the relevant threshold and they need to be

clearly temporary so that we can see that we fail to return to the status quo ante. A researcher is

rarely so blessed.

        Donald R. Davis and David E. Weinstein (2002) initiated work that addresses the

practical salience of multiple equilibria in the context of city sizes. The experiment considered

was the Allied bombing of Japanese cities during World War II. This disturbance was

exogenous, temporary and one of the most powerful shocks to relative city sizes in the history of

the world. Hence it is an ideal laboratory for identifying multiple equilibria. That paper examined

city population data and, in the context of the present paper, may be viewed as having answered

two questions. Do the data reject a null that city population shares have a unique stable

equilibrium? Do the data support a stated condition that would be sufficient to establish multiple

equilibria in city population shares? In both cases, our answer was “no” – we could not reject a

unique stable equilibrium nor could we establish the sufficient condition for multiple equilibria

in city population shares.


much remains to be done. Andrea Moro (2003) considers multiple equilibria in a statistical discrimination labor
model.


                                                                                                              2
        The present paper goes beyond Davis and Weinstein (2002) in several dimensions. First

we examine new and more detailed data. In addition to the city population data of the first paper,

we consider data on aggregate city manufacturing and city-industry data for eight manufacturing

industries. This is the first paper, to our knowledge, that tests whether the location of production

is subject to multiple equilibria. Moreover, the detailed industry data is important because

multiple equilibria may well arise at one level of aggregation even if not at another. For example,

physical geography may act strongly to determine relative city populations or even relative sizes

of city manufacturing, but multiple equilibria may yet arise in particular manufacturing

industries. Subject to the level of detail in the available data, we can consider this question.

        The second important advance over Davis and Weinstein (2002) is that we provide a

sharper contrast between the implications of models of unique and multiple equilibria, one that

naturally suggests empirical implementation in a framework of threshold regression. This new

approach no longer requires that we treat unique equilibrium as the null, hence gives a greater

opportunity for multiple equilibria to demonstrate their empirical relevance. Moreover, subject to

the restrictions underlying our analysis, we now examine necessary (rather than sufficient)

conditions for multiple equilibria. Hence a failure to find evidence of these conditions would be a

more powerful rejection of the theory of multiple equilibria in this context. The methods

developed in this paper to test for multiple equilibria may have application across a broad range

of fields.

        The present paper delivers a clear message: The data prefer a model with a unique stable

equilibrium. Faced even with shocks of frightening magnitude, there is a strong tendency for

cities to recover not only their prior share of population and manufacturing in aggregate, but




                                                                                                   3
even the specific industries that they previously enjoyed. Our tests provide no support for the

hypothesis of multiple equilibria.3

         These results are highly relevant for policy analysis. Theories of multiple equilibria carry

within them an important temptation. If multiple equilibria are possible, it is tempting to

intervene to select that deemed most advantageous by the policymaker. If thresholds separate

radically different equilibria, then the resolute policymaker can change the whole course of

regional development or strongly affect the industrial composition of a region even with limited

and temporary interventions. Implicitly, such views are at the base of regional and urban

development policies in Europe, the United States, and elsewhere.4

         Our results provide a strong caution against the idea that one may use limited and

temporary interventions to select equilibria with large and permanent effects on city

development. We confirm on population and city-aggregate manufacturing data that such

aggregate measures of activity in cities are highly robust to temporary shocks even of immense

size. Perhaps this is not so surprising given that natural geographic features may have a very

strong influence on aggregate activity (Rappaport and Sachs 2001). However, it is much harder

to believe that these visible features of geography impose the same direct constraints on the size

of individual industries. Here the theory of multiple equilibria should emerge in full force. The

fact that cities have a very strong tendency to return not only to the prior level of manufacturing

activity but also to recover the specific industries that previously thrived there even in the

3
 It is crucial to keep in mind that the broad structure of the models applied to the study of multiple equilibria rarely
suffice for this phenomenon – multiple equilibria also depend on parameter values. Hence a rejection of multiple
equilibria would not be a rejection of the underlying model of economic geography. Moreover, the fact that such
models allow the possibility of multiple equilibria, but do not imply them, also underscores the idea that tests for the
salience of multiple equilibria must be conducted directly in the context of interest. Our results are offered only as a
contribution to what we hope will be a broader research effort to examine the salience of multiple equilibria in a
wide variety of contexts.




                                                                                                                  4
aftermath of overwhelming destruction is very strong evidence that temporary interventions of

economically relevant magnitude are extremely unlikely to alter the course of aggregate

manufacturing or even to strongly affect industrial structure in a given locale. Small and

temporary interventions to reap large and permanent changes in levels and composition of

regional economic activity is an idea that does not find support in the data.



                                                     II. Theory

           Paul R. Krugman (1991) develops what has come to be known as the “core-periphery

model,” which provides a theoretical framework for the empirical exercise we undertake.

Krugman considers a country with two regions that are symmetric in all fundamentals. Each

location has a fixed quantity of immobile factors dedicated to production of a constant returns,

perfect competition, homogeneous good termed “agriculture.” There is also a labor force mobile

between regions that produces an increasing returns, monopolistic competition set of

differentiated varieties in what is termed “manufacturing.” There are costs of trade only in the

manufactured good. With only two regions, symmetrically placed, the state of the system can be

summarized by the share of the mobile manufacturing labor force in Region 1, which we can

term S. Mobile labor is assumed to adjust between regions according to a myopic Marshallian

adjustment determined by instantaneous differences in real wages in each of the regions.

           By symmetry of the underlying fundamentals, S = ½, i.e. equal region sizes, is always an

equilibrium (although it need not be stable). The symmetric equilibrium could be globally stable,

as illustrated in Figure 1. However, the key novelty of Krugman’s paper concerns the possibility

of asymmetric equilibria, ones in which manufacturing is concentrated in a single region. The

4
    Baldwin, et al. (2003) provide a thorough and lucid analysis of the policy issues raised by the new economic



                                                                                                                   5
spatial equilibrium is viewed as a contest between centripetal forces pulling economic activity

together and centrifugal forces pushing economic activity apart. The relative strength of these

forces varies with S, the share of the mobile labor force in Region 1. The mobile labor force itself

provides the source of demand for locally produced manufactured products that can make

regional concentration self-sustaining.

         Krugman found it convenient to focus on examples of equilibria either with perfect

symmetry or complete concentration of manufactures. However, given that there are many

potential types of centrifugal and centripetal forces, a slightly richer model is perfectly capable

of admitting multiple stable equilibria without complete concentration. For our purposes, it is

convenient to illustrate our approach in just such a case. As above, let S be the share of

manufacturing in Region 1, and S be its rate of change. Figure 2 exhibits three stable equilibria

(indicated by Ω + ∆1 , Ω, and Ω + ∆ 3 ), as well as two thresholds (indicated by b1 and b2 ).

         We can now use Figure 2 to illustrate the key ideas underlying our empirical work. For

concreteness, assume we are initially in the symmetric equilibrium ( Ω ), and consider the impact

of shocks to S. If these shocks are small, i.e. do not shift S out of the range ( b1 , b2 ), then local

stability of the symmetric equilibrium insures that in the aftermath of the shocks, manufacturing

shares return to their original magnitudes. This is why an empirical test of these theories requires

that shocks be large: Small shocks mimic the effects of a globally stable equilibrium, making it

difficult to know if we are in the world of Figure 1 or Figure 2.

         Now consider, for example, a large negative shock that pushes S below the threshold b1

in Figure 2. The manufacturing share of Region 1 will thereafter converge to a new lower



geography. They refer to the possibility of spatial catastrophes as the “most celebrated” feature of Krugman’s core-
periphery model (p. 35).


                                                                                                               6
equilibrium at Ω + ∆1 . Similarly, a large shock that raises S above b2 would lead S to converge to

a new long run equilibrium at Ω + ∆ 3 . A key feature in these examples that has drawn attention

to the new economic geography is the possibility of these spatial catastrophes. Small incremental

movements that push an economy past a threshold can have large effects on the equilibrium.

Similarly, this literature has emphasized the potential importance of hysteresis. Even if the initial

shock is only temporary, once a threshold is passed, the change in equilibrium will be

permanent.5

         As a step in the direction of our empirical analysis, it is useful to translate the information

in Figures 1 and 2 into the space of two-period growth rates. First, convert the units to log-shares

(excluding a zero share, of course). Second, divide the time analytically into two periods. Period

t is the period of an initial and temporary shock. Period t+1 is the time interval of convergence

from the initial shock to the new full equilibrium. Figure 3 illustrates this for the case of a unique

stable equilibrium. In this case, the analytics are extremely simple. Whatever happens in the

period of the shock is precisely undone in the period of the recovery. Accordingly, the only

possible location for an observation is on a line of slope minus unity through the origin.

         The analysis is only slightly more complicated in the case of multiple equilibria. This is

considered in Figure 4. First, so long as the period t shock remains in the interval (b1 , b2 ) , the




5
  It is worth clarifying at this point the sense of “multiple equilibria” that we use. In the simple Krugman (1991)
model, each starting value for S, Region 1’s share of the mobile labor force, converges to a unique equilibrium;
however, multiple values of S are consistent with full equilibrium. This sense of multiple equilibria is perhaps
closest to the experiment below focusing on city population and possibly aggregate manufacturing. Alternatively, as
in Krugman and Venables (1995), a given division of immobile productive resources between locations may be
consistent with multiple equilibria. In this case, the initial structure of production serves to pin down which
equilibrium reigns. In the experiments below, this sense of multiple equilibria may pertain either to city-aggregate
manufacturing or city-industry data, depending on the structure of input-output linkages. Neither approach rules out
the possibility that expectations could help to coordinate on an equilibrium. Since we do not observe expectations of
the mechanism by which they are formed, our approach implicitly assumes the same Marshallian expectations
applied in the theoretical models that provide foundation for our work.


                                                                                                               7
result is precisely as in the case of the unique stable equilibrium.6 Within this interval, any

observation in this space must lie on a line through the origin with slope minus unity. Now

consider what happens if there is a negative shock sufficiently large to push the log-share below

threshold b1 . It is simplest to begin by imagining that (by chance) the shock pushes the log-share

all the way down to the new equilibrium at Ω + ∆1 (-∆1 log units below Ω ). In the following

period, in this case, there would be no further change. If the initial shock had pushed the log-

share below b1 but to some point other than the new full equilibrium, then the second period

adjustment would simply undo the deviation relative to the new full equilibrium at Ω + ∆1 . That

is, in two-period growth space and for the domain below b1 , any observation must lie on a line

with slope minus unity passing through ∆1 . An exactly parallel discussion would be pertinent to

shocks that push the initial log-share above b2 . Any observation must then lie on a line with

slope minus unity passing through ∆ 3 .

           The translation to the two-period growth space thus provides a very simple contrast

between a model of a unique equilibrium versus one of multiple equilibria. In the case of a

unique equilibrium, an observation should simply lie on a line with slope minus unity through

the origin. In the case of multiple equilibria, we get a sequence of lines, all with slope minus

unity, but with different intercepts. Because in this latter case these lines have slope minus unity,

the intercepts are ordered and correspond to the displacement in log-share space from the initial

to the new equilibrium. These elements will be central when we turn to empirical analysis.

           The Krugman model features a ruthlessly simple environment – one in which there is a

single state variable, the share of manufacturing in one region of a two-region world. In that


6
    Note the change in notation. As we move from levels to log units, we remove the overstrikes above the variables.


                                                                                                               8
world, the dynamics can be viewed as s = φ ( s ) , so that changes in a region’s size depend on that

region’s size alone. When we turn to the empirics, our implementation of the Krugman model

will impose strong assumptions.7 For a wide class of new economic geography models, relative

allocation is unaffected by the size of the aggregate economy, so that the dynamics could be

written generically as a function of the shares, sct = φ ( sct ,{sc 't }) The first assumption is that the

dynamics (hence thresholds) for a particular city may be written as sct = φ ( sct ) , hence

independent of the evolution of other city shares (and correlatively for the city-industry case).

The second assumption is that, where relevant, the thresholds are common in log-share units

across cities and industries. Hence, if it takes a 40 percent negative shock to move aggregate

manufacturing in Tokyo past the threshold to a lower equilibrium, it likewise takes a 40 percent

negative shock to do so in Osaka or Himeji. Similarly, when we consider pooled city-industry

observations, we require that if it takes a 35 percent negative shock to move metals in Niigata to

a lower equilibrium, it would take the same size negative shock to move machinery in Kyoto to a

lower equilibrium. In short, we have assumed that movements across thresholds can be stated in

terms of a city’s (or city-industry’s) own size alone and that these thresholds require a common

proportional decline (rise) to pass a threshold (or thresholds). Under these assumptions, the two

period model of adjustment in Figures 3 and 4 is not just a representation of changes for a single

city (or city-industry), but is rather one in which we can place all relevant observations.




7
  These assumptions should surely be revisited in future work. Nonetheless, we believe that the gains from having a
structured look at the data are sufficient justification for imposing these assumptions at this stage of development of
empirical research into multiple equilibria.


                                                                                                                 9
                                        III. Experimental Design

                                               A. The Experiment

         In searching for multiple equilibria in city-industry data8, an ideal experiment would have

several key features. Shocks would be large, variable, exogenous, and purely temporary. In this

paper, we consider the Allied bombing of Japanese cities and industry in WWII as precisely such

an experiment.

         The devastation of Japanese cities in the closing months of the war is one of the strongest

shocks to relative city and industry sizes in the history of the world. United States strategic

bombing targeted sixty-six Japanese cities. These include Hiroshima and Nagasaki, well known

as blast sites of the atomic bombs. In these two blasts alone, more than 100,000 people died and

major segments of the cities were razed. However, the devastation of the bombing campaign

reached far beyond Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Raids of other Japanese cities with high explosives

and napalm incendiaries were likewise devastating. Tokyo suffered over 100,000 deaths from

firebombing raids and slightly over half of its structures burned to the ground. Most other cities

suffered far fewer casualties. However, the median city among the sixty-six targeted had half of

all buildings destroyed.

         If anything, these figures understate the impact of the bombing campaign on production

(see Figure 5). Wartime manufacturing production peaked in 1941, falling mildly through 1944

as the slowly-tightening noose of the Allied war effort made re-supply of important raw

8
  The contrast between Figures 3 and 4 also helps in understanding the difference between the exercise on
population data of Davis and Weinstein (2002) and the tests provided here. Note that observations in quadrants 1
and 3 represent regions with a positive (negative) shock in a first period followed by a further positive (negative)
shock in the second (recovery) period. A comparison of Figures 3 and 4 shows that such observations cannot arise in
the case of a unique stable equilibrium, but could well arise in the case of multiple equilibria. Davis and Weinstein
(2002) asked whether such observations were a central tendency in the city-population data. If they had found a
positive answer, that would have been sufficient to establish the existence of multiple equilibria. However, a finding
that such observations are a central tendency is not a necessary consequence of multiple equilibria. Here we will use



                                                                                                              10
materials more difficult and the early stages of Allied bombing began to bite. Manufacturing

output plummeted in 1945 as the Allied bombing raids reached their height. From the peak in

1941 to the nadir in 1946, Japanese manufacturing output fell by nearly 90 percent. In short, it is

fair to say these are large shocks.

         While the magnitude of the shocks to city sizes and output was large, there was also a

great deal of variance in these shocks. Our sample includes 114 cities for which we could obtain

production data. The median city in our sample had one casualty for every 600 people; however

those in the top ten percent had casualty rates ranging from 1 in 100 to one in five. By contrast,

those cities in the bottom quartile lost less than one person in ten thousand. Capital destruction

exhibits similar variability. The median number of buildings lost in a city was about one for

every thirty-five people. But cities in the top decile of destruction lost more than one building for

every nine people. And at the other end of the distribution, approximately a quarter of the cities

lost fewer than one building for every ten thousand inhabitants. Reasons for this variance include

not bombing for cultural reasons (e.g. Kyoto); preservation of future atomic bomb targets (e.g.

Niigata and Kitakyushu); distance from US airbases (e.g. Sapporo, Sendai, and other Northern

cities); evolving antiaircraft defense capabilities (e.g. Osaka); the topography of specific cities

(the relatively larger destruction in Hiroshima as opposed to Nagasaki); evolution of US air

capabilities; the fact that early and incomplete firebombings created firebreaks that prevented the

most destructive firestorms; and sheer fortune, as in the fact that Nagasaki was bombed only

when the primary target, Kokura (now Kitakyushu), could not be visually identified due to cloud

cover.




the full structure of the contrast between Figures 3 and 4 to distinguish the cases of unique equilibrium versus
multiple equilibria.


                                                                                                               11
           There was also substantial variation in the impact of bombing on different industries.

Table 1 presents data on how quantum indices of output moved over the five years between 1941

and 1946.9 Heavily targeted industries, such as machinery and metals, saw their output fall by

over ninety percent while other sectors such as processed food and lumber and wood had

declines that were half as large. This suggests that the bombing had a significant impact on

aggregate Japanese industrial structure.

           Even within cities, there was often considerable variation in the severity of damage by

industry. This reflected variation in the type of bombing carried out (conventional ordnance,

firebombing, or nuclear weapons), targeted production, errors in targeting, and sheer fate. Table

2 presents correlations between the growth rate between 1938 and 1948 of one industry in a

given city with those of the other industries in the same city. Not surprisingly, these within-city

correlations in growth rates are positive, indicating that having one’s city bombed tended to be

bad for all industries. More startling is the low level of these correlations: the median correlation

is just 0.31. Even the highly targeted sectors of machinery and metals only exhibit a correlation

of 0.60. This suggests that there was substantial variation in the relative shares of industries even

within cities.

           A more detailed look at the data bears this out. For example, incendiaries comprised

ninety percent of the ordnance dropped on Tokyo and these attacks destroyed 56 square miles.

As a result, output of all manufacturing sectors in Tokyo declined relative to the Japan average.

Even so, there was substantial variation. Textiles and apparel fell only 12 percent relative to the

national average, but metals and publishing fell 44 and 79 percent respectively. More surprising

is the case of Nagoya, which received more bomb tonnage (14.6 kilotons) than any other

Japanese city. It actually emerged from the war with some industries increasing their share of

9
    These quantum indices are aggregated using value added weights.

                                                                                               12
national production. In part, this was due to the firebreaks discussed above and in part this was

due to the high share of precision raids using high-explosive bombs, which left many untargeted

factories untouched. In 1938, Nagoya supplied 12 percent of Japan’s ceramics products and 11

percent of Japan’s machinery. Over the next ten years, the machinery industry in Nagoya, a

principal target of bombing raids, saw its output fall by more than 35 percent relative to the

industry as a whole. By contrast, the output of ceramics in Nagoya rose by 21 percent relative to

the national average. Similarly the metals sector in Nagoya saw its share of national output rise

64 percent.

       It is interesting to compare these numbers to what happened to industrial sectors in cities

bombed lightly or not at all. In Kyoto and Sapporo, machinery was the fastest growing sector,

with output rising 75 percent and 186 percent faster than the national average. By contrast,

ceramics – which had risen in Nagoya – fell by 58 percent in Kyoto (relative to the national

average) and fell as a share of Sapporo’s aggregate manufacturing output.

       In sum, these data suggest that the allied bombing of Japan produced tremendous

variation within and across cities in the output of Japanese industries.

       Since our dependent variables will be city and industry growth rates, we need to address

one potential selection issue. While there is evidence that the US targeted cities on the basis of

population and industrial structure, there is no evidence that US picked industries on the basis of

past or estimated future growth rates. We could find no references to targeting based on urban

industrial growth in any source material. Moreover, the US Strategic Bombing Survey did not

even cite the main data source on Japanese urban output data, raising the question of whether

they knew the existence of these data. Even if they did, there is scant evidence that the US

actually or inadvertently targeted on the basis of growth rates. For example the correlation




                                                                                               13
between prewar (1932 to 1938) manufacturing growth and casualty rates is only 0.07. Taken

together, we believe that the choice of US targets can safely be treated as exogenous.

        The empirical exercise that we conduct requires that we can appropriately identify the

period of the shock, which should be temporary, as well as identifying the period of the recovery.

The dramatic decline in output during the War provides a very natural periodization for the

shock itself. In our central tests, our measure of the period of the shock is the change in output

from 1938 to 1948, as is mandated by data availability. While peak to trough would take us from

1941 to 1946, the period available is proximate and hence should suffice. Even by 1948,

Japanese manufacturing output levels remained barely 25 percent of their 1938 level. That the

wartime shocks were temporary is obvious, but for this no less important. Deciding on the

appropriate period of recovery is more difficult, since one has to decide whether to use an

endpoint at which Japan reaches its pre-war peak level of manufacturing (which occurred in the

early 1960’s) or the point at which it resumes the prior trend (which would be near the end of the

1960’s). We have opted for the latter, although the principal results are not affected by taking an

earlier cutoff.


                                B. Relevance of the Japanese Case

        One important concern is the relevance for modern economies of results on Japanese

manufacturing industries, where our earliest data goes back to 1932 and the most recent is 1969.

After all, the main body of the theoretical literature contemplates a modern industrial economy

with differentiated products and a well-articulated web of intermediate suppliers (Fujita,

Krugman and Venables 1999). If these conditions were not met, then this would be an

inappropriate venue in which to test these theories. Violation of these conditions could arise, in




                                                                                              14
principle, either in large autonomous plants or small home-production plants, either of which

failed to integrate in an essential way with other local producers.

       An examination of the historical literature strongly points to the importance of producers

tightly linked to a diverse set of intermediate suppliers, as suggested by theory. Indeed, the shift

from precision bombing of large Japanese plants with high explosives to area bombing of

Japanese cities was premised precisely on the need to disrupt the web of suppliers widely

dispersed in the cities. However, the US Strategic Bombing Survey (henceforth USSBS) argues

explicitly that these plants were not simply small cottage industries: “Before the urban attacks

began, ‘home’ industry, in the strict sense of household industry (which by Japanese definition

included plants with up to 10 workers), had almost disappeared.” (p. 29) In its place, the USSBS

argued, was an elaborate system of specialized contractors which became the focus of the US air

assault:

       Part of the objective of the urban raids was the destruction of the smaller ‘feeder’
       plants in the industrial areas. It was believed that the effect of such destruction
       would be immediately and seriously felt in the war economy…. It was discovered,
       however, that subcontracting in wartime Japan followed more or less the same
       pattern as it did in the Western countries, being widely distributed in plants of 50
       to 10,000 or more workers. The effect of the urban raids on the great number of
       plants within that range was extensive. The ultimate effect of such destruction or
       damage varied considerably as among cities and industries. (p. 20-21)

       This view was strongly supported by post-war surveys that considered the reasons for

declines in production. A survey of 33 of the largest end product plants in Tokyo, Kawasaki, and

Yokohama, corroborates the notion that it was the destruction of specialized components

manufacturers. The USSBS writes:

       Bomb damage to component suppliers was cited as the primary cause of
       component failure among the 33 customer plants. Next in order of importance
       was the shortage of raw materials as it affected these suppliers, and last was labor
       trouble. The latter two causes were in part induced, in part aggravated, by bomb
       damage. The impact of bomb damage on smaller component plants is illustrated



                                                                                               15
       by the damage statistics for the Tokyo-Kawasaki-Yokohama complex, which
       revealed that plants of 100 workers and under were 73 percent destroyed. In
       Tokyo, the electrical equipment industry, particularly radio and communications
       equipment, was drastically affected by damage to its smaller component
       suppliers…. The Osaka Arsenal suffered a precipitous decline in production
       because of the destruction of the Nippon Kogaku plant…which supplied firing
       mechanisms for AA [Anti-Aircraft] guns, the Arsenal’s chief item of output. The
       electric steel production of the Mitsubishi Steel Works at Nagasaki, was virtually
       stopped because of the destruction, in an urban attack, of its supplier of carbon
       electrodes . . . . (pp. 31-32)

       A second feature important for verifying the relevance of the Krugman-type models is the

localization of demand and cost influences on local production. One window on this is to

compare declines in production across three types of plants: (1) Plants that are bombed; (2)

Plants not bombed in cities that are bombed; (3) Plants in cities not bombed. By July 1945,

plants that were bombed had their output reduced by nearly three-fourths from an October 1944

peak. Over the same period, plants that were not bombed located in cities that were bombed had

output fall by just over half. Plants located in cities that were not bombed had output fall by a

quarter (USSBS). A comparison between plant types (1) and (2) reveals that the direct impact of

a plant’s own bombing on plant output is surprisingly modest – only an incremental 25 percent in

lost output. A comparison of plant types (2) and (3) reveals the importance of local factors. Even

in comparing plants not bombed, simply to be in a city that is bombed costs the plant a quarter of

its output. This is the same magnitude as the direct effect of bombing!

       One tempting alternative to the hypothesis of highly localized demand and cost effects on

production through the web of intermediate suppliers is the possibility that the negative impact of

being in a city that is bombed comes through the destruction of urban infrastructure. This would

be a mistake. The USSBS categorically rejects the notion that infrastructure destruction was

crucial, “Shipping and rail movements were maintained during the raid period with only slight

interruptions, and the supply of water, gas and electric power to the remaining essential



                                                                                               16
consumers was always adequate . . . . At Hiroshima, target of the atom bomb, rail traffic was

delayed only a few hours.” (p. 20) Japanese data bears this out. In Table 3, we present

destruction of Japanese assets by asset class. A clear implication of this table is that public

infrastructure, while obviously impaired, tended to be damaged far less seriously than other

forms of capital. Hence infrastructure damage does not seem to be the primary culprit.

        Taken together, these historical accounts and data draw a picture of Japanese industrial

structure of the time for which the canonical models of the new economic geography may appear

a good representation. There seems to have been a highly articulated web of intermediate

suppliers to industry, the destruction of which was a primary factor determining US bombing

strategy. Moreover, there seems to have been an importantly localized component of the effects

of bombing, consistent with emphases within this literature.



                                                IV. Empirics

                                                     A. Data

        Our data include three measures of economic activity. The first is a coarse measure – city

population – previously employed in Davis and Weinstein (2002), which we include here for the

purpose of comparison and because we apply new methods to the data. The second is aggregate

city manufacturing. This is consistently available for 114 cities, which jointly accounted for 64

percent of Japanese manufacturing in 1938.10 In the early periods, these data are available at

infrequent intervals, namely 1932, 1938, and 1948; the last date we use is 1969. Our third and

final measure of economic activity is city-industry data for eight manufacturing industries. In



10
  This number was calculated by dividing the total manufacturing output of the 114 cities listed in the Nihon Toshi
Nenkan by the total manufacturing output number in the Kogyo Tokei 50 Nenshi [50 Year History of Industrial
Statistics].


                                                                                                             17
order of size in 1938, they are Machinery; Metals; Chemicals; Textiles and Apparel; Processed

Food; Printing and Publishing; Lumber and Wood; and Ceramics (Stone, Glass, and Clay).

       The new data on manufacturing in aggregate and by industry is very important. First, it

provides a more direct and precise measure of economic activity than the population data.

Indeed, both the magnitude of the shocks and variability are much greater in the production than

the population data. Second, a great deal of the theory has been developed specifically to capture

features considered of particular importance in manufacturing. Finally, the ability to move down

to the level of industries within manufacturing will allow us to see whether it is possible to

identify multiple equilibria at any of a variety of levels of aggregation – since they could well be

present at one level even if not at another.

       In moving from theory to data, there will be an additional concern. Although the

literature following in the wake of Krugman (1991) is often termed the “new economic

geography,” real features of physical geography are rarely modeled. Yet in particular locations,

physical geography may impose strong limits on city expansion. In particular, this could be an

issue in a highly mountainous country such as Japan. Tokyo, lying on the large Kanto Plain, may

naturally be larger in aggregate than Kyoto, nestled in a considerably smaller valley. Even if over

half of Tokyo is destroyed in the war, with Kyoto nearly untouched, the grip of geography may

imply that in aggregate Tokyo will return to a much greater size. This suggests the great

advantage in the present paper of moving from the aggregate city data of Davis and Weinstein

(2002) to the city-industry data of the present paper. While physical geography may impose

strong restrictions on the aggregate expansion of a city, typically these do not constrain

expansion of particular industries in particular cities. This point is underscored by the fact that

across all cities and industries the median observation on city-industry output as a share of city




                                                                                                 18
output is just 4.5 percent. For most city-industry observations, physical geography imposes no

meaningful constraint on expansion of city-industry output.

       We will also require direct measures of shocks to cities during the war. The first is death

– the number killed or missing as a result of bombing deflated by city population in 1940. The

second is destruction – the number of buildings destroyed per capita in the city in the course of

the war. We can also divide cities according to whether or not they were bombed. In order to

control for interventions by the government, as opposed to the consequences of private actions,

we will also need a measure of regionally directed government reconstruction expenditures. This

excludes subsidy programs that do not discriminate by location. The total expenditures of this

type are small. These expenditures are divided by the city’s 1947 population to obtain a per

capita variable government reconstruction expenses. Further details on the data are available in

the Data Appendix.



                                         B. Specifications

       1. Unique Equilibrium

       The next step, then, is to move from the theoretical discussion of Section II above to an

empirical implementation. It is useful to break this discussion up into two parts, one in which we

assume there is a unique equilibrium and the other in which we contemplate the possibility that

there may be multiple equilibria.

       We begin with the case of unique equilibrium, as represented in Figure 3. If we could

partition time into two periods – the first the period of the shock and the second the period of the

recovery – then the unique equilibrium model makes a very simple prediction: Starting from




                                                                                              19
equilibrium, whatever shock there is in period one will simply be undone in the second period.

As we can see in Figure 3, the data should lie on a line with slope minus unity through the origin.

        This is the basis for the empirical specification employed by Davis and Weinstein (2002).

Let Scit be the share of output produced in city c in industry i at time t, and let scit be the natural

logarithm of this share. Let ν ci 48 be the (typically large) shock to the city-industry share

occasioned by the war and ν ci 69 be the (typically small) shock around the new postwar

equilibrium. Suppose further that in each city, industry i has an initial stable equilibrium size Ωci

and is buffeted by city-industry specific shocks εcit. We can think about Ωci as the result of all

unchanging locational forces that affect an industry’s size in a particular location. In this case we

can write the share of an industry in any city in 1948 as,

                                                  sci 48 = Ωci + ε ci 48                                  (1)

We can model the persistence in these shocks to industry shares as:

                                               ε ci 48 = ρε ci 27 + ν ci 48                               (2)

where the parameter ρ ∈ [0,1) represents the rate at which shocks dissipate over time. Davis and

Weinstein (2002) showed this gives rise to:


                           sci 69 − sci 48 = ( ρ − 1)ν ci 48 + ν ci 69 + ρ (1 − ρ ) ε ci 27           (3)



        The term in square brackets is the error term and is uncorrelated with the wartime shock.

An obvious proxy for the shock, ν ci 48 , is the growth rate between 1938 and 1948. Unfortunately,

we cannot simply plug this variable into equation (3). The reason can be understood most simply

by writing out the terms of the growth rate explicitly:

                           sci 48 − sci 38 = ν ci 48 + ( ρ − 1)ν ci 38 + ρ (1 − ρ ) ε ci16            (4)


                                                                                                   20
        The terms in square brackets represent classical measurement error. The obvious solution

to this problem is to instrument for the innovation using bombing data. The instruments we use

to identify the magnitude of the shock, νci48, are “death” (the number of casualties and missing11

in the city as a share of the 1940 population) and the interaction of “destruction” (buildings

destroyed as a share of the 1940 population) with industry dummies.12 This enables us to control

for the fact that bombing is likely to have varying impacts on industries depending on whether

the industry was targeted or not.

        Importantly, under the null of a unique equilibrium, we expect the estimated value of ρ

to equal zero so the coefficient on instrumented wartime growth will equal minus unity.



        2. Multiple Equilibria

        We now develop an empirical specification for the case in which there might be multiple

equilibria. This case is complicated by the fact that a priori we know neither the number of

equilibria nor the location of the thresholds. Our task is considerably simplified if we first

abstract from this and assume that indeed we do know the number of equilibria and the location

of the thresholds. We can then turn later to how we would determine these empirically.

        Consider a case, for example, in which there are three equilibria. Assume there is an

initial equilibrium log-share, Ωci , a low equilibrium at – ∆1 log-share units below

(i.e. the first equilibrium is located at Ωci + ∆1 in log space), and third a high equilibrium at ∆3

log-share units above the initial equilibrium. Assume that all city-industry shares are in full


11
   Virtually all of the missing people disappeared following high intensity firebombings or nuclear attacks and
therefore we believe them to be casualties.
12
   In principle we could have interacted our death instrument with industry dummies too. However, plots of the data
and preliminary runs suggested that destruction had far more power as an instrumental variable. Hence, in the
interests of conserving degrees of freedom, we only interacted the destruction variable.


                                                                                                            21
equilibrium in the period prior to the shock (here 1938) so that the wartime innovation is the only

shock that can push a city-industry observation past a threshold. Let the lower threshold be a

shock b1 in log-share units and the upper threshold be at b2 > b1 log-share units in the space of

wartime shocks. We hypothesize that the log-share in 1969 then follows



                                                    Ωci + ∆1 + ε ci1 69          if    ν ci 48 < b1
                                                   
                                        sci 69   =  Ωci      + ε ci2 69          if    b1 < ν ci 48 < b2                              (5)
                                                   Ω + ∆ + ε 3                   if    ν ci 48 > b2
                                                    ci     3     ci 69




The error terms change as we cross a threshold because shocks must be stated as relative to the

new equilibrium. Formally, we have

                                                       ε ci1 69 = ρ ( ε ci 48 − ∆1 ) +ν ci 69
                                                       ε ci2 69 = ρε ci 48 +ν ci 69                                                    (6)
                                                       ε ci3 69 = ρ ( ε ci 48 − ∆ 3 ) +ν ci 69



If we subtract equation (1) from the equations presented in (5) we obtain our equations of

motion:

                                                   ∆1 + ( ε ci1 69 − ε ci 48 )                  if ν ci 48 < b1
                                                  
                                                  
                               sci 69 − sci 48   =       (ε ci2 69 − ε ci 48 )                  if b1 < ν ci 48 < b2                  (7)
                                                  
                                                  ∆ 3 + ( ε ci 69 − ε ci 48 )                  if ν ci 48 > b2
                                                              3




If we substitute in (2) and (6) into the above expressions we obtain

                   ∆1 (1 − ρ ) + ( ρ − 1)ν ci 48 + ν ci 69 + ρ (1 − ρ ) ε ci 27                      if ν ci 48 < b1
                   
sci 69 − sci 48   =                  ( ρ − 1)ν ci 48 + ν ci 69 + ρ (1 − ρ ) ε ci 27                   if b1 < ν ci 48 < b2        (8)
                    
                     ∆ 3 (1 − ρ ) + ( ρ − 1)ν ci 48 + ν ci 69 + ρ (1 − ρ ) ε ci 27                  if ν ci 48 > b2




                                                                                                                                  22
There are a few important features of the equations of motion described in equation (8). First,

each of these equations differs only in the constant term. Second, if there is not much persistence

in the shocks, then the coefficient on the innovation due to bombing, ν ci 48 , should be close to

minus one. Finally, the error term, which is the set of variables that is enclosed in square

brackets, is uncorrelated with the remaining variables on the right-hand side. It will be

convenient for future reference to re-write equation (8) as:

                        sci 69 − sci 48 = (1 − ρ ) ∆1 I1 ( b1 , ν ci 48 ) + (1 − ρ ) ∆ 3 I 3 ( b2 , ν ci 48 )
                                                                                                                      (9)
                                        + ( ρ − 1)( sci 48 − sci 38 ) + ν ci 69 + ρ (1 − ρ ) ε ci 27 

where I1 ( b1 , ν ci 48 ) and I 2 ( b2 , ν ci 48 ) are indicator variables that equal unity if ν ci 48 < b1 or

ν ci 48 > b2 respectively, and we have substituted in the wartime growth rate as a proxy for the

unobserved wartime shock ν ci 48 .

         Thus far we have simply assumed that we know the locations of the thresholds and so we

must return to this question now. A standard approach within the literature on threshold

regression would be to generate the likelihood function associated with equation (8) and then

pick ∆1, ∆3, ρ, b1, and b2 to maximize its value. However, if we try to do this, we run into a

thorny problem. For reasons described earlier, we will need to instrument the wartime growth

rate with per capita death and destruction in the cities. The instrumenting equation, of course,

will need to be run with all right hand side variables from (9), including the indicator variables.

However, the indicator variables themselves are functions of the instrumented shocks, so will

change with every different choice of thresholds. And the instrumented values themselves then

also change with the thresholds. While this discussion may seem a bit convoluted, it has a simple

bottom line. The likelihood function should be defined on the parameters alone, holding the data

fixed. However, the need to instrument, combined with the fact that the instrumented values


                                                                                                                 23
themselves depend on the value of key parameters, means that it is not possible to hold all the

“data” fixed. The likelihood function is not well-defined here.

       In the face of this, we develop an alternative. If we assume that the periods we look over

are long enough for non-contemporaneous shocks to dissipate, then we can impose ρ = 0 . This

then allows us to focus on the long difference between equations (9) and (3). We can then

estimate

                           sci 69 − sci 38 = ∆1 I1 ( b1 , ν ci 48 ) + ∆ 3 I 3 ( b2 , ν ci 48 )
                                                                                                  (10)
                                            + ν ci 69 + ρ (1 − ρ ) ε ci 27 




The key advantage of equation (10) is that it has a well-defined likelihood function because we

no longer need to instrument. Once we have transformed the data in this way, we can proceed as

if we were performing a standard threshold regression and pick the four parameters (∆1, ∆3, b1,

and b2) that maximize the value of the likelihood function. In the general case where we have n

thresholds, our estimates of the parameters answer a question of the following form: “Contingent

on believing that there are n thresholds separating n+1 stable equilibria, which parameters

maximize the likelihood function?”

       The mechanics of the threshold regression require us to maximize the likelihood function

for all parameter values. This cannot be done analytically because the likelihood function will

have flat spots when small movements in the threshold values cause no points to moved from

one equilibrium grouping to another and will jump discretely when infinitesimal movements in

threshold values move points from one equilibrium to another. For computational ease, we focus

on thresholds in which observations move from one equilibrium to another in clusters of five

percent of the observations.




                                                                                                 24
           We implement this as follows. Theory indicates that the determinant of whether we cross

a threshold is going to be monotonically related to the magnitude of the shock. By regressing

industry growth between 1938 and 1948 on death, destruction, prewar growth, and postwar

reconstruction expenses, we obtain a linear relationship of how bombing affects population or

industry size.13 If we multiply the magnitude of death and destruction by their respective

estimated coefficients, we obtain an estimate of the magnitude of the shock to each location

generated by the bombing. We can then use this shock variable in order to group the data

according how much the growth rate of each industry in each city was affected by the bombing.

Bin 1 corresponds to the five percent hardest hit industrial locations, and Bin 20 contains the

least damaged five percent. We then perform a grid search for the thresholds using a number of

strategies.

           First, if there is only one equilibrium, then there should only be one intercept. In this case

we can run two specifications. First, we can use two-stage least squares to estimate ρ, and then

test the reasonableness of restriction that it equals zero in the one stable equilibrium case.

Second, we can estimate the constrained version so that we can obtain a likelihood function and

calculate the Schwarz criterion under the maintained hypothesis that there is a unique

equilibrium and ρ = 1.

           We next consider the possibility of two equilibria. In order to test for this possibility, we

first order the data according to our shock variable. We then set the threshold b1 to the level of

the fifth percentile and pick the remaining parameters in order to maximize the likelihood

function. We then repeat this exercise by calculating the maximum likelihood values of the

parameters when b1 is set at the tenth percentile, the fifteenth percentile and so on. This process


13
     We include postwar reconstruction expenses because they may have affected growth between 1945 and 1948.


                                                                                                         25
is continued until we have a maximum likelihood value for each value of b1. The parameters that

maximize the likelihood across all values of the threshold become our estimates.

       Our procedure in the case of three equilibria is analogous. In this case we divide the data

into three groups based again on the shock variable. This time we allow the thresholds to occur at

any percentile that we can factor by five (i.e. thresholds at (5,10); (5, 15); (5, 20); and so on until

all possible combinations have been exhausted). Once again we calculate maximum likelihood

parameters for each set of thresholds, and then pick the set of parameters and thresholds that

generate the highest of these maximum values of the likelihood function. The maximum number

of equilibria that we consider (in a correlative manner) is four.

       Holding fixed the number of equilibria, the preferred selection of the thresholds is

determined by the value of the likelihood function. For the selected specification to be

admissible, we impose one further requirement. As we have set it up, the theory requires that

locations suffering more negative shocks cannot arrive at a higher equilibrium. This then implies

an ordering on the intercepts associated with the corresponding equilibria. Hence for a particular

specification to be admissible, we require that the ordering of intercepts be in accord with the

predictions of the theory of multiple equilibria.

       Having obtained the preferred specification for each assumption regarding the number of

equilibria, we can then apply the Schwarz criterion to identify which model is best supported by

the data. The Schwarz criterion is defined to be:

                                          ln(Lt) - p/2*ln(N)

where Li is the maximized likelihood under hypothesis t (i.e. the number of thresholds), p is the

number of parameters and N is the number of observations. The preferred specification is the one




                                                                                                 26
with the largest Schwarz criterion. This criterion will asymptotically pick the correct model with

probability one.

       Before turning to the estimation, there are a few remaining technical issues that we need

to address. First, we should correct for government policies to rebuild cities. Although Davis and

Weinstein (2002) found that the effect of these policies became insignificant 20 years after the

end of the war, we include them for completeness. There are two government interventions that

we need to address. In the first few years after the end of the Second World War, the allies

thought Japan should pay war reparations to other countries. Unfortunately, the abject poverty of

Japan made this difficult, and so the allies began dismantling surviving Japanese factories and

shipping the machinery abroad. This in combination with the fact that Japan had to pay for the

US occupation explains why Japanese government transfers to the US exceeded US aid until

1948. Fortunately for us, since we are looking at growth after 1948, our results are unlikely to be

biased by this policy.

       In 1949, with the fall of China to the communists and the rise of a left-wing movement in

Japan, US policy toward Japan changed, and a less punitive policy was adopted. US aid,

although always small, began to exceed Japanese payments to the US. Moreover, the Japanese

government made some small payments to rebuild particular cities. Since these may have some

impact on the location of particular industries, we include these reconstruction expenses in our

specification (RECON).

       The second potential problem that we should correct for is that it is possible that ρ would

not equal zero because there may be some other correlation between past and future growth rates

that we do not model. In order to correct this, we include the prewar growth rate in the




                                                                                               27
regression. Finally, we include a constant term to allow for the fact that the error term might not

be mean zero. Hence our estimating equation is:

sci 69 − sci 38 = δ 2 + δ1 I1 ( b1 , ν ci 4 Z ) + δ3 I 3 ( b2 , ν ci 48 ) + β PREWAR ci + γ R ECON c + µci    (11)

where δ1, δ2, δ3, β, γ , b1 and b2 are all parameters to be estimated, PREWAR is the prewar

growth rate, and µ is an iid error term. Here, one believes that stronger negative shocks push

cities or industries to smaller equilibria, it should be the case that δ1 + δ2 < δ2 < δ2 + δ3 or

 δ1 < 0 < δ 3 . It is important to note that δ2 here represents only the second equilibrium from the

left. As such, it is simply a normalization. Our work does not impose that δ2 reflects the initial

equilibrium point and so does not presume whether any or all of the multiple equilibria lie above

or below the initial equilibrium.




                                                   C. Data Preview

         Regression analysis will provide the key evidence in this paper. However, it is useful to

get a feel for the data by considering some simple experiments and showing plots of the data.

The key feature of the theory of multiple equilibria that we build on is the idea that big shocks

will differ qualitatively from small shocks. Small shocks return to a (local) stable equilibrium.

Big shocks pass a threshold and fail to return to the initial equilibrium. Hence a natural first place

to look is to consider what happened to manufacturing in the cities that were hit hardest during

the war. Measure the intensity of destruction by the number of buildings destroyed per inhabitant

in 1940. Let us create a sample of the ten cities hit hardest according to this measure. In this

sample, these cities lost at least one building for every eight inhabitants. If we now order our

sample by the manufacturing growth rate between 1938-1948, the median city saw its share of


                                                                                                             28
Japanese manufacturing fall by nearly 25 percent. If we now order these same cities by their

growth in the subsequent period, 1948-1969, the median city in this sample increased its share of

Japanese manufacturing by 40 percent. In other words, this simple view of the data offers no

suggestion that the hardest hit cities failed to recover their shares of Japanese manufacturing.

Indeed, as it turns out, the typical member in this sample of hard-hit cities actually increased its

share of Japanese manufacturing in the period of recovery.

        We can get a further feel for the data by looking at plots. For each city and each period,

we can normalize the manufacturing growth rate by subtracting off the corresponding growth

rate for all cities. There is mean reversion in the data if a negative shock in one period is

followed by a positive shock of the same magnitude in the following period. In the pure mean

reversion case, the data will be arrayed along a line with slope minus unity. By contrast, if there

were multiple equilibria, one would expect to see the data for industries that were particularly

hard hit arrayed along a line parallel and to the left of the data for less damaged sectors. Figure 6

summarizes the data on aggregate manufacturing, the size of each circle representing the size of

manufacturing in that city in 1938. The data reveal three things. First, there is a clear negative

association between the two growth rates. This strongly suggests some degree of reversion back

to the initial share. Second, the data for the extreme points seems to be arrayed roughly along the

same line as for more moderately affected industries. Finally, there is a lot of dispersion among

small cities. This may reflect an underlying high degree of volatility in manufacturing growth

rates in small cities.

        One obvious concern with drawing conclusions from the previous graph is that

manufacturing may be too large an aggregate to be meaningful. Geography may lock in city size

and also aggregate manufacturing. It is less clear that geography should lock in a city’s industrial




                                                                                                29
structure. One of the problems of using disaggregated data is that cities with infinitesimal shares

of output in particular industries often have explosively large or small growth rates.14 This

threatens to swamp the variation that arises among city-industry data that accounts for the vast

majority of output. We therefore decided to restrict our attention to only those industrial

locations that account for more than 0.1 percent of Japanese urban output in that industry. This

collection of industrial locations comprised at least 98 percent of Japanese urban output in 1938

in each of our eight industries.

        In Figure 7, we repeat our experiment by plotting the normalized growth rates of

industrial locations that account for more than 0.1 percent of Japanese urban output in 1938.

Here we normalize each industry’s growth rate in a city with the industry’s growth rate in all

cities and the size of the circle represents the share of that industry in the Japan total for that

industry. Once again we see the clear negative relationship. When industries in cities suffer

negative shocks, they appear to grow faster in subsequent periods. If multiple equilibria were

prominent features of the data, one might expect to see industries with extreme shocks have less

complete recoveries than those with smaller shocks. The data, however, do not appear to match

this hypothesis.

        As a final preview of the data we present the corresponding graphs for each of the eight

industries in Figure 8. The plots are quite striking. In each industry there appears to be a clear

negative association between the magnitude of the shock to that industry during the war and the

rate of growth in the postwar period. The behavior of extreme points is particularly striking in

these plots. If one believed in multiple equilibria, one should not expect extreme points to lie

14
  For example, between 1932 and 1938 the share of Japanese printing and publishing in Maebashi (population
161,000) fell from one thousandth to 0.4 millionths, but by 1948 Printing and Publishing in Maebashi had returned
to its 1932 share. Whether this dramatic evolution reflects the fortunes of a particular plant in Maebashi or




                                                                                                           30
along the line defined by the other points. Instead they seem to lie more or less where one would

predict based on a linear extrapolation of the less extreme points.

         Indeed these plots demonstrate that even as we switch from population to output data and

disaggregate from total city manufacturing to city-industry observations we find the same kind of

mean reversion as Davis and Weinstein (2002, Figure 1) found in city population data.



                                             D. Regression Results

         In this section we present our threshold regression results. Because it is possible that

multiple equilibria arise at one level of aggregation even if not at another, we consider this at

various levels of aggregation. We consider it first using the city population data considered in

Davis and Weinstein (2002). The analysis of that data is augmented here by our new approach

which sharpens the contrast between the theory of unique versus multiple equilibria and which

also places the theories on a more even footing in our estimation approach. Thereafter, we

consider the same questions using data on city aggregate manufacturing and city-industry

observations for eight manufacturing industries. Since manufacturing is less than half of all

economic activity within a typical city, it should be clear that even if population in a city were to

recover from the shocks, this need not be true of aggregate city-manufacturing. The same point

holds a fortiori for particular industries within manufacturing, which we also examine.

         We begin by considering city population data. Column 1 of Table 4 replicates the Davis

and Weinstein (2002) results using population data. The IV estimate in column 1 tests a null of a

unique stable equilibrium by asking if we can reject that the coefficient on the wartime (1940-

1947) growth rate is minus unity. We cannot reject a coefficient of minus unity, hence cannot


measurement error is hard to say, but these fluctuations of several thousand percent in tiny city-industry cases
threaten to swamp the other variation in our data.


                                                                                                               31
reject a null that there is a unique stable equilibrium. We also find that regionally-directed

government reconstruction expenses following the war had no significant impact on city sizes

twenty years after the war.

         We next apply our threshold regression approach described above to testing for multiple

equilibria. This places unique and multiple equilibria on an even footing. The results are reported

in the remaining columns of Table 4. In column 2 of Table 4, we present the results for the

estimation of equation (11) in the case in which there is a unique equilibrium. Given how close

our previous estimate of ρ was to 0 (minus unity on wartime growth), it is not surprising that the

estimates of the other parameters do not change much when we constrain ρ to take on this value.

         Columns 3 through 5 present the results for threshold regressions premised on various

numbers of equilibria.15 In these regressions, the constant plus δ1 is the intercept for the first

equilibrium; the constant term is the intercept for the second equilibrium, the constant plus δ3 is

the intercept for the third equilibrium; and the constant plus δ4 is the intercept for the fourth

equilibrium. For each model of the number of equilibria, we calculate threshold values

corresponding to how big a shock the city needs to receive to cross over into that new

equilibrium. In order for the equilibria to be sensible in the sense that greater destruction does

not cause a city to become larger, we require that the intercepts must be ordered as follows: δ1 +

δ2 < δ2 < δ2 + δ3 < δ2 + δ4 which can be simplified to δ1 < 0 < δ3 < δ4. Similarly, because it

cannot be the case that an equilibrium is both stable and lies along a transition path to another

equilibrium, it must be the case that the thresholds lie between the equilibria. Putting these

together, we have the following condition:


15
  In principle, we could have considered the possibility of more than four equilibria. However neither the data plots
nor any of the regression results suggested that raising the number of potential equilibria was likely to improve the
results.


                                                                                                              32
                      Intercept Ordering Criterion: δ1 < b1 < 0 < b2 < δ3 < b3 < δ4

In other words, in order to accept the hypothesis that a model of multiple equilibria describes the

data, we require that the data selects the model and that the parameter estimates are consistent

with the model.

         The Schwarz criterion, presented at the bottom, slightly favors a multiple equilibrium

model with two equilibria, but the parameter values associated with this model violate the

intercept ordering criterion. In this case, the intercept for the low equilibrium has the wrong sign.

Taken literally, the estimates would imply that cities that receive a negative shock of magnitude

0.1 percent or more would increase their size by 10 percent. This is inconsistent with the model

underlying the exercise, hence we rule it out.16 The data do let us draw a different conclusion.

We can ask: Contingent on believing that multiple equilibria are possible, does the data suggest

that negative shocks can move urban populations to lower equilibria? The answer to this question

is “no.” Following enormous shocks there is no evidence that cities unravel further or fail to

return to their former size.

         We now examine whether multiple equilibria are evident at the city aggregate

manufacturing level. Since manufacturing constitutes significantly less than half of all economic

activity, it is quite possible that geography might lock in population but not aggregate city

manufacturing. Indeed, a large class of theory about multiple equilibria in economic geography

models is about the location of manufacturing. The results for city-manufacturing appear in

Tables 5 and 6. The number of observations falls to 98 because the Japan City Yearbook only

reports production data for the largest cities. As expected, the instrumentation equations


16
  In principle, one could think about a more complicated model in which a negative shock might provide an
opportunity for more than a full recovery. Perhaps this could be constructed as a variant of the model of Brezis,
Krugman, and Tsiddon (1993). In any case, such an outcome is clearly inconsistent with multiple equilibria in the
context of the model underlying our data exercise.


                                                                                                            33
(reported in the first column of Table 5) reveal death and destruction significantly affect the

growth of production.

        Turning to our threshold regressions in columns 2-5 of Table 6, the Schwarz criterion

clearly favors the model of one equilibrium. The model of multiple equilibria that fares best is

the two equilibria model. Here the estimated intercept for the growth path for the lower

equilibrium lies below the intercept for the higher equilibrium, although the intercepts are not

statistically distinct. As we move to higher numbers of potential equilibria, the Schwarz criterion

continues to reject these models ever more strongly and the parameters violate the intercept

ordering criterion. For example in the three equilibrium case, the parameter estimates indicate

that by increasing the magnitude of a negative shock from just under 0.3 percent to anything

under 1.4 percent of output, would cause the equilibrium output to rise by 1.33 log units.

Moreover, the closeness of the threshold values and volatility of the estimates suggests these

results are being driven by a few outliers between thresholds that are very close together and

probably do not reflect multiple equilibria.

        Other parameter estimates seem to be precisely estimated and plausible in magnitude.

Reconstruction expenses have the correct sign in most specifications and are significant at the 10

percent level. Interestingly, past growth rates of manufacturing seem to have, if anything, a

negative correlation with future growth rates. This may suggest some degree of mean reversion

over long time periods.

        Given that our threshold regression has indicated that a unique equilibrium is the

preferred model, it is reasonable to ask whether we obtain plausible estimates of ρ if we take as

the null that the manufacturing output in each location is uniquely determined. In order to assess

this, we estimate equation (3) using instrumental variables and report the results in column 1 of




                                                                                                34
Table 6. Most interesting for our purposes is the coefficient on wartime growth. It is negative,

significant, and indistinguishable from minus unity even though the point estimate is of slightly

smaller magnitude. Once again we cannot reject the hypothesis that manufacturing shares

recover completely from these temporary shocks. This time, however, the standard errors are

larger, in part due to the smaller number of observations and the greater variability in

manufacturing output relative to that of population.

        Although we cannot reject the hypothesis that ρ equals zero, the point estimate we obtain

is 0.26. It is therefore reasonable to ask whether the assumption that ρ equals zero, imposed in

the implementation of the threshold regression, might be biasing our results. If ρ is indeed

greater than zero, it is straightforward to see that this would bias our estimates of δ1 downward

and the δ3’s upward. The reason is that if ρ is positive, the error term will contain ρν ci 48 , which

is negatively correlated with the lower indicator variable and positively correlated with the

higher indicator variable. This means that our tests will be biased in favor of finding multiple

equilibria because the coefficient on the lower indicator is biased downwards and the coefficient

on the higher one is biased upwards. The fact that we reject the model of multiple equilibria

despite this potential bias strengthens the case for the unique equilibrium version.

        We next consider the question of whether multiple equilibria matter for individual

industries within manufacturing. There are a number of reasons why this might allow a finding

of multiple equilibria even where it was difficult to find them at higher levels of aggregation.

One reason is that the focus on individual industries goes a long way toward relieving purely

geographical constraints that can bind more tightly on city population or even aggregate city

manufacturing. Namely, if population equilibria are stable and shares of manufacturing are

proportional to city population, it could be the case that manufacturing simply grew with



                                                                                                 35
population. This view of the world does not does not find much support in the data. While there

is no question that there is a strong positive correlation between city-size and the size of

manufacturing (which in our data is 0.95), the correlation necessary to link population with

manufacturing in our econometric specification is a correlation between the growth rates. The

correlation between the growth rate of manufacturing between 1948 and 1969 with population

between 1947 and 1970 is only 0.33.17 This low correlation suggests that the growth rate of

manufacturing is not easily explainable by the growth rate of population alone. Nevertheless, it

may make sense to see if the results hold up on datasets that exhibit even lower correlations with

population growth. For example, since the correlation between the growth rate of sectors within

manufacturing and urban population is only 0.13, we can safely claim that the recovery of a

city’s population is largely uncorrelated with the growth rates of individual industries within the

city.

         A more compelling reason to examine disaggregated data is that the prior focus using

higher levels of aggregation may have obscured a great deal of the heterogeneity across cities. As

noted before, differences in bombing accuracy, which industries were targeted, geography, urban

defenses, and just plain luck led to very different outcomes among industries in cities. If

precision attacks savaged Nagoya’s machinery industry but spared its metals sector, did this have

a long-term effect on the structure of production in the city?

         Working with the more disaggregated data enables us to exploit the fact that bombing is

likely to affect industries differently. For example, sectors in cities that were principally targeted

by high explosive bombs, such as machinery, were likely destroyed with relatively small

amounts of collateral damage to other structures. Other sectors, such as textiles, were typically


17
  The different start and end points correspond to the different years in which the manufacturing surveys and
censuses were performed.


                                                                                                                36
affected through area bombing that destroyed large numbers of structures. Hence by interacting

our building destruction variable with an industry dummy and including industry fixed effects,

we can exploit the variation generated by the varying correlations between building destruction

and output reductions of particular sectors.

        Results from this estimation are presented in Table 5. As one can see, building

destruction has no discernible impact on machinery output, but the low fixed effect for this sector

indicates that it was fairly uniformly targeted. At the other extreme is textiles, which was a fairly

unconcentrated sector in prewar Japan, and which is extremely sensitive to area bombing. It is

hard to give clear interpretations to the other coefficients except to say that the data strongly

reject the notion that bombing affects all industries similarly.

        If we multiply the coefficient estimates by death and the interaction of destruction with

the industry dummies, we obtain a measure of the magnitude of the shock in each industry within

a city that was due to the bombing. Once again we can use these estimates to calculate the shock

values and perform the threshold regression. The results are presented in Table 7. Government

reconstruction expenses cease to have any impact in these specifications probably because these

expenditures did not target particular industries in particular locations and hence there is little

correlation between these regionally-directed expenditures and the growth rate of particular

industries. More interesting for our purposes, however, is the fact that the Schwarz criterion

prefers the model in which there is a unique equilibrium. This implies that not only do

population and aggregate manufacturing return to their prior level, but that even shocks to

particular industries within those cities were reversed.

        Of the specifications that entail multiple equilibria, the one featuring two equilibria again

appears most plausible even though it is rejected by the Schwarz criterion. The estimated




                                                                                                37
threshold is at –0.67 log units, which indicates that those industrial locations that saw their

output fall 49 percent more than the Japan average. Given that the average industry in Japan fell

by 87 percent as a result of the war, these locations saw output fall by around 93%. Indeed, the

industrial locations that make up the data in this interval only include the 15 percent of the data

that comprise the most bomb sensitive industries in the hardest hit locations. While one might

want to interpret the point estimate of –0.425 for δ1 as evidence that these cities shifted to a new

lower equilibrium, the point estimate violates the intercept-ordering criterion, because the new

equilibrium point lies to the right of the threshold (at –0.672). Hence the most sensible multiple

equilibria model is rejected by the data and does not produce plausible point estimates.

        To investigate the plausibility of the interpretation that a high ρ might be biasing the

estimate for δ1 downward, we estimated ρ in unique equilibrium case using instrumental

variables. Since the Schwarz criterion indicates that this is the correct model, it seems

appropriate to see what value for ρ we obtain. Our parameter estimate for ρ -1 is 0.655 (i.e. ρ is

0.34). Moreover, we can reject a ρ of 0 (but not 0.1) at conventional levels. One possible reason

for this higher estimate of ρ is that it may be the case that places hit extremely hard take longer

to recover. One of the features of the industry data is that the impacts of bombing were

significantly more heterogeneous across industrial locations than across urban populations or

aggregate manufacturing. For example, the standard deviation of our shock variable received for

bombed cities was 0.09 when we use population data but 0.41 when we use industry data. This

suggests that there were far more industries that received extreme shocks than populations. One

reason why this might matter is that Davis and Weinstein (2002) found that it took Hiroshima’s

population, which had a casualty rate in excess of 20 percent, around half again longer than the

typical city to recover.



                                                                                                  38
        Given that 10 percent of our data below the lower threshold comes from Hiroshima as

well as our two most extreme points, it is reasonable to ask whether industries in Hiroshima are

responsible for finding ρ > 0. Dropping Hiroshima does not qualitatively affect any of the

threshold regressions (using any of the datasets), but it does drive down the estimate of ρ by 0.1

(as one can see in column 2 of Table 7) and makes it indistinguishable from zero. Hence we can

conclude that the industry-level runs always support the model featuring a unique equilibrium,

and we cannot reject the hypothesis that industries hit with non-nuclear ordnance returned to

their prewar locations after 24 years.

        In short, the conclusions above from city population and aggregate city manufacturing

data are strongly reinforced when we turn to the disaggregated city-industry data. The population

of cities, aggregate manufacturing, and even specific industries have no tendency to move to

lower equilibria following large shocks.

       One additional possibility that it is worth exploring is whether it is possible that

manufacturing consists of some industries that exhibit multiple equilibria and others that do not.

We have already presented plots indicating that in most industries the data suggests that there is a

strong tendency for damaged industrial locations to recover. Unfortunately, we do not have

enough observations to conduct tests of multiple equilibria for individual industries that have

power to distinguish between hypotheses. One way around this problem is to test for multiple

equilibria among the set of industries that are a priori most likely to exhibit them. It is often

argued that concentrated industries are more likely to exhibit increasing returns and multiple

equilibria. Thus, it is reasonable to ask whether we would obtain the same results if we restricted

our estimation to sectors which are more geographically concentrated.




                                                                                                39
       In order to determine which sectors are the most geographically concentrated, we

constructed Herfindahl indices based on the share that each industry had in each location. Given

that we had 98 or 99 observations in each industry, a Herfindahl of unity indicates perfect

geographic specialization, while a Herfindahl of 0.01 indicates no specialization. In our sample,

this procedure yields a plausible set of industries as candidates for increasing returns. The most

concentrated sector is Printing and Publishing (Herfindahl = 0.28) followed by Machinery (0.19),

Metals (0.18), and Chemicals (0.15). The least concentrated sectors were Processed Foods (0.08)

and Textiles (0.05).

       Our estimates using only data from the four most concentrated industries – Printing and

Publishing, Machinery, Metals, and Chemicals – resulted in our dropping about two thirds of the

data. The reason why our sample contains more points from less concentrated industries is that

concentrated industries contain more zeros or industries of trivial size. Had we kept our bin sizes

at 5 percent of the data this would have meant that we were trying to identify equilibria using

only five or six points instead of the thirty-three points that we were working with earlier. Since

this would make our procedure vulnerable to outliers, we increased our bin size to 10 percent of

the data, which still meant that we were searching for equilibria that could encompass as few as

eleven points.

       Splitting the sample this way resulted in coefficients that were not qualitatively different

from those reported in Table 7. The Schwarz criterion prefers the model of one equilibrium and

the coefficient on wartime growth is negative and significant. As in Table 7, the estimate of ρ

was just above zero for the full sample, but indistinguishable from zero if Hiroshima was

dropped. As a result, we conclude that our results are robust to limiting our sample to the most

concentrated industries.




                                                                                              40
                                          V. Conclusions

        The concept of multiple equilibria is a powerful force in modern economic thought. In

recent decades, it has been a central theoretical element in macroeconomics, development, urban

and regional economics, and international trade. The theoretical developments have been

inspired by puzzling features of the world for which these theories seem to offer an account. Yet

theory has far outpaced formal empirics.

        The most crucial empirical question – are multiple equilibria a salient feature of real

economies – seems hardly to have been touched. One reason for the scarcity of empirical work

testing for the existence of multiple equilibria is that they are inherently difficult to identify. In

many contexts, one needs large, exogenous, highly variable, and temporary shocks. Such

experiments are rare.

        The present paper considers the Allied bombing of Japan during World War II as

precisely such an experiment. The paper makes important advances over prior work. It provides

the first test for multiple equilibria in the location of production. To do this, it develops simple

analytics and an associated threshold regression framework for distinguishing the hypotheses of

unique versus multiple equilibria. It then applies these tests to data on city population, aggregate

city manufacturing, and city-industry data for eight manufacturing industries. The disaggregated

industry runs are particularly important because they remove any obvious geographical

limitations on the opportunities of particular city-industry observations to expand or contract.

        The results of our experiments are clear: At all levels of aggregation examined, the data

prefer a model of unique equilibrium. In the aftermath of a shock, there is a strong tendency for




                                                                                                  41
city population, aggregate manufacturing and even the particular industries that existed prior to

the shock to return to their former importance.

       Our results are important for policy. Theories of multiple equilibria, explicitly or

implicitly, are the foundation for a great deal of regional policy. Such policies promise to attain

large and permanent impacts on regional industrial structure through small and temporary

interventions at critical moments. Our findings that even wholesale destruction of cities and

industries via incendiary, high explosive and nuclear bombs have little impact on the long-term

level and structure of manufacturing should give pause to those for whom a small subsidy is the

only arrow in their quiver.

       We have emphasized that within the context of our analytic framework, multiple

equilibria do not appear to be a salient feature. It is now time to provide a series of caveats. First,

if one instead asked the question whether there are cases of cities or city-industry observations in

which decline is followed by further decline, or a rise is followed by a yet greater rise, the

answer would be in the affirmative. Is this not itself confirmation of the theory of multiple

equilibria with its associated catastrophes? It’s not clear how one could possibly rule out such a

claim unless all of the data aligned neatly on a single line. Nevertheless, it would be a grand

decline in ambition if the theory were to explain a few select points rather than a central

tendency.

       A second question concerns the particular restrictions we have imposed in structuring our

tests. In particular, we have posited that the size evolution of cities and industries depends only

on what happens in that city or city-industry. This is clearly an unrealistic assumption – one

expects that what happens to a nearby city or city-industry affects its neighbors’ opportunities.

Two questions arise. Is there a more appealing alternative approach? Is there reason to believe




                                                                                                 42
that the results will change appreciably? First, we will note, full generality is hopeless. We have

data with as many as 114 cities and as many as eight industries. The state space for such a system

will be incredibly complex and it is hard to imagine how one will identify potential equilibria or

thresholds with any confidence. An alternative that we have not pursued here, but which might

be feasible for future work, would be to use summary measures of supply and market access to

condition the likelihood of reverting to the prior shares. While we believe that future work along

these lines would be interesting, we conjecture that it would do little to alter our central results.

In our view, the most striking feature of our results is the congruence between our threshold

regression results and the simple plots of industry growth rates in the period of the shock and

recovery. Both point to mean reversion as the central tendency.

       A third issue concerns the nature of the experiment. Inherently, our experiment asks if

industries and cities, once established, are robust even to enormous shocks. We answer in the

affirmative. Yet it is a different question whether directed greenfield investment can permanently

alter the course of regional development. Even where nuclear bombs fall, the land remains, as do

particular claims to the land. A labor force specialized to particular industries may have largely

survived (as did 80 percent of the population of Hiroshima). Infrastructure, as we emphasized

earlier, largely survived the attacks. One could argue, then, that the prior pattern of economic

activity acts as a focal point for reconstruction. We believe there is some merit in these

observations and that further investigation is warranted. Still, our results strongly caution against

taking literally the particular models in the literature on policy in an economic geography

framework that rely crucially on high mobility of factors and industries. These models have been

very important in discussions of European and regional integration. Our results still stress that

small and temporary interventions are extremely unlikely to succeed in shifting existing patterns




                                                                                                43
of production. Hence, to insist on this path of defending the theories is also to say that, in policy

terms, they can work only at the margins.

       We hope that our paper will encourage further work by researchers in this and other

fields to explore more deeply the empirical importance of multiple equilibria. The negative

results for multiple equilibria in the context of city population and production structure obviously

need not carry over to other contexts. We believe that the methods we develop to test for

multiple equilibria are suitable for application in a broad range of fields. Moreover we hope that

our paper has demonstrated that empirical examination of these issues is both feasible and

worthwhile.




                                                                                               44
                                                Table 1
                        Evolution of Japanese manufacturing during World War II
                        (Quantum Indices from Japanese Economic Statistics)

                                                      1941       1946      Change
             Manufacturing                           206.2        27.4      -87%
             Machinery                               639.2        38.0      -94%
             Metals                                  270.2        20.5      -92%
             Chemicals                               252.9        36.9      -85%
             Textiles and Apparel                      79.4       13.5      -83%
             Processed Food                            89.9       54.2      -40%
             Printing and Publishing                 133.5       32.7       -76%
             Lumber and Wood                         187.0        91.6      -51%
             Stone, Clay, Glass                      124.6       29.4       -76%




                                               Table 2

                Correlation of Growth Rates of Industries Within Cities 1938 to 1948




            Machinery    Metals    Chemicals    Textiles      Food       Printing   Lumber
Metals        0.60
Chemicals     0.30        0.36
Textiles      0.12        0.35         0.25
Food          0.32        0.65         0.31       0.49
Printing      0.11        0.30         0.04       0.29        0.35
Lumber        0.23        0.35         0.21       0.25        0.25        0.41
Ceramics      0.13        0.53         0.36       0.38        0.50        0.41       0.23
                             Table 3
Inflation Adjusted Percent Decline in Assets Between 1935 and 1945

                                               Decline
        Total                                    25.4
        Buildings                                24.6
        Harbors and canals                         7.5
        Bridges                                    3.5
        Industrial machinery and equipmen        34.3
        Railroads and tramways                     7.0
        Cars                                     21.9
        Ships                                    80.6
        Electric power generation facilities     10.8
        Telecommunication facilities             14.8
        Water and sewerage works                 16.8

        Source:Namakamura, Takafusa.and Masayasu
              Miyazaki.Shiryo, Taiheiyo Senso Higai
              Chosa Hokoku (1995), pp.295-96.
                                                  Table 4
                                           Population Regressions



Dependent Variable is
                                    1947 and 1965                      1940 and 1965
Growth rate Between
                                     IV Estimate 1 Equilibrium 2 Equilibria     3 Equilibria 4 Equilibria
Population growth rate                  0.617         0.627        0.501            0.514       0.508
between 1925 and 1940                 (0.0923)      (0.0671)     (0.0734)         (0.0738)     (0.074)

Population growth rate                  -1.03
between 1940 and 1947                  (0.163)

δ1                                                                   0.0978       -0.0720      -0.090
                                                                    (0.0256)      (0.0325)     (0.036)

δ3                                                                                 -0.127      -0.055
                                                                                  (0.0272)     (0.045)

δ4                                                                                             -0.147
                                                                                               (0.040)

Gov't reconstruction expenses           0.392          0.412        -0.0358         0.236       0.203
                                       (0.514)        (0.495)       (0.498)        (0.500)     (0.500)

Constant                                 0.215          0.209         0.196         0.315       0.335
                                       (0.0407)       (0.0146)      (0.0146)      (0.0267)     (0.032)

Thresholds
b1                                                                   -0.001        -0.056       -0.056
b2                                                                                      0       -0.001
b3                                                                                                0

Intercept Ordering Criterion             N/A            N/A           Fail          Fail         Fail
Schwarz Criterion                        N/A            75.6          77.1          74.9         69.9
Number of observations                   303            303           303           303          303

                 Standard Errors are in Parenthesis Below Estimated Coefficient Value
                                           Table 5
                                   Instrumenting Equations


                                       Dependent Variable is Growth rate
                                           between 1938 and 1948
                                 Total      standard      IRFE w/        standard
                             Manufacturing    errors       Industry        errors
                                                           Shocks
                                  (1)          (1a)           (2)           (2a)
Growth between 1932 and 1938    -0.368       (0.107)        -0.239        (0.049)

Deaths per Capita                     1.54          (3.66)        -0.317         (2.13)

Buildings Destroyed Per Capita        -8.00         (1.64)
Destruction * Ceramics                                             -4.38         (4.80)
Destruction * Chemicals                                            -7.70         (4.19)
Destruction * Processed Food                                       -4.03         (2.83)
Destruction * Lumber and Wood                                      -5.27         (2.55)
Destruction * Machinery                                            1.65          (4.12)
Destruction * Metals                                               -11.3         (4.97)
Destruction * Printing and Publishing                              -2.39         (3.09)
Destruction * Textiles and Apparel                                 -11.7         (2.51)

Gov't Reconstruction Expenses         14.0          (10.3)         3.51          (9.81)

Constant                              0.700        (0.111)
Ceramics Constant                                                 0.141          (0.371)
Chemicals Constant                                                0.884          (0.332)
Processed Food Constant                                           0.505          (0.200)
Lumber and Wood Constant                                          0.554          (0.191)
Machinery Constant                                                -0.039         (0.295)
Metals Constant                                                   0.840          (0.378)
Printing and Publishing Constant                                  0.540          (0.236)
Textiles and Apparel Constant                                     0.439          (0.189)

R2                                    0.309                        0.211
Number of observations                 98                           325

         Standard Errors are in Parenthesis to the Right of Estimated Coefficient Value
                                               Table 6
                                       Aggregate Manufacturing


Dependent Variable is                1948 and              1938 and 1948 plus 1948 and 1969
Growth rate Between…                   1969
                                    IV Estimate 1 Equilibrium 2 Equilibria 3 Equilibria 4 Equilibria
                                        (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)
Growth rate                           -0.287       -0.397        -0.376        -0.340       -0.360
between 1932 and 1938                 (0.146)      (0.131)       (0.131)       (0.127)      (0.126)

Growth rate                           -0.737
between 1938 and 1948                 (0.214)

δ1                                                                -0.306          -1.47     -1.47
                                                                  (0.184)        (0.434)   (0.429)

δ3                                                                                -1.33    -0.954
                                                                                 (0.452)   (0.495)

δ4                                                                                         -1.6990
                                                                                           (0.323)

Gov't reconstruction expenses           22.1          25.3         -4.01          21.3      21.3
                                       (11.6)        (12.8)        (8.86)        (12.5)    (12.4)

Constant                               0.291         0.376         -0.170         1.77      1.76
                                      (0.113)       (0.102)       (0.0586)       (0.432)   (0.427)

Thresholds
b1                                                                -0.0490        -0.014    -0.014
b2                                                                               -0.003    -0.003
b3                                                                                            0

Intercept Ordering Criterion            N/A           N/A           Pass          Fail      Fail
Schwarz Criterion                       N/A           -131          -134          -135      -137
Number of observations                   98            98            98            98        98

               Standard Errors are in Parenthesis Below Estimated Coefficient Value
                                                Table 7
        Individual Industry Runs with Industry Fixed Effects: Bombing Allowed to Have Different
                                           Industry Impacts


Dependent Variable is                    1948 and 1969             1938 and 1948 plus 1948 and 1969
Growth rate Between…
                                         IV      IV Est. No     1          2          3          4
                                      Estimate   Hiroshima Equilibrium Equilibria Equilibria Equilibria
                                         (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
Growth rate                            -0.132      -0.150    -0.213     -0.218     -0.219     -0.225
between 1932 and 1938                 (0.0476)    (0.0510)  (0.0450)   (0.0446) (0.0443)      (0.044)

Growth rate                            -0.655      -0.747
between 1938 and 1948                  (0.124)     (0.135)

δ1                                                                         -0.425        -0.836     -0.389
                                                                           (0.157)      (0.0.240)   (0.167)


δ3                                                                                      -0.700       0.776
                                                                                        (0.248)     (0.240)


δ4                                                                                                  0.0310
                                                                                                    (0.247)

Gov't reconstruction expenses          -1.22       -1.01        -0.543      0.133        -5.41      -5.20
                                       (7.64)      (7.92)       (9.07)      (8.98)       (9.10)     (9.04)

Thresholds
b1                                                                          -0.672       -0.188     -0.672
b2                                                                                       -0.107     -0.187
b3                                                                                                  -0.107

Intercept Ordering Criterion            N/A         N/A          N/A        Fail          Fail       Fail
Schwarz Criterion                       N/A         N/A          -451       -453          -456       -459
Number of observations                  325         319          325        325            325        325

                 Standard Errors are in Parenthesis Below Estimated Coefficient Value
                                        Figure 1
                            Globally Stable Unique Equilibrium

   Stable equilibrium
S: Region 1 Manufacturing Share




           S



  S    0                                                         1
                                   Ω
                                            Figure 2
                             Multiple Equilibria in the Krugman Model

       Stable equilibrium
       Threshold
    S: Region 1 Manufacturing Share




      S




     0                                                                           1
S          Ω + ∆1            b1             Ω                     b2    Ω + ∆3
                                           Figure 3
         Two-Period Adjustment in the Model of Globally Stable Unique Equilibrium

s: Region One Ln(Manufacturing Share)



                                   ∆St+1

        45°


                   DATA




                                                                  ∆St
                               0
                                          Figure 4
                Two-Period Adjustment in the Model of Multiple Equilibrium

s: Region One Ln(Manufacturing Share)



                               ∆St+1

          45°                       ∆3




 DATA                                                DATA
                             DATA



                                                                    + st
           ∆1           b1     0             b2             ∆3




                                     ∆1
                                                                           Figure 5




                                         Annual Index of Manufacturing Production in Japan (1938 = 100)

125




100




 75




 50




 25




  0
      1930   1931   1932   1933   1934     1935    1936   1937   1938   1939   1940   1941   1942   1943   1944   1945   1946   1947   1948
                                                                        Year
                                                                           Figure 6

                                        Prewar and Postwar growth rates of manufacturing shares in bombed cities



                                   2
Normalized Growth (1948 to 1969)




                                   1




                                   0




                                   -1




                                   -2
                                          -2                          0                        2                   4
                                                                   Normalized Growth (1938 to 1948)
                                                             Figure 7

                                             Mean-Differenced Industry Growth Rates



                                   5
Normalized Growth (1948 to 1969)




                                   0




                                   -5
                                        -5                        0                   5
                                                   Normalized Growth (1938 to 1948)
                                                                                                          Figure 8

                                                                                              Industry Growth Rates




                                             Ceramics                                   Chemicals                               Processed Food
                                        2                                          2                                       2
                                                                                   1
                                        1                                                                                  1
                                                                                   0
Normalized Growth (1948 to 1969)




                                        0                                                                                  0
                                                                                   -1
                                       -1                                          -2                                      -1
                                             -4         -2       0         2            -1      0          1       2   3        -2       -1        0       1   2
                                             Lumber and Wood                            Machinery                               Metals
                                        2                                                                                  3
                                                                                   2
                                   2.2e-15                                                                                 2

                                       -2                                          0                                       1

                                       -4                                                                                  0

                                       -6                                          -2                                      -1
                                             -4       -2        0      2                -6      -4        -2       0   2        -4            -2       0       2
                                             Printing and Publishing                    Textiles and Apparel
                                        1                                          4
                                                                                   2
                                        0
                                                                                   0
                                       -1
                                                                                   -2
                                       -2                                          -4
                                             -4         -2       0         2             -4          -2        0       2

                                                                               Normalized Growth (1938 to 1948)
                                                                       Prewar vs Postwar Growth Rate
                                         References
Baldwin, Richard; Forslid, Rikard; Martin, Philippe; Ottaviano, Gianmarco; Robert-Nicoud,
      Frederic (2003) Economic Geography and Public Policy, Princeton: Princeton University
      Press.

Cohen, Jerome B. (1949) Japan’s Economy in War and Reconstruction, Minneapolis: University
       of Minnesota Press.

Cooper, Russell (2002) “Estimation and Identification of Structural Parameters in the Presence
       of Multiple Equilibria,” mimeo, Boston University, May.

Cooper, Russell; John, Andrew, “Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian Models,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 103, no. 3, August 1988, pp. 441-63.

David, Paul A. (2000) “Path Dependence, Its Critics, and the Quest for ‘Historical Economics,’
       Stanford University Working Papers 00-011.

Davis, Donald R.; Weinstein, David E. (2002) “Bones, Bombs, and Breakpoints: The Geography
       of Economic Activity,” American Economic Review 92:5, December, pages 1269-1289.

Fujita, M., P. R. Krugman, and A. J. Venables (1999) The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions, and
        International Trade, Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Fujita M, Thisse JF (2002) Economics of agglomeration, Cambridge: Cambridge U. Pr.

Gabaix, Xavier (1999) “Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Explanation” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       114 (3), August 1999, pages 739-67.

Gallup, John, Jeffrey Sachs, and Andrew Mellinger (1999) “Geography and Economic
        Development,” International Regional Science Review, vol. 22, no. 2, August, pp. 179-
        232

Hammel, Eric (1998) Air War Pacific: America’s Air War Against Japan in East Asia and the
     Pacific 1941-1945 Chronology, Pacifica: Pacifica Press.

Henderson, J.V. (1974) “The Sizes and Types of Cities,” American Economic Review 64: 640-
      56.

Krugman, P. R. (1991) “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography,” Journal of Political
      Economy, 99: 483-499.

Krugman, Paul R. (1991b) “History versus Expectations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
      106, no. 2, May, pp. 651-67.
Krugman, Paul R; Venables, Anthony J, “Globalization and the Inequality of Nations,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 110, no. 4, November 1995, pp. 857-80.

Lucas, Robert E , Jr. (2001) “Externalities and Cities,” Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 4,
       no. 2, April 2001, pp. 245-74.

Management and Coordination Agency of Japan, Nihon Choki Tokei Soran (Historical Statistics
      of Japan), Vol.1, 1987, pp.94-104.

Moro, Andrea, (2003) “The Effect of Statistical Discrimination on Black-White Wage
      Inequality: Estimating a Model With Multiple Equilibria,” International Economic
      Review, May, 44:2, pp. 467-500.

Murphy, Kevin M; Shleifer, Andrei; Vishny, Robert W, “Industrialization and the Big Push,”
      Journal of Political Economy, vol. 97, no. 5, October 1989, pp. 1003-26.

Nakamura, Takahide, and Masayasu Miyazaki. ed., Shiryo Taiheiyo Senso Higai Chosa Hokoku
     [Damage Survey Report of the Second World War] Todai Shuppankai, 1995.

Neary JP, (2001) “The spatial economy: Cities, regions and international trade by Fujita M,
       Krugman P, Venables AJ,” Journal of Economic Literature, 39 (2): 536-561 June.

Rappaport, Jordan and Jeffrey D. Sachs (2001) “The US as a Coastal Nation,” Mimeo.

Statistics Bureau of the Prime Minister’s Office, Nihon Tokei Nenkan (Japan Statistical
         Yearbook), 1950, pp.154-155.

Simon, H. (1955) “On a class of skew distribution functions,” Biometrika 42: 425-440.

Tokyo Shisei Chosakai. (Various Years) Nihon Toshi Nenkan [Japan City Yearbook] Tokyo:
      Daiichi Hoki Shuppan.

Toyo Keizai Shinposha. ed. (1991) Kanketsu Showa Kokusei Soran [Complete Showa Census
      Compendium] Vol.1, Tokyo: Toyo Keizai Shinposha.

Tsusan Sangyo Daijin Kanbo Chosa Tokeibu (1961) Kogyo Tokei 50 Nenshi [50 Year History of
       Industrial Statistics] Tokyo: Okurasho Insatsukyoku.

United States Strategic Bombing Survey (1947) Effects of Air Attack on Japanese Urban
       EconomyVol. 55, Washington, D.C.: Urban Areas Division.

Werrell, Kenneth P. (1996) Blankets of Fire: U.S. Bombers over Japan during World War II,
       Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press.
                                               Data Appendix

       There are two principal sources of information on death and destruction caused by World
War II in Japan: the US Strategic Bombing Survey (USSBS) (1947) and Nakamura and
Miyazaki (1995). This latter source is basically a reprint of “The Report on Damage and
Casualties of World War II” compiled by The Central Economic Stabilization Board (CESB) in
1949 and reprinted in Nakamura and Miyazaki (1995). The US source is particularly good for
matching death and destruction to particular US air operations, while the Japanese source is a far
more complete 600-page census of all death and destruction that occurred within Japan proper.
As such, we use Nakamura and Miyazaki (1995) as the source for all death and destruction data
presented in our tables, figures, and regressions.
       Urban population data were taken from the Kanketsu Showa Kokusei Soran. This data
source reports urban populations for several hundred cities based on censuses every five years.18
The only exception is 1945. The 1945 census of cities was not performed until 1947 due to the
war. This is actually fortunate for us. Japanese ground transportation was largely unaffected by
the war. This means that by 1947, anyone who had fled due to the fear of air strikes could have
returned provided that housing and employment existed there.
       Urban manufacturing data was taken from the Japan City Yearbook, and reconstruction
expense data was taken from the Japan Statistical Yearbook.




18
   We dropped the city of Kure from our data. Kure became the site of a major Japanese naval arsenal. As a result
its population rose 50% between 1925 and 1940 as Japan built up its fleet. Kure was heavily bombed during the war
and then returned to its prewar size as demand for naval warships approached zero after the war.
