                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS

                                         Kristian R. Miltersen
                                         Eduardo S. Schwartz

                                         Working Paper 10258
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10258


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




We are grateful for discussions at Vanderbilt University, Simon Frazer University, University of Utah,
European Finance Association’s annual meeting (August 2003), Odense University, Norwegian School of
Economics and Business Administration, and at Symposium on Dynamic Corporate Finance and Incentives,
Copenhagen Business School. We are grateful to Bart Lambrecht, Grzegorz Pawlina, and seminar participants
for valuable comments and suggestions. Miltersen gratefully acknowledges financial support of Storebrand.
Document typeset in LATEX. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Kristian R. Miltersen and Eduardo S. Schwartz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
R&D Investments with Competitive Interactions
Kristian R. Miltersen and Eduardo S. Schwartz
NBER Working Paper No. 10258
January 2004
JEL No. G31, O32, O22

                                           ABSTRACT

In this article we develop a model to analyze patent-protected R&D investment projects when there

is (imperfect) competition in the development and marketing of the resulting product. The

competitive interactions that occur substantially complicate the solution of the problem since the

decision maker has to take into account not only the factors that affect her/his own decisions, but

also the factors that affect the decisions of the other investors. The real options framework utilized

to deal with investments under uncertainty is extended to incorporate the game theoretic concepts

required to deal with these interactions. Implementation of the model shows that competition in

R&D, in general, not only increases production and reduces prices, but also shortens the time of

developing the product and increases the probability of a successful development. These benefits

to society are countered by increased total investment costs in R&D and lower aggregate value of

the R&D investment projects.

Kristian R. Miltersen
Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration
Department of Finance and Operations Research
Helleveien 30
N-5045 Bergen
Norway
kristian.r.miltersen@nhh.no

Eduardo S. Schwartz
Department of Fiancé
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Box 951481, UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
eschwart@anderson.ucla.edu
                           R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                      2


                                             1. Introduction

  Among all types of investment projects patent-protected R&D (research and development) investment

projects pose one of the most diﬃcult tasks for evaluators. The main reason for this is that there are

multiple sources of uncertainty in R&D investment projects and that they interact in complicated ways.

The problem is so complex that until recently it was not possible, even with numerical methods, to analyze

them. The development of numerical simulation methods that deal with optimal stopping time problems

(Longstaﬀ and Schwartz 2001) has now made this possible.

  R&D investment projects typically take a long time to complete and since there is a learning process about

the R&D project as investments proceed, there is large uncertainty about the investment costs required for

the R&D project. There is not only uncertainty about the total costs of the development, but also about

the time it will take to complete the development. In essence, there is learning while investing. Moreover,

during the development phase there exists a possibility that exogenous factors such as political or technical

disasters can put an end to the R&D investment project. These type of catastrophic events are very common

in R&D investment projects because of the long investment time horizon.

  Once the development phase is completed, the resulting product is produced and marketed. During this

marketing phase there is uncertainty about the demand for the product as well as the supply of competing

products. Seen from the start of the development phase these uncertainties are magniﬁed by the fact that

it is not even clear what the exact product that comes out of the R&D investment project would be. In

addition, if the resulting product is patent-protected and the patent is obtained during the development

phase of the R&D investment project, there will be uncertainty not only about the level of the cash ﬂows

produced, but also about the duration of these cash ﬂows since the starting date of the marketing phase is

uncertain but the expiration date of the patent is ﬁxed.

  The possibility of competing products during the marketing phase plays a crucial role for the R&D

investment decisions during the development phase since also the competing products have to go through a

similar development phase. Moreover, competition in the development phase feeds back into the marketing

phase in the sense that the competitive interactions in the development phase may have the eﬀect that some

of the competitors terminate their R&D investment projects even before they complete their development.

  In this article we develop a model to analyze patent-protected R&D investment projects that takes into

account all the sources of uncertainty described above. In particular, we combine elements of real options

theory with equilibrium concepts from game theory to study this problem where the R&D investment

decisions of one player depend critically on the decisions of the other players. These competitive interactions
                           R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                      3


aﬀect the valuation problem both in the development phase and in the marketing phase. The possibility of

an oligopolistic outcome in the marketing phase aﬀects the decisions taken by the players in the development

phase.

  We have concretized our problem by taking as an example an R&D investment project from the phar-

maceutical industry. This is a particularly interesting problem since the investments required to develop a

new drug are in the magnitude of hundreds of millions of dollars and typically take more than ten years to

complete. Moreover, these R&D investment projects are usually patent protected at a very early stage of

the development phase. Without taking competitive interactions into account Schwartz and Moon (2000)

and Schwartz (2001) have also studied R&D investment projects in the pharmaceutical industry using a

real options framework. In this article we mainly focus on the competitive interactions between competing

ﬁrms. In the monopoly situation the owner of the R&D investment project can assume that the probability

distribution of the underlying is exogenously given, whereas in the oligopoly situation the decisions of all

players aﬀect this probability distribution. Hence, the probability distribution of the underlying becomes

endogenous and it is therefore part of the equilibrium outcome.

  Many of the aspects of our R&D investment problem have been analyzed separately in a number of

articles in the literature. Grenadier and Weiss (1997) and Bernardo and Chowdhry (2002) concentrate on

the experience obtained in the investment process, but do not consider competitive interactions. The idea

is that the option to invest is also an option to get more experience with a certain technology, i.e. learning

by investing, and that this should be taken into account when analyzing the optimal time to invest. The

aspect of competition is considered by Williams (1993), who analyzes the competitive exercise of options

to invest. The main point is that as more investors exercise their options, the less attractive it is for other

investors to exercise their options because of a downward sloping demand curve. The aspect of competition

and especially the problem of coordinating the investment behavior is further analyzed by Huisman and

Kort (1999) and Huisman, Thijssen, and Kort (2001). Huisman and Kort (1999) argue that the perfect

coordination between the competing investors assumed by Williams (1993) is not an equilibrium outcome

without cooperation between investors; in a non-cooperative setting it can happen in equilibrium that more

than one investors invest simultaneously. Huisman, Thijssen, and Kort (2001) generalize these results by

allowing for mixed strategies by competing investors. The aspect of asymmetric competing ﬁrms is analyzed

by Pawlina and Kort (2001). Smit and Ankum (1993) is the ﬁrst article to combine sequential investment

options with competitive issues. Their discrete two-period binomial model captures some of the same features

as our model. A similar model but in continuous time is developed by Baldursson (1998), who shows that
                           R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                      4


the problem can also be solved as a central-planner problem for a speciﬁcally engineered ﬁctitious social

planner. Finally, Grenadier (2002) adds a time-to-build feature to this model. The models in the last three

articles have in common that investors have a number of capacity options they can exercise. In deriving the

optimal exercise strategy for these capacity options investors take into account both the impact that their

own exercise strategy, as well as the exercise strategies of the other investors, have on the market. None of

these models have the feature of a ﬁnite time horizon, which is essential to deal with patents with ﬁnite life.

Since these models deal with capacity expansion, they do not distinguish between a development phase and

a marketing phase, which is critical in R&D investment projects. Some of these models capture learning

by investing in the sense that exercising an investment option reveals more information; Grenadier (2002)

adds a time-to-build feature in the sense that it takes a certain amount of time from when the decision to

exercise an option is taken and until the pay oﬀ is realized. But none of the models capture learning while

investing in competitive markets in the sense that investments take time and information is revealed while

investing, so that it can become optimal to abandon the investment project even before completion because

of competitive interactions.

  Grenadier (1999) and Lambrecht and Perraudin (1999) introduce asymmetric information issues in the

competitive exercise of options to invest. In these one-investor-one-option models there are no compound

option aspects. Grenadier (1999) shows that asymmetric information can lead to informational cascades.

Lambrecht and Perraudin (1999) concentrate on preemption in winner-takes-it-all competitive investment

games.

  In our model we consider two ﬁrms which are investing in R&D for two diﬀerent drugs targeted to cure

the same disease, so that if both are successful they would have to share the same market. The fact that,

if both are successful, they will obtain duopoly proﬁts instead of monopoly proﬁts in at least part of the

marketing phase of the product, implies that during the development phase, each ﬁrm will take into account

not only its own situation but also the situation of its competitor, to make its R&D investment decisions.

The costs to completion of the R&D investment project for each ﬁrm are assumed to follow stochastic

processes through time with two types of shocks, i.e. technical shocks, which are idiosyncratic to each ﬁrm,

and input cost shocks, which are common to both ﬁrms. In addition, during the development phase there is

a Poisson probability of catastrophic events for each R&D investment project in the sense that it may have

to be terminated because of some terrible side eﬀect in the clinical trials or other reasons. The winning firm,

that is, the ﬁrm that ﬁrst successfully completes the R&D investment project, starts receiving monopoly

proﬁts in the sale of the drug until the losing firm eventually completes the R&D investment project, at
                           R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                     5


which point both ﬁrms share the duopoly proﬁts from the sale of the drug. The demand for the drug is

also stochastic and we assume that the demand shocks follow a geometric Brownian motion. We allow also

for the input cost shocks, common to both R&D investment projects, to be correlated with the demand

shocks since both can depend on general market conditions. The equilibrium investment and production

strategies for both ﬁrms are derived in a Cournot-Nash framework. During the development phase we focus

for each ﬁrm on the optimal stopping time to exit the R&D investment project which represents the optimal

exercise of the option to abandon the R&D investment project. Note that the optimal exercise strategy

for the abandonment option for one ﬁrm depends on the exercise strategy of the other ﬁrm and vice versa,

so that the values of both R&D investment projects and the optimal exercise strategies have to be solved

simultaneously.

  While the problem is initially formulated in continuous time, it is solved using a discrete time approxi-

mation. Since there is no closed form solution to the complex problem we formulate, we solve the problem

using numerical simulation methods. We apply an extended version of the least-squares approach proposed

by Longstaﬀ and Schwartz (2001) for valuing American options, to determine the optimal stopping time for

both ﬁrms, taking into account the competitive interactions.

  For comparative purposes, when we report the results of the analysis for the duopoly situation, we also

report the corresponding results for the monopoly situation. The monopoly situation corresponds closely

to the real option problem solved by Schwartz (2001). However, in order to make this comparison more

fair to the monopoly situation in our model, the monopolist has access to both R&D investment projects.

Obviously, the monopolist will invest in the most valuable of the two projects, but, in addition, she/he

has the option to invest in the second project as a backup project. The value of a backup project to the

monopolist is, however, limited in the sense that she/he will only get beneﬁts from the project if either the

main project is hit by a catastrophic event or if it turns out that the main project is more expensive to

develop than the backup project.

  In reporting the results we mainly concentrate on the symmetric case, that is, when both R&D investment

projects are identical in the duopoly situation. Though the computer program we have developed to solve

the problem numerically is able to handle a great deal of generality, most of the interesting insights of the

model can be better observed in the symmetric case. Without loss of generality, we concentrate on the case

where the patents for both competitive drugs expire at the same date. If, on the other hand, the patents

have diﬀerent expiration dates, there is no value in the second patent protection when the ﬁrst patent expires

since generic drugs related to the ﬁrst drug will be introduced and be able to compete with the second drug.
                                 R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                          6

                                                           Monopoly
                                                           phase:
                                                           winning firm
                                                           earns
                               Competitive                 monopoly
                               R&D phase:                  profit, losing                 Duopoly                 Perfect
                               both firms                  firm still                     phase: both             competition
                 Both firms    invest in                   invests in                     firms earn              phase: zero
   Pre patents   take out      post patents   First drug   post patents     Second drug   duopoly       Patents   profit to
   R&D phase     their patents R&D            marketed     R&D              marketed      profit        expire    both firms
                                                                                                                                -   t
                      0                            τ                             τ                           T




                                              Figure 1. Time line of our model.




  The model provides some interesting results with potentially important policy implications. As expected,

the value of the R&D investment project to the monopolist is higher than the aggregate value of the R&D

investment projects for both duopolists since both have to share the same demand. Unless the R&D in-

vestment projects are very marginal, the amount produced is on average higher for the duopolists, not only

because when both are producing simultaneously they produce a larger amount (at a lower price), but also

because the probability that at least one of the duopolists eventually produces is higher than the probability

that the monopolist produces, and on average the time until the ﬁrst project is completed is shorter. If the

R&D investment projects are very marginal competition in R&D can actually harm the development if there

is no mechanism to select which of the two duopolists who should invest and who should abandon. Hence,

if the objective of the policy maker or regulator is to promote the production of the largest possible amount

of drugs at the lowest possible price in the shortest period of time, competition in R&D accomplishes this

objective in most cases. Only in the cases where the R&D investment projects are very marginal can it be

beneﬁcial to protect one single developer from competition in order to accomplish these goals. One should,

in addition, have in mind that the total costs to R&D are higher in the duopoly situation and that the

value of the R&D investment projects is lower. The model presented can also be used to derive other policy

implications such as the eﬀect of subsidies or drug price and/or quantity commitments on the amount of

R&D investments.

  The article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model and derives the Cournot-Nash type

equilibrium. Section 3 explains the numerical solution procedure used in the implementation of the model.

Section 4 describes the numerical results and performs sensitivity analysis of these results with respect to key

parameters of the model. Finally, Section 5 summarizes the article and provides some concluding remarks.
                              R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                              7


                                                    2. The Model

    We assume that two ﬁrms are each investing in R&D for a drug that is targeted to cure the same disease.

Both ﬁrms take out a patent on their speciﬁc drug at date zero based on their earlier (pre patents) R&D.1

The two patents are based on diﬀerent molecules and will lead to diﬀerent drugs, but both drugs are targeted

to cure the same disease. Before the drugs can be marketed, some post patents R&D must be conducted

(further research, development, testing, clinical trials, etc.). When the ﬁrst drug is marketed, the drug will

be protected from competition by the patent so that the owner would be able to earn a monopoly proﬁt until,

eventually, the second ﬁrm markets its competing drug. When that second drug is marketed, the two ﬁrms

will still be protected from further competition by their two patents. Hence, the two ﬁrms have the only two

drugs for this disease and will therefore be able to earn a duopoly proﬁt.2 This situation continues until the
two patents expire.3 When this happens, we assume that generics will ﬂood the market and drive all proﬁts to

zero in a perfect competitive market setting.4 The whole time line of our model is summarized in Figure 1.

The important decision variables for our two ﬁrms are the post patents R&D investment/abandonment

decisions. That is, based on the information of both the ﬁrm’s own and its competitor’s estimated remaining

R&D investments and forecasts of the demand for the drug, each ﬁrm must consider whether it is worthwhile

for it to continue investing in R&D or whether it should abandon its R&D investment project. In order to

solve that problem we ﬁrst have to develop a model for the consumption market where the drug is eventually

going to be sold.

    We start by modeling the market for drugs for a given disease. We assume that the price of the drug,

denoted Pt , at any given date, t, is given by


                                                     Pt = Yt Q(qt ),


when the date t instantaneous production rate is qt . Here Y is an exogenously given stochastic process that

models demand shocks to the model. That is, Y captures stochastic shocks that change the demand of the

drug, e.g., epidemics, acts of terror, development of vaccines, non-anticipated alternative drugs, etc. We




1
  The assumption that both ﬁrms take out their patents at the same date is not important. The game could also (without loss
of generality) start at the date when the second ﬁrm takes out its patent.
2
  Note that here we have abstracted from the fact that one of the drugs may be more eﬃcient than the other and, thus, may
capture a larger share of the market.
3
  If the two patens do not expire on the same date, then this situation only continues until one of the two patents expire.
4
  It would be easy to introduce some terminal value to the R&D investment projects at the expiration of the patent period.
                                 R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                      8



                                                               Q(q)

                        20




                        15
                    Q




                        10




                         5




                                    qiD q M     qD
                         0
                             0          2             4                6             8           10            12
                                                                       q


          Figure 2. The inverse demand function, Q(·), from equation (1) for a = 15 and b = 0.1.
          The optimal production rates, q M and qiD , for the monopoly and the duopoly situations are
          marked together with the total production rate in the duopoly case, q D .



assume Y follows a geometric Brownian motion under an equivalent martingale measure, Q, i.e.5


                                            dYt = µy Yt dt + σy Yt dWty ,        Y0 = 1,


where µy and σy are given constants parameterizing the drift and volatility of the demand shocks and W y

is a standard Brownian motion under an equivalent martingale measure, Q.6 Q(·) is the inverse demand

function for the drug (except for Yt ) and we assume it has the following form

                                                                   2
(1)                                               Q(q) ≡ ae−bq ,            q ≥ 0,


where a and b are positive constants. We have chosen this speciﬁc form of the inverse demand function since

it gives internal optimal solutions even without variable production cost rates both for the monopoly and


5Since in this article we pursue the valuation and the optimal R&D investment/abandonment strategies, we only need to model
our stochastic processes under an equivalent martingale measure, Q.
6Formally, deﬁne the probability space (Ω, F , Q) and a ﬁltration, F ≡ {F }
                                                                         t t∈[0,T ] , which we will concretize later, that fulﬁlls the
usual conditions. All stochastic processes we deﬁne in this article, including Y and W y , are implicitly assumed to be adapted
to F.
                                R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                  9


duopoly supply situations.7 For a = 15 and b = 0.1 we have depicted the inverse demand function, Q(·), in

Figure 2.

   If there is only one ﬁrm which has monopolistic supply of the drug at date t, this ﬁrm would simply

control the production rate, qt , to maximize the instantaneous proﬁt rate, Πt , given by

                                                                            2
                                                  Πt ≡ Pt qt = Yt aqt e−bqt .


Note again that for simplicity we have assumed that the variable direct production cost rate is zero. The

optimal monopoly production rate at date t, q M , is easily derived as

                                                               1
                                                         qM = √ ,
                                                               2b

which is independent of t. Since in the monopoly case there is only one ﬁrm producing, this production rate

will also be the total production rate at any date. It implies a monopoly price at date t of

                                                              a
                                                        PtM = √ Yt
                                                               e

and a monopoly proﬁt rate at date t of
                                                              a
                                                        t = √
                                                       ΠM        Yt .
                                                             2be
The superscript M indicates monopoly.

   If there are two ﬁrms, indexed one and two, competing for selling drugs to cure the same disease at date

t, we assume that these two ﬁrms compete in a Cournot competitive fashion. In order to calculate the

corresponding market equilibrium we ﬁrst would have to calculate the two ﬁrms’ response functions. Given

ﬁrm j ∈ {1, 2} has set its production rate at date t to qjt , consider the problem of ﬁnding the optimal
production rate for the other ﬁrm, which is indexed i = 3 − j,8 at date t. Given ﬁrm j ∈ {1, 2} has set its

production rate at date t to qjt , ﬁrm i = 3 − j should maximize its instantaneous proﬁt rate at date t as a




7For simplicity we assume that variable production costs are zero, because this signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes our analysis. Basically,
the only role for the inverse demand function, Q, is to provide two diﬀerent production levels, one for the situation where there
is only one producer, the monopoly situation, and one for the situation where there are two producers, the duopoly situation.
Production costs would only matter for the decision of how much to produce when the drug is marketed. If there are positive
production costs, the inverse demand function, Q, should just be altered so that it gives the two optimal production rates as
solutions when the production costs are included in the optimization and so that the corresponding function values are the
proﬁt rates. The whole analysis can then be carried out the same way as it is in the article. In the pharmaceutical industry
variable production cost rates have little importance relative to R&D investment costs. That is, variable production cost rates
can be neglected from the problem without any signiﬁcant alterations of the qualitative conclusions from our analysis.
8There are exactly two ﬁrms in our model, indexed one and two. Hence, if one ﬁrm has index j ∈ {1, 2}, the other ﬁrm must
be indexed 3 − j.
                            R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                 10


function of its own production rate, qit ,

                                                                                  2
                                       Πit ≡ Pt qit = Yt aqit e−b(qit +qjt ) .


The response function for ﬁrm i’s production rate at date t is easily derived as
                                                            
                                                                  2 +2
                                                                bqjt
                                              ∗                          qjt
                                             qit (qjt ) =              −     .
                                                                   4b     2

By symmetry we know that the response functions for both ﬁrms are identical. The unique Nash equilibrium

production rate at date t in a Cournot duopoly setting is then the (unique) ﬁx point of the function
                                                            
                                                                bq 2 + 2 q
                                                q(q) ≡                  − ,
                                                                   4b    2

which is again independent of t. Hence, the equilibrium production rate at date t for each of the two ﬁrms

can easily be derived as
                                                   1
                                             qiD = √ ,              i ∈ {1, 2}.
                                                  2 b
Hence, the total duopoly production rate will be

                                                            2
                                                                     1
                                                 qD =           qiD = √ ,
                                                            i=1
                                                                       b

the duopoly price at date t will be
                                                                  a
                                                       PtD =        Yt ,
                                                                  e
and the duopoly proﬁt rate at date t to each of the two ﬁrms will be

                                                     a
                                         ΠD
                                          it =       √ Yt ,            i ∈ {1, 2}.
                                                   2e b

The superscript D indicates duopoly. Note that the total production rate at date t has increased by a factor
√
  2 ≈ 1.41 from √12b in the monopoly case to √1b in the duopoly case and at the same time the price has
                    √                                                         
dropped by a factor e ≈ 1.65 and total proﬁt rates have dropped by a factor 2e ≈ 1.17, see Figure 2.

  If there is perfect competition, standard microeconomic arguments give that the proﬁt of each (identical)

ﬁrm is driven to zero. In our model we have assumed that variable production cost rates are zero so this

means that the sum of the production rates for all the ﬁrms would converge to inﬁnity and the corresponding
                               R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                11


equilibrium price for the drug would be zero. That is,


                                                       q P C ≡ ∞,

                                                   PtP C = 0,


and


                                                    it ≡ 0,
                                                   ΠP                   i ∈ N.
                                                      C




The superscript P C indicates perfect competition.

   This characterizes the situation our two ﬁrms will face when their respective R&D investment projects

eventually develop into a drug that can be marketed. That is, in real options terms we have characterized the

underlying security. However, in order to develop the drug the ﬁrms have to go through an uncertain phase

of R&D. At date zero when the ﬁrms take out their patents, each of the two ﬁrms has an estimate of the

costs of the remaining R&D investments, K10 and K20 , that they each still have to conduct. These estimates

of remaining R&D investment costs are assumed to be public information, i.e. common knowledge.9 At any

given date t the estimated remaining R&D investment costs for ﬁrm i ∈ {1, 2} is given by the stochastic

variable, Kit . For tractability we assume that the whole process of past and present estimated remaining

R&D investment costs, {(K1s , K2s )}s∈[0,t] as well as the past and present values of the demand shock process,

{Ys }s∈[0,t] , are public information. As long as ﬁrm i has not yet abandoned its R&D investment project,

the stochastic process, Ki , for i ∈ {1, 2}, develops over time under an equivalent martingale measure, Q,

according to the stochastic diﬀerential equations

                                                       
(2)                            dKit = −Ii dt + γi          Ii Kit dzti + µik Kit dt + σik Kit dWtk .


Here z 1 , z 2 , and W k are standard Brownian motions under Q. The ﬁrst term in equation (2) reﬂects the

rate at which the ﬁrm invests in R&D for the drug at date t.10 Since the decision to continue investing

in R&D is an irreversible decision, the current investment rate, Ii , must at any date t be non-negative.

Furthermore, since it takes time to conduct R&D, the current investment rate, Ii , must at any date t be

ﬁnite. The second term in equation (2) reﬂects the uncertain nature of the R&D process itself over time

9In this article we have abstracted from the interesting issues arising from asymmetric information, and concentrated our
attention on capturing the competitive interactions.
10Purely for expositional simplicity we have assumed that the investment rate of ﬁrm i is a constant, I . In our numerical
                                                                                                       i
implementation of our model, cf. Section 3, it could as well have been a deterministic function of time or even a deterministic
function of the current values of the governing state variables.
                               R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                12


due to technical uncertainty. The more R&D investments the ﬁrm estimates it still has to conduct and the

higher the current R&D investment rate is, the more uncertainty will be revealed per time unit. Moreover,

we assume that these type of technical shocks are independent between the two ﬁrms and also independent

of the demand shocks and the R&D input cost shocks. That is, z 1 and z 2 are independent of each other and

also independent of W y and W k .11 γi is a ﬁrm speciﬁc volatility parameter measuring the size of technical

shocks. The two last terms in equation (2) reﬂect that the estimated remaining R&D investment costs vary

not only because of technical shocks but also because of general uncertainty in the surrounding market, e.g.,

labor costs, input costs to the R&D process, etc. We assume that these input cost shocks are the same for

both ﬁrms; thus it is the same Brownian motion, W k , that enters into both ﬁrms’ estimated remaining R&D

investment cost processes. Moreover, W k may be correlated with W y to reﬂect that the general market

conditions are also related to the demand of the drug.12 That is, we assume


                                                   dW y , W k t = ρyk dt.


The drift terms µik and volatility terms σik parameterize the uncertainty in the surrounding market, which

may be diﬀerent for the two ﬁrms. For example, ﬁrm speciﬁc expected increases in labor costs and input

costs over time is parameterized via µik . At date zero when the ﬁrms take out their patents, their estimated

remaining R&D investment costs are of course positive, so Ki0 > 0, i ∈ {1, 2}. The speciﬁcation of the

development of the estimated remaining R&D investment costs from equation (2) is very similar to the

speciﬁcations used in Pindyck (1993), Schwartz and Moon (2000), and Schwartz (2001).13

   Schwartz and Moon (2000) and Schwartz (2001) consider also the possibility of catastrophic events. This

reﬂects the fact that besides costs uncertainty and demand uncertainty there is also a risk that the R&D

investment project can simply fail for other reasons independent of how much the ﬁrm invests in it and

independent of how high the demand for the drug will be. It may be that the clinical trials reveal that


11This assumption is not essential, but it simpliﬁes the development of the model.
12Both positive and negative correlations as well as no correlation are economically plausible. A positive correlation could be
explained by a higher than expected demand for the drug if the general economy booms, which would then also lead to higher
than expected input costs to the R&D investment project. This would, e.g., be the case for a drug like Insulin. A negative
correlation could be explained by a higher than expected demand for the drug if the general economy ends up in a recession.
This would be the case for a drug like Prozac. Naturally, there are also cases where there is no connection between the demand
for the drug and the general state of the economy. In our main numerical examples in Section 4 we use a small negative
correlation, but we also perform sensitivity analysis with respect to this correlation parameter.
13It should be pointed out that the models in these articles are formulated as stochastic optimal control problems, whereas
our problem is formulated as an optimal stopping time problem. The optimal solutions to these stochastic optimal control
problems are typically bang-bang solutions and therefore they are very similar to the solution obtained by solving an optimal
stopping time problem. However, the optimal stopping time solution does not allow for costless temporary shut-down of the
R&D investment project. Since we are dealing here with a ﬁnite time horizon, the option to temporary shut down is not
important and, in addition, probably unrealistic for a drug development project.
                               R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                               13



                                                   K1 and K2

                     140



                     120



                     100



                      80
                 K




                      60



                      40



                      20



                       0
                           0          5    R&D      10       M     15    D   20     PC     25
                                                            t


        Figure 3. Illustrative sample paths of the two estimated remaining R&D investment cost
        processes, K1 and K2 , from equation (2) for K10 = K20 = 100, I1 = I2 = 10, γ1 = γ2 = 0.2,
        µ1k = µ2k = 0, and σ1k = σ2k = 0.1. In these sample paths we have assumed that both R&D
        investment projects continue until their corresponding estimated remaining R&D investment
        cost processes, K1 and K2 , hit zero. The competitive R&D phase (marked R&D) takes
        place in the time period from date zero and until the ﬁrst process hits zero around date
        10.6. The monopoly phase (marked M) takes place in the time period from when the ﬁrst
        process hits zero around date 10.6 and until the second process hits zero around date 16.6.
        Finally, the duopoly phase (marked D) takes place in the time period from when the second
        process hits zero around date 16.6 and until the patents expire at date T , which is 20 years
        in this example. After date T (20 years) the perfect competition phase (marked PC) takes
        over.



the drug has some terrible side eﬀects, it may turn out that it simply is not technically feasible to develop

the drug, it may be that the government prohibits certain classes of drugs, etc. We model this type of

catastrophic events as two Poisson processes, denoted Q1 and Q2 , one for each ﬁrm, with intensities λ1 and

λ2 . These two Poisson processes are independent of each other and also independent of the other three

governing state variables, K1 , K2 , and Y . For tractability we also assume that past and present values of

the Poisson processes, {(Q1s , Q2s )}s∈[0,t] , are public information.

  We have depicted illustrative sample paths of the two estimated remaining R&D investment cost processes,

K1 and K2 , in Figure 3 in an example where both ﬁrms are exactly equal (the symmetric case): both ﬁrms

have at date zero estimated remaining R&D investment costs of 100 (K10 = K20 = 100) and both invest
                                 R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                   14


10 per year in R&D (I1 = I2 = 10). Both ﬁrms face technical shock volatility of 20% (γ1 = γ2 = 0.2) and

equal drift and volatility parameters of the input cost shocks to the R&D investment project of zero and 10%

(µ1k = µ2k = 0 and σ1k = σ2k = 0.1). In these sample paths we have assumed that the R&D investment

projects continue until the corresponding estimated remaining R&D investment cost processes, K1 and K2 ,

hit zero. The competitive R&D phase (marked R&D in Figure 3) takes place in the time period from date

zero and until the ﬁrst process hits zero around date 10.6. The monopoly phase (marked M in Figure 3)

takes place in the time period from when the ﬁrst process hits zero around date 10.6 and until the second

process hits zero around date 16.6. Finally, the duopoly phase (marked D in Figure 3) takes place in the

time period from when the second process hits zero around date 16.6 and until the patents expire at date

T , which is 20 years in this example. After date T (20 years) the perfect competition phase (marked PC

in Figure 3) takes over. Cf. Figure 1 for the complete time line of our model. The parameter values used

to create Figure 3 are identical to the ones that we will use in our numerical examples in Section 4. Note

that the four phases of our model, the competitive R&D phase, the monopoly phase, the duopoly phase, and

the perfect competition phase, are deﬁned based solely on the development of the two estimated remaining

cost processes, K1 and K2 . Because of optimal abandonment of the R&D investment project and/or the
occurrence of catastrophic events, it may very well be the case that there is only one ﬁrm (or even no ﬁrms)

producing drugs in the duopoly phase. Similar things can happen in the other phases. The names of the

diﬀerent phases are based on what would have happened if there were no abandonment and the catastrophic

events never occurred. The reader should only use the names of the diﬀerent phases to be able to distinguish

the four phases of the model and not necessarily as a statement of what type of economic activity that will

occur in these phases.

   The drug developed by ﬁrm i ∈ {1, 2} is marketed as soon as the corresponding (estimated) remaining

R&D investment cost process, Ki , hits zero unless either an optimal abandonment decision has been taken
earlier on or catastrophic events have occurred to the R&D investment project earlier on.14 In order to keep

track of when this happens we introduce some stopping times.15 Deﬁne τi to reﬂect when ﬁrm i’s product

will be marketed, i ∈ {1, 2}, if its project is still alive, i.e., if neither an optimal abandonment decision has

been taken earlier on nor catastrophic events have occurred to the R&D investment project earlier on. As a



14We place estimated in parentheses because when the (estimated) remaining R&D investments are exactly zero, they are not
just estimates any more, they are truly zero: the drug is ready.
15Formally, a stochastic variable, τ , is a stopping time related to the ﬁltration F if the event {τ ≤ t} ∈ F , for all t ∈ [0, T ].
                                                                                                             t
Moreover let S(F) denote the set of all stopping times related to the ﬁltration F. For the rest of the article the ﬁltration F will
be the ﬁltration generated by the governing state variables, i.e. Ft = σ{(Ys , K1s , K2s , Q1s , Q2s )|s ∈ [0, t]}.
                                R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                15


ﬁrst attempt we can specify this as

                                                    inf{t ≥ 0|Kit = 0}.

However, the patents the ﬁrms take out at date zero have a certain life span, normally twenty years, which

we here denote T . If none of the two ﬁrms have been able to market a drug within that life span, they will

not be able to derive any proﬁts from their R&D eﬀort. There are many possible scenarios leading to that

conclusion. One of them is that if they continue their R&D eﬀort even after date T and eventually market

their drug, an instant later the generics are ready with competing drugs because the patents have already

expired. So they will not be able to derive any proﬁts from their R&D eﬀort. A more likely scenario is the

following: since it would never be optimal to continue the R&D investment projects after date T , the R&D

investment project will be abandoned at date T at the latest, and very likely much earlier. Hence, there will

be no drugs marketed and therefore no generics either. Again, they will not be able to derive any proﬁts

from their R&D eﬀort. Thus, our stopping times are only interesting when they are strictly smaller than

T since there can be derived no proﬁts after date T . That is, we would like to reﬁne our deﬁnition of τi ,
i ∈ {1, 2} to16
                                                                         
                                            τi ≡ min inf{t ≥ 0|Kit = 0}, T .

Hence, the monopoly phase starts at date τ deﬁned as


                                                      τ ≡ min{τ1 , τ2 },


and the duopoly phase starts at date τ deﬁned as


                                                      τ ≡ max{τ1 , τ2 }.


As long as the ﬁrms are still investing in R&D, they can decide to abandon their R&D investment project if

they ﬁnd that it is not proﬁtable to continue. We will denote the stopping time when the ﬁrms stop investing

in their R&D investment projects for economic reasons by νi , i ∈ {1, 2}.17 Surely, they will stop investing no

later than when their R&D investment project is completed, hence νi ≤ τi . The event {νi = τi } now means

that the ﬁrm did not ﬁnd it optimal to abandon its R&D investment project before completion, whereas




16We do not include the catastrophic events into our stopping times since these are much more eﬃciently dealt with explicitly by
multiplying the relevant expressions with the probability that the catastrophic events will occur under an equivalent martingale
measure, Q.
17We still do not include catastrophic events into our stopping times, cf. footnote no. 16.
                               R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                16


the event {νi < τi } means that the ﬁrm did ﬁnd it optimal to abandon its R&D investment project before

completion.18

   We are now ready to more formally set up the objectives of the two ﬁrms. Deﬁne the winning ﬁrm as the

ﬁrm which, if its project is alive, markets its drug at the entrance date into the monopoly phase and let w

denote the index of the winning ﬁrm. That is,
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          1,    τ1 = τ ,
                                                    w≡
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          2,    τ1 = τ .

Moreover, let l denote the index of the losing ﬁrm, i.e., the ﬁrm which, if its project is alive, markets its

drug at the entrance date into the duopoly phase.19 That is,


                                                         l ≡ 3 − w.


   In order to ﬁnd the values of the two ﬁrms’ R&D investment projects as well as their optimal R&D

investment/abandonment strategies we have to value their projects in all three phases of our model starting

from the last phase, i.e. the duopoly phase. At the entrance date into the duopoly phase there are three

possible situations: there can be either two, one, or no projects alive to be marketed. If there are still two

projects alive to be marketed at the entrance date into the duopoly phase, the ﬁrms will compete in the

usual Cournot fashion. At any given date t in the duopoly phase, i.e. t ∈ [τ , T ), the total value to each of




18Note that the estimated remaining R&D investment costs at date t, K are not (necessarily) in any precise mathematical
                                                                     it
sense equal to the expected remaining R&D investment costs. That is, in general Kit is not equal to
                                                  νi                        
                                            EQ       e−(r+λi )(s−t) Ii ds Ft ,
                                                    t
not even conditional on completion. Clearly this expectation will (among other parameters) depend on µik , T , and λi . In the
model the state variable Kit governs how far the R&D investment project is from completion. The value of Kit is never directly
used as expected remaining R&D costs.
19Note that in the event that the two ﬁrms’ estimated remaining R&D investment cost processes hit zero exactly at the same
instant in time or none of them hit zero before the patent expires at date T , ﬁrm one would be called the winning ﬁrm and ﬁrm
two would be called the losing ﬁrm. But as we will see in the derivation of the objective functions below in these two special
cases, there will be no diﬀerence between the winning ﬁrm’s and the losing ﬁrm’s objective functions. Hence, it does not really
matter which of the two we assign as the winning ﬁrm and which we assign as the losing ﬁrm in these two special cases.
                               R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                               17


the two ﬁrms of all cash ﬂows after that date can be derived as20
                                          T                   
                                     Q       −r(s−t) D
                      V (Yt , t) ≡ E
                        D2
                                            e       Πis ds Ft
                                                 t
                                                                  T                       
                                            a
                                      =     √ EQ                      e−r(s−t) Ys ds Ft
                                          2e b                t
                                                         T
                                            a
                                      =     √                e−r(s−t) E Q [Ys |Ft ]ds
                                          2e b       t
                                                         T
                                         a
(3)                                   = √                    e−r(s−t) Yt eµy (s−t) ds
                                       2e b          t
                                                           T
                                          a
                                      =   √ Yt e(r−µy )t     e−(r−µy )s ds
                                        2e b             t
                                              a                                          
                                      =            √ Yt e(r−µy )t e−(r−µy )t − e−(r−µy )T
                                        2(r − µy )e b
                                              a                           
                                      =            √ 1 − e−(r−µy )(T −t) Yt ,      t ∈ [τ , T ),
                                        2(r − µy )e b

where r is the riskless interest rate, which we for simplicity assume is constant. Note that the value will

only depend on the value of the state variable Y and the date t. The two state variables measuring the

estimated remaining R&D investment costs, K1 and K2 , are already zero so they are not relevant any more.

The superscript D2 indicates that this is the project value in the duopoly phase if there are still two projects

alive, i.e. if both projects have survived the catastrophic events and none of them have been abandoned for

economic reasons.

   If one of the ﬁrms is hit by catastrophic events or if one of the ﬁrms abandons its R&D investment project

prior to the duopoly phase, the other ﬁrm would be able to earn a monopoly proﬁt even in the duopoly

phase. At any given date t in the duopoly phase, i.e. t ∈ [τ , T ], the total value to the surviving ﬁrm of all

cash ﬂows after that date can similarly be derived as
                                                     T                            
                         V D1 (Yt , t) ≡ E Q             e−r(s−t) ΠM
                                                                   s ds Ft
                                                 t
(4)
                                                a                           
                                      =            √      1 − e−(r−µy )(T −t) Yt ,            t ∈ [τ , T ).
                                          (r − µy ) 2be

The superscript D1 indicates that this is the surviving project value in the duopoly phase if only one of the

projects is alive.

   If none of the two projects are alive in the duopoly phase, obviously no proﬁts will be made and the value

is therefore zero.
20Since we have already developed all our stochastic processes under an equivalent martingale measure, Q, the value of all
future proﬁts and costs can be calculated by just summing (integrating) all the expected cash ﬂows (cash ﬂow rates) discounted
using the riskless interest rate.
                             R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                       18


  In the monopoly phase, i.e. from date τ to date τ , the winning ﬁrm makes a monopoly proﬁt (if its project

is still alive) while the losing ﬁrm is (perhaps) still investing in R&D. For this period we will have to separate

the calculations of the values of the two ﬁrms. If the losing ﬁrm’s project is still alive, it is still investing

in R&D and, therefore, it is still exposed to catastrophic events. The conditional probability (under an

equivalent martingale measure, Q) that the losing ﬁrm is hit by catastrophic events during a period from

date t to date s in the monopoly phase, given that its project was alive at date t is 1 − e−λl (s−t) . Similarly,

the conditional probability (under an equivalent martingale measure, Q) that it is not hit by catastrophic

events throughout the period from date t to date s in the monopoly phase, given that its project was alive at

date t is e−λl (s−t) . The winning ﬁrm, on the other hand, is no longer exposed to catastrophic events since it

has already completed its R&D investment project at the entrance date into the monopoly phase. However,

the objective function of the losing ﬁrm depends on whether or not the winning ﬁrm’s project is alive at

the entrance date into the monopoly phase, since this determines whether the losing ﬁrm will be earning

a monopoly or a duopoly proﬁt when its R&D investment project is eventually completed. If the winning

ﬁrm’s project is still alive at the entrance date into the monopoly phase, then, at any given date t in the

monopoly phase, i.e. t ∈ [τ , τ ), the total value to the losing ﬁrm (if its project is alive) of all cash ﬂows after
that date can be derived as
                                                          νl
             VlM 2l (Yt , Klt , t) ≡ max E Q −                 e−λl (s−t) e−r(s−t) Il ds
                                  νl ∈S(F)            t
                                                                                                                 
                                                                   −λl (τ −t) −r(τ −t)
                                              + 1{νl =τ } e                  e           V   D2
                                                                                                  (Yτ , τ ) Ft
                                                          νl
(5)                            = max E Q −                     e−(r+λl )(s−t) Il ds
                                  νl ∈S(F)            t

                                                        a
                                              +              √ e−(r+λl )(τ −t) ×
                                                  2(r − µy )e b
                                                                                                       
                                                                         
                                                      1 − e−(r−µy )(T −τ ) 1{νl =τ } Yτ              Ft ,        t ∈ [τ , τ ).

Note that the value will only depend on the value of the state variable Y , the estimated remaining R&D

investment costs for the losing ﬁrm, Kl , and the date t. The state variable measuring the estimated remaining

R&D investment costs for the winning ﬁrm, Kw , is already zero and therefore not relevant any more. The

superscript M 2l indicates that this is the losing ﬁrm’s value in the monopoly phase if the winning ﬁrm’s

project is still alive. Note the two terms in equation (5): the ﬁrst term is the losing ﬁrm’s R&D investment

costs in the monopoly phase after date t and until it is either hit by catastrophic events, it decides to

abandon its R&D investment project, or until its R&D investment project is completed; the second term is
                             R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                           19


the losing ﬁrm’s share of the duopoly proﬁt in the duopoly phase in the event that the losing ﬁrm is not hit

by catastrophic events in the period from date t and until the entrance date into the duopoly phase and it

does not decide to abandon its R&D investment project before completion. In equation (5) we use a so-called

indicator function of the form 1A , where A is some event. This function takes the value one if the event, A, is

true and zero otherwise. The value in equation (5) is the result of a maximization problem, since the losing

ﬁrm should decide at each instant in time whether to continue investing in R&D or to abandon the R&D

investment project. This decision must at each date be taken based on the available information, i.e. the past

and current values of the governing state variables. That is, the R&D investment/abandonment strategy

must be a stopping time related to the ﬁltration F. We have indicated this restriction in equation (5) by

requiring νl to be a member of the set S(F). Denote the optimal R&D investment/abandonment strategy
for the problem in equation (5) as νlt2∗ . Note that the optimal R&D investment/abandonment strategy

will depend on the valuation date t in the problem in equation (5), i.e., it is the (date t) optimal R&D

investment/abandonment strategy for the rest of the monopoly phase, given that the losing ﬁrm has not

yet abandoned its R&D investment project at date t. The superscript 2∗ indicates that this is the (date t)

optimal R&D investment/abandonment strategy, given that the winning ﬁrm’s project is still alive at that

date.

  Intuitively the optimal stopping time problem in equation (5) can be solved by dynamic programming.

The boundary condition is given by the value at the entrance date into the duopoly phase. That is,


(6)                                         VlM 2l (Yτ , 0, τ ) = V D2 (Yτ , τ ).


The optimal stopping time problem is solved by starting with the boundary condition and then going

backward in time in the usual dynamic programming fashion. That is, we solve for the value of the R&D

investment project at date t (in the monopoly phase) conditional on that we have already solved for the

value at any later date s. Let VlM 2l (Ys , Kls , s) denote the total value at date s in the monopoly phase to

the losing ﬁrm (if its project is still alive) of all cash ﬂows after date s when it follows the optimal stopping

time rule. The value at date t to the losing ﬁrm, if it continues investing in its R&D investment project at

date t, can then (intuitively) be written as

                                                                                                               
(7)     V̂lM 2l (Yt , Klt , t) = E Q −e−(r+λl )dt Il dt + e−(r+λl )dt VlM 2l (Yt + dYt , Klt + dKlt , t + dt) Ft .
                               R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                    20


If V̂lM 2l (Yt , Klt , t) is positive, the losing ﬁrm should continue investing at date t, otherwise it should abandon

its R&D investment project. That is,

                                                                                         
(8)                                  VlM 2l (Yt , Klt , t) = max V̂lM 2l (Yt , Klt , t), 0 .


To make this method rigorous in continuous time, we must derive a partial diﬀerential equation to solve for

V̂lM 2l , assuming that the ﬁrm continues investing, and at each instant in time check whether its value is

non-negative. As soon as it becomes negative, it is time to abandon the R&D investment project. This is

the same as the standard solution method normally applied to value an American option in a Black-Scholes

setting. Details can be found in Appendix A.

   If the winning ﬁrm’s project is no longer alive at the entrance date into the monopoly phase,21 then at

any given date t in the monopoly phase, i.e. t ∈ [τ , τ ), the total value to the losing ﬁrm (if its project is

alive) of all cash ﬂows after that date can similarly be derived as
                                                              νl
              VlM 1l (Yt , Klt , t) ≡ max E Q −                    e−(λl +r)(s−t) Il ds
                                    νl ∈S(F)              t
                                                                                                            
                                                  + 1{νl =τ } e−(λl +r)(τ −t) V D1 (Yτ , τ ) Ft
                                                              νl
(9)                              = max E Q −                       e−(r+λl )(s−t) Il ds
                                    νl ∈S(F)              t

                                                            a
                                                  +            √    e−(r+λl )(τ −t) ×
                                                      (r − µy ) 2be
                                                                                                           
                                                                   −(r−µy )(T −τ )
                                                                                      
                                                          1−e                             1{νl =τ } Yτ   Ft ,   t ∈ [τ , τ ).

Here the superscript M 1l indicates that this is the losing ﬁrm’s project value in the monopoly phase if the win-

ning ﬁrm’s project is no longer alive. In this case we denote the date t optimal R&D investment/abandonment

strategy for the problem in equation (9) as νlt1∗ . Here the superscript 1∗ indicates that this is the (date t)

optimal R&D investment/abandonment strategy, given that the winning ﬁrm’s project is no longer alive at

that date. This optimal stopping time problem can be solved in the same way as sketched in equation (7).

Details can be found in Appendix A.

   In the valuation of the winning ﬁrm’s future cash ﬂows we must take into account both the fact that the

losing ﬁrm is (perhaps) still investing in R&D and is therefore still exposed to catastrophic events, and the

fact that it will follow the just derived optimal R&D investment/abandonment strategy. At any given date


21Note again that the winning (losing) ﬁrm’s project refers to the project that would have been completed ﬁrst (last) if it is
neither abandoned for economic reasons nor hit by catastrophic events.
                                 R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                        21


t in the monopoly phase the winning ﬁrm (if its project is alive) can observe whether or not the losing ﬁrm’s

project is still alive. This observation is important for the valuation of the winning ﬁrm’s future cash ﬂows

since this indicates whether there is still uncertainty about whether the losing ﬁrm will eventually complete

its R&D investment project or not. At any given date t in the monopoly phase, i.e. t ∈ [τ , τ ), if the losing

ﬁrm’s project is still alive at that date, the total value to the winning ﬁrm of all cash ﬂows after that date

can be derived as,
                                          τ
       VwM 2w (Yt , Klt , t) ≡ E Q            e−r(s−t) ΠM
                                                        s ds + 1{νlt
                                                                  2∗ =τ } e
                                                                           −λl (τ −t) −r(τ −t) D2
                                                                                     e        V (Yτ , τ )
                                      t
                                                                                                                 
                                                           
                                     +      1 − e−λl (τ −t) 1{νlt2∗ =τ } + 1{νlt2∗ <τ } e−r(τ −t) V D1 (Yτ , τ ) Ft

                                                     τ
                                  a
                           = EQ √                        e−r(s−t) Ys ds
                                 2be             t

                                                          a                                
                                     + e−(r+λl )(τ −t)           √ 1 − e−(r−µy )(T −τ ) 1{νlt2∗ =τ } Yτ
                                                   2(r − µy )e b
                                                                               
                                     + 1 − e−λl (τ −t) 1{νlt2∗ =τ } + 1{νlt2∗ <τ } e−r(τ −t) ×
(10)                                                                              
                                          a              −(r−µy )(T −τ )
                                                                          
                                             √      1−e                     Yτ Ft
                                   (r − µy ) 2be
                                          τ                   
                              a
                           =√     EQ        e−r(s−t) Ys ds Ft
                              2be       t
                                                                                                                      
                                     a                                             
                            +             √ E Q e−(r+λl )(τ −t) 1 − e−(r−µy )(T −τ ) 1{νlt2∗ =τ } Yτ             Ft
                              2(r − µy )e b
                                       a                                           
                             +            √    E Q e−r(τ −t) 1 − e−(r−µy )(T −τ ) ×
                                 (r − µy ) 2be
                                                                                                            
                                                                     
                                                      1 − e−λl (τ −t) 1{νlt2∗ =τ } + 1{νlt2∗ <τ } Yτ         Ft ,         t ∈ [τ , τ ).


The superscript M 2w indicates that this is the winning ﬁrm’s project value in the monopoly phase if the

losing ﬁrm’s project is still alive. Note the three terms in equation (10): the ﬁrst term is the winning ﬁrm’s

monopoly proﬁt from date t and until the end of the monopoly phase; the second term is the winning ﬁrm’s

share of the duopoly proﬁt in the duopoly phase in the event that the losing ﬁrm is not hit by catastrophic

events in the period from date t and until the entrance date into the duopoly phase and the losing ﬁrm

does not abandon its R&D investment project before completion; ﬁnally the third term is the winning ﬁrm’s

monopoly proﬁt in the duopoly phase in the event that the losing ﬁrm is either hit by catastrophic events

before the entrance date into the duopoly phase or the losing ﬁrm ﬁnds it optimal to abandon its R&D

investment project before completion.
                             R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                       22


  Finally, if the losing ﬁrm’s project is no longer alive, the winning ﬁrm will be able to make a monopoly

proﬁt until its patent expires. Hence, we can value its proﬁt in the same way as in the duopoly phase. That

is, at any given date t in the monopoly phase, i.e. t ∈ [τ , τ ), if the losing ﬁrm’s project is no longer alive at

that date, the total value to the winning ﬁrm of all cash ﬂows after that date can be derived as,

                                                         a                           
(11)           V M 1w (Yt , t) ≡ V D1 (Yt , t) =            √      1 − e−(r−µy )(T −t) Yt ,   t ∈ [τ , τ ),
                                                   (r − µy ) 2be

even though, strictly speaking, V D1 is not deﬁned to be used in the monopoly phase. Note that the value

will only depend on the value of the state variable Y , and the date t. The state variable measuring the

estimated remaining R&D investment costs for the losing ﬁrm, Kl , is no longer relevant since that ﬁrm has

either been hit by catastrophic events or has abandoned its R&D investment project before completion. The

superscript M 1w indicates that this is the winning ﬁrm’s project value in the monopoly phase if the losing

ﬁrm’s project is no longer alive.

  In the competitive R&D phase before any of the two drugs are marketed, i.e. from date zero to date τ , the

two ﬁrms are competing to market their drug before the competitor markets its drug. Therefore, the actual

R&D investment/abandonment decision itself is somewhat trickier in this phase. In the monopoly phase

there was no element of competitive interaction between the two ﬁrms in the R&D investment decision itself:

the losing ﬁrm simply considers, given that the winning ﬁrm is already making a monopoly (production)

proﬁt in the monopoly phase, whether it is more proﬁtable to continue investing in R&D or whether it is

more proﬁtable to abandon its R&D investment project. In the competitive R&D phase, when both ﬁrms

are still investing in R&D, there is a competitive interaction element to the R&D investment/abandonment

strategy. There is a clear advantage to the ﬁrm which markets its drug before its competitor. Moreover,

it may very well be the case that the value to one of the ﬁrms of all future cash ﬂows is negative, if the

other ﬁrm continues investing in R&D, but positive if the other ﬁrm abandons its R&D investment project.

Hence, the R&D investment/abandonment strategy may not only depend on the valuation of the ﬁrm’s own

R&D investment project. That is, we will have to use the same kind of reasoning in order to ﬁnd the optimal

R&D investment/abandonment strategies for both of the ﬁrms as we did in the derivation of the duopoly

production rates, i.e., a Cournot-Nash type equilibrium. Therefore, we must investigate at any given date t

the two ﬁrms’ response functions in terms of their date t optimal R&D investment/abandonment decision, as

a reaction to their competitor’s given date t R&D investment/abandonment decision. To solve that problem

we ﬁrst need to know the date t value of the project as well as the optimal R&D investment strategy if the

other ﬁrm is hit by catastrophic events or if it abandons its R&D investment project for economic reasons.
                           R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                         23


This is a standard optimal stopping time problem that can be solved by the same methods as applied for the

losing ﬁrm in the monopoly phase. That is, at any given date t in the competitive R&D phase, i.e. t ∈ [0, τ ),

if the other ﬁrm’s project is no longer alive, the total value to ﬁrm i of all cash ﬂows after that date can be

derived as,
                                                  νi
         ViR&D1 (Yt , Kit , t) ≡ max E Q −             e−(r+λi )(s−t) Ii ds
                              νi ∈S(F)        t
(12)                                                                                         
                                          + 1{νi =τi } e−(r+λi )(τi −t) V M 1w (Yτi , τi ) Ft ,   t ∈ [0, τ ).


In equation (12) we have exploited the fact that V D1 and V M 1w are identical, even though, strictly speaking,

they are not deﬁned on the same time intervals, cf. equation (11). Note that the value will only depend on

the value of the state variable Y , the estimated remaining R&D investment costs for the ﬁrm itself, Ki , and

the date t. The state variables measuring the estimated remaining R&D investment costs for the competing

ﬁrm, Kj , for j = 3 − i, is no longer relevant since that ﬁrm has either been hit by catastrophic events or has

abandoned its R&D investment project before completion. The superscript R&D1 indicates that this is the

project value in the competitive R&D phase if the other ﬁrm’s project is no longer alive. Note the two terms

in equation (12): the ﬁrst term is ﬁrm i’s R&D investment costs from date t and until it is either hit by

catastrophic events, it decides to abandon its R&D investment project, or until its R&D investment project

is completed; the second term is ﬁrm i’s monopoly proﬁt in the event that its project is completed. In this

case we denote the date t optimal R&D investment/abandonment strategy for the problem in equation (12)
    1∗
as νit . Again the superscript 1∗ indicates that this is the (date t) optimal R&D investment/abandonment

strategy, given that the other ﬁrm’s project is no longer alive at that date. This optimal stopping time

problem can be solved in the same way as sketched in equation (7). Details can be found in Appendix A.

  Now that we know the date t value of ﬁrm i’s R&D investment project if the other ﬁrm decides to abandon

its R&D investment project, we need to derive the date t value of ﬁrm i’s R&D investment project if the

other ﬁrm continues investing in its R&D investment project in order to ﬁnd the best response function.

In order to derive the date t value of ﬁrm i’s R&D investment project if the other ﬁrm continues investing

in its R&D investment project, we must take into account both the fact that both ﬁrms are exposed to

catastrophic events and the fact that both ﬁrms follow R&D investment strategies that are Cournot-Nash

equilibria at any later date s ≥ t in the competitive R&D phase. Therefore, in the case where both ﬁrms are

still investing in their R&D investment projects, we cannot just write the objective function of ﬁrm i at date

t as a simple optimal stopping time problem as we have done in the monopoly phase for the losing ﬁrm and

in the competitive R&D phase when there is only one project left. Because of the competitive interactions
                                R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                           24


we are only able to derive the objective function as a solution to a dynamic programming problem. If both

projects are alive in the competitive R&D phase, the boundary conditions for the project values are given

by the value at the entrance date into the monopoly phase. That is,22


(13)                                  VwR&D2 (Yτ , Klτ , 0, τ ) = VwM 2w (Yτ , Klτ , τ )


and


(14)                                  VlR&D2 (Yτ , Klτ , 0, τ ) = VlM 2l (Yτ , Klτ , τ ).


The valuation problem in the competitive R&D phase is then solved by going backward in time in the usual

dynamic programming fashion. That is, we solve for the value of the R&D investment project at date t (in

the competitive R&D phase) conditional on that we have already solved for the value at any later date s.

Let ViR&D2 (Ys , K1s , K2s , s) denote the total value to ﬁrm i at date s of all cash ﬂows after date s in the

competitive R&D phase if both projects are still alive and both ﬁrms follow R&D investment strategies that

are Cournot-Nash equilibria at any later date u ≥ s in the competitive R&D phase. From equation (12) we

have, in addition, derived the total value at date s in the competitive R&D phase to ﬁrm i of all cash ﬂows

after date s when it follows the optimal stopping time rule in the case where the other ﬁrm abandons its R&D

investment project. This value is denoted ViR&D1 (Ys , Kis , s). The total value at date t in the competitive
R&D phase to ﬁrm i (if its project is still alive) of all cash ﬂows after date t, if both ﬁrms continue investing

in their R&D investment projects at date t, can then (intuitively) be written as

          V̂iR&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) = E Q −e−(r+λi )dt Ii dt


                                            + e−(r+λi +λj )dt ViR&D2 (Yt + dYt , K1t + dK1t , K2t + dK2t , t + dt)
(15)
                                                                    
                                            + e−(r+λi )dt 1 − e−λj dt ×
                                                                                        
                                              ViR&D1 (Yt + dYt , Kit + dKit , t + dt) Ft .

The superscript R&D2 indicates that this is the ﬁrm’s value in the competitive R&D phase if the other

ﬁrm’s project is still alive.



22In this derivation of the boundary conditions we have implicitly assumed that ﬁrm two is the winning ﬁrm and that ﬁrm one
is the losing ﬁrm. If the opposite situation is the case, then Klτ and zero should be interchanged in the arguments of both
V R&D2 s on the left hand sides of the equations.
                              R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                     25



                                                                                             Firm two
                                                        Continues investing                                Abandons
                Continues investing     V̂1R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t), V̂2R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t)   V1R&D1 (Yt , K1t , t), 0
   Firm one
                     Abandons                           0, V2R&D1 (Yt , K2t , t)                              0, 0
         Table 1. Normal form representation of the R&D investment game with competitive inter-
         actions between the two ﬁrms at date t in the competitive R&D phase. The table contains
         the date t value to each of the two duopolists of all future cash ﬂows after that date (ﬁrm
         one’s value before the comma and ﬁrm two’s value after the comma) given that both ﬁrms
         follow the decisions indicated in the margin of the box at date t and that both ﬁrms follow
         R&D investment strategies that are Cournot-Nash equilibria at any later date s ≥ t in the
         competitive R&D phase.



   To ﬁnd the Cournot-Nash type equilibrium R&D investment/abandonment decisions at date t for the two

ﬁrms in the competitive R&D phase, we will have to consider the game in Table 1. Table 1 contains the date t

value to each of the two duopolists of all future cash ﬂows after that date (ﬁrm one’s value before the comma

and ﬁrm two’s value after the comma) given that both ﬁrms follow the decisions indicated in the margin of

the box at date t and that both ﬁrms follow R&D investment strategies that are Cournot-Nash equilibria at

any later date s ≥ t in the competitive R&D phase. Take, e.g., the upper right corner of the box in Table 1.

The two numbers, V1R&D1 (Yt , K1t , t), 0, indicate that if ﬁrm one continues investing in its R&D investment
project and ﬁrm two abandons its R&D investment project, then the value of all future cash ﬂows to ﬁrm one

would be V1R&D1 (Yt , K1t , t), whereas the value of all future cash ﬂows to ﬁrm two would be zero. Naturally,
V̂iR&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) < ViR&D1 (Yt , Kit , t), for both i = 1 and i = 2, i.e., the value to ﬁrm i of all future

cash ﬂows if it continues investing in R&D is lower if the other ﬁrm also continues investing in R&D than if

the other ﬁrm abandons its R&D investment project, ceteris paribus. If V̂iR&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) ≥ 0, for both

i = 1 and i = 2, there is a unique Nash equilibrium in simple strategies. This equilibrium is that both ﬁrms

continue investing. If, for one i, V̂iR&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) ≥ 0 and V̂jR&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) < 0, for j = 3 − i,

then the unique Nash equilibrium in simple strategies is that ﬁrm i continues investing in R&D, whereas

ﬁrm j = 3 − i abandons its R&D investment project. If ViR&D1 (Yt , Kit , t) < 0, for both i = 1 and i = 2,

then the unique Nash equilibrium in simple strategies is that both ﬁrms abandon their R&D investment

projects. If, for one i, ViR&D1 (Yt , Kit , t) ≥ 0 and VjR&D1 (Yt , Kjt , t) < 0, for j = 3 − i, then the unique Nash

equilibrium in simple strategies is that ﬁrm i continues investing in R&D, whereas ﬁrm j = 3 − i abandons

its R&D investment project. Finally, if ViR&D1 (Yt , Kit , t) ≥ 0 and V̂iR&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) < 0, for both i = 1

and i = 2, then there are multiple Nash equilibria in simple strategies. It is a Nash equilibrium in simple

strategies that one of the ﬁrms continues investing in R&D and the other abandons its R&D investment
                                R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                26


project. The question is how the two ﬁrms should select a rule for which of the two ﬁrms should continue

investing in R&D and which of them should abandon its R&D investment project. Any rule that given

the information set available to the two ﬁrms unambiguously selects which of the two ﬁrms should continue

investing in R&D and which of them should abandon its R&D investment project is a Nash equilibrium. In

our numerical solution procedure presented in Section 3 we have implemented the rule that the ﬁrm with

the highest value of continuing investing in R&D, given that the other ﬁrm abandons its R&D investment

project, continues investing in R&D, and the other ﬁrm abandons its R&D investment project. In the

zero-probability event that both ﬁrms have identical values of continuing investing in R&D, given that the

other ﬁrm abandons its R&D investment project, we say that ﬁrm two continues investing in R&D and

ﬁrm one abandons its R&D investment project.23 That is, we have implemented the rule that it is ﬁrm
one which continues investing in R&D and ﬁrm two which abandons its R&D investment project if and

only if V1R&D1 (Yt , K1t , t) > V2R&D1 (Yt , K2t , t). This Nash equilibrium among all Nash equilibria is the one

that gives the highest ex ante values of the two ﬁrms’ projects and therefore it should be the one Nash

equilibrium that both ﬁrms would prefer to play. One economic motivation for this reﬁnement criterion is

a story related to mutual threads of war of attrition.24 First of all we can think of the two ﬁrms as the

two opponents of a potential war of attrition. Firm i’s gain from winning this war of attrition by forcing

ﬁrm j = 3 − i to abandon its R&D investment project at date t is ViR&D1 (Yt , Kit , t). Both ﬁrms know their

own and their opponent’s potential gains from winning this war of attrition. Since the value of losing the

potential war of attrition is zero, ViR&D1 (Yt , Kit , t) can also be interpreted as the maximum amount that

ﬁrm i would be willing to spend in order to win this war of attrition. Faced with these facts we ﬁnd it

plausible that the ﬁrm with the lowest value of V R&D1 voluntarily abandons its R&D investment project

without even starting the war of attrition. This implies that the ﬁrm with the highest value of V R&D1

can continue its R&D investment project as a monopolist without having to spend any money to win the

war of attrition. It is also possible to think about this reﬁnement in terms of mergers and acquisitions. In

these cases the equilibrium outcome would be the same, i.e. the ﬁrm with the highest value of V R&D1 will

continue its R&D investment project and the other ﬁrm would abandon its R&D project, but typically a

Nash bargaining game would be involved and there would be a wealth transfer from the ﬁrm with the highest

value of V R&D1 to the ﬁrm with the lowest value of V R&D1 . In this case there could also be an increase in
23Since we assume that both projects are identical at date zero, i.e. we are working with symmetric ﬁrms, this event happens
with probability one at date zero when the projects are marginal. This means that whenever it is not optimal for both duopolists
to initiate their R&D investment projects at date zero, only ﬁrm two would initiate its R&D investment project and we will de
facto have a monopoly situation.
24Other articles that consider wars of attrition in duopoly situations are Ghemawat and Nalebuﬀ (1985), Fudenberg and Tirole
(1986), and Lambrecht (2001).
                                  R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                              27


value to above the highest value of V R&D1 if the two R&D investment projects can be combined in some way

as a result of a merger or an acquisition. Finally, there is also a Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies. For

comparison we have also implemented this rule in our numerical solution procedure presented in Section 3.
                                                                                                               VjR&D1 (Yt ,Kjt ,t)
This equilibrium is that ﬁrm i = 3−j continues investing with probability                          VjR&D1 (Yt ,Kjt ,t)−V̂jR&D2 (Yt ,K1t ,K2t ,t)
                                                           VjR&D1 (Yt ,Kjt ,t)
and abandons with probability 1 −              VjR&D1 (Yt ,Kjt ,t)−V̂jR&D2 (Yt ,K1t ,K2t ,t)
                                                                                               , for both ﬁrms i = 1 and i = 2. Note

that ViR&D1 (Yt , Kit , t) ≥ 0 and V̂iR&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) < 0, for both i = 1 and i = 2, such that the

probabilities for continuing investing are positive and strictly less than one. This alternative equilibrium,

while theoretically appealing in the sense that it provides the same value (namely zero) to both projects at

date t, does not provide the highest ex-ante value for the projects. Hence, we have found the Cournot-Nash

type equilibrium investment decisions for date t. The date t values for each of the two projects corresponding

to the outcome of this Cournot-Nash type investment game can then be assigned to V1R&D2 and V2R&D2 ,
cf. equations (16) and (17) in Appendix B. This last step replaces equation (8) in the optimal stopping

time problem. To make this method rigorous in continuous time we must derive two partial diﬀerential

equations to solve for V̂1R&D2 and V̂2R&D2 assuming that both ﬁrms continue investing, and at each instant

in time check that it is a Nash equilibrium for both ﬁrms to continue investing. As soon as one of the other

three outcomes of the game becomes a Nash equilibrium the competitive interactions come to an end and

the corresponding values from equation (12) can be substituted in as a boundary condition. Details can be

found in Appendix B.

   The way to solve for the date zero Cournot-Nash type equilibrium R&D investment/abandonment strate-

gies for the two ﬁrms is to successively solve for Nash equilibria in the game in Table 1 at each instant in time,

starting with equations (13) and (14) at the entrance date into the monopoly phase and going backwards in

time using equation (15) until date zero.


                                          3. Numerical Solution Procedure

   We solve the model numerically by applying a variation of the Longstaﬀ-Schwartz method (Longstaﬀ and

Schwartz 2001). This is done by ﬁrst simulating 100,000 discretizised25 sample paths of the three governing

state variables Y , K1 , and K2 . It is then easy to determine the two stopping times τ and τ for each sample

path, cf. Figure 3. The value of all future proﬁts to each of the two ﬁrms can easily be calculated at date τ by

equations (3) and (4) in both the case where the ﬁrm will be the only one on the market, i.e. a monopolist, and

in the case where the ﬁrms will be sharing the market, i.e. duopolists. The reason that we have to calculate

25In our implementation we have used a discretization based on three-month intervals. That is, we have separated the twenty-
year time period, [0, T ], into 80 quarters.
                                R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                28


both proﬁt values is that we do not know if and when one of the two ﬁrms will abandon its R&D investment

project or if and when it may be hit by catastrophic events. The losing ﬁrm’s value in the monopoly phase

is, however, a little bit more problematic in that it involves the R&D investment/abandonment decision,

cf. equations (5) and (9). The value of the losing ﬁrm, at any given date in the monopoly phase, of all

future cash ﬂows, if the ﬁrm continues investing in R&D, can be approximated by the following backward

procedure similar in spirit to equation (7): regress the continuation value along each of the sample paths

which are in the monopoly phase at the same date on a speciﬁc function of the current values along the

corresponding sample paths of the two governing state variables, Kl and Y . The regression coeﬃcients from

this regression is used to approximate the value, at this date in the monopoly phase, of all future cash ﬂows,

if the ﬁrm continues investing in R&D, simply by applying the regression to the current values of the two

governing state variables.26 If the value of continuing investing in R&D is greater than the costs of investing

in R&D for another quarter, the ﬁrm should continue investing in R&D, otherwise it should abandon its

R&D investment project. This procedure gives us the value of all future cash ﬂows for the losing ﬁrm back

to date τ as well as the ﬁrm’s R&D investment/abandonment decisions along each sample path for each

quarter in the monopoly phase both in the case where both projects are alive and in the case where there

is only one project alive. With the losing ﬁrm’s R&D investment/abandonment decisions along each sample

path for each quarter in the monopoly phase it is quite easy to calculate the winning ﬁrm’s value of all future

proﬁts at date τ by equations (10) and (11).

   In the competitive R&D phase, the same method is applied to approximate the value of all future cash

ﬂows, given the current value of the (now three) governing state variables, K1 , K2 and Y , cf. equation (15).

However, as we saw in Section 2 the actual R&D investment/abandonment decision is somewhat more tricky

in this situation as we, for each quarter, have to go through the game in Table 1 to ﬁnd the Nash equilibrium

R&D investment/abandonment decisions based on the values from equations (12) and (15). Note that in

the case where we allow for mixed strategies the investment/abandonment decision is not just an either-

or decision (either the ﬁrm continues investing in its R&D project, or it abandons its project), the mixed

strategy is implemented as a probability of continuing to invest.



26The Longstaﬀ-Schwartz method exploits the fact that the continuation value, i.e. the date t value of all future cash ﬂows from
the R&D investment project if the ﬁrm continues investing in R&D (including the option to abandon later on), is simply the
date t conditional expectation of the value of the true future cash ﬂows from the R&D investment project under an equivalent
martingale measure, Q. Since the current date t value of the two governing state variables is a suﬃcient statistic of all date t
information, it follows that the conditional expectation under Q is some (unknown) function of the current realized values of
the two governing state variables. It is this unknown function that we try to approximate/estimate at each instant in time.
This is done by estimating ten coeﬃcients in a cubic polynomial parameterization of the function.
                           R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                     29


  When this backward procedure is carried out starting from date T = 20 and quarter by quarter going

backwards through the duopoly phase, the monopoly phase, and the competitive R&D phase back to date

zero, all the R&D investment/abandonment decisions (possible as mixed strategies) for the two ﬁrms have

been determined for each quarter and for each of the 100,000 sample paths, both in the case where there are

still two projects alive and in the case where there is only one project alive. The actual values of all future

cash ﬂows from continuing the R&D investment project which are the results of the regressions that has been

run are not used in the computation of the value of the projects, only the R&D investment/abandonment

decisions they have caused are used.

  In order to value the R&D investment projects for the two ﬁrms at date zero we implement a forward

procedure that ﬁnds the value by evaluating the proﬁt along each sample path taking into account the R&D

investment/abandonment decisions (possible as mixed strategies) derived by the backward procedure and

averaging over all the sample paths.



                                          4. Numerical Results

  In this section we provide a numerical illustration of the model. Since we solve the problem using numerical

simulations, we are able to characterize the solution in great detail. We ﬁrst develop a base case and then

we perform sensitivity analysis with respect to some of the key parameters of the model. We emphasize the

diﬀerences between competitive (duopoly) and monopoly solutions to the R&D investment project. We have

two diﬀerent competitive solutions: one using the war of attrition reﬁnement and one using mixed strategies

and also two diﬀerent monopoly solutions: one where the monopolist only has access to project one and one

where the monopolist has access to both projects.

  Table 2 contains the data for the base case. The inverse demand function parameters are the same as

the ones used to construct Figure 2. Note that parameter a is a measure of the size of the market for the

product and that parameter b is a measure of the depth of the market, i.e., a measure for how much the

price would change for a given change in supplied quantity. The R&D investment cost parameters are the

ones used to construct the sample paths in Figure 3. The other parameters are chosen to represent a typical

drug development project (Schwartz 2001).

  The results of the numerical simulations for the base case are shown in Table 3. As expected the value of

the R&D investment project in the monopoly situation is higher than the sum of the values of the two R&D

investment projects in the duopoly situation. The monopolist not only optimizes its production rate after

completion of the R&D investment project in order to maximize its own per period production proﬁts, but it
                               R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                             30



                                               Inverse demand function
                   First parameter                                                        a           15
                   Second parameter                                                       b          0.1
                                                     Demand shocks
                   Drift parameter                                                       µy            0
                   Diﬀusion parameter                                                     σy        20%
                   Initial value                                                          Y0          1
                        Estimated remaining R&D investment costs for ﬁrm one’s project
                   Initial value                                            K10        100
                   Investment rate                                                        I1          10
                   Diﬀusion parameter of technical shocks                                 γ1        20%
                   Drift parameter of input cost shocks                                  µ1k          0
                   Diﬀusion parameter of input cost shocks                               σ1k        10%
                        Estimated remaining R&D investment costs for ﬁrm two’s project
                   Initial value                                            K20        100
                   Investment rate                                                        I2          10
                   Diﬀusion parameter of technical shocks                                 γ2        20%
                   Drift parameter of input cost shocks                                  µ2k          0
                   Diﬀusion parameter of input cost shocks                               σ2k        10%
                                                Other parameters
                   Intensity of catastrophic events for ﬁrm one                           λ1        0.07
                   Intensity of catastrophic events for ﬁrm two                          λ2         0.07
                   Correlation between demand shocks and input cost shocks               ρyk        –0.1
                   Riskless interest rate                                                 r          5%
                   Duration of the patent period                                          T           20
                                      Numerical procedure parameters
                   Number of simulated paths                                              N     100,000
                   Duration of each time step                                            ∆t         0.25
                                       Table 2. Base case parameter values.



also uses an optimal R&D investment/abandonment strategy during the period of R&D investments without

having to consider competitive interactions. In the base case it turns out not to be optimal to initiate a

backup project.27 Hence, the results are identical for the monopolist who has access only to project one and

for the monopolist who has access to both projects. Note that the present value of the revenues generated

during the production period is 27% higher in the duopoly situation than in the monopoly situation even

though on average the price per unit sold is lower in the duopoly situation than in the monopoly situation.

27
  In fact, it turns out only to be optimal for a monopolist to initiate the backup project for very proﬁtable R&D investment
projects. In our numerical examples this only happens when a = 17.5 or higher, cf. Figure 4 below.
                               R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                             31


                                                        Duopoly situation       Duopoly situation       Monopoly situation
                                                        with war of attrition   with mixed strategies
 Value of R&D investment project(s)                              4.9                     4.9                  10.0
 Present value of revenues                                      63.7                    63.6                  50.3
 Present value of R&D investment costs                          58.8                    58.7                  40.4
 Total number of units produced                                 11.6                    11.5                   8.5
 Present value of revenue per unit produced                      5.5                     5.5                   5.9
 Present value of R&D investment costs per unit prod.            5.1                     5.1                   4.7
 Probability of catastrophic events for each ﬁrm                24.4%                   24.3%                 33.5%
 Probability of economic abandonment for each ﬁrm               50.8%                   51.0%                 32.3%
 Total probability of not completing for each ﬁrm               75.2%                   75.3%                 65.7%
 Probability that at least one ﬁrm completes                    43.4%                   43.3%                 34.3%
 Probability that both ﬁrms complete                             5.6%                    5.6%                  n/a

         Table 3. Results of base case analysis using the base case parameter values from Table 2.




This is due to the fact that, on average, the total number of units produced is 36% higher in the duopoly

situation than in the monopoly situation. There are three reasons, all working in the same direction, for this

higher production in the duopoly situation. Firstly, there is a higher probability that a product is developed

in the duopoly situation than in the monopoly situation since (i) catastrophic events are diversiﬁed over

the two duopolists and (ii) the R&D investment costs for the winning duopoly ﬁrm are on average smaller

than the R&D investment costs for the monopoly ﬁrm because the winning duopoly ﬁrm typically has the

estimated remaining R&D investment cost process which hits zero ﬁrst. Secondly, on average the time to

completion for the ﬁrst product is shorter in the duopoly situation than in the monopoly situation so there

is a longer time period to produce before the patents expire. Thirdly, in those cases where both duopolists

complete their R&D investment projects, the production rate is higher after the second ﬁrm completes its

R&D investment project (see ﬁgure 2). The ﬂip side of the beneﬁts of having more units produced in the

duopoly situation is that the total present value of the R&D investment costs is higher in the duopoly

situation than in the monopoly situation. Even on a per unit basis the present value of the R&D investment

costs is higher in the duopoly situation than in the monopoly situation, since there is a duplication of the

R&D investment costs. The results are practically identical for the two diﬀerent implemented reﬁnements

of the duopoly situation. Practically it does not matter for this case whether the duopolists play mixed

strategies or play a war of attrition game. Therefore, in the following we will only report on the duopoly

results with war of attrition reﬁnements. We will, however, comment on the results related to duopoly

with mixed strategies when there are signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the results when using war of attrition

reﬁnement and mixed strategies.
                              R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                           32


     Now let us turn to the analysis of the probabilities of abandonment.28 The probability of abandonment of

the R&D investment project because it is no longer proﬁtable to continue investing (economic abandonment)

for each of the two duopolists is much larger (50.8–51.0%) than it is for the monopolist (32.3%), since the

expected future cash ﬂows to each of the two duopolists are smaller. A consequence of this is that on

average the life time of an R&D investment project initiated by a duopolist is shorter than the life time of

an R&D investment project initiated by a monopolist, and therefore the probability of catastrophic events is

smaller for a given R&D investment project if it is initiated by a duopolist (24.3–24.4%) than if it is initiated

by a monopolist (33.5%). The outcome of these two opposing eﬀects is that, on a per project basis, the

probability of completion of the R&D investment project is higher if the R&D investment project is initiated

by a monopolist than if it is initiated by a duopolist. If we take into account that there are two duopolists,

each with an R&D investment project; however, the probability that at least one of the two duopolists will

complete is higher (43.3–43.4%) than the probability that the monopolist will complete (34.3%). Finally, in

our base case, the probability that both duopolists complete is only 5.6%. That is, the conditional probability

that the second duopolist completes, conditional on the ﬁrst completing, is only 22.3–22.6%, which is lower

than the unconditional probability that a given duopolist will complete (24.7–24.8%).

     In summary, if we only take into account the value of the R&D investment projects, the monopoly

situation is the superior alternative for society. But, if society’s objective criteria include the number of

units produced, the price per unit produced, the time to complete the R&D investment project, and the

probability of successful completion, the duopoly situation may very well be the superior alternative. Note

that these beneﬁts of the duopoly situation came about not only because of the lower price charged when

both duopolists are producing, but also because of the fact that the chance of completion is higher and the

expected time to completion of the ﬁrst R&D investment project is shorter. These results are robust to

most of the numerical simulations we have performed. Only when the R&D investment projects are very

marginal will monopoly induce higher probability of successful completion and thereby a higher number of

units produced than duopoly with mixed strategies. If the duopolists are playing war of attrition, the results

are identical to the monopoly case since the R&D investment projects are so marginal that one of the two

duopolists abandon at date zero.

     To get to a deeper understanding of the insights of the model, we now perturb some of the key parameters

of the model and analyze their impact, for both the duopoly and monopoly situations, on valuation, number

of units produced, and probabilities of completion. We ﬁrst analyze the sensitivity to the size of the market.
28
 Note that these are risk neutral probabilities since we have only developed the stochastic processes under an equivalent
martingale measure, Q.
                             30.0                                                                                                                                                        17.0

                                                                                                                                                                                         16.0
                             27.5
                                                                                                                                                                                         15.0

                             25.0                                                                                                                                                        14.0

                                                                                                                                                                                         13.0
                             22.5
                                                                                                                                                                                         12.0
                             20.0
                                                                                                                                                                                         11.0

                             17.5                                                                                                                                                        10.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                9.0
                             15.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                8.0

                             12.5                                                                                                                                                               7.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                6.0
                             10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                5.0




                                                                                                                                                                     Number of units produced
                                    7.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                4.0




    R&D investment project values
                                    5.0                                                                                                                                                         3.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                2.0
                                    2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                1.0

                                    0.0                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                       11.5   12.0   12.5   13.0   13.5   14.0   14.5   15.0   15.5   16.0   16.5   17.0   17.5   18.0   18.5   19.0   19.5   20.0                                11.5   12.0   12.5   13.0   13.5   14.0   14.5   15.0   15.5   16.0   16.5   17.0   17.5   18.0   18.5   19.0   19.5   20.0
                                                                                          Parameter a                                                                                                                                                Parameter a


                                     (a) Values of R&D investment projects in the monopoly (solid                                                                                                (b) Units produced in the monopoly (solid line) and the duopoly
                                     line) and the duopoly (dashed line) situations as a function of                                                                                             (dashed line) situations as a function of market size, a.
                                     market size, a.


                               0.65                                                                                                                                                        7.50


                               0.60                                                                                                                                                        7.25


                               0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                           7.00

                               0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                           6.75

                               0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                           6.50

                               0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                           6.25
                               0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                           6.00
                               0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                           5.75
                               0.25

                                                                                                                                                                                           5.50
                               0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS




                                                                                                                                                                     Values per unit produced




    Probabilities of completion
                                                                                                                                                                                           5.25
                               0.15

                                                                                                                                                                                           5.00
                               0.10


                               0.05                                                                                                                                                        4.75


                               0.00                                                                                                                                                        4.50
                                   11.5       12.0   12.5   13.0   13.5   14.0   14.5   15.0   15.5   16.0   16.5   17.0   17.5   18.0   18.5   19.0   19.5   20.0                             11.5      12.0   12.5   13.0   13.5   14.0   14.5   15.0   15.5   16.0   16.5   17.0   17.5   18.0   18.5   19.0   19.5   20.0
                                                                                          Parameter a                                                                                                                                                Parameter a


                                     (c) Probabilities of completion in the monopoly situation (solid                                                                                            (d) Present value of costs (solid line) and revenues (dashed-
                                     line), and probabilities that at least one of the duopolists com-                                                                                           dotted line) in the monopoly situation and present value of costs
                                     pletes (dashed line), and that both of the duopolists (dotted                                                                                               (dashed line) and revenues (dotted line) in the duopoly situation
                                     line) complete in the duopoly situation as a function of market
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                33




                                                                                                                                                                                                 per unit produced as a function of market size, a.
                                     size, a.



Figure 4. Sensitivity analysis between duopoly with war of attrition reﬁnement and monopoly with respect to the market size, a.
                          22.5                                                                                                                                                        17.0

                                                                                                                                                                                      16.0

                          20.0                                                                                                                                                        15.0

                                                                                                                                                                                      14.0

                          17.5
                                                                                                                                                                                      13.0

                                                                                                                                                                                      12.0
                          15.0
                                                                                                                                                                                      11.0

                                                                                                                                                                                      10.0
                          12.5
                                                                                                                                                                                             9.0

                                                                                                                                                                                             8.0
                          10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                             7.0

                                                                                                                                                                                             6.0
                                 7.5
                                                                                                                                                                                             5.0




                                                                                                                                                                  Number of units produced
                                                                                                                                                                                             4.0
                                 5.0




 R&D investment project values
                                                                                                                                                                                             3.0

                                 2.5                                                                                                                                                         2.0

                                                                                                                                                                                             1.0

                                 0.0                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                    11.5   12.0   12.5   13.0   13.5   14.0   14.5   15.0   15.5   16.0   16.5   17.0   17.5   18.0   18.5   19.0   19.5   20.0                                11.5   12.0   12.5   13.0   13.5   14.0   14.5   15.0   15.5   16.0   16.5   17.0   17.5   18.0   18.5   19.0   19.5   20.0
                                                                                       Parameter a                                                                                                                                                Parameter a


                                  (a) Values of R&D investment projects in the duopoly situa-                                                                                                 (b) Units produced in the duopoly situation with mixed strate-
                                  tion with mixed strategies (solid line) and with war of attrition                                                                                           gies (solid line) and with war of attrition reﬁnement (dashed
                                  reﬁnement (dashed line) as a function of market size, a.                                                                                                    line) as a function of market size, a.


                            0.65                                                                                                                                                        6.75


                            0.60
                                                                                                                                                                                        6.50
                            0.55


                            0.50                                                                                                                                                        6.25


                            0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                        6.00

                            0.40

                                                                                                                                                                                        5.75
                            0.35


                            0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                        5.50

                            0.25

                                                                                                                                                                                        5.25
                            0.20
                                                                                                                                                                  Values per unit produced




 Probabilities of completion
                            0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS




                                                                                                                                                                                        5.00

                            0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                        4.75
                            0.05


                            0.00                                                                                                                                                        4.50
                                11.5       12.0   12.5   13.0   13.5   14.0   14.5   15.0   15.5   16.0   16.5   17.0   17.5   18.0   18.5   19.0   19.5   20.0                             11.5      12.0   12.5   13.0   13.5   14.0   14.5   15.0   15.5   16.0   16.5   17.0   17.5   18.0   18.5   19.0   19.5   20.0
                                                                                       Parameter a                                                                                                                                                Parameter a


                                  (c) Probabilities that at least one of the duopolists complete                                                                                              (d) Present value of costs (solid line) and revenues (dashed-
                                  (solid line) and that both of the duopolists (dashed-dotted line)                                                                                           dotted line) in the duopoly situation with mixed strategies and
                                  complete with mixed strategies, and probabilities that at least                                                                                             present value of costs (dashed line) and revenues (dotted line) in
                                  one of the duopolists completes (dashed line) and that both of                                                                                              the duopoly situation with war of attrition reﬁnement per unit
                                  the duopolists (dotted line) complete with war of attrition re-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             34




                                                                                                                                                                                              produced as a function of market size, a.
                                  ﬁnement as a function of market size, a.



Figure 5. Sensitivity analysis between duopoly with war of attrition reﬁnement and duopoly with mixed strategies with
respect to the market size, a.
                                R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                 35


The parameter a of the inverse demand function captures the number of units demanded for a given price

or the price that can be charged for a given quantity produced.29 We vary a from 11.5 up to 20 in Figure 4.

When a = 11.5, the market is so small that it is not optimal to initiate the R&D investment project even

in the monopoly situation, so that the value of the R&D investment project is zero, the number of units

produced is zero, and the probability of (economic) abandonment is 100%. When a = 12, 12.5, or 13, it is

optimal for the monopolist to initiate the R&D investment project, but the market is still not large enough

to make it optimal for both of the duopolists to initiate their R&D investment projects. However, according

to the rules of the R&D investment game given by our choice of reﬁnement criterion in the competitive R&D

phase, cf. Table 1 in Section 2, in this situation one of the ﬁrms’ (ﬁrm two’s) R&D investment projects is

initiated and the other ﬁrm’s (ﬁrm one’s) R&D investment project is immediately abandoned. Thus, the

duopoly (with war of attrition reﬁnement) and monopoly situations are identical when a = 12, 12.5, or 13.

With mixed strategies both duopolists initiate their R&D investment projects at date zero when a = 12,

12.5, or 13, cf. Figure 5 for comparison between the two diﬀerent reﬁnements in the duopoly situation. When

a is 13.5 or higher, both duopolists initiate their R&D investment projects at date zero and the diﬀerences

between the duopoly and monopoly situations start arising. The scenario when a = 15 corresponds to the

base case discussed in detail above, cf. Table 3.

   Figure 4(a) shows that as the size of the market increases, the values of the R&D investment projects

in both the duopoly and the monopoly situations increase, but the R&D investment project values in the

monopoly situation (solid line) increase more than in the duopoly situation (dashed line) such that the

absolute diﬀerence between the monopoly and the duopoly situations also increases. Figure 4(b) shows that

the number of units produced also increases with the market size. The increase is, however, stronger for

the duopoly situation (dashed line) than for the monopoly situation (solid line). The three reasons for a

larger production in the duopoly situation than in the monopoly situation mentioned above get stronger

the larger the size of the market. This is because as the demand increases, the better the projects are, and

therefore the later will one of the duopolists eventually abandon for economic reasons. This implies that the

diversiﬁcation eﬀects and the eﬀect that one of the duopolists completes on average earlier are increased, and

at the same time the probability that both of the duopolists complete increases. In Figure 4(d) we present

the present values of the R&D investment costs per unit produced and the present value of revenues per

units produced for both the duopoly and monopoly situations. As the size of the market increases, the price
29Our speciﬁcation of the demand function is such that the optimal quantity produced both in the monopoly and duopoly
situations is independent of a, such that there is only a price eﬀect when the size of the market is changed. Note, however, that
there is an indirect eﬀect on the quantity produced since, as the price increases, on average more R&D investment projects are
completed, which implies a higher average number of units produced.
                           R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                    36


per unit sold also increases, and then also the present value of the revenue per unit produced will increase

in both the monopoly (dashed-dotted line) and the duopoly (dotted line) situations. As the present value

of revenues per unit produced increases, the ﬁrms are willing to incur more R&D investment costs per unit

produced in order to obtain these per unit revenues. Hence, also the present value of R&D investment costs

per unit produced increases in both the monopoly (solid line) and the duopoly (dashed line) situations. The

two inner curves correspond to the duopoly situation and the two outer curves correspond to the monopoly

situation. The diﬀerence between the two inner curves and the diﬀerence between the two outer curves are

the R&D investment project values per unit produced to the duopolist and monopolist, respectively. The

probabilities of completion are depicted in Figure 4(c). As we can see, both the probability that at least one

of the duopolists completes (dashed line) and the probability that both of the duopolists complete (dotted

line) increase with market size in absolute terms as well as relative to the monopoly situation (solid line).

  Figure 5 shows that when a is 13.5 or higher there is practically no diﬀerence between the two diﬀerent

reﬁnements in the duopoly situation. The value of the R&D investment projects will always be highest with

the war of attrition reﬁnement, since this reﬁnement is the one with the highest ex-ante values. A closer

look at Figure 5(a) shows that the values with war of attrition reﬁnement (dashed line) is higher than the

values with mixed strategies reﬁnement (solid line) even for values of a at 13.5 or higher, most signiﬁcantly

for a = 13.5 and a = 14.0 when the chances for scenarios where the distinction actually matters are the

highest. It is interesting to see that when the R&D investment projects are very marginal, i.e. for a = 12,

the probability of completion as well as the number of units produced are higher for the duopoly situation

with war of attrition reﬁnement (which for this case is de facto a monopoly situation) than for the duopoly

situation with mixed strategies. Already for a = 12.5 the probabilities of completion and the number of

units produced become almost equal. For a = 13 the mixed strategy reﬁnement gives signiﬁcantly higher

probabilities of completion, more units produced, and lower price per unit produced. This is because when

the projects are very marginal the probabilities of continuing investing for each of the two ﬁrms with the

mixed strategy reﬁnement is low. However, when the projects are a little better (but still marginal) the

mixed strategy reﬁnement gives a higher probability that each of the projects will be completed and there

is even a small chance that both projects will be completed, cf. Figure 5(c).

  The intensity of catastrophic events, λ, measures the probability per unit of time that the value of the

R&D investment projects will vanish due to unforeseen external circumstances and thereby quantiﬁes how

challenging the R&D investment projects are. An increase in the value of λ clearly decreases the value of the

R&D investment projects both in the duopoly and monopoly situations, but it also increases the advantage
                           45.0                                                                                                          25.0




                           40.0                                                                                                          22.5



                                                                                                                                         20.0
                           35.0


                                                                                                                                         17.5
                           30.0


                                                                                                                                         15.0
                           25.0

                                                                                                                                         12.5

                           20.0

                                                                                                                                         10.0


                           15.0
                                                                                                                                                7.5




                                                                                                                     Number of units produced
                           10.0




  R&D investment project values
                                                                                                                                                5.0



                                  5.0
                                                                                                                                                2.5



                                  0.0                                                                                                           0.0
                                    0.00   0.01   0.02   0.03   0.04       0.05   0.06   0.07   0.08   0.09   0.10                                0.00   0.01   0.02   0.03   0.04       0.05   0.06   0.07   0.08   0.09   0.10
                                                                   Parameter λ                                                                                                   Parameter λ


                                   (a) Values of R&D investment projects in the monopoly (solid                                                  (b) Units produced in the monopoly (solid line) and the duopoly
                                   line) and the duopoly (dashed line) situations as a function of                                               (dashed line) situations as a function of intensity of catastrophic
                                   intensity of catastrophic events, λ.                                                                          events, λ.


                             1.00                                                                                                          6.25


                                                                                                                                           6.00
                             0.90

                                                                                                                                           5.75
                             0.80

                                                                                                                                           5.50

                             0.70
                                                                                                                                           5.25

                             0.60
                                                                                                                                           5.00


                             0.50                                                                                                          4.75


                                                                                                                                           4.50
                             0.40

                                                                                                                                           4.25
                             0.30
                                                                                                                     Values per unit produced




  Probabilities of completion
                                                                                                                                           4.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS




                             0.20
                                                                                                                                           3.75

                             0.10
                                                                                                                                           3.50


                             0.00                                                                                                          3.25
                                 0.00      0.01   0.02   0.03   0.04       0.05   0.06   0.07   0.08   0.09   0.10                             0.00      0.01   0.02   0.03   0.04       0.05   0.06   0.07   0.08   0.09   0.10
                                                                       Parameter λ                                                                                                   Parameter λ


                                   (c) Probabilities of completion in the monopoly situation (solid                                              (d) Present value of costs (solid line) and revenues (dashed-
                                   line), probabilities that at least one of the duopolists completes                                            dotted line) in the monopoly situation and present value of costs
                                   (dashed line), that both of the duopolists (dotted line) complete,                                            (dashed line) and revenues (dotted line) in the duopoly situa-
                                   and that the second duopolist completes conditional on that the                                               tion per unit produced as a function of intensity of catastrophic
                                   ﬁrst one completes (dashed-dotted line) in the duopoly situation                                              events, λ.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   37




                                   as a function of intensity of catastrophic events, λ.



Figure 6. Sensitivity analysis between duopoly with war of attrition reﬁnement and monopoly with respect to the intensity
of catastrophic events, λ = λ1 = λ2 .
                           R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                    38


that diversiﬁcation has on the R&D investment project values in the duopoly situation compared to the

monopoly situation. In Figure 6 we vary λ for both ﬁrms (λ = λ1 = λ2 ) from zero (no catastrophic events)

up to 0.10. When λ = 0.10, we get the same scenario as explained above where the R&D investment project

is so marginal that only one of the two duopolists would optimally initiate investment in the R&D investment

project, and therefore the results for the monopoly and duopoly situations are identical in this scenario. (It

is also the case here that this is the only value of λ where there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two

diﬀerent reﬁnements in the duopoly case.) For all other values of λ in Figure 6 we get that both duopolists

optimally initiate their investment in the R&D investment project at date zero. Recall that in the base case

λ = 0.07. Keep in mind that for this analysis we maintain the inverse demand function ﬁxed, so that all

the results are due to the eﬀect that the catastrophic events have on the completion of the R&D investment

projects. Figure 6(a) shows that the value of the R&D investment projects in the monopoly situation (solid

line) is more than twice what it is in the duopoly situation (dashed line) for λ = 0; this is mostly because

the duopolists incur much higher R&D investment costs without getting the beneﬁts of the diversiﬁcation

of the catastrophic events (since there are no catastrophic events). But when λ increases, the value of the

R&D investment project in the monopoly situation (solid line) decreases much faster than the value of the

R&D investment projects in the duopoly situation (dashed line) mainly due to the increased diversiﬁcation

of catastrophic events in the duopoly situation. In Figure 6(b) we see that the number of units produced

decreases as λ increases in both situations. However, the relative diﬀerence between the number of units

produced in the monopoly situation (solid line) and in the duopoly situation (dashed line) is smaller than

the relative diﬀerence between the values of the R&D investment projects because the R&D investment

duplication eﬀect does not directly inﬂuence the number of units produced.

  Figure 6(d) illustrates the eﬀect of λ on the present value of revenues and the present value of R&D

investment costs per unit produced for both the monopoly and the duopoly situations. The present value

of revenues per unit produced increases in both the monopoly (dashed-dotted line) and the duopoly (dotted

line) situations because as λ increases, the R&D investment projects become more and more marginal and

the threshold level of the demand shocks for abandonment becomes higher, ceteris paribus. Hence, as λ

increases the average price conditional on production occurring also increases. R&D investment costs per

unit produced also increase both in the monopoly (solid line) and the duopoly (dashed line) situations

because since the revenues per unit produced are higher, the ﬁrm is willing to incur higher R&D investment

costs per unit produced, but they even go up faster than the revenues per unit produced so that the project

values per unit produced go down. In Figure 6(c) we observe that the probabilities of completion decrease
                           R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                   39


as λ increases. As a measure of the catastrophic events diversiﬁcation eﬀect we compute the conditional

probability that a monopolist would complete, given that at least one of the duopolists completes (dashed-

dotted line). Since the conditional probabilities decrease, the advantage of diversiﬁcation increases. This

continues until the last value of λ, where the monopoly and duopoly situations are identical so in this case

there is no diversiﬁcation eﬀect. Even for λ = 0 there is a small diversiﬁcation eﬀect due to the fact that

on average the surviving duopolist would be the one with the lowest realized R&D investment costs; i.e. the

duopolist with the estimated remaining R&D investment cost process that hits zero ﬁrst.

  Figure 7 analyzes the eﬀects of changing the correlation between demand shocks and the input cost

shocks. As mentioned earlier this correlation will depend on the type of product being considered. We

change the correlation between −0.3 and +0.3. The base case has ρyk = −0.1. Clearly, the more negative
the correlation is, the better the R&D investment projects are since this implies a higher probability that,

when R&D investment costs turn out to be low, demand is high and vice versa. De facto this gives a higher

volatility of the cash ﬂows. A simple option argument implies that this results in higher values for the R&D

investment projects, higher number of units produced, and higher probabilities of completion in both the

monopoly and duopoly situations. In addition, a more negative correlation implies that on average higher

demand shocks for the cases that are completed and therefore a higher on average revenue per unit produced

both in the monopoly (dashed-dotted line) and the duopoly (dotted line) situations, cf. Figure 7(d).

  Up to now we have concentrated on analyzing the eﬀect of competition on patent-protected R&D in-

vestment projects for the case where both duopolists are identical. Now we look at a particular case of

asymmetry which highlights a new angle of competition between the duopolists. In Figure 8 we change the

level of technical shocks for ﬁrm two, γ2 , from 0.1 to 0.3 while keeping constant ﬁrm one’s technical shocks
at γ1 = 0.2 as well as all other parameters. Figure 8 reports the valuation results of this exercise. First

note the value of the R&D investment project for a monopolist when its technical shocks change (dotted

line). As expected, higher uncertainty increases the value of the R&D investment project. This result follows

from standard real option arguments. The corresponding duopoly ﬁrm value (solid line) grows faster with

uncertainty than does the value of the corresponding monopoly ﬁrm in percentage terms. For the lowest

uncertainty in the ﬁgure, γ2 = 0.1, it is not optimal for ﬁrm two to initiate the R&D investment project

and therefore its value is zero. Most interesting, the value of ﬁrm one’s project (dashed line) decreases

dramatically. Recall that for this ﬁrm all parameters have been kept constant. We can see here that changes

in the other ﬁrm’s technical uncertainty have a big impact on this ﬁrm’s value, and all of this impact is due

to the competitive interactions between the ﬁrms. At γ2 = 0.1, because ﬁrm two does not invest, ﬁrm one
                                                                13.0                                                                                                 12.5


                                                                12.0
                                                                                                                                                                     12.0

                                                                11.0
                                                                                                                                                                     11.5

                                                                10.0
                                                                                                                                                                     11.0
                                                                 9.0

                                                                                                                                                                     10.5
                                                                 8.0


                                                                 7.0                                                                                                 10.0


                                                                 6.0                                                                                                  9.5


                                                                 5.0
                                                                                                                                                                      9.0

                                                                 4.0
                                                                                                                                                                      8.5




                                                                                                            Number of units produced
                                                                 3.0




  R&D investment project values
                                                                                                                                                                      8.0
                                                                 2.0

                                                                                                                                                                      7.5
                                                                 1.0


                                                                 0.0                                                                                                  7.0
                           -0.3            -0.2       -0.1             0.0   0.1        0.2           0.3                       -0.3            -0.2       -0.1             0.0   0.1        0.2           0.3
                                                             Parameter ρyk                                                                                        Parameter ρyk



                                  (a) Values of R&D investment projects in the monopoly (solid                                         (b) Units produced in the monopoly (solid line) and the duopoly
                                  line) and the duopoly (dashed line) situations as a function of                                      (dashed line) situations as a function of correlation coeﬃcient,
                                  correlation coeﬃcient, ρyk .                                                                         ρyk .


                                                                0.50                                                                                                 6.25



                                                                0.45
                                                                                                                                                                     6.00

                                                                0.40


                                                                                                                                                                     5.75
                                                                0.35



                                                                0.30
                                                                                                                                                                     5.50


                                                                0.25


                                                                                                                                                                     5.25
                                                                0.20



                                                                0.15
                                                                                                                                                                     5.00
                                                                                                            Values per unit produced




  Probabilities of completion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS




                                                                0.10

                                                                                                                                                                     4.75
                                                                0.05



                                                                0.00                                                                                                 4.50
                             -0.3          -0.2       -0.1             0.0   0.1        0.2           0.3                         -0.3          -0.2       -0.1             0.0   0.1        0.2           0.3
                                                             Parameter ρyk                                                                                        Parameter ρyk



                                  (c) Probabilities of completion in the monopoly situation (solid                                     (d) Present value of costs (solid line) and revenues (dashed-
                                  line), and probabilities that at least one of the duopolists com-                                    dotted line) in the monopoly situation and present value of costs
                                  pletes (dashed line), and that both of the duopolists (dotted                                        (dashed line) and revenues (dotted line) in the duopoly situation
                                  line) complete in the duopoly situation as a function of correla-                                    per unit produced as a function of correlation coeﬃcient, ρyk .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40




                                  tion coeﬃcient, ρyk .



Figure 7. Sensitivity analysis between duopoly with war of attrition reﬁnement and monopoly with respect to the correlation
coeﬃcient, ρyk .
                                                        R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS          41


                                           12.0


                                           11.0


                                           10.0


               R&D investment project values   9.0


                                               8.0


                                               7.0


                                               6.0


                                               5.0


                                               4.0


                                               3.0


                                               2.0


                                               1.0


                                               0.0
                                                 0.10          0.15            0.20          0.25       0.30
                                                                           Parameter γ2



        Figure 8. Sensitivity analysis between duopoly with war of attrition reﬁnement and mo-
        nopoly with respect to the level of technical shocks for ﬁrm two, γ2 . Value of the R&D
        investment project in the monopoly situation (dotted line), value of ﬁrm one’s R&D invest-
        ment project (dashed line), value of ﬁrm two’s R&D investment project (solid line), and
        value of both ﬁrms’ R&D investment projects (dashed-dotted line) in the duopoly situation
        as a function of the level of technical shocks for ﬁrm two, γ2 .


becomes a monopolist. Hence, its value (dashed line) will be the same as that of the pure monopolist (dotted

line) for γ2 = 0.2. In summary, as the uncertainty of ﬁrm two’s project increases, the value of ﬁrm two’s

project increases, the value of ﬁrm one’s project decreases, but the aggregate value of both ﬁrms’ projects

still increases (dashed-dotted line) except for γ2 = 0.1, where ﬁrm two does not initiate investment. This

example illustrates the importance of taking into account competitive interactions in real option valuation.

Even without any changes in the parameters of a particular ﬁrm, its value can vary because of changes in

the competitive environment such as changes of a parameter in a competing ﬁrm.


                                                                       5. Conclusion

  In this article we have developed a model to analyze patent-protected R&D investment projects when

there is competition in the development and marketing of the resulting product (in our case a medical

drug). The competitive interactions that occur substantially complicate the solution of the problem since

each of the duopolists has to take into account not only the factors that aﬀect its own decisions, but also
                           R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                   42


the factors that aﬀect the decisions of the other duopolist. The real options framework utilized to deal with

investments under uncertainty is extended to incorporate the game theoretic concepts required to deal with

these interactions.

  Implementation of the model shows that competition in R&D in most cases not only increases production

and reduces prices, but also shortens the time of developing the product and increases the probability of a

successful development. These beneﬁts to society are countered by increased total investment costs in R&D

and lower aggregate value of the R&D investment projects. We have also seen that if the R&D investment

projects are very marginal, competition in R&D may actually harm the development if there is no mechanism

to select which of the two duopolists who should invest and who should abandon. Only in the these cases

would it be beneﬁcial to protect one single developer from competition.

  Some extensions of the model would be easy to implement. For example, the current implementation of

the model assumes that both patents expire at the same date and that net cash ﬂows revert to zero. It would

be trivial to add a terminal value for the R&D investment projects. It would be somewhat more diﬃcult

to implement diﬀerent expiration dates for the patents in our numerical procedure, though strictly in our

formulation of the model this would be of no beneﬁt since generic drugs would be introduced as soon as the

ﬁrst patent expires. A more challenging task would be to increase the number of competitors, but we believe

that the qualitative nature of the results would not change.

  In some sense our war of attrition reﬁnement criterion in the case of multiple Nash equilibria in the

game played by the duopolists favors the duopoly situation. This criterion says that when it is not optimal

for both duopolists to continue investing, but it would be optimal for a monopolist to continue investing,

then the duopolist with the highest value of continuing to invest will proceed investing while the other

will abandon. This reasonable rule is not just any Nash equilibrium, it is the Nash equilibrium that gives

the highest ex-ante value for the duopolist’s R&D investment projects and we motivated this choice of

reﬁnement criterion by an economic argument of mutual threats of war of attrition. It is, however, not the

only possible Nash equilibrium; mixed strategies among other equilibria would also be possible, (cf. Huisman

and Kort 1999, Huisman, Thijssen, and Kort 2001), we have also implemented this alternative and found

that unless the R&D investment project is fairly marginal, the results of the two diﬀerent implementations

are basically identical. It is also possible to think in terms of mergers and acquisitions but we have not

pursued any of these two last reﬁnements further in this article.

  A more interesting and complex extension would be to add asymmetric information to the model. In the

development of the model we assumed that all participants know the value of the state variables at each
                              R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                            43


date and that they use these values to make their decisions. It is somewhat unrealistic to suppose that a

duopolist has as good an estimate of the remaining R&D investment costs to complete the other duopolist’s

project as it has of its own project. More realistically, it estimates the competitor’s cost with some error.

   The model developed here could potentially help in the formulation of a public policy with respect to

the encouragement of investments in R&D. At the very least it contributes to our understanding of these

important issues in economic development.




    Appendix A. The Partial Differential Equation for the Value of the Losing Firm’s

                                                                Project

   The partial diﬀerential equation (PDE) corresponding to the intuitive derivation in equation (7) can be

derived by Itô’s lemma and (other) standard arguments from stochastic control theory. Basically, the PDE

is derived by applying Itô’s lemma to VlM 2l (Yt + dYt , Klt + dKlt , t + dt), eliminating the martingale terms

by taking the expectation under Q, and diﬀerentiating on both sides of equation (7) with respect to time,

i.e. ‘dividing’ by dt. Starting with the boundary condition from equation (6)


                                              VlM 2l (y, 0, t) = VlD2 (y, t),


for y ≥ 0 and t ∈ [0, T ], the function VlM 2l must fulﬁll the PDE,

  1 2 2 ∂ 2 M 2l                               ∂2
    σy y      V   (y, k, t) + σ y σ lk ρyk yk     V M 2l (y, k, t)
  2      ∂y 2   l
                                              ∂y∂k l
                                  2
            1             2 2 ∂                           ∂                                ∂
           + (γl2 Il k + σlk k ) 2 VlM 2l (y, k, t) + µy y VlM 2l (y, k, t) + (µlk k − Il ) VlM 2l (y, k, t)
            2                   ∂k                        ∂y                               ∂k
                                                             ∂
                                                            + VlM 2l (y, k, t) − Il − (r + λl )VlM 2l (y, k, t) = 0,
                                                             ∂t

for all y ≥ 0, k ≥ 0, and t ∈ [0, T ], and the free boundary condition


                                                   VlM 2l (y, k, t) ≥ 0.


That is, the R&D investment continuation region is {(y, k, t) ∈ R2 ×[0, T ] : VlM 2l (y, k, t) ≥ 0}. VlM 2l (y, k, t) <

0 is the condition for when the optimal economic abandonment decision should be taken.
                              R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                  44


Appendix B. The Partial Differential Equation for the Value of Both Firms’ Projects in

                                                     the Competitive R&D Phase

  The Nash equilibria in the normal form representation of the R&D investment game from Table 1 deter-

mine the functions V1R&D2 and V2R&D2 , cf. equation (15), as the following:

(16)
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  V̂1R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t)   if V̂1R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) ≥ 0 and
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                                                   V̂2R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) ≥ 0,
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                   V1R&D1 (Yt , K1t , t)         if (V̂1R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) ≥ 0 and
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                                                    V̂2R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) < 0) or
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                                                   (V1R&D1 (Yt , K1t , t) ≥ 0 and
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                                                    V2R&D1 (Yt , K2t , t) < 0) or
                                  
                                  
                                  
  V1R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) =                                     (V1R&D1 (Yt , K1t , t) > V2R&D1 (Yt , K2t , t) ≥ 0 and
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                                                    V̂2R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) < 0),
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                   0                             if V1R&D1 (Yt , K1t , t) < 0 or
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                                                   (V̂1R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) < 0 and
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                                                    V̂2R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) ≥ 0) or
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                                                   (V2R&D1 (Yt , K2t , t) ≥ V1R&D1 (Yt , K1t , t) ≥ 0 and
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                                                    V̂1R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) < 0),
                                 R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                    45


and


(17)
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   V̂2R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t)
                                                                     if V̂1R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) ≥ 0 and
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                                                        V̂2R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) ≥ 0,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                    V2R&D1 (Yt , K2t , t)            if (V̂1R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) < 0 and
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                                                         V̂2R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) ≥ 0) or
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                                                        (V1R&D1 (Yt , K1t , t) < 0 and
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                                                         V2R&D1 (Yt , K2t , t) ≥ 0) or
                                   
                                   
                                   
   V2R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) =                                         (V2R&D1 (Yt , K2t , t) ≥ V1R&D1 (Yt , K1t , t) ≥ 0 and
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                                                         V̂1R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) < 0),
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                    0                                if V2R&D1 (Yt , K1t , t) < 0 or
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                                                        (V̂1R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) ≥ 0 and
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                                                         V̂2R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) < 0) or
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                                                        (V1R&D1 (Yt , K1t , t) > V2R&D1 (Yt , K2t , t) ≥ 0 and
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                                                         V̂2R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) < 0).

Equations (16) and (17) are similar in spirit to equation (8) for the optimal stopping time problem.30

   The same methodology as sketched in Appendix A can be used to derive the PDEs corresponding to the

intuitive derivation in equation (15). Starting with the boundary conditions from equations (13) and (14),


30In the case of mixed strategies, Equations (16) and (17) should be substituted with
                                                   
                                                       R&D2 (Y , K , K , t)    if V̂1R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) ≥ 0 and
                                                    V̂i
                                                              t   1t      2t
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                                                  V̂2R&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) ≥ 0,
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                    ViR&D1 (Yt , Kit , t)      if (V̂iR&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) ≥ 0 and
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                                                   V̂jR&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) < 0) or
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                                                 (ViR&D1 (Yt , Kit , t) ≥ 0 and
                                                   
                                                   
                                                                                  VjR&D1 (Yt , Kjt , t) < 0),
                   ViR&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) =
                                                   
                                                    0                          if ViR&D1 (Yt , Kit , t) < 0 or
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                                                 (V̂iR&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) < 0 and
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                                                  V̂jR&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) ≥ 0) or
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                                                 (ViR&D1 (Yt , Kit , t) ≥ 0 and
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                                                  VjR&D1 (Yt , Kjt , t) ≥ 0 and
                                                   
                                                   
                                                                                  V̂iR&D2 (Yt , K1t , K2t , t) < 0),
where j = 3 − i.
                                   R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                                  46


the functions V1R&D2 and V2R&D2 must fulﬁll the PDE

   1 2 2 ∂ 2 R&D2                                       ∂2
     σy y      V   (y, k1 , k2 , t) + σ y σ 1k ρyk yk1      V R&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t)
   2      ∂y 2   i
                                                       ∂y∂k1 i
                                    ∂2                            1              2 2 ∂
                                                                                          2
              + σy σ2k ρyk yk2           ViR&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t) + (γ12 I1 k1 + σ1k k1 ) 2 ViR&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t)
                                   ∂y∂k2                          2                     ∂k1
                                    ∂2                             1              2 2 ∂
                                                                                           2
              + σ1k σ2k k1 k2             ViR&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t) + (γ22 I2 k2 + σ2k k2 ) 2 ViR&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t)
                                  ∂k1 ∂k2                          2                     ∂k2
                                ∂ R&D2                                           ∂ R&D2
                         + µy y    Vi       (y, k1 , k2 , t) + (µ1k k1 − I1 )     V      (y, k1 , k2 , t)
                                ∂y                                             ∂k1 i
                                              ∂ R&D2                           ∂
                            + (µ2k k2 − I2 )     Vi          (y, k1 , k2 , t) + ViR&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t)
                                             ∂k2                               ∂t

                                                      + λj ViR&D1 (y, ki , t) − Ii − (r + λ1 + λ2 )ViR&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t) = 0,


for i ∈ {1, 2} and the free boundary conditions


                                                        V1R&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t) ≥ 0


and


                                                       V2R&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t) ≥ 0.


That is, the R&D investment continuation region for both ﬁrms, cf. equations (16) and (17), is {(y, k1 , k2 , t) ∈

R3 ×[0, T ] : V1R&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t) ≥ 0 and V2R&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t) ≥ 0}. V1R&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t) < 0 or V2R&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t) <

0 is the condition for when the optimal economic abandonment decision should be taken for (at least) one

of the two ﬁrms. The boundary condition that gives the value to each of the two projects when the R&D

investment continuation region is left can be derived from equations (16) and (17).31


                                                              References

Baldursson, F. M. (1998): “Irreversible Investment Under Uncertainty in Oligopoly,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and

 Control, 22, 627–644.

Bernardo, A. E., and B. Chowdhry (2002): “Resources, Real Options, and Corporate Strategy,” Journal of Financial

 Economics, 63, 211–234.

Fudenberg, D., and J. Tirole (1986): “A Theory of Exit in Duopoly,” Econometrica, 54(4), 943–960.

Ghemawat, P., and B. Nalebuff (1985): “Exit,” Rand Journal of Economics, 16(2), 184–194.

31In the case of mixed strategies, the continuation region is {(y, k , k , t)            ∈ R3 × [0, T ] : (V1R&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t) ≥
                                                                    1 2
0 and V2R&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t) ≥     0) or (V1R&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t)   <   0 and V2R&D2 (y, k1 , k2 , t) < 0 and V1R&D1 (y, k1 , t) ≥
0 and V2R&D1 (y, k2 , t) ≥ 0)}.
                                R&D INVESTMENTS WITH COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS                                          47


Grenadier, S. R. (1999): “Information Revelation Through Option Exercise,” The Review of Financial Studies, 12(1), 95–129.

        (2002): “Option Exercise Games: An Application to the Equilibrium Investment Strategies of Firms,” The Review of

 Financial Studies, 15(3), 691–721.

Grenadier, S. R., and A. M. Weiss (1997): “Investment in Technological Innovations: An Option Pricing Approach,” Journal

 of Financial Economics, 44, 397–416.

Huisman, K. J. M., and P. M. Kort (1999): “Eﬀects of Strategic Interactions on the Option Value of Waiting,” Working

 paper, Department of Economics and CentER, Tilburg University, P. O. Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands.

Huisman, K. J. M., J. J. J. Thijssen, and P. M. Kort (2001): “Symmetric Equilibrium Strategies in Game Theoretical

 Real Option Models,” Working paper, Department of Economics and CentER, Tilburg University, P. O. Box 90153, 5000 LE

 Tilburg, The Netherlands.

Lambrecht, B. (2001): “The Impact of debt Financing on Entry and Exit in a Duopoly,” The Review of Financial Studies,

 14(3), 765–804.

Lambrecht, B., and W. Perraudin (1999): “Real Options and Preemption Under Incomplete Information,” Working paper,

 University of Cambridge and Birkbeck College, London, Forthcoming in Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control.

Longstaff, F. A., and E. S. Schwartz (2001): “Valuing American Options by Simulation: A Simple Least-Squares Ap-

 proach,” The Review of Financial Studies, 14(1), 113–147.

Pawlina, G., and P. M. Kort (2001): “Real Options in an Asymmetric Duopoly: Who Beneﬁts From Your Competitive

 Disadvantage?,” Working Paper 2001–95, Department of Economics and CentER, Tilburg University, P. O. Box 90153, 5000

 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands.

Pindyck, R. S. (1993): “Investments of Uncertain Cost,” Journal of Financial Economics, 34, 53–76.

Schwartz, E. S. (2001): “Patents and R&D as Real Options,” Working Paper #12–01, The John E. Anderson Graduate School

 of Management at UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095–1481, USA.

Schwartz, E. S., and M. Moon (2000): “Evaluating Research and Development Investments,” in Project Flexibility, Agency,

 and Competition, chap. 6, pp. 85–106. Oxford University Press, New York, New York, USA.

Smit, H. T. J., and L. A. Ankum (1993): “A Real Options and Game-Theoretic Approach to Corporate Investment Strategy

 Under Competition,” Financial Management, 22(3), 241–250.

Williams, J. T. (1993): “Equilibrium and Options on Real Assets,” The Review of Financial Studies, 6(4), 825–850.
