                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   AIR POLLUTION AND INFANT HEALTH:
         WHAT CAN WE LEARN FROM CALIFORNIA’S RECENT EXPERIENCE?

                                              Janet Currie
                                             Matthew Neidell

                                          Working Paper 10251
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10251


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




We thank Maureen Cropper, Michael Greenstone, Paul Rathouz, and Jonathan Samet as well as seminar
participants at Boston University, Columbia, UC Davis, the University of Chicago, the NBER Summer
Institute, Princeton and Yale for many helpful comments, and Trudy Cameron for suggesting this line of
research. The authors also thank Ellen Kang for excellent research assistance. Financial support from
Princeton’s Center for Health and Well-Being and from the University of Chicago’s Center for Integrating
Statistical and Environmental Science is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Janet Currie and Matthew Neidell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn From California’s Recent Experience?
Janet Currie and Matthew Neidell
NBER Working Paper No. 10251
January 2004
JEL No. I18

                                            ABSTRACT

We examine the impact of air pollution on infant death in California over the 1990s. Our work offers

several innovations: First, many previous studies examine populations subject to far greater levels

of pollution. In contrast, the experience of California in the 1990s is clearly relevant to current

debates over the regulation of pollution. Second, many studies examine a few routinely monitored

pollutants in isolation, generally because of data limitations. We examine four “criteria” pollutants

in a common framework. Third, we develop an identification strategy based on within zip code

variation in pollution levels that controls for potentially important unobserved characteristics of high

pollution areas. Fourth, we use rich individual-level data to investigate effects of pollution on infant

mortality, fetal deaths, low birth weight and prematurity in a common framework. We find that the

reductions in carbon monoxide (CO) and particulates (PM10) over the 1990s in California saved

over 1,000 infant lives. However, we find little consistent evidence of pollution effects on fetal

deaths, low birth weight or short gestation.

Janet Currie
Department of Economics
UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
currie@simba.sscnet.ucla.edu

Matthew Neidell
Department of Economics and CISES
University of Chicago
5734 S. Ellis Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
mneidell@uchicago.edu
         Air quality regulations are costly to both producers and consumers, and the optimal level

of pollution abatement is hotly contested. For example, in October 2002, the Bush

administration joined Daimler Chrysler and General Motors in a lawsuit against Californian

regulations that would have mandated that one in ten cars sold in California be Alow emission@ or

Azero-emission@ vehicles, beginning in 2003 (Doggett, 2002; New York Times, October 14,

2002). New standards for ozone and particulates were proposed by the Environmental

Protection Agency (EPA) in 1997, but were held up in the courts until a Supreme Court decision

in 2001 (Stafford, 2001).

         Pollution abatement is often justified as something that will promote health: Yet there is

still much to be learned about the specific health effects. The EPA did not include infant

mortality in the primary quantitative benefit analysis of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments in

1999 (U.S. EPA 1999) because the weight of the scientific evidence linking infant health to air

pollution was viewed as insufficient.1

         This paper addresses this issue by examining the impact of air pollution on infant death

in California over the 1990s. Infants are of interest for two reasons. First, policy makers and the

public are highly motivated to protect these most vulnerable members of society. Second, in the

case of infant death the link between cause and effect is immediate, whereas for adults, diseases

today may reflect pollution exposure that occurred many years ago.2

         Our work offers several innovations over the existing literature. First, many previous

studies examine populations subject to greater levels of pollution, either because they lived

1
  As of May 12, 2003, the EPA’s Scientific Advisory Board was debating whether to include an analysis of infant
health effects in its 2003 report to Congress on the benefits of the Clean Air Act. However, they had determined that
“[these] estimates are not meant to be additive to the primary estimates of mortality” (U.S. EPA, 2003, page 6-13).
2
  California’s experience is also of special interest, since under the Clean Air Act of 1970, it is the only state allowed
to set automobile emission standards at a level higher than the federal standard. Other states may adopt California’s

                                                       3
further in the past or in some more heavily polluted place. In contrast, the experience of

California in the 1990s is clearly relevant to the contemporary debate over pollution levels in the

United States.

         Second, many studies examine a few routinely monitored pollutants in isolation,

generally because of data limitations. We examine four Acriteria@ pollutants that are commonly

monitored in the U.S.: Ozone (O3), carbon monoxide (CO), particulate matter (PM10), and

nitrogen dioxide (NO2). Thus our results may shed light on the important question of which

pollutants are most harmful to infants.

         Third, while epidemiological studies have documented correlations between pollution

and poor infant outcomes, it is possible that these correlations reflect some omitted

characteristics (such as differences in socio-economic status or pollution of ground water) that

are correlated with both air pollution and infant health outcomes. We will control for this

possibility both by including a rich set of covariates, such as whether the birth was covered by

public health insurance, and by estimating models with zip code level fixed effects, which will

capture any unobserved characteristics of zip codes that are unchanged over time.

         Fourth, we exploit rich individual-level data to estimate linear models that approximate

hazard models, where the hazard is defined either over weeks or months, and the baseline hazard

is specified as a flexible non-parametric spline. The robustness of our key results suggests that

they are not driven by mortality displacement (or Aharvesting@).

         Fifth, we examine effects on infant mortality, fetal death, low birth weight and

prematurity in a common framework, in order to try to determine whether pollution affects

infants primarily before or after the birth. And unlike virtually all existing studies, our estimates


standards, but may not draft their own.

                                              4
of the effects on low birth weight and prematurity take the possibility of fetal selection into

account.

        Our estimates confirm that air pollution has a significant effect on infant mortality, even

at the relatively low levels of pollution experienced in recent years. Our estimates suggest that

the reductions in CO and PM10 that occurred over the 1990s saved more than 1,000 infant lives

in California. However, in contrast to much of the epidemiological literature, we find little

consistent evidence that pollution in the prenatal period affects birth weight, the probability of

short gestation, or the risk of fetal death, at least at the levels of pollution that we observe.

Finally, we show that the estimated per unit effects of pollution are similar for blacks and whites

and for children of more and less educated people, and that between-zip code differences in

pollution levels account for relatively little of observed between-group differences in infant

mortality rates.

        The rest of the paper is laid out as follows: Section II provides necessary background

information about the previous literature and the ways in which pollution may affect infant

health. Section III describes our data while methods are described in Section IV. Section V

offers results, and Section VI ends with a discussion and conclusions.

II. Background

        Motor vehicles are a major source of PM10, NO2, and especially of COBas much as 90%

of CO in cities comes from motor vehicle exhaust (EPA, January 1993). Carbon Monoxide is an

odorless, colorless gas which is poisonous at high levels. CO bonds with hemoglobin more

easily than oxygen, so that it reduces the body=s ability to deliver oxygen to organs and tissues.

Because infants are small, and many have respiratory problems in any case, CO may be

particularly harmful to them. Nitrogen Dioxide is a brown, reactive gas that irritates the lungs

                                               5
and may lower resistance to respiratory infections. It is also an important precursor to

particulate matter in California.

       Particulate matter can take many forms, including ash and dust. It is thought that the

most damage comes from the smallest particles, since they are inhaled deep into the lungs (U.S.

EPA, 2003b). The mechanism through which particles harm health are controversial, however

the leading theory is that they cause an inflammatory response which weakens the immune

system (Seaton, et al. 1995). In infants, a weakened immune system could make them more

susceptible to death from a wide range of causes. PM10 exposure could also affect the health of

the mother, for example, by weakening her immune system, and hence affect the fetus.

       Ozone (the major component of smog) is a highly reactive compound that damages

tissue, reduces lung function, and sensitizes the lungs to other irritants. For example, exposure

to O3 during exercise reduces lung functioning in adults, and causes symptoms such as chest

pain, coughing, and pulmonary congestion. Ozone is formed through reactions between nitrogen

oxides (such as NO2) and volatile organic compounds (which are found in auto emissions,

among other sources) in heat and sunlight. Interestingly, ozone is not generally found in homes

because it is highly reactive, and quickly reacts with household surfaces (http://www.hc-

sc.gc.ca/hecs-sesc/air_quality/faq.htm).

       Compliance with standards for NO2 and PM10 is assessed by looking at annual means

(there is a 24-hour standard for PM10 as well). Compliance with standards for O3 and CO is

assessed by examining whether the level of pollution exceeded the standard over any eight-hour

period during the year. These different approaches to standards suggest that the effects of NO2

and PM10 may be expected to be cumulative while the effects of CO and O3 are expected to be



                                             6
more acute. We do not examine the two other criteria pollutants, SO2 and lead, because levels

are now so low that many monitors have been removed from service.

         A link between air pollution and infant health has long been suspected, although the

exact biological mechanisms through which it occurs are not known. We also know little about

what levels of these pollutants are sufficient to affect infant mortality (death in the first year of

life) or about the extent that infants are protected from the negative effects of pollution while

they are in the womb.

         Only some potential mechanisms have been examined. For example, it has long been

known that CO can disturb the functioning of the placenta, that it crosses the placenta, and that it

tends to concentrate in the fetus at higher levels than in the mother (Longo, 1977); it has also

been shown in studies using rats that CO can have a negative effect on brain development

(Garvey and Longo, 1978).

         Other studies have examined the negative effects of chemicals that are associated with

high levels of CO and PM10; since motor vehicle exhaust is a major contributor of these two

monitored pollutants, these pollutants may themselves be markers for other components of

exhaust such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), acetonitrile, benzene, butadiene, and

cyanide. Many of these compounds have been shown to have effects on developing fetuses in

animal studies which may include retarded growth.3 Studies in humans have shown elevated

levels of an enzyme induced by PAHs in women about to have preterm deliveries (Huel et al.,

1993).




3
 The web site http://www.epa.gov/ttn/atw/hapindex.html provides a list of the chemicals present in vehicle exhaust,
and evidence regarding their health effects.

                                                    7
        Many studies have demonstrated links between very severe pollution episodes and

increased mortality of infants and others. For example, Logan and Glasg (1953) found dramatic

increases in cardiopulmonary mortality during a killer fog that occurred in London England in

1952. Chart 1 summarizes some of the more recent studies, dividing them into two groups. The

first group focuses on the link between poor infant outcomes and pollution in areas with high

levels of pollution; most report negative associations between pollution and infant outcomes.4

        The second part of the chart focuses on U.S. studies, many of which also report a link

between air pollution and infant health, although some do not. For example, Lipfert, Zhang, and

Wyzga (2000) find that while they can replicate previous findings of a negative effect of PM10

on infant health, the result is not robust to changes in specification.

        An important limitation of all of these studies is that it is possible that the observed

relationships could reflect an unobserved factor that was correlated with both air pollution and

child outcomes. This is likely to be a greater problem in studies such as Lui et al. (2003) that do

not control for factors such as maternal education. However, it may be a problem even in studies

that include such controls. Suppose for example, that areas with high levels of air pollution also

tended to have high levels of water pollution. Then one might falsely conclude that air pollution

was to blame for infant deaths, with potentially negative consequences for remediation efforts.

Similarly, as we will show below, zip codes with high pollution have many other characteristics

that may have a direct effect on infant outcomes, such as high rates of teen parenthood and low

average levels of education. Many of the previous studies may be invalidated by the failure to

control adequately for these characteristics.

4
 Note that PM10 refers to particles less than a particular size, while many of the studies reviewed in this chart
discuss Total Suspended Particles or TSPs. In general one would expect TSP and PM10 to move together because


                                                    8
        Two studies by Chay and Greenstone deal with the problem of omitted confounders by

focusing on Anatural experiments@ provided by the implementation of the Clean Air Act of 1970,

and geographic variation in pollution levels induced by the recession of the early 1980s. These

studies are similar in spirit to a sequence of papers by C. Arden Pope, who investigated the

health effects of the temporary closing of a Utah steel mill (Pope, 1989; Ransom and Pope, 1992;

Pope, Schwartz, and Ransom, 1992) and to Friedman et al. (2001) who examine the effect of

changes in traffic patterns in Atlanta due to the 1996 Olympic games. However, these studies

did not look specifically at infants.

        Chay and Greenstone show that on average, TSPs fell from 95 to 60 micrograms per

cubic meter of air between 1970 and 1984. However, they show that both the Clean Air Act and

the recession induced sharper reductions in TSPs in some areas than in others, and they use this

exogenous variation in levels of pollution to identify its effects. They estimate that a one unit

decline in TSPs associated with the Clean Air Act (recession) led to between five and eight (four

and seven) fewer infant deaths per 100,000 live births but had little effect on the incidence of

low birth weight.5

        Although these studies provide compelling evidence of the link between pollution and

infant health, it is not clear that reductions from the much lower levels of ambient pollution

today would have the same effect. For example, it might be the case that only pollution above

some threshold is harmful, and that pollution has already been reduced below that threshold.

Moreover, the Chay and Greenstone studies cannot speak to whether other pollutants affect

infant health, since only TSPs were measured during the time period that they study.


PM10 is a component of TSP, but some of the larger particles included in TSP may be less damaging than the
particles found in PM10.


                                                   9
        In the current paper, we propose an alternative identification strategy using individual-

level data and exploiting within-zip code variation in pollution levels. This strategy enables us

to create finer measures of pollution and to control for individual differences between mothers

that may be associated with birth outcomes. As we show below, even after controlling for

seasonal effects and weather, there is a great deal of within-zip code variation in pollution levels.

The zip code fixed effects control for many factors (such as poverty) which are both strongly

geographically concentrated, and associated with poorer prospects for infants. Using this

strategy allows us to identify the effects of pollution in more recent data, to compare the effects

of several criteria pollutants, and to distinguish between the effects of prenatal and post-natal

pollution exposure.

        A final issue is that this paper (like the others discussed above) examines the effect of

outdoor air quality measured using a fixed monitor. Actual personal exposures are affected by

ambient air quality, indoor air quality, and the time the individual spends indoors and outdoors.

One might expect, for example, that infants spend little time outdoors, so that outdoor air quality

might not be relevant.

        The research on the relationship between indoor and outdoor air quality has established

several results (see Spengler, Samet and McCarthy (2000) for a survey of the literature on indoor

air pollution). First, much of what is outdoors comes indoorsBestimates of the fraction of indoor

fine particles that originated outdoors range from 46% to 84% depending on whether the house

was air-conditioned and whether windows were left open (Wilson, Mage, and Grant, 2000). The




5
  Although Almond, Chay, and Lee (2002) argue that birth weight does not have a causal effect on infant mortality,
low birth weight is still widely acknowledged to be the leading indicator of poor health at birth.

                                                    10
rate at which outdoor air circulates through a house depends on the season and the weather,

variables we will control for in our analysis.

        Second, although the cross-sectional correlation between ambient air quality and personal

exposure is low (between .2 and .6 in most studies of PM for e.g.), the time-series correlation is

higher. This is because for a given individual, indoor sources of air pollution may be relatively

constant and uncorrelated with outdoor air quality. So for a given individual, much of the

variation in air quality comes from variation in ambient pollution levels (Wilson, Mage, and

Grant, 2000).

III Data

        Detailed data on atmospheric pollution comes from the California Environmental

Protection Agency=s air monitoring stations. These monitors record ambient levels of Acriteria

pollutants@, which are those air pollutants considered most responsible for urban air pollution.

Monitors tend to be located in the most densely populated areas of the state, and also in those

that are most polluted. The location of monitors may also change over time. Hence, in this

analysis, we use only those monitors that existed continuously throughout the period, although

using all monitors does not change our results.6

        Following Neidell (2003), we use the monitor data to construct a measure of pollution for

each zip code in the state as follows: First, we calculate the centroid of each zip code. We then

measure the distance between the EPA monitor and the center of the zip code. Finally, we

calculate a weighted average pollution level using all monitors within a 20-mile radius of the zip

code=s center, using the inverse of the distance to the monitor as the weight. We use this method


6
 The data is the California Ambient Air Quality Data from the California Air Resources Board, a department of the
California Environmental Protection Agency (available at http://www.arb.ca.gov/aqd/aqdcd/aqdcd.htm).

                                                   11
to construct a pollution measure for each zip code and time period. Using this method, we are

able to assign a pollution level to zip codes covering about 70 percent of the births in the state.

Zip codes that we were not able to assign pollution levels to are overwhelmingly rural. While

not every urban zip code has a monitor, of the births included in our sample, 76% were within 10

miles of a monitor, and we obtain very similar results if we limit our analysis to this subsample,

as shown below.

        In order to assess the accuracy of our measure, we compare the actual level of pollution

at each monitor location with the level of pollution that we would assign using our method (i.e.

using the distance weighted average of data from all other monitors less than 20 miles away, if

the monitor in question was not there). The correlations between the actual and predicted levels

of pollution are remarkably high for O3 and for NO2 (.92 and .90, respectively). Correlations

for PM10 and CO are somewhat lower, but still high (.77 and .78) suggesting that our measure is

reasonably accurate. Note that this measurement error means that the estimates reported below

will tend to understate the actual effects of pollution somewhat.

        Descriptive statistics for the pollution variables are shown in the first panel of Table 1,

which also describes the units.7 Table 1 shows that there is considerable variation in these

measures, both between zip codes, and within zip codes over time, over our sample period. For

example, the within zip code standard deviation for CO is .777 compared to the between zip

code standard deviation of .677 (which can be compared to the mean of 1.975 units.)

        The pollutants we examine exhibit different seasonal patterns, as shown in Figure 1. In

California, ambient levels of CO, PM10 and NO2 tend to increase in cold weather when they are

7
 These measures are highly correlated with measures of short-term spikes in pollutants. For example, the
correlation between the maximum 1 hour reading for CO and the maximum 8 hour average for CO ranges from .91


                                                12
trapped by damp cold air. PM10 also spikes in cold weather because it is produced by

combustion sources used for heating. In general, levels of CO, PM10, and NO2 are highly

correlated which may make it difficult to disentangle their effects. Moreover, NO2 is a major

precursor of PM10 in California, which suggests that these two pollutants may be particularly

highly correlated. We will examine the sensitivity to our estimates to excluding NO2 below. On

the other hand, ozone forms at a higher rate in heat and sunlight. Thus ozone emissions spike

during the summer. As we will show below, the negative correlation of ozone with other

pollutants can yield wrong-signed effects in single-pollutant models.

         Our models include monthly fixed effects to control for seasonal effects, which removes

some of the variation in pollution, but Figure 2 shows that a great deal of within zip code

variation remains. Figure 2 plots residual levels of pollution after the zip code dummies, month

and year dummies, weather indicators and all of the other variables included in our models have

been controlled for. Residuals are normalized by mean pollution levels so that they are

expressed in percentage terms. (Weather data come from the Surface Summary of the Day

(TD3200) from the National Climatic Data Center available at

http://www4.ncdc.noaa.gov/cgi-win/wwcgi.dll?wwAW~MP#MR.) It is very important to

establish that there is significant within zip code variation, since mean differences in the level of

pollutants between zip codes are not used to identify the effects of pollution in the zip code fixed

effects models.

         Data on birth weight, gestational age, infant deaths and fetal deaths come from the

California Birth Cohort files for 1989 to 2000. These data are abstracted from birth, death, and

fetal death certificates. Birth weight is the single most widely used summary measure of infant


to .95, depending on the month of the year. For ozone, the comparable figures are .89 to .97.

                                                    13
health, and low birth weight (defined as birth weight less than 2500 grams) is a marker for higher

rates of infant mortality and other negative outcomes. Most infants who are low birth weight are

also premature (defined as gestation less than 37 weeks), so we also look at this outcome. Note,

that there is no birth cohort file for 1998, so this year is excluded from our analysis.

       The distinction between fetal and infant death is that a child must be born alive in order

to be registered as an infant death. In California, a live birth is defined as Athe complete

expulsion or extraction from its mother of a product of conception...which, after such separation,

breathes or shows any other evidence of life...@, while a fetal death is a Adeath prior to complete

expulsion or extraction from its mother of a product of conception@ (California Code of

Regulations, Title 17, sections 915 and 916).

       Hence, a premature delivery that ended in a child dying before birth would be classified

not as an infant death, but as a fetal death. If pollution has an effect on fetal deaths, then

examining only the population of live births may yield biased estimates of its true effects. For

example, if pollution causes a fetus that would have been born alive, but low birth weight to be

stillborn, then it could even appear that pollution increased birth weight.

       Since fetal death certificates give birth weight and gestation, we combined live births and

fetal deaths in order to create a sample of pregnancies lasting at least 26 weeks for our

examination of birth weight, gestation, and fetal death. Examination of the effects of pollution

on this sample will give us estimates of the effects of pollution on birth outcomes that are not

biased by fetal selection that occurs after 26 weeks. While pollution might also cause fetal

deaths before 26 weeks, the data does not support an analysis of this issue.

       Descriptive statistics for these variables are also shown in Table 1. The infant mortality

rate here is the number of infants who die in a particular quarter divided by the number of infants

                                              14
less than one year old; hence to compare to published figures one would multiply this number by

four. The estimates indicate that over the sample period, about 6.56 children per 1,000 died in

their first year. Table 1 shows that about nine percent of pregnancies lasting at least 26 weeks

have gestation less than 37 weeks, while about 5 percent of pregnancies result in a low birth

weight delivery. Finally, the rate of fetal death is similar to the infant mortality rate.

        In addition to the infant health measures, Birth Cohort File variables relevant for our

analysis include the date of birth, mother=s age, race and ethnicity, education, marital status, and

the 5-digit zip code of maternal residence, as well as information about use of prenatal care and

whether the birth was covered by public health insurance. The rapid increase in the fraction of

births covered by Medicaid is a potential confounding factor when examining birth outcomes

because there is evidence that Medicaid coverage changed the way that at risk infants were

treated (c.f. Currie and Gruber, 1996), so it is fortunate that we can control for Medicaid

coverage of the birth directly. Unfortunately, it is not possible to control for maternal smoking,

since this information is not included on California=s birth certificate.

       The third panel of Table 1 shows trends in pollution levels over the sample period. All

four pollutants show considerable declines. The fourth panel of Table 1 shows that although the

infant mortality rate fell sharply over a relatively short time, trends in low birth weight and

gestation were much flatter. This part of the table suggests then, that declines in mortality were

largely due to events occurring after the birth, rather than to improvements in prenatal health.

Finally, the last panel of Table 1 lists the federal standards for the pollutants we examine. A

comparison of the first and last panels of the tables suggests that current pollution levels in

California are well under these standards.



                                              15
        Table 2 shows mean outcomes and pollution levels as well as means of various control

variables by zip code pollution level. In order to rank zip code-years by pollution level, we first

standardized all of the pollution measures using a Az-score@ and then took the average of the four

measures. While this is a rough way to rank areas, Table 2 indicates that it is informative--there

are sharp differences in ambient pollution levels between the most polluted and the least polluted

areas of the state. For example, the CO measure is more than twice as high in the most polluted

areas compared to the least polluted ones.

        These gradients correspond to gradients in birth outcomes: The most polluted areas have

uniformly worse outcomes than the least polluted ones. This association could be due to the fact

that pollution levels are highly correlated with socioeconomic characteristics that are themselves

predictive of poorer birth outcomes. For example, Table 2 shows that more polluted areas tend

to have more mothers who are black and unmarried, and have fewer mothers who are college

educated. In what follows, we will control for these important observable differences between

locations, as well as for unobservable zip code-level characteristics by including zip code-level

fixed effects.

        Finally, the bottom portion of Table 2 shows differences in zip code-level pollution

exposures by individual race and maternal education. The table shows that although high

pollution zip codes have a higher fraction black than low pollution zip codes, the average black

mother is exposed to similar levels of air pollution as the average white mother. The differences

by education are somewhat greater, but are surprisingly small given the large differences

between zip codes. The final panel of Table 2 gives the numbers of births in the various

categories, which will be used to calculate the number of deaths averted due to pollution

reduction below.

                                             16
IV. Methods

We begin by estimating models of the effects of prenatal pollution exposure on the probability of

low birth weight, short gestation, and fetal death using a 10 percent random sample of all

pregnancies that lasted at least 26 weeks (regardless of whether or not the pregnancy ended in a

live birth). These models have the form:

        Piz = wizγ + pz1η1 + pz2η2 + φz + Γt + Yt,                                     (1)

where Piz is defined as the probability of low birth weight or short gestation; the wiz are time-

invariant covariates measured at the individual level, such as the mother=s demographic and

background characteristics; the vector pz1 measures prenatal pollution exposure (measured at

either the last month before birth, the last trimester before birth, the first month of the pregnancy,

or the first trimester of the pregnancy); pz2 is a vector of weather variables, defined in a

corresponding fashion; φz is a zip code specific fixed effect; Γt is a vector of month dummies

which allows for seasonal effects, and Yt is a vector of year dummies that allows for state-wide

trends in these outcomes. In this model, the main coefficient of interest is η1, the effect of

prenatal pollution exposure on the probability of a negative outcome.

        Having used model (1) to analyze the effects of prenatal pollution exposures, we go on to

analyze the effects of post-natal exposures on the probability of infant mortality. These models

control for birth weight and gestation as a means of controlling for the effect of pollution before

the birth, in order to isolate the effect of exposure after the birth.

        The probability of death Pizt is specified as:

        Pizt = α(t) + wizγ + hizπ + xzt1β1 + xzt2β2 + φz + Γt + Yt,                            (2)

where α(t) is a measure of duration dependence and is specified as a linear spline in the weeks

since the child=s birth, with breaks after 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, 20, and 32 weeks. These break points

                                               17
reflect the fact that death is much more common in the first weeks than thereafter. The wiz are

defined as above; the hiz are time-invariant measures of the infants health at the time of the birth,

including indicators for low birth weight and short gestation; the xzt1 are time-varying measures

of pollution exposure, the xzt2 are weather indicators; and the φz, Γt, and Yt are defined as in (1).

In this model, any effect of prenatal exposures is assumed to be captured via the effects on birth

weight and gestation, which are controlled. The main coefficient of interest is β1, the effect of

post-natal pollution exposure on the probability of death.

       This model can be thought of as a flexible, discrete-time, hazard model that allows for

time-varying covariates, non-parametric duration dependence, and zip code-level fixed effects.

The model imposes little Astructure@ on the pattern of coefficients, allowing the data to Aspeak for

itself@, a consideration that is particularly important given the lack of guidance in the literature

regarding mechanisms and functional form. Allison (1982) shows that estimates from models of

this type converge to those obtained from continuous time models, as discussed further in the

appendix. (Note that we have also estimated models using f(Pizt) as the dependent variable,

where f is the logit transformationBthe results were very similar).

       In order to implement this estimation strategy, we treat an individual who lived for n

weeks as if they contributed n person-week observations to the sample. The dependent variable

is coded as 1 in the period the infant dies, and 0 in all other periods. Each time-invariant

covariate is repeated for every period, while the time-varying covariates are updated each period.

Pizt is then regressed on the covariates specified in (2) by ordinary least squares.

       This procedure yields a very large number of observations. Most infants survive all 52

weeks of their first year, yielding a sample of 250 million weekly observations. Hence, we

employ case-control sampling to reduce the number of observations. First, we keep all

                                              18
individuals who died (the cases) in the week that they died. Then, in order to select controls, we

choose randomly among all the observations on children who lived for at least as many periods

as the index child, and who were in the same zip code, and we take the control child=s

observation for that week. That is, if a child died in week 3, the controls would be chosen from

observations on all children who lived at least 3 weeks regardless of whether they later died. For

each zip code-week, we randomly chose five times as many non-deaths as deaths (we show

below that results using 15 times as many non-deaths are very similar). This method greatly

reduces computational burden while yielding unbiased estimates of the effects of pollution on

the probability of death (Mantel (1973), Prentice and Breslow (1978), Lubin and Gail (1984)).8

         As discussed above, we chose a week as the unit of time in our base specification. A

potential problem with choosing such a small interval is that children who die from exposure to

high amounts of pollution in week t, might have died at t+1 in any case. This problem of

mortality displacement is sometimes referred to as Aharvesting@ (Schwartz (2001)). If harvesting

is an important phenomenon, then estimates based on weekly pollution measures will tend to

overstate the loss of life caused by pollution. For example, the actual loss of life might be only

one week, rather than average life expectancy at birth. Moreover, models estimated using

weekly pollution focus on the short-term effects of pollution exposure.

         On the other hand, a problem with models using longer time units, such as months, is

that the measure of pollution is imprecisely assigned. For example, if we use the month as the

8
 In contrast, suppose we took all children who died, and selected a control group by sampling all children who
survived their first year. At any point in time during the year, we would have a sample that excluded infants who
were at risk of death, but survived only to die later. We reproduce Mantel’s discussion of why retaining individuals
on the basis of their outcomes only adds a constant to the log odds ratio in the Appendix. Since we begin with the
entire universe of births and can choose the sample to analyze, we have followed the case control literature that
specifies the correct way to choose an analysis sample rather than the economics literature on “choice-based
sampling” which suggests estimation methods to deal with samples that have been chosen non-randomly (c.f.


                                                    19
time unit, children who die in their first week of life are incorrectly assigned average pollution

levels for all of the days in the month.

        Thus, using longer time periods involves more measurement error, which could bias

coefficients downwards, especially if it is the acute effects of exposure that matter. Still, it is

important to note that PM10, in particular, is only measured once every six days, and is quite

variable, so that readings over a few weeks might actually give a more accurate picture of the

amount of pollution a child was exposed to. In order to deal with these problems, we will

compare estimates from models using weeks to estimates from models using months as the time

unit, and we also try augmenting our weekly model by including average cumulative weekly

exposures.

        Note that since weather is a key determinant of pollution levels, but could also have

independent effects on infant health, we include controls for maximum temperatures and average

precipitation in the vector xzt2. These controls are specified to be in the same time units as the

pollutantsCfor example, if both pollution in the weeks after birth and pollution in the last

trimester are included in the model, then variables measuring the weather during these periods

are also included. To the extent that weather affects pollution without having an independent

effect on infant health, including the weather variables will reduce the amount of legitimate

variation in our pollution measures, and attenuate the estimated effects (Samet et al., 1997).

However, as shown below, we find that the exclusion of the weather variables has little effect on

our estimates.




Manski and Lerman, 1977; Imbens, 1992).

                                              20
V. Results

       a) Effects of Prenatal Exposures

       Table 3 shows estimates of model (1), where the dependent variable is the probability of

short gestation. For convenience, the coefficients and standard errors on the pollutants and on

the weather variables are multiplied by 1000. For comparison with previous work, we first

estimate cross sectional models for each pollutant separately. The Asingle pollutant@ models

without zip code fixed effects shown in columns (1) through (4), indicate that exposure to PM10,

NO2, and Ozone in the month before birth all increase the probability of short gestation.

Column (5) shows that if we include all four pollutants, only PM10 and Ozone have significant

effects. The estimated effects are slightly larger if NO2 is excluded from the model, as shown in

column (6).

       However, as discussed above, the pollution measures may be capturing other

characteristics of zip codes. Columns (7) through (12) of Table 3 show the same models

estimated using zip code fixed effects. The estimated effects of pollution on the probability of

short gestation disappear, suggesting that it is very important to control for omitted variables.

       Table 3 also displays the other covariates included in our models. These variables have

largely the expected signs and are not much affected by the inclusion of the fixed effects. For

example, infants born to black, unmarried, less educated mothers are more likely to suffer from

short gestation than other infants, as are infants of high parity.

       The first two panels of Table 4 present estimates from similar models of low birth

weight, and the probability of fetal death. Only the estimated effects of pollution are shown; the

coefficients on the other covariates are supressed in order to save space. Even in the cross

section, we find little consistent evidence that pollution affects these outcomes once the

                                              21
observable characteristics of mothers are controlled. In the fixed effects models CO is

significant when all four pollutants are included in the model (see column 11). However, this

may be an artifact of collinearity since the significant effect disappears when NO2 is omitted

from the model (see column 12).

       The literature gives little guidance about when in pregnancy pollution is likely to be most

harmful. Therefore, we have estimated models similar to those shown in Tables 3 and 4 using

pollution measured in the first month of pregnancy, the last trimester of pregnancy, and the first

trimester of pregnancy. The only notable result is displayed in the third panel of Table 4, which

shows that when we use the last trimester rather than the last month of pregnancy, the cross-

sectional estimates of the effects of pollution on the probability of short gestation are larger than

those shown in Table 3. However, when zip code fixed effects are included in the model, none

of the effects are statistically significant. Similarly, we found little evidence that pollution in the

first month or first trimester of pregnancy was harmful, at least at the levels in our study.

       It is possible however, that the effects of pollution are non-linear; that is, they are

harmful above some threshold level. It is also possible that pollution has a more negative effect

on more vulnerable infants. Table 5 shows the results of several attempts to test this hypothesis

by including interactions with a) whether the mother lives in one of the Ahigh pollution@ zip

codes identified in Table 2; b) whether the mother is black; and c) whether the mother has less

than a high school education. In the fixed effects models, we find little evidence of non-linear or

differential effects on low birth weight or short gestation. However, the third panel of Table 5

shows that CO appears to have a stronger effect on the probability of fetal death in high pollution

zip codes (although the total effect for these infants is still either zero or negative), and among

the children of mothers with less than a high school education.

                                              22
       b) Effects of Pollution on Infant Mortality

        Table 6 shows estimates of model (2). A comparison of the cross-sectional and fixed

effects estimates shows that the estimates are quite robust to the inclusion of zip code fixed

effects, in contrast to the models of prenatal exposures discussed above. The single-pollutant

models suggest that CO, PM10, and NO2 exposures all increase the probability of death, while

ozone has a counter-intuitive negative effect. However, when all four pollutants (or when CO,

PM10, and ozone are included) only CO has a significant effect.

       The figures in bold are the implied number of deaths associated with a one unit increase

in the pollutant in question, per 100,000 births. Given the 4,720,190 births in areas where

pollution could be assigned over our sample period, the estimate of 13.864 in the last column of

Table 6 suggests that the one unit decline in CO that took place over the sample period saved

654 infant lives. (Note that we do not consider possible lives saved in areas without pollution

monitors. If these areas did not have monitors because they had little pollution and/or were

sparely populated, then reductions in pollution could be expected to have relatively little effect).

       Table 7 shows that the estimated effect of CO is extremely robust to many changes in

specification. Except for columns 5 and 6, all of the models included zip code fixed effects. The

coefficients on the other covariates are excluded from the table in order to conserve space.

       Columns 1 and 2 of Table 7 use a sample in which 15 times as many non-deaths as deaths

were chosen (rather than 5 times). While the standard errors are smaller, as one would expect,

the effect sizes are very similar to those in Table 6. Columns 3 and 4 show the effect of

excluding temperature and precipitation, and demonstrate that this has little effect. Columns 5

and 6 show estimates from models that include a fixed effect for each zip code and year. While

this specification controls for everything shared by mothers within a particular zip code and year,

                                             23
it is not our preferred specification, because some zip code-year cells have no deaths.

Nevertheless, it is reassuring to find that the inclusion of these additional fixed effects has little

effect on the estimates.

        Columns 7 and 8 show estimates from models that exclude deaths (and controls) from the

first week of life. Our rationale for this specification check is that infants who are very sick may

never leave the hospital, and the quality of the air they are exposed to may be strictly controlled

(if they are in an incubator, for example). Once again, this change has relatively little effect on

our estimates.

        Columns 9 and 10 show estimates from models that use data from monitors within a 10

mile radius of each zip code centroid. The sample size is smaller, given that those who live

between 10 and 20 miles away from a monitor are now excluded. However, the estimates are

similar to those in Table 6.

        Finally, columns 11 and 12 show estimates from models where the unit of time is the

calendar month, rather than the week. As discussed above, the use of a broader time unit could

attenuate the estimated effects by introducing more measurement error. Alternatively, it may

increase the estimated effects for pollutants like PM10 that are measured irregularly, or that are

thought to have cumulative impacts. Column 12 suggests that the estimated effect of CO is

again robust to this change in specification, which indicates that the estimated effect is unlikely

to be driven by Aharvesting@. However, as hypothesized, the estimated effect of PM10 is

increased by moving to a longer time interval. The point estimate implies that the 15.9 unit

decline in PM10 that took place over our sample period reduced the number of deaths by 415

over the sample period.



                                              24
       Table 8 shows estimates from a model intended to get at possible cumulative effects of

pollution in an alternative way. In addition to the weekly measures of pollution exposure, the

models shown in Table 8 also include the average weekly exposure over the child=s life. This

modification has little effect on the estimated coefficient on CO. However, in column 5, the

cumulative effect of NO2 is large and statistically significant, while column 6 shows that the

cumulative effect of PM10 is significant when NO2 is omitted. Thus, the last two rows of Table

7 and Table 8 suggest that PM10 (and possibly its precursor NO2) have cumulative effects on

infant health which increase the probability of mortality. Still, the estimated effect of PM10 in

Table 8 is considerably smaller than in Table 7, suggesting that exposure in the last few weeks

may matter more than cumulative exposure over the infant=s entire lifetime.

       We have also investigated possible non-linearities in the effects of pollution on infant

mortality, as well as the possibility that pollution has different effects on different groups by

estimating models similar to those shown in Table 5. None of the interaction terms in these

models were statistically significant. Hence, we find little evidence of a non-linear effect of

pollution on infant mortality (at least over the range of pollution measured in our data), and

conclude that the same exposure to pollution will have the same effect on mortality risk

regardless of race or maternal education.

       The estimates in Table 2 suggested that there were small differences in the average

pollution levels experienced by children of mothers with and without a high school education.

We calculate that the mean difference of .229 units in CO exposure could be responsible for an

extra 51.82 deaths in the less educated group relative to the more educated group over the

sample period, while the 3.077 unit difference in PM10 exposure could have accounted for 27.82



                                             25
extra deaths in the less educated group. Still, this is a relatively small fraction of the overall

difference (4,885) in the number of deaths between the two groups.

       To summarize, CO and PM10 appear to have the most significant effects on infant

mortality. The estimated effect of CO is remarkably robust to many changes in specification,

and implies that reduction in CO over our sample period saved approximately 654 lives in

California. The coefficient on PM10 is more sensitive to specification, but the models using

monthly measures suggest that the decline in PM10 saved 415 lives over the same period.

       The estimated effect of PM10 is smaller than the Chay and Greenstone estimates of the

effects of TSPs. The single pollutant model for PM10 using the monthly measure (which is not

shown) implies that each one unit reduction led to a decline of 1.17 deaths per 100,000.

However, it must be kept in mind that the estimates are not directly comparable, given that TSPs

are a broader measure than PM10 (while roughly half of TSPs are less than 10 microns in

diameter, smaller particles are thought to have the worst effects), and that Chay and Greenstone

use more aggregate data. The effect of PM10 in aggregate data is investigated further in the next

section.

       c) Estimated Effects in More Aggregate Data

       Several previous studies have used aggregate rather than individual-level data and it is of

interest to compare our results with theirs. Hence, we have aggregated our data to the zip code-

quarter level and estimated models similar to (1) and (2). All of the models in Table 9 control

for zip code fixed effects. Note that in the infant mortality regressions, we now control only for

pollution in the quarter of birth. These models are shown in Table 9. The sample size for the

infant mortality regressions is slightly smaller than for the birth outcome regressions, because for

1989, the rate can only be calculated for the last quarter of the year. In order to compare the

                                              26
effect sizes to those indicated in bold in Tables 6 and 7, it is necessary to multiply coefficients

and standard errors by 100 to give the effect per 100,000 live births.

        The first panel of Table 9 shows that in the aggregate-level data, only PM10 has a

statistically significant effect in the multi-pollutant models--there is no statistically significant

effect of CO. This observation suggests that estimates based on aggregate data will significantly

under-estimate the effects of CO, perhaps because acute exposures matter. On the other hand,

the point estimate of .004 on PM10 in column (6) indicates that there was a decline of .4 deaths

per 100,000 per unit of PM10 reduction per quarter, or a reduction of 1.6 deaths per 100,000

annually, which is larger than the estimate of .554 per 100,000 implied by the comparable Table

7 estimate. Hence, it does appear that the estimated effects of PM10 are larger in more aggregate

data.

        The rest of the Table shows that once again, we find little consistent effect of pollution

on the incidence of prematurity or fetal death in the fixed effects models. Panel 2 indicates

however, that the coefficient on CO is significant in the multi-pollutant model for low birth

weight, and very large. However, the fact that CO is not significant in the single-pollutant model

suggests that the finding in the multi-pollutant model may be due to collinearity between the

pollution measures.

VI. Discussion and Conclusions

        Environmental policy continues to be contentious. For example, the EPA has responded

to the threat posed by increased diesel emissions by proposing new rules that would require

refiners to phase in cleaner diesel fuel between 2006 and 2010, but the American Petroleum

Institute and the National Petro-chemical and Refiners Association have filed suit in an effort to



                                              27
block implementation of these standards (Stafford, 2001).9 Similarly, there is controversy over

the Bush administration=s recent AClear Skies@ initiative, which would eliminate the requirement

that older power plants upgrade their pollution controls when they upgrade or modernize their

equipment and replace them with Acap and trade@ provisions. Critics contend that the plan would

not regulate CO production, provides weaker caps than alternative legislation introduced in the

Senate, and will not necessarily reduce pollution in the most polluted areas, an important

consideration if the effects of pollution are non-linear (Environmental Defense, 2003).

         In order to begin to evaluate the costs and benefits of such policies, it is necessary to

understand how changes from current, historically low levels of air pollution are likely to affect

health, and which pollutants have the greatest health effects. This paper examines the effects of

air pollution on infant health, using recent data from California. Our models are identified using

within zip code variation in pollution, so that we are able to control for unobservable fixed

characteristics of zip codes as well as for a detailed group of observable time-varying

characteristics.

         Controlling for detailed characteristics of individuals including zip code of residence

causes us to overturn some of the findings in the cross-sectional epidemiological literature

concerning prenatal pollution exposures. For example, we find little average effect of prenatal

pollution exposure on the probability of low birth weight, short gestation, or fetal death once zip

code fixed effects are included in individual-level models, although there is some evidence that

people in high pollution areas, and children whose mothers have less than a high school

education, may be more subject to fetal death induced by pollution.


9
 Due to increased driving, trucks burning diesel emitted more nitrogen oxides and particles in 1997, than they did in
1970 when the Clean Air Act was passed.

                                                    28
       In Asingle pollutant@ models that include fixed effects, we find that CO, PM10, and NO2

all increase infant mortality. Our results for CO also hold in Amulti-pollutant@ models and are

extremely robust to many changes in specification. The estimated effects of PM10 and NO2 (an

important precursor) are more sensitive to specification, and show some signs of collinearity.

However, our preferred estimates imply that reductions in CO and PM10 over the time interval

we study saved over 1,000 infant lives in California alone. These findings are clearly relevant to

policy debates over automobile emissions and the Clear Skies Initiative, for example.

       A complete evaluation of the costs and benefits of improvements in air quality is far

beyond the scope of this paper (see for example, Greenstone (2002) who calculates the cost of

the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments, or Sieg et al. (2000) who examine willingness to

pay for air quality improvements in the context of a general equilibrium model of housing

prices). Note however that there are several reasons why the health benefit that we measure here

might not be capitalized into housing prices. First, the effects of pollution on infant health are

not well knownCthat is a starting point for this research. Second, CO is a colorless, odorless gas

and people may not be willing to pay for reductions in pollution that they do not observe. Third,

to the extent that parents place a lower value on infant health relative to other goods than infants

would, the value of their health will not be fully captured by the parents= willingness to pay for

pollution reduction.

       What is the value then, of improvements in infant health due to reductions in pollution?

If we value a life at a very conservative $1.6 million, then the estimated reduction in infant

deaths due to reduced air pollution in California over the 1990s would be valued at $1.7




                                             29
billion.10 If we use the EPA(1999) value of $4.8 million, the benefit would grow to $5.1 billion.

These estimates ignore other benefits of pollution reduction, such as improvements in health

which are not at the life/death margin, and so are lower-bound estimates of the benefits to

infants. But they may still provide a useful benchmark for assessing the benefits of further

reductions in air pollution in terms of infant health.




10
   Chay and Greenstone (2001a) use this $1.6 million value. However, Viscusi (1993) suggested that the value of a
life was between $3.5 and $8.5 million, and U.S. EPA (1999) valued infant lives lost due to lead at $4.8 million, the
same value that they used for adult lives.

                                                     30
                                          References

Alderman, Beth, Anna Baron, and David Savitz. AMaternal Exposure to Neighborhood Carbon
Monoxide and Risk of Low Infant Birth Weight,@ Public Health Reports, 102 #4, July-August
1987, 410-414.

Allison, Paul, ADiscrete-Time Methods for the Analysis of Event Histories,@ Sociological
Methodology, 13, 61-98, 1982.

Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Chay and David Lee. ADoes Low Birth Weight Matter? Evidence
from the U.S. Population of Twin Births@, Xerox, Dept. of Economics, Berkeley (August 2002)

Bobak, M. AOutdoor Air Pollution, Low Birth weight, and Prematurity@, Environmental Health
Perspectives, 108, 2000, 173-176.

Chay, Kenneth and Michael Greenstone. AThe Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality:
Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession@, forthcoming,
Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Chay, Kenneth and Michael Greenstone. AAir Quality, Infant Mortality, and the Clean Air Act of
1970", xerox, Dept. of Economics, Berkeley, August 2001.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. "Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Expansions
of Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women," The Journal of Political Economy, December,
1996

Dejmek, J. S.G. Selevan, I. Solansky, RJ. Sram. AFetal Growth and Maternal Exposure to
Particulate Matter During Pregnancy@, Environmental Health Perspectives, 107, 1999, 475-480.

Doggett, Tom. AWhite House, EPA Clash on Lower Vehicle Emissions@, Reuters wire service,
October 17, 2002.

Environmental Defense. APresident=s Clear Skies Initiative Won=t Clean Pollution Without
Changes@, New Release, Jan 28, 2003,
www.environmentaldefense.org/pressrelease.cfm?ContentID=2629.

Friedman, Michael, Kenneth Powell, Lori Hutwagner, LeRoy Graham, W. Gerald Teague.
AImpact of Changes in Transportation and Commuting Behaviors During the 1996 Summer
Olympic Games in Atlanta on Air Quality and Childhood Asthma,@ Journal of the American
Medical Association, 285 #7, Feb. 21, 2001, 897-905.

Garvey, D.J. and L.D. Longo. AChronic Low Level Maternal Carbon Monoxide Exposure and
Fetal Growth and Development@ Biology and Reproduction, 19, 8-114, 1978.



                                           31
Greenstone, Michael. AThe Impacts of Environmental Regulations on Industrial Activity:
Evidence from the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments and the Census of Manufactures@,
Journal of Political Economy, CX, 2002.

Hales, Simon, Clare Salmond, G. Ian Town, Tord Kjellstrom, Alistair Woodward. ADaily
Mortality in Relation to Weather and Air Pollution in Christchurch, New Zealand@, Australian
and New Zealand Journal of Public Health, 24:1, 1999, 89-91.

Imbens, Guido. AAn Efficient Method of Moments Estimator for Discrete Choice Models with
Choice-Based Sampling,@ Econometrica 60 (1992): 1187-1214.

Lipfert, F. W., J. Zhang, and R.E. Wyzga. AInfant Mortality and Air Pollution: A Comprehensive
Analysis of U.S. Data for 1990@, Journal of the Air Waste Management Association, 50(8),
August 2000, 1350-1566.

Logan, W.P.D. and M.D. Glasg. AMortality in London Fog Incident, 1952", Lancet 1:336-338,
1953.

Loomis, Dana, Margarita Castillejos, Diane Gold, William McDonnell, Victor Hugo Borja-
Aburto. AAir Pollution and Infant Mortality in Mexico City,@ Epidemiology Resources, 10 #2,
1999, 118-123.

Longo, L.D. AThe Biological Effects of Carbon Monoxide on the Pregnant Woman, Fetus and
Newborn Infant@, American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 129, 690103, 1987.

Lubin, Jay and Mitchell Gail, ABiased selection of controls for case-control analyses of cohort
studies@ Biometrics 40 (1), 63-75, 1984.

Lui, Shiliang, Daniel Krewski, Yuanli Shi, Yue Chen, and Richard Burnett. AAssociation
between Gaseous Ambient Air Pollutants and Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes in Vancouver
Canada,@ Environmental Health Perspectives, 111 #14, November 2003, 1773-1778.

Maisonet, Mildred, Timothy Bush, Adolfo Correa, and Jouni Jaakkola. ARelation Between
Ambient Air Pollution and Low Birth Weight in the Northeastern United States,@ Environmental
Health Perspectives, 109 #3, June 2001, 351-356.

Manski, Charles and Steven Lerman. AThe Estimation of Choice Probabilities from Choice
Based Samples,@ Econometrica, 45 #8, Nov. 1977, 1977-1988.

Mantel, Nathan, ASynthetic retrospective studies and related topics,@ Biometrics 29(3), 479-486,
1973.

Neidell, Matthew. A Air Pollution, Health, and Socio-Economic Status: The Effect of Outdoor
Air Quality on Childhood Asthma,” CISES Working Paper #11, October 2003.
Pereira, Luiz, Dana Loomis, Gleice Conceicao, Alfesio Braga, Rosangela Arcas, Humberto

                                            32
Kishi, Julio Singer, Gyorgy Bohm, and Paulo Saldiva. AAssociation Between Air Pollution and
Intrauterine Mortality in Sao Paulo Brazil,@ Environmental Health Perspectives, 106 #6, June
1998, 325-329.

Pope, C. Arden III. ARespiratory Disease Associated with Community Air Pollution and a Steell
Mill, Utah Valley,@ American Journal of Public Health, 79, 1989, 623-628.

Pope, C. Arden, J. Schwartz, and Michael Ransom. ADaily Mortality and PM10 Pollution in Utah
Valley,@ Archives of Environmental Health, 47, 1992, 211-216.

Prentice, R.L., and N.E. Breslow, ARetrospective studies and failure time models@ Biometrika,
65(1), 153-158, 1978.

Ransom, Michael, C. Arden Pope. AElementary School Absences and PM10 Pollution in Utah
Valley,@ Environmental Research, 58, 1992, 204-219.

Ritz, Beate, and Fei Yu. AThe Effects of Ambient Carbon Monoxide on Low Birth Weight
Among Children Born in Southern California Between 1989 and 1993", Environmental Health
Perspectives, 107, 1999, 17-25.

Ritz, Beate, Fei Yu, Guadalupe Chapa and Scott Fruin. AEffect of Air Pollution on Preterm Birth
Among Children Born in Southern California Between 1989 and 1993", Epidemiology, 11 #5,
Sept. 2000, 502-511.

Samet, Jonathan, Scott Zeger, Julia Kelsall, Jing Xu and Laurence Kalstein. ADoes Weather
Confound or Modify the Association of Particulate Air Pollution with Mortality?@ Environmental
Research Section A, LXXVII, 1997, 9-19.

Schwartz, Joel, AHarvesting and long term exposure effects in the relation between air pollution
and mortality,@ American Journal of Epidemiology, 151(5), 440-448, 2000.

Seaton, Anthony et al. AParticulate Air Pollution and Acute Health Effects,@ The Lancet, v354,
Jan. 21, 1995, 176-178.

Seig, Holger, V. Kerry Smith, H. Spencer Banzhaf, and Randy Walsh. AEstimating the General
Equilibrium Benefits of Large Policy Changes: The Clean Air Act Revisited@, NBER Working
Paper #7744, June 2000.

Spengler, John, Samet, Jonathan and McCarthy, J.F. Indoor Air Quality Handbook (New York,
NY:McGraw_hill Book Co.) 2000.

Stafford, Robert T. AAn Uphill Drive@, Washington D.C.: Clean Air Trust, 2001.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The Benefits and Costs of the
Clean Air Act, 1990-2010. Report to the U.S. Congress, November 1999.

                                           33
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. ANational Ambient Air Quality Standards@, Nov. 15th
2002, http://www.epa.gov/airs/criteria.html.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. ASecond Prospective Analytical Plan@, May 12, 2003
(Scientific Advisory Board Advisory Council on Clean Air Compliance: Washington D.C.).

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. ACriteria Pollutants@ February 20th, 2003b,
http://www.epa.gov/oar/oaqps/greenbk/o3co.html.

Viscusi, W. Kip. AThe Value of Risks to Life and Health@ Journal of Economic Literature.
31(4):1912-1946, Dec. 1993.

Wang, X., H. Ding, L. Ryan, X. Xu. AAssociations between Air Pollution and Low Birth Weight:
A Community-Based Study@, Environmental Health Perspectives, 105, 514-520, 1997.

Williams, L. A.M. Spence, and S.C. Tideman. AImplications of the Observed Effect of Air
Pollution on Birth Weight@, Social Biology, 24, 1977, 1-9.

Wilson, William, David Mage, and Lester Grant. AEstimating Separately Personal Exposure to
Ambient and Nonambient Particulate Matter for Epidemiology and Risk Assessment: Why and
How@, Journal of the Air Waste Management Association, 50, July 2000, 1167-1183.

Woodruff, T.J., J. Grillo, K.C. Schoendorf. AThe Relationship Between Selected Causes of
Postneonatal Infant Mortality and Particulate Air Pollution in the United States@, Environmental
Health Perspectives, 105, 1997, 608-612.

Xu, X, H. Ding. X. Wang. :Acute Effects of Total Suspended Particles and Sulfur Dioxides on
Preterm Delivery: A Community-Based Cohort Study@ Archives of Environmental Health, 50,
1995, 407-415.




                                           34
Appendix:

1. Description of the survival model

The description of this model follows Allison (1982). Define a discrete-time hazard rate:

Pit = Pr[Ti = t | Ti > t , xit ]                                                              (A1)

where Pit is the probability of death for individual i in period t, T is the time of occurrence, and x
are covariates that affect death.

We can now specify the likelihood function:
      n
L = ∏ [Pr(Ti = t )]∂i [Pr(Ti > t )]1−∂i                                                       (A2)
     i =1



where δi is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the observation is uncensored and 0 otherwise. This is
analogous to the continuous time model in that each individual contributes to the likelihood
function the hazard rate if uncensored and the survivor function if censored.

Using conditional probabilities, we can restate the hazard and survivor function as:
                        t −1
Pr(Ti = t ) = Pit ∏ (1 − Pij )
                        j =1

                  t
                                                                                              (A3)
P r(Ti > t ) = ∏ (1 − Pij )
                 j =1

After substituting these into the likelihood function, taking logs, and rearranging terms, we are
left with:

          n   ti
                    Pit  n ti
log L = ∑∑ yit log           + ∑∑ log (1 − Pit )                                            (A4)
        i =1 j =1   1 − Pit  i =1 j =1

where yit = 1 if person i dies in period t, and 0 otherwise. This now amounts to the analysis of
binary data, and, after specifying the hazard as a function of the covariates, can be estimated by
logit model. Alternatively, we can specify the hazard as a linear probability model and estimate
it by least squares.

2. A Note on Case Control Sampling
Mantel (1973, pages 481-482) provides a simple explanation of case-control sampling. In his
analysis, a random proportion d1 of cases, and a random proportion d2 of controls are chosen. It
is key that people be chosen from both groups randomly. Intuitively, there is little to be gained
by arbitrarily increasing the size of the control group, if the size of the treatment group is fixed.
However, it still seems that selecting the individuals to be retained on the basis of their outcome
will introduce a bias. Mantel shows however, that only the intercept of the log odds ratio is
changed. Specifically,


                                              35
AThe possible outcomes for individual i with vector Xi are:
1) he can develop disease and be in the sample, with probability d1P(Yi=1|Xi);
2) he can develop disease and not be in the sample, with probability (1-d1)P(Yi=1|Xi);
3) he can remain disease free and be in the sample, with probability d2P(Yi=0|Xi);
4) he can remain disease free and not be in the sample, with probability (1-d2)P(Yi=0|Xi).
We now make use of the fact that for any truncated multinomial...the probability P=, for a
particular observable outcome is its unconditional probability divided by the total of
probabilities for observable outcomes. Thus we may write
P=(Yi=1|Xi) = d1P(Yi=1|Xi)/[d1P(Yi=1|Xi) + d2P(Yi=0|Xi)]                                     (A5)
in consequence of which
P=(Yi=1|Xi)/P=(Yi=0|Xi) = d1P(Yi=1|Xi)/d2P(Yi=0|Xi)                                          (A6)
or the log odds
log{P=(Yi=1|Xi)/P=(Yi=0|Xi) = log(d1/d2) + log{P(Yi=1|Xi)/P(Yi=0|Xi)                         (A7).
What this implies is that the conditional log odds for being a case has the same dependence on Xi
as the unconditional log odds; only the intercept is changed.@




                                            36
                            Chart 1: Selected Epidemiological Studies of Effects of Pollution on Infant Health

A: Studies of High Pollution Areas
Study                         Location         Years      Outcomes         Pollutants     Effects
Bobak (2000)                  Czech Republic   1991       low birth weight SO2, TSP, NOX  Mean exposure during pregnancy related to
                                                            preterm birth,                  increased risk of LBW and preterm birth. Effects
                                                            growth retard.                  greatest for exposure in first trimester.
Bobak and Leon (1999)     Czech Republic    1989-91       infant mortality SO2, TSP, NOX  Mean lifetime exposure to TSPs increased mortality
                                                                                            due to respiratory causes when all pollutants
                                                                                            entered in model.
Dejmek et al. (1999)      Northern Bohemia, 1994-96     Growth           PM10, PM2.5      Exposure in 1st month of pregnancy related to
                           Europe                         retardation                       interuterine growth retardation.
Loomis et al. (1999)      Mexico City       1993-95     infant mortality PM10             PM10 associated with higher risk of mortality within
                                                                                            3 to 5 days.
Luiz et al (1998)         Sao Paulo, Brazil 1991,92, 95 fetal death      index of CO, NO2 Index associated with increased risk of fetal death
                                                                           SO2, O3, PM10    within 5 days.
Wang, Ding, Ryan,         Beijing, China    1988-91     low birth weight SO2 & TSP        Exposure in last trimester increases risk of low
 and Xu (1997)                                                                              birth weight.
Xu, Ding, and Wang (1995) Beijing, China    1988        preterm birth    SO2 & TSP        7-day lagged moving average of each pollutant
                                                                                            associated with increased risk of preterm birth.

B: Studies of the U.S. and Canada
Alderman et al. (1987)      Colorado           1975-83    low birth weight CO                 No association between CO in last trimester and LBW
                                                                                                once maternal education and race were controlled.
Lipfert, Zhang, and Wyzga   All of U.S.        1990       infant mortality   PM10, CP, SO2,   County level annual avg. pollution measures did not
   '(2000)                                                                    SO4, PM2.5        have robust relationships to pollutants when
                                                                                                maternal variables were controlled.
Liu et al. (2003)           Vancouver,        1985-1998 low birth weight CO, NO2, SO2,        SO2 in 1st month increases LBW. SO2 and CO in
                             Canada                       preterm birth,  O3                    last month increases preterm birth. Growth retard-
                                                          growth retard.                        ation associated with CO, NO2, SO2 in 1st month.
Mainsonet et al. (2001)     Northeastern U.S. 1994-96   low birth weight CO, PM10, SO2        CO in last trimester and SO2 in 2nd trimester
                                                                                                increase LBW. No effect of PM10.
Ritz et al. (2000)          Los Angeles        1989-1993 preterm birth       CO, NO2, O3,     PM10 exposure 6 weeks before birth increases
                                                                              & PM10            preterm birth. CO exposure in same interval has
                                                                                               effects only in some areas.
Ritz and Yu (1999)          Los Angeles        1989-1993 low birth weight CO, NO2, O3,        CO exposure in last trimester increased incidence
                                                                             & PM10             of low birth weight.
Williams, Spence,           Los Angeles        early 1970s low birth weight TSP               Lower mean birth weight in areas with high pollution
 & Tideman (1977)                                                                               among women who were non-smokers.
Woodruff et al. (1997)      86 U.S. MSAs       1989-91    infant mortality   PM10             Infants with high exposure more likely to die in
                                                                                                postneonatal period.
                       19




                                    0
                                        0.1
                                              0.2
                                                    0.3
                                                          0.4
                                                                0.5
                                                                      0.6
                                                                            0.7
                                                                                  0.8
                            89
                               .1
                       19
                            89
                               .3
                       19
                            90
                               .1
                       19
                            90
                               .3
                       19
                            91
                               .1
                       19
                            91
                               .3
                       19
                            92
                               .1
                       19
                            92
                               .3
                       19
                            93
                               .1
                       19
                            93
                               .3




CO/10
                       19
                            94
                               .1
                       19
                            94




PM10
                               .3
                       19




        year/quarter
                            95
                               .1
                       19




NO2
                            95
                               .3
                       19
                            96
                               .1

O3
                       19
                            96
                               .3
                       19
                            97
                               .1
                       19
                            97
                               .3
                       19
                            99
                               .1
                                                                                        Figure 1. Seasonal Variation in Pollution




                       19
                            99
                               .3
                       20
                            00
                               .1
                       20
                            00
                               .3
                     19




                                  -0.4
                                         -0.3
                                                -0.2
                                                       -0.1
                                                              0
                                                                  0.1
                                                                        0.2
                                                                              0.3
                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                          0.5
                          89
                             .1
                     19
                          89
                             .3
                     19
                          90
                             .1
                     19
                          90
                             .3
                     19
                          91
                             .1
                     19
                          91
                             .3
                     19
                          92
                             .1
                     19
                          92
                             .3
                     19
                          93
                             .1
                     19
                          93
                             .3




o3
                     19
                          94
                             .1
                     19




co
                          94
                             .3
                     19
                          95




      year/quarter
                             .1




pm
                                                                                                               Pollution




                     19
                          95
                             .3
                     19



no2
                          96
                             .1
                     19
                          96
                             .3
                     19
                          97
                             .1
                     19
                          97
                             .3
                     19
                          99
                             .1
                                                                                                Figure 2. Percent Residual Variation in




                     19
                          99
                             .3
                     20
                          00
                             .1
                     20
                          00
                             .3
Table 1: Levels and Trends in Pollution and Infant Health

                                                                        Between zip     Within zip
Variable                                   Mean           Std. Dev.      std. Dev.      std. Dev.
Panel 1
CO 8-hr ppm                               1.975            1.101           0.677          0.777
PM10 24-hr ug/m3                          39.125           14.165          10.833         9.244
NO2 1-hr ppb                              50.919           18.370          15.356         9.457
O3 8-hr ppb                               40.424           15.929          9.937          11.802
Panel 2
Quarterly IMR per 1000                     1.64             1.95           4.07            11.28
gestation<37 per 1,000                     92.60            30.91          25.72           48.64
low birth weight per 1,000                 48.80            21.59          14.94           39.08
fetal deaths per 1,000                     5.86             6.58           3.38            13.64

Panel 3
year                                        CO             PM10             NO2             O3
1989                                       2.409           48.817          60.340         45.993
1990                                       2.435           46.174          58.986         41.400
1991                                       2.252           45.965          57.426         43.326
1992                                       2.243           41.339          54.208         42.709
1993                                       1.940           36.645          48.058         40.879
1994                                       2.071           36.923          51.123         40.309
1995                                       1.822           33.728          48.383         39.799
1996                                       1.767           35.253          47.488         39.581
1997                                       1.585           33.774          43.083         36.593
1999                                       1.544           36.098          44.936         36.259
2000                                       1.388           32.891          42.001         35.685

Panel 4                                  Quarterly       Gestation       Low Birth         Fetal
year                                       IMR          < 37 weeks        Weight          Deaths
1989                                       2.16            95.67           51.11           6.49
1990                                       1.97            93.31           48.73           6.27
1991                                       1.87            92.39           47.91           6.04
1992                                       1.69            91.73           48.76           5.92
1993                                       1.67            92.73           48.98           5.78
1994                                       1.66            92.22           49.94           5.75
1995                                       1.51            92.15           48.86           5.86
1996                                       1.41            92.23           48.80           5.88
1997                                       1.40            92.08           48.56           5.40
1999                                       1.32            92.56           47.04           5.36
2000                                       1.35            91.28           47.72           5.60

National Ambient Air Quality Standards
CO                                    9.5 ppm         8-hr
                                     35.5 ppm         1-hr
PM10                                 155 ug/m3        24-hr
NO2                                    54 ppb         annual
O3                                     85 ppb         8-hr
                                      125 ppb         1-hr

Note: What we refer to as the quarterly IMR is the number of infants < 12 months old who died in a quarter.
Table 2: Pollution Levels for Bottom, Middle, and Top Third of Zipcode-Years
Ranked by Mean Pollution Levels

Variable                             bottom 1/3         middle 1/3         top 1/3
CO 8-hr                                1.157              1.883             2.786
PM10 24-hr                             25.136            39.036            53.580
NO2 1-hr                               30.972            49.538            68.865
O3 8-hr                                33.698            40.095            47.136

quarterly IMR                          1.512               1.788            1.965
gestation<37 per 1,000                 78.385             89.626           92.388
low BW per 1,000                       43.281             47.243           48.673
fetal death per 1,000                  5.129              5.743            5.862

% male                                 0.488              0.488                0.489
% black                                0.064              0.071                0.078
% hispanic                             0.256              0.393                0.440
% asian                                0.134              0.108                0.099
% other race                           0.015              0.008                0.006
% married                              0.742              0.700                0.669
% foreign mom                          0.333              0.416                0.455
% racial diff b/w parents              0.185              0.172                0.154
% HS dropout                           0.216              0.285                0.326
% HS grads                             0.334              0.339                0.344
% AD degree                            0.153              0.140                0.134
% college grads                        0.297              0.236                0.196
% teen mothers                         0.055              0.064                0.070
% age 19 to 25                         0.267              0.303                0.325
% age 26 to 30                         0.276              0.282                0.288
% age 31 to 35                         0.258              0.230                0.214
% age >= 36                            0.144              0.121                0.103
% first born                           0.431              0.413                0.408
% second born                          0.323              0.310                0.304
% third born                           0.148              0.159                0.162
% gov't insurance                      0.338              0.408                0.416
% prenatal care in 1st trimester       0.826              0.807                0.769

Average Zipcode Pollution Levels by Individual Race and Education:
                                        O3                NO2                   CO      PM
All                                   40.274             51.156                1.968   39.090
Blacks                                38.135             51.916                2.124   38.878
Non-blacks                            40.464             51.088                1.954   39.109
< HS                                  40.664             54.495                2.118   41.103
>= HS                                 40.068             49.391                1.889   38.026

Sample Statistics:
                                     Total births      Total deaths     IMR per 1000
All                                  4,720,190           26,111             5.53
Blacks                                384,711             4,495            11.68
Non-blacks                           4,335,479           21,616             4.99
< HS                                 1,632,097           10,613             6.50
>= HS                                3,088,093           15,498             5.02
Table 3: The Effect of Pollution on the Probability of Short Gestation
Pollution Measure=Average During Last Month of Pregnancy

                       1          2          3          4           5         6          7          8          9         10         11         12
                      CS         CS         CS         CS          CS        CS         FE         FE         FE         FE         FE         FE
CO                   0.867                                        0.005     0.293      0.248                                       0.211      0.387
                    [0.502]                                      [0.870]   [0.587]    [3.022]                                     [1.097]    [2.387]
PM10                           0.211**                           0.162**   0.167**                0.087                            0.061      0.065
                               [0.033]                           [0.042]   [0.041]               [0.137]                          [0.086]    [0.108]
NO2                                       0.094**                 0.022                                      0.054                 0.021
                                          [0.028]                [0.051]                                    [0.268]               [0.284]
Ozone                                                 0.167**    0.110*     0.117**                                     0.087      0.078      0.084
                                                      [0.039]    [0.048]    [0.045]                                    [0.154]    [0.186]    [0.135]
Max temp. last        -0.078   -0.200*     -0.141    -0.336**   -0.360**   -0.354**   -0.415     -0.441     -0.435     -0.534     -0.536     -0.531
  30 days            [0.078]   [0.082]    [0.082]     [0.098]    [0.101]    [0.100]   [0.434]    [0.485]    [0.516]    [0.494]    [0.510]    [0.496]
Avg. Precip.         -0.167*    -0.083    -0.153*     -0.195*    -0.118     -0.118    -0.193     -0.155     -0.182     -0.204     -0.172     -0.173
  last 30 days       [0.077]   [0.077]    [0.077]     [0.076]    [0.079]    [0.079]   [0.219]    [0.213]    [0.228]    [0.210]    [0.241]    [0.229]
Infant Characteristics
Male                -0.012**   -0.012**   -0.012**   -0.012**   -0.012**   -0.012**   -0.012**   -0.012**   -0.012**   -0.012**   -0.012**   -0.012**
                     [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]
first birth         -0.018**   -0.018**   -0.018**   -0.017**   -0.018**   -0.018**   -0.016**   -0.016**   -0.016**   -0.016**   -0.016**   -0.016**
                     [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]
second birth        -0.022**   -0.022**   -0.022**   -0.022**   -0.022**   -0.022**   -0.021**   -0.021**   -0.021**   -0.020**   -0.021**   -0.021**
                     [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]
third birth         -0.017**   -0.017**   -0.017**   -0.016**   -0.017**   -0.017**   -0.016**   -0.016**   -0.016**   -0.015**   -0.016**   -0.016**
                     [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]
Mother Characteristics
Black                0.056**    0.056**    0.055**    0.056**    0.056**    0.056**    0.052**    0.052**    0.052**    0.052**    0.052**    0.052**
                     [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]
Hispanic             0.010**    0.009**    0.009**    0.010**    0.009**    0.009**    0.008**    0.007**    0.008**    0.008**    0.007**    0.007**
                     [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]
Asian                0.022**    0.022**    0.022**    0.022**    0.022**    0.022**    0.023**    0.022**    0.023**    0.023**    0.022**    0.022**
                     [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]
Other Race             0.01      0.01       0.01      0.010*      0.009      0.009      0.009      0.009      0.009      0.01       0.008      0.008
                     [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]
Married             -0.013**   -0.013**   -0.013**   -0.013**   -0.013**   -0.013**   -0.013**   -0.013**   -0.013**   -0.013**   -0.013**   -0.013**
                     [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]
Foreign Born        -0.009**   -0.009**   -0.009**   -0.009**   -0.009**   -0.009**   -0.009**   -0.009**   -0.009**   -0.009**   -0.009**   -0.009**
                     [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]
Parents of           0.008**    0.008**    0.008**    0.008**    0.008**    0.008**    0.009**    0.009**    0.009**    0.009**    0.009**    0.009**
  Different Race     [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]
Table 3: The Effect of Pollution on the Probability of Short Gestation (continued)
Pollution Measure=Average During Last Month of Pregnancy

                       1           2          3           4           5           6          7           8           9         10          11         12
                      CS          CS         CS          CS          CS          CS         FE          FE          FE         FE          FE         FE
HS Graduate        -0.010**    -0.010**   -0.009**    -0.010**    -0.010**    -0.010**   -0.009**    -0.009**    -0.009**   -0.009**    -0.009**   -0.009**
                    [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]     [0.001]     [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]     [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]
Some College       -0.015**    -0.014**   -0.015**    -0.015**    -0.015**    -0.015**   -0.013**    -0.013**    -0.013**   -0.013**    -0.013**   -0.013**
                    [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]
College Grad.      -0.024**    -0.024**   -0.024**    -0.024**    -0.024**    -0.024**   -0.021**    -0.021**    -0.021**   -0.021**    -0.022**   -0.022**
                    [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]
Parents Diff.       0.002*      0.002*     0.002*      0.002*      0.002*      0.002*     0.002*      0.002*      0.002*     0.002*      0.002*     0.002*
 Education          [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]     [0.001]     [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]     [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]
19 to 25           -0.019**    -0.019**   -0.019**    -0.019**    -0.018**    -0.019**   -0.019**    -0.018**    -0.019**   -0.019**    -0.018**   -0.018**
                    [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]
26 to 30           -0.020**    -0.019**   -0.020**    -0.020**    -0.019**    -0.019**   -0.019**    -0.018**    -0.019**   -0.019**    -0.018**   -0.018**
                    [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]
31 to 35           -0.012**    -0.012**   -0.013**    -0.013**    -0.012**    -0.012**   -0.011**    -0.011**    -0.011**   -0.011**    -0.010**   -0.010**
                    [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.002]
> 36                 0.004       0.005      0.004       0.004       0.005       0.005     0.006*      0.006*      0.006*     0.006*      0.007*     0.006*
                    [0.003]     [0.003]    [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]    [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]    [0.003]     [0.003]    [0.003]
gov't insurance     0.013**     0.013**    0.013**     0.013**     0.013**     0.013**    0.011**     0.011**     0.011**    0.011**     0.011**    0.011**
                    [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]     [0.001]     [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]     [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]
prenatal care      -0.024**    -0.024**   -0.024**    -0.024**    -0.023**    -0.023**   -0.023**    -0.023**    -0.023**   -0.023**    -0.023**   -0.023**
 1st trimester      [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]     [0.001]     [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]     [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.001]
Observations       452148      453073     454580      458897      449239      449426     452148      453073      454580     458897      449239     449426
R-squared            0.01        0.01       0.01        0.01        0.01        0.01       0.01        0.01        0.01       0.01        0.01       0.01

Notes: Robust standard errors are in brackets. A * indicates significance at the 5% level. A ** indicates significance at the 1% level.
Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 1,000. CS indicates that the model is cross sectional while FE indicates fixed effects.
Table 4: The Effect of Pollution on Other Pregnancy Outcomes

                     1         2          3          4         5         6         7          8           9       10        11         12
                    CS        CS         CS         CS       CS         CS        FE         FE          FE       FE        FE         FE
1. Dependent Variable=Low Birthweight, Pollution Measure=Average During Last Month of Pregnancy
CO                 0.596                                    1.439*     0.379     0.451                                     1.699*     0.621
                  [0.373]                                  [0.655]    [0.439]   [1.237]                                    [0.750]   [1.050]
PM10                        0.051*                          0.055      0.036                0.001                           0.003    -0.019
                            [0.025]                        [0.031]    [0.030]              [0.058]                         [0.045]   [0.050]
NO2                                     0.016              -0.082*                                     -0.037              -0.124
                                       [0.021]             [0.038]                                     [0.107]             [0.116]
Ozone                                             -0.006    0.022     -0.003                                     -0.015     0.043     0.008
                                                  [0.029]  [0.036]    [0.034]                                    [0.066]   [0.079]   [0.061]
Observations      451394   452291      453826     458116   448486     448673    451394     452291      453826    458116    448486    448673
R-squared          0.01      0.01       0.01       0.01      0.01      0.01      0.01       0.01        0.01      0.01      0.01      0.01

2. Dependent Variable=Fetal Death, Pollution Measure=Average During Last Month of Pregnancy
CO                -0.221                                     0.024     -0.213      0.044                                    -0.05     0.121
                  [0.130]                                   [0.213]    [0.149]    [0.200]                                  [0.218]   [0.197]
PM10                         -0.003                          0.008      0.003                0.003                         -0.005    -0.002
                             [0.009]                        [0.011]    [0.010]              [0.012]                        [0.012]   [0.012]
NO2                                      -0.014             -0.019                                      0.013                0.02
                                        [0.007]             [0.012]                                    [0.017]             [0.022]
Ozone                                              0.013     0.011      0.006                                     0.009     0.007     0.012
                                                  [0.010]   [0.012]    [0.011]                                   [0.013]   [0.015]   [0.013]
Observations      392981     392887     394084    396931    390670    390791     392981     392887     394084    396931    390670    390791
R-squared          0.00       0.00        0.00      0.00     0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00       0.00      0.00       0.00     0.00

3. Dependent Variable=Short Gestation, Pollution Measure=Average During Last Trimester of Pregnancy
CO                1.302*                                    -1.336     0.287      0.306                                    -1.703      0.25
                  [0.535]                                   [1.008]   [0.647]    [3.751]                                   [2.581]   [2.820]
PM10                        0.250**                         0.175**   0.208**                 0.088                         0.017     0.066
                            [0.037]                         [0.051]   [0.048]                [0.195]                       [0.159]   [0.181]
NO2                                    0.145**              0.119*                                      0.145               0.228
                                        [0.029]             [0.056]                                    [0.319]             [0.352]
Ozone                                             0.198**    0.083     0.115*                                     0.085     0.027     0.077
                                                   [0.045]  [0.056]   [0.054]                                    [0.202]   [0.234]   [0.200]
Observations      461165    461165     461165     461165    461165    461165     461165      461165    461165    461165    461165    461165
R-squared          0.01      0.01        0.01       0.01     0.01       0.01      0.01        0.01      0.01      0.01      0.01      0.01

Note: Specification is the same as Table 3. See Table 3 notes.
Table 5: Differential Effects of Pollution on Birth Outcomes, Zipcode Fixed Effects Models
                                     1          2           3          4           5           6
    Interaction Variable:     High Poll. High Poll.       < HS       < HS        Black       Black
1. Dependent Variable=Low Birth Weight
CO                                4.139      -0.708       1.534      0.695       1.365        0.535
                                [2.499]      [2.508]     [0.896]    [1.135]     [0.742]      [1.056]
CO*interaction var.              -1.095       0.609       0.738      0.014       1.846       -0.362
                                [1.042]      [0.838]     [1.279]    [0.804]     [2.970]      [2.013]
PM10                              0.217       0.144       0.008     -0.011      -0.019       -0.037
                                [0.118]      [0.110]     [0.051]    [0.054]     [0.046]      [0.051]
PM10*interaction var.              -0.1      -0.075      -0.012     -0.028       0.295        0.244
                                [0.052]      [0.047]     [0.064]    [0.061]     [0.156]      [0.150]
NO2                              -0.484                  -0.106                 -0.103
                                [0.271]                  [0.120]                [0.115]
NO2*interaction var.              0.163                  -0.058                 -0.189
                                [0.084]                  [0.075]                [0.177]
O3                                0.053      -0.071       0.001     -0.027        0.05        0.022
                                [0.178]      [0.165]     [0.081]    [0.064]     [0.079]      [0.061]
O3*interaction var.              -0.001       0.035      0.117*      0.095      -0.178       -0.244
                                [0.055]      [0.054]     [0.057]    [0.052]     [0.139]      [0.128]
2. Dependent Variable=Short Gestation
CO                                3.994        5.21      -0.528     -0.321       0.338        0.215
                                [3.761]      [5.239]     [1.198]    [2.499]     [1.102]      [2.421]
CO*interaction var.              -1.599      -2.017       1.908      1.786      -1.853        1.435
                                [1.538]      [1.518]     [1.693]    [1.044]     [3.324]      [2.129]
PM10                             -0.006       0.01        0.085      0.089       0.059        0.057
                                [0.212]      [0.197]     [0.091]    [0.110]     [0.086]      [0.107]
PM10*interaction var.             0.031       0.026      -0.059     -0.064       0.046        0.119
                                [0.093]      [0.085]     [0.086]    [0.082]     [0.173]      [0.164]
NO2                                0.12                   0.023                    0
                                [0.604]                  [0.287]                [0.284]
NO2*interaction var.             -0.038                  -0.011                  0.275
                                [0.156]                  [0.101]                [0.209]
O3                                0.361       0.394       0.033      0.039       0.076        0.075
                                [0.384]      [0.358]     [0.189]    [0.140]     [0.186]      [0.135]
O3*interaction var.              -0.114      -0.124       0.124      0.122       0.003        0.095
                                [0.100]      [0.104]     [0.078]    [0.068]     [0.163]      [0.144]
3. Dependent Variable=Fetal Death
CO                              -1.702*     -1.631**     -0.424     -0.102      -0.119        0.128
                                [0.774]      [0.616]     [0.264]    [0.226]     [0.229]      [0.200]
CO*interaction var.              0.655*      0.706**     0.862*     0.512*       0.68        -0.076
                                [0.306]      [0.236]     [0.361]    [0.254]     [0.905]      [0.637]
PM10                              0.029       0.024       0.001      0.007      -0.009       -0.004
                                [0.037]      [0.036]     [0.014]    [0.014]     [0.012]      [0.012]
PM10*interaction var.            -0.011      -0.008      -0.016     -0.022       0.054        0.032
                                [0.016]      [0.015]     [0.019]    [0.018]     [0.050]      [0.045]
NO2                               0.007                   0.031                  0.025
                                [0.058]                  [0.023]                [0.021]
NO2*interaction var.              0.006                  -0.028                 -0.065
                                [0.022]                  [0.023]                [0.063]
O3                               -0.032      -0.034      -0.002      0.006       0.005        0.011
                                [0.043]      [0.040]     [0.016]    [0.014]     [0.015]      [0.013]
O3*interaction var.               0.018       0.021       0.024      0.016       0.028        0.009
                                [0.015]      [0.014]     [0.017]    [0.016]     [0.044]      [0.039]

See notes for Tables 3 and 4.
Table 6: Effects of Pollution on Infant Mortality, Conditional on Birth Weight and Gestation, Time Units=Weeks.

                           1          2           3           4             5           6          7          8            9         10        11       12
                          CS         CS          CS          CS            CS          CS         FE         FE           FE         FE       FE        FE
CO                       3.332                                            4.849       3.739      4.088                                       5.284     4.154
                       [0.609]**                                       [1.237]**   [0.763]**   [0.765]**                                   [1.359]** [0.945]**
                        11.121                                           16.184      12.479     13.644                                      17.635    13.864
PM10                               -0.011                                -0.093      -0.108                 0.085                           -0.015    -0.033
                                   [0.037]                              [0.047]*    [0.045]*               [0.043]*                         [0.054]   [0.051]
                                   -0.037                                -0.310      -0.360                 0.284                           -0.050    -0.110
NO2                                              0.109                   -0.082                                          0.169              -0.098
                                               [0.035]**                 [0.070]                                       [0.049]**            [0.087]
                                                 0.364                   -0.274                                          0.564              -0.327
O3                                                          -0.244       -0.081     -0.105                                        -0.195    -0.018    -0.044
                                                           [0.053]**     [0.063]    [0.060]                                      [0.068]** [0.075]    [0.073]
                                                            -0.814       -0.270     -0.350                                        -0.651    -0.060    -0.147
Max. Temp. in           -0.616      -0.743      -0.755      -0.412       -0.418     -0.431      -0.484      -0.679      -0.661    -0.424    -0.412    -0.422
  week                 [0.074]**   [0.071]**   [0.071]**   [0.100]**   [0.100]**   [0.100]**   [0.085]**   [0.080]**   [0.080]** [0.113]** [0.113]** [0.113]**
Avg. Precipitation       0.049       0.012       0.029       0.039        0.042      0.041       0.069       0.039       0.046     0.036     0.066     0.066
  in week               [0.064]     [0.064]     [0.063]     [0.064]      [0.064]    [0.064]     [0.069]     [0.070]     [0.069]   [0.069] [0.070]     [0.070]
Infant Characteristics
Birthweight             -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.003      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.003
                       [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**
Gestation               -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001
                       [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**   [0.000]**
male                    -0.031      -0.031      -0.031      -0.031      -0.031      -0.031      -0.031      -0.031      -0.031      -0.031      -0.031      -0.031
                       [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**
1-2 weeks old            -0.13       -0.13       -0.13       -0.13       -0.13       -0.13      -0.131      -0.131      -0.131      -0.131      -0.131      -0.131
                       [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**
3-4 weeks old           -0.358      -0.359      -0.358      -0.358      -0.358      -0.358      -0.359      -0.359      -0.359      -0.359      -0.359      -0.359
                       [0.026]**   [0.026]**   [0.026]**   [0.026]**   [0.026]**   [0.026]**   [0.026]**   [0.026]**   [0.026]**   [0.026]**   [0.026]**   [0.026]**
5-8 weeks old           -0.339      -0.339      -0.339      -0.339      -0.339      -0.339      -0.339      -0.339      -0.339      -0.339      -0.339      -0.339
                       [0.007]**   [0.007]**   [0.007]**   [0.007]**   [0.007]**   [0.007]**   [0.007]**   [0.007]**   [0.007]**   [0.007]**   [0.007]**   [0.007]**
9-12 weeks old           -0.04       -0.04       -0.04       -0.04       -0.04       -0.04       -0.04       -0.04       -0.04       -0.04       -0.04       -0.04
                       [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**
13-20 weeks old         -0.007      -0.007      -0.007      -0.007      -0.007      -0.007      -0.007      -0.007      -0.007      -0.007      -0.007      -0.007
                       [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**
21-32 weeks old         -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004
                       [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**
> 32 weeks old          -0.008      -0.008      -0.008      -0.008      -0.008      -0.008      -0.008      -0.008      -0.008      -0.008      -0.008      -0.008
                       [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**   [0.001]**
1st born                -0.044      -0.044      -0.044      -0.044      -0.044      -0.044      -0.047      -0.047      -0.047      -0.047      -0.047      -0.047
                       [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**
Table 6: Effects of Pollution on Infant Mortality, Conditional on Birth Weight and Gestation, Time Units=Weeks. (continued)

                           1           2           3           4           5           6           7           8           9        10        11        12
                          CS          CS          CS          CS          CS          CS          FE          FE          FE        FE        FE        FE
2nd born                -0.021      -0.021      -0.021      -0.021      -0.021      -0.021      -0.023      -0.023      -0.023    -0.023    -0.023    -0.023
                       [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]** [0.002]** [0.002]** [0.002]**
3rd born                -0.013      -0.013      -0.013      -0.013      -0.013      -0.013      -0.014      -0.014      -0.014    -0.014    -0.014    -0.014
                       [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]** [0.003]** [0.003]** [0.003]**
Mother Characteristics
Black                   -0.011       -0.01      -0.011      -0.011      -0.012      -0.012       0.001       0.001       0.001       0.001       0.001       0.001
                       [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**    [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]
Hispanic                -0.023      -0.022      -0.022      -0.022      -0.022      -0.023       -0.02       -0.02       -0.02       -0.02       -0.02       -0.02
                       [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**
Asian                   -0.013      -0.013      -0.013      -0.013      -0.013      -0.013       -0.01       -0.01       -0.01       -0.01       -0.01       -0.01
                       [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**
Other Race              -0.007      -0.007      -0.007      -0.007      -0.007      -0.007      -0.005      -0.005      -0.005      -0.005      -0.005      -0.005
                        [0.008]     [0.008]     [0.008]     [0.008]     [0.008]     [0.008]     [0.008]     [0.008]     [0.008]     [0.008]     [0.008]     [0.008]
Married                  0.004       0.004       0.004       0.004       0.004       0.004       0.003       0.004       0.003       0.004       0.003       0.003
                        [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]
Foreign Born            -0.021       -0.02      -0.021      -0.021      -0.021      -0.021      -0.021      -0.021      -0.021      -0.021      -0.021      -0.021
                       [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**
Parents of               0.011       0.011       0.011       0.011       0.011       0.011       0.011       0.011       0.011       0.011       0.011       0.011
 Different Race        [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**
HS Graduate             -0.008      -0.008      -0.008      -0.008      -0.008      -0.008      -0.009      -0.009      -0.009      -0.009      -0.009      -0.009
                       [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**
Some College            -0.013      -0.013      -0.013      -0.013      -0.013      -0.013      -0.015      -0.015      -0.015      -0.015      -0.015      -0.015
                       [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**
College Grad.           -0.015      -0.015      -0.015      -0.015      -0.015      -0.015      -0.019      -0.019      -0.019      -0.019      -0.019      -0.019
                       [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**
Parents Diff.            0.002       0.002       0.002       0.002       0.002       0.002       0.002       0.002       0.002       0.002       0.002       0.002
 Education              [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]
19 to 25                -0.011      -0.011      -0.011      -0.011      -0.011      -0.011      -0.011      -0.011      -0.011      -0.011      -0.011      -0.011
                       [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**
26 to 30                -0.018      -0.018      -0.018      -0.018      -0.018      -0.018      -0.019      -0.019      -0.019      -0.019      -0.019      -0.019
                       [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**   [0.003]**
31 to 35                 -0.02       -0.02       -0.02       -0.02       -0.02       -0.02      -0.022      -0.022      -0.022      -0.022      -0.022      -0.022
                       [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**
> 36                    -0.014      -0.013      -0.013      -0.014      -0.014      -0.014      -0.015      -0.015      -0.015      -0.015      -0.015      -0.015
                       [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**   [0.004]**
gov't insurance          0.011       0.01        0.01        0.01        0.011       0.011       0.013       0.013       0.013       0.013       0.013       0.013
 for birth             [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**
prenatal care 1st       -0.012      -0.012      -0.012      -0.012      -0.012      -0.012      -0.012      -0.012      -0.012      -0.012      -0.012      -0.012
 trimester             [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.002]**
Observations            149197      149197      149197      149197      149197      149197      149197      149197      149197      149197      149197      149197
R-squared                0.49        0.49        0.49        0.49        0.49        0.49        0.49        0.49        0.49         0.49        0.49       0.49

See Table 3 notes. Figures in bold indicate the number of deaths per 100,000 that would be saved by a one unit reduction in the pollutant.
Table 7: Alternative Specifications of the Table 6 Weekly Hazard Model, Zipcode Fixed Effects Models

                     1           2            3           4        5          6             7          8            9          10           11        12
                 15X non     15X non         No          No              zip-year      Drop 1st    Drop 1st     10-mile     10-mile    time unit time unit
                  deaths      deaths     weather     weather zip-year fe     fe            wk         wk        sample      sample     is month is month
CO                 2.209       1.721       5.607       4.095     5.616     4.187          6.26       4.549       4.374       3.988         3.21     4.61
                 [0.587]**   [0.405]**   [1.355]**   [0.947]** [1.465]** [0.991]**     [1.409]**   [0.979]**   [1.207]**   [0.891]**    [1.506]* [1.173]**
                  19.660      15.317      18.713      13.667    18.744    13.974        17.981      13.067      14.598      13.310       10.713    15.386
PM10               0.000      -0.007      -0.026      -0.051    -0.008    -0.031        -0.005      -0.032       -0.082      -0.082       0.129     0.166
                  [0.024]     [0.022]     [0.053]     [0.050]   [0.057]   [0.054]       [0.056]     [0.053]     [0.057]     [0.053]      [0.089]  [0.080]*
                   0.000                  -0.087      -0.170    -0.027    -0.103        -0.014      -0.092       -0.274      -0.274       0.431     0.554
NO2               -0.042                  -0.131                -0.124                  -0.148                    -0.04                   0.144
                  [0.038]                 [0.087]               [0.096]                 [0.092]                 [0.086]                  [0.121]
                  -0.374                  -0.437                -0.414                  -0.494                   -0.134                   0.481
O3                 0.007      -0.004      -0.216      -0.257    -0.007     -0.04        -0.021      -0.061       -0.001    -0.015        -0.088    -0.056
                  [0.032]     [0.031]    [0.059]**   [0.055]**  [0.080]   [0.078]       [0.076]     [0.075]     [0.078]    [0.077]       [0.095]   [0.092]
                   0.062      -0.036      -0.721      -0.858    -0.023    -0.134        -0.060      -0.175       -0.003    -0.050        -0.294    -0.187
Observations      397695      397695      149197      149197    149197    149197        133978      133978      114573     115336       149243    149243
R-squared           0.4         0.4         0.49        0.49      0.52      0.52          0.17        0.17         0.5       0.5           0.47     0.47

Notes: Aside from the variation noted in the column heading, these regressions are otherwise similar to those shown in Table 6.
See Table 6 notes.
Table 8: Effects of Pollution on Infant Mortality, Including Cumulative Average Weekly Exposure
Zipcode Fixed Effects Models

                            1          2            3           4             5           6
CO                       3.301                                              5.759       3.692
                       [0.773]**                                         [1.410]**   [0.984]**
                         11.017                                            19.221      12.322
CO cumulative            0.346                                             -0.287       0.151
                        [0.156]*                                           [0.278]     [0.197]
                         0.115                                             -0.096       0.051
PM10                                    0                                  -0.048      -0.088
                                     [0.045]                               [0.055]     [0.053]
                                      0.000                                -0.160      -0.294
PM10 cumulative                       0.034                                 0.021       0.029
                                    [0.010]**                              [0.012]    [0.011]*
                                      0.011                                 0.007       0.010
NO2                                                0.054                   -0.203
                                                  [0.054]                 [0.095]*
                                                   0.180                   -0.678
NO2 cumulative                                    44.162                   43.456
                                                [12.294]**               [20.341]*
                                                  14.739                   14.504
O3                                                            -0.198        0.033      -0.019
                                                             [0.069]**     [0.077]     [0.075]
                                                              -0.661        0.110      -0.063
O3 cumulative                                                  1.511      -20.182      -8.680
                                                              [9.426]     [12.519]    [11.306]
                                                               0.504       -6.736      -2.897
Observations           149197       149197       149197       149197      149197      149197
R-squared               0.49         0.49         0.49         0.49         0.49        0.49

Notes: Aside from the change in time unit from weeks to months, and the addition of the measure of
cumulative pollution exposure in Panel B, these models have the same form as the fixed effects models
in Table 6. See Table 6 notes.
Table 9: Estimates Using Data Aggregated to Quarterly Level

                                   1               2             3            4            5             6
1. Dependent Varialbe=Infant Mortality
CO, quarter of death            0.047                                                    0.015        0.030
                               [0.0307]                                                 [0.0355]     [0.0326]
PM10, quarter of death                         0.0047***                                0.0036**     0.0040**
                                                [0.0017]                                [0.0016]     [0.0018]
NO2, quarter of death                                         0.0052*                    0.003
                                                              [0.0028]                  [0.0031]
Ozone, quarter of death                                                     0.002        0.000         0.000
                                                                           [0.0017]     [0.0017]      [0.0018]
# Observations                     30238         30238        30238         30238        30238         30238
R-squared                           0.09          0.09         0.09          0.09         0.09          0.09

2. Dependent Varialbe=Low Birthweight
CO, quarter of birth           0.367                                                    0.7077**      0.5808*
                              [0.3225]                                                  [0.3324]      [0.3118]
PM10, quarter of birth                           -0.014                                  -0.030        -0.033
                                                [0.0171]                                [0.0220]      [0.0205]
NO2, quarter of birth                                          0.004                     -0.021
                                                              [0.0244]                  [0.0314]
Ozone, quarter of birth                                                     0.009         0.032        0.027
                                                                           [0.0177]     [0.0217]      [0.0206]
# Observations                     35219         35219        35219         35219        35219         35219
R-squared                           0.26          0.26         0.26          0.26         0.26          0.26

3. Dependent Varialbe=Gestation < 37 weeks
CO, quarter of birth           0.356                                                      0.285        0.330
                              [0.5285]                                                  [0.6564]      [0.6010]
PM10, quarter of birth                      0.013                                         0.005        0.007
                                           [0.0335]                                     [0.0384]      [0.0384]
NO2, quarter of birth                                          0.022                      0.008
                                                              [0.0373]                  [0.0469]
Ozone, quarter of birth                                                     0.001        -0.001        0.002
                                                                           [0.0298]     [0.0331]      [0.0294]
# Observations                     35219         35219        35219         35219        35219         35219
R-squared                           0.34          0.34         0.34          0.34         0.34          0.34

4. Dependent Varialbe=Fetal Deaths
CO, quarter of birth            0.037                                                    -0.008         0.055
                              [0.1163]                                                  [0.1375]      [0.1199]
PM10, quarter of birth                           0.002                                   -0.003        -0.001
                                                [0.0051]                                [0.0069]      [0.0063]
NO2, quarter of birth                                          0.010                      0.011
                                                              [0.0081]                  [0.0120]
Ozone, quarter of birth                                                     0.004         0.002        0.005
                                                                           [0.0059]     [0.0072]      [0.0070]
# Observations                     35219         35219        35219         35219        35219         35219
R-squared                           0.06          0.06         0.06          0.06         0.06          0.06

Note: The dependent variable in all cases is events per 1,000, per quarter. To get rates per 100,000, multiply
by 100. Robust standard errors in brackets. A * and ** indicate significance at the 5 and 1% levels,
respectively. Specifications are similar to those shown in Tables 3 and 6 and include zipcode fixed effects.
