NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAXATION, CORPORATE FINANCIAL ILICY
AND THE COST OF CAPITAL

Alan J. Auerbach

Working Paper No. 1026

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

November 1982

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1026
November 1982

Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy and the Cost of Capital

Abstract

The cost of capital plays an important role in the allocation of resources

among competing uses in a decentralized market system. The purpose of this
paper is to organize and present what is known and what is hypothesized about

the effects of taxation on the incentive to invest, via the cost of capital,
taking full account of important issues that arise independently frpm the ques— -

tion

of taxation. Included in the analysis is a discussion of empirical findings

about the interaction of inflation and taxation in influencing the incentive to
invest, and a treatment of taxation and uncertainty.

Alan J. Auerbach
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
(617) 495—3934

I.

Introduction

The cost of capital plays an important role in the allocation of resources

among

coxreting uses in the context of a decentralized market system. Most

simply, it is the price paid for the use of capital resources over a defined
period of tine. However, even in the presence of a functioning capital market
with a well—defined rate of interest, determination of the cost of capital is
complicated by a number of factors.

Because investnnt projects are normally long—lived and irreversible, an
instantaneous opportunity cost does not suffice f or evaluating such under-

takings. Likewise, risk is a major

factor

in the investment decision, inducing

a dependence of the cost of capital on the risk characteristics of the asso-

ciated investment. The nature of this relation depends, in part, on the extent
to which markets exist for the trading of risks. The common institutional
structure in which investment decisions are made by individuals distinct from
those to whom investment earnings accrue also complicates matters, as does the
use of several different types of securities to obtain funds for investment.

Each of these questions has provoked much thought and research. Though
this paper's main subject is the effect of taxation on the cost of capital, our

analysis cannot logically be separated from these other issues. Indeed, it is
the richness of the problem of determining the cost of capital in the absence of

any taxation that contributes to the complexity of the present problem. For
example, the existence of corporations as intermediaries in the investment decision is important not only because of the question of management incentives vis
a vis stockholders, but also because tax systems commonly tax such corporations

as independent entities. Much of the complexity in the analysis of the impact
of taxes on the cost of capital my be traced to this fact.

—2—

The purpose of this paper, then, is to organize and present what is known
and what is hypothesized about the effects of taxation on the incentive to
invest, via the cost of capital, taking full account of the issues that arise

independently from the question of taxation. This approach makes for less certain conclusions, but perhaps appropriately so. There are many problems in this
area awaiting satisfactory resolution.

Our

analysis

begins in Section II with a presentation of the basic model of

multiperiod consumer optimization that gives rise to the notion of a cost of

capital. Even in the simplest two—period framework, issues arise that may

lead

to ambiguity in the definition of capital cost, and are instructive about the

results of more complex models. Section III introduces taxation in its simplest

form, an incox tax. The discussion of an income tax presupposes a definition

of incon. Central to any

such definition

for capital income is the notion of

depreciation, which we develop in this section. With this concept, it is then
possible to define a shadow price or user cost of capital (Jorgenson, 1963)
which accounts not only for the cost of capital as defined above, but also for

the costs of asset depreciation and taxation. Having defined the user cost in

Section

IV, we then are prepared for a preliminary examination of the effects of

the taxation on firm behavior.
In Section V, we present a more realistic treatment of taxation, considering

the interaction of corporate and individual taxes, and the special role of

inflation in distorting the xrasurenient of income. This area is a particularly

controversial one, and we review some of the empirical work to date.
In Section VI, we introduce uncertainty, beginning with the Modigliani—

Miller theorem (1958). There

follows a development of the Arrow—Debreu concept

—3—

of

state contingent commodities and prices and the simpler Capital Asset Pricing

Model (Sharpe, l964; Lintner, 1965) as vehicles for deriving discount rates

for risky projects in the absence of taxation. We also discuss related issues
that will become important in analyzing the effects of taxation, notably the
effects of incomplete markets and the problem of managerial incentives.

In Section VII, we integrate the results of Section V and VI to consider the
impact of taxes on the cost of capital in the presence of uncertainty, including
a discussion of the effects of bankruptcy and tax law asymmetries with respect

to gains and losses. This is the nest general of approaches, and it provides
some (though perhaps not yet enough) help in explaining some of the confounding
aspects of corporate financial policy, particularly the observed patterns of

dividends and borrowing. Our analysis also includes a normative discussion of
the welfare effects of tax—induced changes in the cost of capital in the presence of uncertainty.

—4—

II.

The Cost of Capital

In a one—good, two—period certainty ndel without taxes, competitive price—
taking firms maximize the welfare of their owners by accepting all investment

projects (which defer output by a period) that earn a rate of return of at least

the one—period interest rate. Since the interest rate is the rate at which
individuals can convert purchases back and forth between the periods, any pro-

ject that earns nre than the interest rate, r, expands the owner's budget set.
With a continuum of available projects, a firm's marginal rate of return

will equal the cost of capital. This is depicted in Figure 2.1. The firm maximizes the wealth of its representative shareholder by ving up its two—period
production possibilities frontier from point 01 (no investment) until the
marginal rate of transformation of period 2 output for period 1 output is

exactly (1 +

r),

at point B. Stopping at point A would yield a lower wealth,

WA, versus wB. The corresponding consumption choices shown, Ac and Bc, indicate
a trading back of some of the period 2 output to consume mare in period 1. This
is accomplished by borrowing at the market interest rate, r, and using part of
the second period income to repay the loan.

This result, that production and consumption decisions should be made independently, is commonly called the Fisher (1930) Separation Theorem, although it
is simply a variant of the general role of the market price vector as the signal
to both firm and household that produces a Pareto—Optimum in competitive

equilibrium (Arrow, 1951; Debreu, 1952). In fact, we may think of the relative
price of period 2 consumption as P2 =

1

r

and neglect the fact that the goods

are consumed at different times.

Here, the cost of capital equals the marginal rate of return. If projects
were discrete, the last acceptable project might yield a return greater than r.

—5-.

Figure 2.1
Welfare Maximization and

the Cost of Capital

periqd 2
slopes = — (1+r)
02

oi

WA

WB

period 1

—6—

In

a model extended to several periods, multi—period projects would have to be

evaluated using the interest rates from all relevant periods. The correct procedure

(Hirshleifer, 1970) is to calculate the present value of each project:
Y

PV=

(2.1)

l+r

Y

1

1

2

rr(1+r)
j

j=l
where

is the project flow in period j, and rj the interest rate in period j,

and accept those projects for which the present value is positive. This is
clearly the appropriate way for a competitive firm to behave.
Such results break down in the face of various alternatives in assumptions.

For example, it is frequently assumed that consumers cannot borrow, or can

borrow only at a higher rate than that at which they can lend. If this borrowing constraint applies to firm and owner taken together, the outcome is as
depicted in Figure 2.2.

In panel A, the two possible outcomes shown are those with net borrowing

and those with net lending. If the consumer is a net borrower, the firm should
produce at point AF in response to the borrowing interest rate rB. If the con—
sunr is a net lender, the firm should produce at BF in response to the interest
rate rL. From the equilibrium requirement that the consumption in the respective cases lie as shown in the vicinity of points A and Bc (indicating net borrowing and lending, respectively), the divergence of the rates rB and r' appear
to increase the likelihood of an intermediate outcome, as shown in panel (b) of

Figure 2.2. Here, the consumer neither lends nor borrows. His discount rate
r* lies between rB and rF, and this is the rate the firm should use in its decisions. Aside from the added complexity, the problem now has the feature that
the cost of capital need correspond to no observed market interest rate.

Further, the firm cannot base its decisions on any observed rate, or any fixed

—7—

Figure 2.2
Welfare Maximization with a Borrowing Constraint
(a)

period 2
Bc

slope = — (1+rL)

,slope

=

_(1+rB)

Ac

period 1

period 2

(b)

period 1

—6—

combination of such rates. The discount rate at point D may lie anywhere between rF and rB. The weights to use depends on the preferences of the firm's
owner.

A corollary of this breakdown of

than one

owner, and through differences

separation is that if the firm has more

in preferences or endowments these

find themselves in different situations with respect to borrowing and
lending, they will disagree about what the firm should do. If, for example, the

owners

firm initially planned to produce at point D, borrowers would wish to invest

less, and lenders would want more investnnt. Thus, each firm's cost of capital
would depend on the composition of its owners, and some decision nchanisin, such
as voting, would be required to determine its policy.

An additional distinction that may be introduced is between firm borrowing

and individual borrowing. If the higher borrowing

vidual

rate only applies to indi-

borrowing, for example, then it can be avoided simply by arranging for

all borrowing to be done by the firm, rather than the individual. Such different treatment of an individual and a firm he owns makes little sense in a

very simple nxdel. However, legal distinctions induced by provisions such as
limited liability could give rise to different borrowing opportunities. Also,
as discussed below, the tax system may cause differences in effective borrowing
rates.

This possibility of an advantage to borrowing by firma (or individuals)

makes firm financial policy a decision with real effects. If the firm can
borrow at a lower rate than its owner, it can increase his welfare by increasing

its borrowing, thereby allowing a reduction in his own personal borrowing. This
makes the firm more valuable to the individual, as depicted in Figure 2.3.
the

If

individual does not borrow, he will value the firm at w0 in terms of current

consumption. However, if the firm borrows, allowing the individual access to

—9—

Figure 2.3
Firm

Financial Policy with Differing Borrowing Rates

period 2

A

Slope = — (l+rL)

slope

—

w0

period 1

—10—

the lower interest rate rL, he will value the firm at w1. From another perspective, the firm's cost of capital differs according to the source of its funds.

If it borrows,

funds from

its cost of capital is rL. If it does not borrow, but obtains

its owners who do, it unist earn the higher rate rB. Therefore, if

is a restriction on the extent to which a firm can borrow, its cost of
capital depends on whether it has reached this limit and now faces the higher,
there

personal

borrowing cost of the margin. The observation of firr engaging in

borrowing does not necessarily inly that they face a cost of capital equal
to rL.

Thus, the existence of more than one interest rate destroys the separation
of firm policy and individual preferences and the unanimity of owners with respect to the investment decision, and introduces scope for a firm to influence

its value and cost of capital through financial policy. These results are par—
ticularly relevant

when taxes are considered.

—11—

III. Capital Income Taxation

Most of the taxes that influence the cost of capital are called income

taxes. But what is an income tax? The comn definition of income is the Haig
(1921) - Simons (1938) measure of cash flow plus accretions to wealth. This may

also

be put as the amount which can be consumed without a decline in the value

of wealth.

In a two—period one—good model with output in each period taken as numer—

(and hence no price level changes between periods), the period 1 income
from a one dollar investment in period 0 equals the full return less the initial
aire

dollar

invested. For a marginal investment with zero present value, this net

return would be r, the interest rate. In a multi—period model, period 1 income
would equal the investment's cash flow, less the original dollar, plus the

remaining value of the investment. In each succeeding period, income would
equal cash flow plus the change in the asset's value. In equilibrium, this
value in each period must equal the present value of the asset's future returns.
This, in turn, depends on the interest rate.

For exairle, consider a project that costs one dollar and has annual

returns X over T years. If the interest rate is constant at r, then the value
at the beginning of period t < T is (from 2.1)

with

x

x

V = t÷1

(3.1)

t 1+r

VT

(3.2)

where

T

(l+r)Tt

O<t<T
—

0. From successive applications of (3.1), we may also write this as:

Xt+VtrVtl
V =

V,,

—

0<t<T

Equation (3.2) may be interpreted as the equilibrium con—

dition that requires a total rate of return on an asset equal to the interest

—12—

rate. For a fixed vector of returns, x, and a fixed interest rate, r, equation
(3.1) or (3.2) allows us to calculate the initial value V and each successive
value. Alternatively, to determine the returns the firm must

earn

to achieve a

net present value of zero, we set V0 = 1 (the asset's initial cost) and solve

for x. Since x has T elements, we must
unique

make a further

assumption to obtain a

solution.

For example, we may

take

x to be constant. In this case, the zero—

present—value solution for x is:
r

(3.3)

r)_T

1 — (1 +

From (3.1) and (3.3), we obtain the solutions for Vt and A Vt:

(3.)

V =

1 - (1 +

r)_(T_t)

(3.5) AV_r'(1\(T÷1t)
r)_T
1 —

+

< T

t<T
—

which are functions of the interest rate except in the limiting case of T =
where the asset is a corisol with V

1 and A V 0 regardless of t.

The opposite of the capital gain, A V, is coirirnn1y

referred

to as the

"economic depreciation" in period t of the asset in question (Hotelling, 1925).

Though this derivation of A V is general, the reference to economic depreciation

is normally confined to assets that wear out and must be replaced. Because of
this association, it is important to distinguish between economic depreciation
and notions of depreciation based on productivity, age, and other factors.

For example, a constant output asset that produces for T years is as productive,
until its demise, as its new counterpart, while its value declines steadily
after its purchase (see (3.5)).

Because economic depreciation is part of an asset's income, its measurement

is important for purposes of income taxation. However, because an asset's

—13—

change in value depends on future flows, it normally depends on future interest
rates. One important special case which is an exception to this rule is tITLe

asset with services that decline at a constant geometric rate. Such an asset
has a pattern of return sumitarized by the decay rate :

x = x1(1)t—1

(3.6)

Solving (3.1) for the value of x1 needed for V0 to equal 1, we obtain
(3.1)

x1 =

Substitution

r

+

of this value of x1 into (3.1) and (3.2) yields:

Vt = (1 —

(3.8)

—L

o)t

V =

—

Thus, the asset's value is proportional to its current productivity, as is its
economic depreciation. Neither depends on prospective interest rates.
Let us now consider the effects of income taxation on the incentive to

invest and the equilibrium valuation of assets. A tax levied at rate t on all
income, both cash flow and capital gains, would yield an after—tax cash flow of

x —

t(x +

Vt).

This could be accomplished by a tax on cash flow net of a

depreciation deduction equal to —

t

However, the value of depreciation

depends on the tax rate, even if the gross cash flows x are fixed. Equation
(3.2) is replaced by:

(3.2')

(x +

L V)(1

— r) =

0 <

rVt_i

t

<T

which, combined with the terminal condition that VT = 0 yields:

x

x

(3.1')

V =
t

+

r

T

+ •.• +
¼

+

r\T—1

0 —
<

t

< T

Thus, an income tax has the effect of presenting the firm with a discount rate
to use in evaluating the before—tax flows x. Hence, -of capital.

is

the firm's cost

Although nothing in general can be said about the response of r to change

in

r,

one can observe that should
VT_i

be independent of t, the

obtained from (3.1) and (3.1') are the same for a given vector

(Samuelson, 19614). This might occur, for exanle, if

ments

values

carried

open to the firm's owners

the alternative invest-

a fixed rate of return, T

(perhaps

determined by world markets), also taxed at rate I. The opportunity cost net of
tax would then be r =

j would not depend on

=

i(1—t), so that (-)

With d(-)/dt * 0, the pattern over time of V and hence A V for the
narginal asset (for which V0 =

1) depends on r. For the asset with fixed

returns over T years, for example, A V

(1

ic:i.

be

(compare (3.5)):

—(T+1—t)

+

=—

would

t < T

r)—T

Only for the georctrica1ly depreciating asset will t not influence the pattern
of capital gains, since the latter depend only on the asset's age and depreciation rate, and not the cost of capital.

A major alternative to income as a tax base is personal cash—flow or con-

sumption.2 In contrast to an income tax, a cash—flow tax would tax all asset
returns,

but permit

(3.1'')

Vt =

a deduction for asset purchases. This

t+i

+ ...

1+r

+

)

XTT

replaces (3.1)

with

0 < t < T

(l+r)_t

but also rxE.kes the initial cost of the asset, net of tax, only (l—t) rather
than 1.

Thus, the net present value of each new

holding x

and

r fixed, is simply

(1t)(V0

—

asset

i). The

per dollar invested,

value of inframarginal

gains is reduced, but the cost of capital and the marginal incentive to invest

are not. Net present value is still maximized by accepting all projects that

have non—negative present value at the discount rate r. This tax system amounts

—15—

to the assumption of

ject, and

a

partnership role by government in each investment pro-

so is equivalent to a tax on an enterprise's economic rents (Brown,

l9!8) .3

Both consumption tax and income tax approaches lead to outcomes in which

pure rents are taxed and firms evaluate all projects with a single discount

rate.

This result may also be generalized by combining the two approaches.

that allows immediate
a fraction of economic depi-ecia—

Consider a tax system with gross flows taxed at rate t

expensing

of a fraction

of investment with

tion permitted as a deduction each year. This leads to the transition equation:

(3.2'

'') xt(l_t) +

=

v(i—p)

rVti

0 <

t

< T

and hence the valuation forni.la

(3.1''') t

•••

X1

(1T)

r

(i +

l—4T

0<t<T
—

XT

(1 +

r

)T_t

1—4t

If we take account of taxes, the asset's initial out—of—pocket cost is
(3.10)

P0 =

+

—

Now, suppose c +

(V0

=

1,

—

1)

so that firmx may

expense

investment and receive deductions for a fraction

tion. In this case, we may

express

a fraction (l—) of their

of their economic deprecia-

(using (3.1''') and (3.10)) the net present

value of a one dollar gross investment as:
x
(3.11)

V —
0

P

0

=

1

(l—t)
(i +

IT

x
+

•••

+

T

(i + ___

— 1

Hence, the firm should accept all projects for which the net present value of
before—tax flows is positive, discounted at the rate

, which

defines this

rate as its cost of capital. As with both income and consumption taxes, initial
rents are taxed at rate r.

Thus, all tax systems for which

+ p = 1,

including

the extreme limits where a 1 or 4 = 1, combine a rent tax at rate t with

cost

of capital equal

systems

to

r
If r
—

is invariant to changes in

or t,

a

all

are "neutral" in the strong sense of not influencing the incentive to

invest. Generally, they are neutral in the weaker sense that they cause firms

to

use the same discount rate for evaluating gross—of-tax flows from each

investment project, regardless of the project's characteristics.

—17—

IV. Taxation

and the User Cost of Capital

Probably the most familiar model used in the analysis of taxation's effect
on investment is the neoclassical model introduced by Jorgenson (1963), the main
component of which is the "user cost of capital," which is a summery statistic

for the overall incentive to use capital in production.5 The user cost differs
from the notion of the cost of capital defined above in that it includes a component for asset depreciation, and allows for a broad range of tax schemes.

The basic model that gives rise to the user cost is of a firm producing

output using a single capital input. Without loss of generality, we may think
of capital as the only input in a production function:

Y = F(K)

(.i)

F' > 0, F'' < 0

where units of capital services are in terlis of those offered by new capital
costs.

The presence of two distinct goods, capital and output, in each period

requires the introduction of at least one relative price. However, because
there is another commodity, money, implicitly present, we introduce two money
prices, that of capital goods,

and output t' for each period t. This

allows for general price inflation, which, as discussed below in Section ....,

has important real effects on the cost of capital via focus of the tax system on
nominal magnitudes.

At least
formulation.

two key assumptions lie behind the simplicity of the user cost

First is the restriction to exponentially depreciating capital

goods. As shown in Section III, these goods have the

desirable property of an

economic depreciation rate that is invariant with respect to the interest rate.

This allows the representation of depreciation as a technological pararxter in

the user cost formula. Similarly, the assumption of a constant (from the firm's

—18—

viewpoint) nErginal cost of new capital goods nEkes the price

exogenous.

Neither of these simplifications is necessary for the derivation of the user
cost as the shadow price of capital, but they are required for other applications.

Though the user cost can be derived from a discrete time model such as

those

examined above, it has come more commonly from a continuous time formula-

tion,

which we follow here.

Since capital services decay exponentially at rate 6, we n.y think of a

unit of ge

t

capital simply as —6t

units of new capital.6 Thus the capital

stock at time t is

Kt =

(14.2)

where

r e(t_5)i

J

S

dS

is investment at date s <

t.

Differentiating (14.2) with respect to t

yields the transition equation:

•

=

-

each
The firm's optimization problem involves the choice of investment at

time to nEximize the wealth of its owners. Without taxes, this is:

(14.14)

maximize w =

J

e' [PtFt

—

qIl

Subject to (14.2) or (14.3), this amounts, as one would expect, to the choice of

investment at each date so that the net present value of future capital services

is zero at the margin. Indeed, if we substitute the Kt in (14.14) using (14.2),
and differentiate with respect to 't we obtain just this result:

(14.5)

= tj e_r_t)

p F'

55

et)d5

—19—

where F' is the irginal

product

of capital at date s. However, a more useful

way of expressing this result comes from substituting instead for I

using (.3), and solving with respect to K. The Euler condition, which must
hold at the optimum

F' =

t

(14.6)

The term

yields:
q

C

=

t

_ (r —

(.)
qt

+ 6)

is the famuhia.i' expression for the user cost of capital, expressing

the shadow price of capital at time t. The fact that investment decisions made
at date t should depend only

on

conditions precisely at that date, and not on

the future, results from the lack of constraints on capital stock adjustnnt or
investment reversibility (Arrow, 19614). We discuss this further below. To
interpret (14.6),

note

F — [6

(14.7)

that it can be rewritten:

—

= Er —

()1()

This expression is analogous to (3.2). It states that, in output units, the
total earnings at date t from an investnnt, the marginal product plus the real
change in asset value, must yield a rate of return equal to the real interest

rate r —

The rate of economic depreciation iS —

(.) takes

account of

changing relative prices. This choice of units affects the measure of income,
but not the user cost itself.
One of the frequent early criticisms of the user cost approach was that

while it was based on a ndel with zero adjustment costs, it normally appeared
in an

investment equation specifying the partial adjustnnt of capital to the

desired stock dictated by (14.6). while son authors (including Eisner and
Stratz, 1963; Lucas, 1967; Gould, 1968; and Treadway, 1969) derived conditions
under which such partial adjustment was consistent with optimizing behavior,

—20—

there is no general result in this vein. However, another way of' looking at
this problem is that the user cost itself is inisspecified. In particular, if
the true cost to the firm of new investment goods is included in the optimiza-

tion, the result will

be a correct nasure of the user cost, to which firms

set

their contemporaneous n.rginal product of capital.

For example, suppose it is costly for the firm to add new capital goods to
its stock quickly, so that it faces a convex adjustment cost in addition to the

underlying, constant capital goods price. Then the total cost of new investment
goods is:

(I) .

(i.8)

where q(.)

is

=(+

the convex adjustment cost function (',

>

O)'

andq(I) is the

total average cost of new capital goods to the firm.

Replacing

with

in expression (14.l.i), and

again

n.ximizing with res-

pect to K, we obtain the analog of (.6):

(1.6')

F' =

C

=

Cr -

+

q

where

(L.9)

dl

is the i.rginal cost to the firm of new capital goods.

Unfortunately, while

may

be observable,

is not, at least on the

supply or cost side. On the demand side, we know that

equals the discounted

flow of marginal products (as in (1.5)) but these, too, are unobservable at
present and will change with

a

change in tax policy. However, following Tobin's

(1969) initial insight, authors nxre recently (Abel, 1979; Hayashi, 1981) have

pointed out that although the marginal cost q is unobservable, it is related to

—21—

the firm's market value. Thus, one can, for example, parameterize the adjustment cost function c(.),

solve equation (.9)

for

I in terms of q, and regress.

This is an important issue f or predicting the short run impact of tax poli-

cies on investment. In the long run, this problem is less important. As our
focus here is on the long run effects of taxation on capital allocation rather
than on the short run impact on investment, we return to the simplified model in
which the supply probe of capital is constant.

A number of major tax code provisions may be introduced into the user cost

formula. We assume there to be a single income tax, assessed at rate t on cash
flow PtF(Kt) less depreciation allowances on existing capita. In addition, we
assume there is an investment tax credit at rate K on new capital goods pur-

chases.8

At this point, we ignore the additional complications of personal

taxation and the special treatment of debt. One may think of this user cost as
the one that holds for a self—financed entrepreneur.

Letting Dt be the depreciation allowance given a unit of capital originally
purchased for a dollar, we obtain the following optimization problem:

(hlO)

w =

fet

=

Jet

{(1.t) PtF(Kt) —

q(i_k)i

{(i_t) ptF(I) —

q(1_k_tZ)I}

+

jtqsisDtS
d +

ds} dt

t JtqI5D_5ds

where

(1..ii)

Z =

J e'rt

Dt dt

0

is

the present value of depreciation allowance accruing to a dollar of new cap-

ital, all tax parameters are constant, and investors never sell or buy used cap-

ital goods.9 Solving (1.iO) with respect to Kt, as before, yields:

—22—

(.l2)

F' C =

(r

-

+ )(i

-

k -

Comparing (1.l2) to (1.6), we see that they differ by the ratio
(1 —

k

—tZ)/(i—'r),

which may be interpreted as the effective reduction in subse-

quent cash flows. As already shown, when these two factors are set equal through
expensing (k =

0, Z = 1),

the marginal incentive to invest is unaffected by

taxation. Likewise, this property holds whenever

+ Z =

1.

A special result also holds when depreciation allowances correspond to eco-

nomic depreciation. This is most

easily

shown when prices are stable, in which

case:

(14.13)

so

Dt =

that Z =

r

5et
and (dropping subscripts) c =

(--

+

6).

This corresponds to the earlier result that economic depreciation results in the
use of a discount rate equal to .TL_ in evaluating gross of tax flows. Likewise,
expensing and economic depreciation can be combined to give a result corresponding that in (3.l1).10

pical tax systems treat assets differently, of course. Aside from the
problems caused by inflation, there is a gap between the patterns of economic

depreciation and those of depreciation allowances.11 This means that there is
no general cost of capital, but a different one for each potential project.
This project—specific discount rate may

be

derived from the user cost forxriila

(14.12)

We begin by noting that a marginal investment is one for which the irgina1
product of capital equals the user cost. Hence, the gross return from such a

project t years after purchase would be C e6t units of output or ptCte6t

—23—

dollars unit of capital. Hence, the discount rate p that results in the
project's gross flows having a zero net present value is defined implicitly by
the equation

4.l4)

q0 =

—ót

e —pt

PCe dt

Substituting in (li.iI)

for

(r _ + o)(J.

C using (1.l2) yields (dropping subscripts):
-

=

k

-

tZ)
(o

(l—T)

—-i)

Since p is determined by nominal cash flows, it is the nominal cost of capital.
The real cost of capital would express the resturns in constant dollars, lti—
plying then by the initial price level p0 rather than the actual price level Pt•
This would yield a discount rate of p —

(i.).
p

For the sile case where inflation is zero and depreciation allowances do
follow economic depreciation (z

= ._), the

cost of capital p is constant only

if the investment tax credit satisfies (Auerbach 1982a):

(.i6)

k=k (l—)

where k0 is the credit that applies to assets for which S = 0.
tax credit that increases with

the

This requires a

productive life of assets (decreases with o)

(Sunley, 1976; Auerbach, 1978; Bradford, 1980). In

fact,

the tax law in the

U.S. seems to reflect this requirement, at least roughly. Currently, for
example, assets qualifying for a three—year tax write—off receive only a 6 percent investment credit while those in the five—year category reeive a ten per-

cent credit. (This does not explain the lack of any credit on buildings, which
fall into the fifteen—year class.)

A cost of capital that differs across prospective investments leads to a

distortion in the choice or production technique, since a requirennt for the

—24—

efficient allocation of resources in production is that firn apply

the

same

cost of capital to all projects.12 However, even with production efficiency, a

uniform

tax

on capital income distorts the intertemporal consumption decision by

introducing a wedge between the consumer's rr.rginal rate of substitution and the
firm's rrarginal rate of transformation between goods in different periods.13

can assess the impact of capital taxation thrcu.gh its effect on the
amount and type of capital used in production. An income tax t imposes a cost
One

on the firm. This leads to a higher user cost and
of capital equal to
hence less capital used in production.1 Aside from the induced decline in
capital use, the higher cost of capital also leads to the choice of less durable
capital. This can be demonstrated using a generalization of the neoclassical

model in which the rate of capital decay, S,

is chosen by the firm to minimize

its user cost of capital.15
Suppose that, in exchange for a greater rate of depreciation, the firm can
obtain greater capital service per unit of new capital (ten Cordobas versus one

Rolls Royce). If this ratio of capital services per unit of new capital is
A(ó) (A' > o), then the cost of capital expression without taxes, (1.6), becomes
(dropping subscripts and inflation):
(14.17)

F' =

C

A(s)

which is minimized with respect to ô when:
(14.i8)

The second—order condition requires that A" < 0.

Since

an income tax

simply

in (14.17) and (14.18), we may think of an increase in I as
replaces r by
having the same impact on the choice of 6 as an increase in r. Totally differ-

entiating (14.18) with respect to r yields:

—25—

-

A1'A

which is positive.

Perhaps a more familiar way of presenting this result is in "Austrian"

capital models in which capital goods yield a single cash flow. The firm
chooses how long to delay the realization of this output, which grows in poten-

tial over time. One

may think

of the asset as a tree awaiting harvest.16 If

B(T) is the function representing the cash flow coming from termination at

date T, the firm seeks to maximize eZ't B(T) in the absence of taxes. This
yields the first-order condition:

(1.19) —r
and the second order condition:
B"

(i.2o)

B' 2

— — (i—) < 0

The project should be terminated when potential output grows at the rate of
interest. Again, since an incoc tax raises the cost of capital to •-

and is equivalent to an increase in r,17 we totaliy differentiate (.19) with
respect to r to discover the effect of income taxation on T:

.2l

dT — (B
dr

B

B' 2 —1

B

which, by (.20), is negative.
It should be exhasized that this shift to less durable capital does not
represent a production distortion. Indeed, an increase in the rate of time
preference r not caused by taxation would cause the same shift. When the tax
system is more complicated than an income tax, however, production distortions

result from differences in the cost of capital applied to projects (see
(1.15)). This may exaggerate or mitigate the effect on asset durability of a
uniform income tax, according to whether the cost of capital rises more for
may

short—lived or long—lived

effect

assets. A particular example of this

concerns the

of inflation on the choice of asset life, considered below.18

—26-.

Personal Taxation and Inflation

V.

The user cost forriulation (I.l2) continues to be helpful in the exaznina—

tion of more realistic tax

A.

systems

and environments.

Inflation

Since

nominal depreciation allowances typically do not change with the

price level, they decline in real value dui-ing inflationary periods. This
causes an increase in the effective taxation of capital income, and therefore in
the cost of capital.19 This effect is most easily seen for the case of economic
depreciation allowances not indexed for inflation. Here, if all prices rise at
the same rate ir =

eQ)

=

Si = . (so

that the price of capital goods at time t is

economic depreciation at time t of an asset purchased at time zero

e_ót =

eSet. The present value of economic depreciation

for

q0 is

per

dollar of assets purchased at time zero is:

(5.1)

Ze =

q0

j0

e rtq0eTrtSe ótdt = r—ir

With depreciation allowances expressed in nominal terms, and based on prices in
the year of purchase, the present value of depreciation allowances is:

(5.2)

Zh =

._ J e

rtqe tdt =

Thus, for a given real discount rate r — it (see 1.7)), Ze is fixed, but
Zh declines with the rate of inflation. What actually happens when it increases
depends on the value taken by

d(r—ir)

discussion of which is best deferred

until personal taxes have been considered.2° With a zero investment tax credit,
combination of (5.2) and (.15) yields the following expression for the cost of
capital (Auerbach 19T9a):

(53)

p =

+

Zh

—27—

> o,

For it

this exceeds the cost of capital imposed by an income tax, given the

real interest rate r —

it.

Moreover,

>

0, so that the cost of capital

increases with 5. Inflation discriminates a.inst short—lived assets. As a
result, an increase in inflation that both increases p in general, but increases

it most for low values of 6 win have an ambiguous effect on the choice of asset
life, since a uniform increase in p would cause 6 to decline (see Section Iv)
but a discrimination against short—lived assets alone would cause 6 to increase.21

B.

Personal Taxation

Most early work on taxation and the cost of capital ignored personal taxa-

tion. This is justifiable only if all forms of corporate source personal income
are taxed at the same rate, for then we can reinterpret r (or r—it if there is
inflation) as the rate of time preference, gross of the personal tax rate.
However, in addition to inflation corrections, this outcome would norinalJ,y

require a full integrationof corporate and personal income taxes, as under an
imputation system where income taxes paid by corporations are treated essential-

ly as withholding of personal income taxes (King 1977). Even where an imputation system is used in practice (as currently in Great Britain) there remain
imperfections,

such as the failure to adjust interest income for price—level

changes. Thus, any existing tax system would require us to take explicit
account of personal taxation in our analysis.
In the U.S., and in other countries that do not have integrated income

taxes,

there are several features that are important to consider. First, per-

sonal income taxes have progressive marginal rate structures, whereas corporate

income taxes typically do not. Second, capital gains are taxed (if at all) at a
lower rate than dividends and interest payments, and on realization rather than

accrual. Third, corporations can deduct interest payments, but not dividends.

—28--

Fourth, no price level adjustments are made to account for the increase of an

inflation premium on capital gains and interest payments. These characteristics

provide for a very conlicated analysis. Indeed, questions arise concerning the
existence of an equlibrium with finite asset demands, for without constraints
such a tax system provides opportunities for unlimited arbitrage at government
expense among households and/or corporations in different tax brackets. Many of

the

results that one obtains, therefore, depend on the way in which constraints

are modelled.

Probably the most commonly discussed of the four characteristics Just cited

is the deductibility of interest payments. As suggested by Modigliani and

Miller (1963), the deductibility of interest inarts a bias to the financing
decision. If one ignores the personal taxation of dividends, capital gains and
interest, firr have an incentive to finance their investments by borrowing.
One way of understanding this is to recognize that the firm and the hoisehold

face different after—tax rates of interest. The individual faces no taxes, and
hence faces an interest rate r. The firm pays taxes on interest income and can
deduct interest payments, and thus faces an interest rate equal to r(l—t).
Therefore, as in Section II, the firmts owner, wishing to borrow to undertake a
certain investment program, will maximize his personal wealth by doing all

borrowing at the firm level, rather than the personal level. In theory, this
gain need not stop at the point where no borrowing is done at the personal

level. The firm can continue to borrow, using the proceeds to repurchase ownership in the firm from the individual, who uses the funds for loans made to the

firm. This operation constitutes pure arbitrage, for the increase in firm

indebtedness leads to an increase in tax deductions. One must iose a
constraint to rule out such behaivor, either in the form of a restriction on
share repurchases, or on the amount of borrowing that the firm does.

—29—

The

presence

of personal taxes complicates matters because of the favorable

tax treatment of capital gains. Since only part of the stockholder's equity
return comes in the form of fully taxed dividends, there exists at least a par-

tial offset to the favorable tax treatment of debt at corporate level. The traditional way of comparing the cost of capital for equity financed versus debt—
financed investments is to imagine a potential project being financed either by
the sale of new shares or new debt, with subsequent cash flows being distributed as dividends, in the former case, or interest payments and principal

repayments, in the latter. Further simplifications are that the assets being
purchased are consols, not depreciating and receiving no depreciation allowances, and that capital gains are taxed upon accrual rather than the correct (but
more difficult to model) taxation only upon realization.22
For equity—financed investment, the after—tax cash flow in period t is
x(l—'r)(l—6) — c A V, where x is the annual gross return, T

is

the corporate

tax, 6 is the persoral income tax and c is the capital gains tax. This yields
the capital market equilibrium equation corresponding to (3.2):

(S.Li')

x(l—t')(l—O) +

(1—c')

A V = rV
t

t—l

since the total after—tax reward (which includes the capital gain A V) st
deliver a rate of return equal to the rate of time preference, r.
Application of (5.1k) successively yields:23

(5.5)

V

=

tl'

r

-r--—

—t 1—9

—

(i--)(l—t)x

=

(l—O)(l—t)

r

So that the asset's net present value equals zero (V0 =

(5.6)

X = (1-6)(l-t)

1) when

—30.-

Since this is the same result one would obtain by discounting the stream of
r

returns x at the rate

,

this

is the relevant cost of capital. Note

(i—e)(i—t)

that the capital gains tax term disappears from (5.5), precisely because a con—
sol generates no capital gains or losses.

Capital gains taxes would

matter

if the firm reinvested part of the cash

flow in each year, rather than distributing it fully. For example, suppose it
paid out a fraction p of the return x, reinvesting the residual in capital of

the same type. This would yield a dividend of x(l—t)p in year 1,

((i—t) )2(l—p)p in year 2, and x = x(1—t)p(l + x(l—t)(l—p) )t—l in
year t: a return growing at rate (1—p) over tine. The term x in
equation (5.1) is replaced now by x and (5.5) because:
x(1—t)p +

(5.5')

V0

Setting V0 =

'5. 6'')

+

=

—

(1—O)(l—r)p
r — x(l—t)(1—p)(1—c)

1

yields the new

cost

of capital:

r

—
X

)t(L)(l.-T)p(l ÷

(1—i)

[1 —

(p0 + (l—p)c)J

which indicates that the full "double—taxation" of equity inconE in (5.6) is

mitigated to the extent that earnings are retained and reinvested,

allowing the

to suffer only capital gains taxes instead of taxes on dividends.
For a debt—financed project, we assume that the entire cash flow of the

stockholder

firm

is absorbed by

debt

is issued). If i is the interest rate, then this yields

interest payments and principal repayments (negative if new

the identity:

—31—

(5.7)

x(1_r) t—i +

itB

+

0

Bt

since interest payments are tax deductible. If we note that this can be
rewritten:
+

then

Bt

=

it is clear that we can follow the same procedure as before, solving this

time for the axiunt of debt B0 that the project will support. Regardless of
whether Xt grows or is constant, the resulting value of x, and hence the cost of

capital, is (not surprisingly) the interest rate:

(5.9)

By combining the results in (5.6') and (5.9), one can also derive a weighted
average cost of capital for the case in which debt and equity finance are used

at the nrgin:2'
—
(5.10)

x =

bi

+ (1—b)

r
(l—t)[l — (pe +

(i—p)c)]

where b is the fraction of debt used at the n.rgin.
The firm seeking to minimize its cost of capital should choose to finance
with debt or equity according to whether i is greater than or less than the

expression on the right hand side of (.6'). If all individuals faced the same
personal tax rates, then the after—tax return to debt, i(1—e), would have to

be equal to discount rate r. Thus, equity would be at least as preferred as
debt if and only if:
(5.11)

(1—e)

<

(1—t)[l

— (pG +

(1—p)cfl

a condition unlikely to be satisfied unless p is extremely low. This result,
along with the fact that c (and hence the cost of equity capital) declines with

—32—

the holding period of capital gains, lies behind the conclusions drawn by

Stiglitz (1973) from a T period nde1 of an investor—entrepreneur:
(1) Firms should use debt finance at the ris.rgin;25

(2)

Firms should pay rio dividends; and

(3)

Investors should realize no capital gains before year T.

None of these predictions is consistent with the evidence in the U.S. Corporations have steadfastly distributed a large fraction of their earnings as divi—
dends,26 and have ii.intained debt—value ratios far below unity.27

These facts nEke it difficult to determine the cost of capital, because the

model we have thus far does not correctly predict the ay that firms behave. At
best, it is an incomplete description of corporate financial behavior, and there

have been nny approaches to completing it.
Probably the simplest though least satisfying approach has been to assume
the existence of some ad hoc constraints requiring that the dividend payout rate
be no less than its observed value p and the debt—value ratio be no greater than

its observed value, b. This gives meaning to the weighted average discount rate

based on observed nEgnitudes, but it does little else. It is a deus ex machina
for explaining the coexistence of sources of finance with apparently different

costs. A xre realistic approach to such constraints requires the presence of
uncertainty. As we discuss below in Section VI, both

dividend

policy and bor-

rowing behavior can be viewed as examples of the "principal—agent" problem in
which holders of the securities in a firm respond to the behavior of managers
possessing greater information than they about the firm's prospects and facing a

certain personal incentive structure. A simple (although not entirely satisfactory) approach used in the literature (see Baumol

and Malkiel, 1967; Auerbach,

1979c; and Feldstein, Green and Shchinski, 1978 for example) to represent the
effect of uncertainty on the financial decision is to assume that tne required

—33—

that the required rates of return on debt and equity increase with leverage,

presumably because of increased bankruptcy risk as well as other factors. In
this case, the cost of capital may be minimized at an interior value of b even

if debt is taxed less heavily than equity. For example, if we let the required
rate of return on debt after tax, rb =

i(l—O),

be an increasing function of b,

the cost of capital in (5.10) is at a minimum when:
(5.12)

bi' +

i

—

1.

where 1' =

Cl—e)[l

-

(pG + (1—p)c)]

= 0

In this case, the cost of capital is still described by

expression (5.10), and the marginal costs of both debt and equity finance equal
this minimized value, rather than their respective average costs i and
(i.-e)[j. —

(pG + (1—p)c)1

Thus, the weighted average concept allows us to

estimate a firm's cost of capital from observed interest rates and equity

returns. A problem with this approach to modelling uncertainty is that it is
unclear whether the inlicit separation of real and financial decisions is
appropriate.

A third method of explaining at least the existence of equity, if not
observed dividend policy, has been the progressivity of the personal tax struc-

ture. While condition (5.11) may not hold for the average marginal tax rate in
the U.S., it could hold for the upper tail of the marginal tax rate distribu-

tion. This was certainly true before the tax cut of 196k, when the value of
G could exceed .9 (while t was .52), and was still true to a lesser extent

before the reduction of the top bracket rate from .7 to .5 in 1981. With some
investors able to supply funds more cheaply to the. firm through equity, and

others through debt, the resulting equilibrium would be segmented, with
investors possessing marginal tax rates above some critical value, 6*, holding

—34—

only- equity, and others holding only debt. This configuration has come to be
known

as a "Miller equilibrium", after the arguments by Miller (1977). Though

the Miller equilibrium does not require that firn be constrained in their
choice of financial policy, it does require the existence of constraint on individual

investors. Otherwise, they could take an arbitrarily large negative pos-

ition in

the security- that offers the lower after—tax return to them, covering

it with a positive position in the other security.28 For exan1e, high bracket
investors could borrow- to buy stock, while low bracket investors could sell

equity short and purchase bonds. Restrictions on borrowing as well as short—
selling have some basis in fact; at least they are tenable sin1ifications to
make in a model.

One in1ication of the Miller ndel is that the cost of capital for each
firm equals the weighted average of its costs of equity and debt in the trivial

sense that each source has the same cost, the interest rate. Another implication is that changes in the personal tax schedule influence the relative returns
to debt and equity in such a way that the after-tax returns must stay equal for
the narginal asset holder, whose tax rate is defined solely by equation (5.11).
Put another way, for the investor for whom the effective tax rates on equity and
debt

are

the same, the net returns to holding debt and equity must be equal.

Hence, the gross returns must be equal, too. Thus, changes in the interest rate

in response to ta.tion sumn.rize changes in the firm's cost of capital. This
also follows directly from the fact that, in equilibrium, firms

must be indif-

ferent between debt and equity.

The segmentation of portfolios predicted by the Miller hypothesis is at

variance

with reality, but this may

be ascribed to the

ignorance of uncertainty

thus far. An inortant question considered below is how uncertainty and the

desire aung investors for diversification changes this result.

—35—

Explaining

dividend behavior has proved more challenging, since there are

essentially no asset holders for whom capital gains aretaxed as heavily as

dividends.29 One ingenious argument (Miller and Scholes, 1918) even attempted
to show that the effective personal tax rate on dividends is zero because the
tax law permits certain tax deductions to be taken only against capital income.

Hence, more dividends provide the opportunity for more deductions. This
hypothesis

testing

is one

of the few in this area lending itself to precise empirical

based on individual tax returns, and, unfortunately, such a test resoun-

dingly rejects it (Feenberg, 1981).
A second explanation for the payment of dividends rests on the potential

inability of firms to turn retained earnings into capital gains.30 In the
Stiglitz model, for example, it is assumed that the accumulated value of the
firm's retentions can be realized at the final date T by the investor, presum-

ably through the sale of the firm or by the sale of the finn's assets. But
these

tvo options differ in an inortant way. The sale of an

price

determined by its productive value relative to that of couarable, newly

asset will be at a

produced assets: its replacement cost. The sale of a firm's shares to another
investor need not realize the same price. As long as the firm's owner cannot
realize capital gains without selling shares in the firm to another taxable

investor, there is no arbitrage chanism to equate these values. In terms of
Tobin's "q", the long run value of marginal q need not equal unity. The normal
mechanism for equating q to one is through new share issues. If q were greater
than one, firms could increase infinitely the value of their stockholders'

wealth by issuing new shares. If q were less than one, they could perform the
same operation in reverse, repurchasing shares from their stockholders.
However, the law in most countries treats new share issues and share repurchases

asymmetrically. Until very recently, share repurchases were illegal in the

—36—

'while

U.K.,

there are Internal Revenue Code provisions in the U.S. that allow

preferential capital gains tax

ciently

out of

proportion

treatment

of repurchases only if

they

are suff 1—

to existing stock ownership and are not done on a

regular basis in lieu of dividends.
Without share repurchases, the value of ms.rginal q can fall as low (for a

uniform

to

personal tax code) as q) =

(2!),

the ratio of the after—personal—tax

after—capital—gains—tax value of a dollar paid to the investor. At this

value of q, firms are just indifferent between paying dividends and retaining,
since the dividend tax on a dollar of dividends, e, equals the after—tax loss in
value

of a dollar retained, (i—q)(i—c).

values

for q, between qD and

1.

Only

Hence, there is a

range of

possible

at the borders of this interval will the

firm

find it desirable to pay dividends (when q = qD) or issue new shares

(q =

1).

The equilibrium value of q, in any period will depend on the demand for

corporate equity, according to Figure 5.1. As long as the demand for a firm's

falls short of

shares

that

which could be provided by a full retention of

earn-

ings, q cannot rise (D1). Only when the dextnd cannot be met through retentions
will the price rise, and only when the price reaches one will firms supply more
equity.

This "new view"

according
which

and

it

of equity finance implies that the cost of capital differs

to which of these three regiis a firm is currently in and those in

will find itself in the future.3- Suppose q0 is the value of q now,

the value of q

in

the nect period. Capital irrket equilibrium requires

that the after—tax rate of return on the firm's investment equal r. If the firm

invests for one period in assets yielding a return per dollar, this requirement implies that
(5.13)

=
rq,0

(1—T)[p(1—e) + (l—p)q1(1—c)

+ (1—c)
(q1— q0)

—37—

FIGURE 5.1
"q"

and

the Demand for

Equity

q

1

S

D3

qD

V

Retentions
Exhausted

Demand

—38—

where p is the payout rate next period. Assuming that firms pay

the

unless q =

no dividends

term in brackets in (5.13) simply equals q1(1—c). Thus,

(5.13) may be simplified in solving for an expression for the cost of capital:

5.11)

For

—
X

q

I

r
(1—i) (1—c)

—

q1—q0
)1
(—)(
1—t

q constant, this simplifies to

(5.15)

X

= t1-t)(l-c)

regardless of what regime the firm is in. Even if q. =

q),

so that the firm pays

dividends in both periods, the cost of capital does not depend on the personal

rate of tax on ordinary income, 0.32 This is because the difference between the
dividend tax, 0, and the capital gains tax, c, is offset by the reduced cost to
the investor of obtaining a given earnings stream.

The case studied above, in which firn issue nw share today and pay dividends in the future, corresponds to a situation in which (q0,q1) =

(i,q),

and

in which the cost of capital is:

r+(0—c)

(5.16)

—
x = ___________

(i—t) (i—e)

which

differs from the expression derived above in (5.6'). There is no contra-

diction here, however. Equation (5.16) gives the one period cost of capital for
a firm issuing new shares now and distributing son of its earnings next period,
while the more familiar (5.6') gives the cost of capital required over several
periods for a firm issuing new shares now and then paying dividends in all suc-

ceeding periods. One could derive (5.6') by combining a succession of one period costs of capital, defined by (5.16) in the first period and (since
q =

for

later periods) (5.15) thereafter. The distinction is analogous to

—39—

that between short—term and long—term interest rates. This comparison helps to
explain why the payout rate enters into (5.6'). If the short term cost of capital is higher now than in the future, the average long—term cost of capital will

be lower the longer the term of investnnt being undertaken. This analor also
helps explain why the appearance of p in expression (5.6' ) does not imply that

the firm can influence its current cost of capital through the choice of divi-

dend policy. It simply indicates that, under the assumptions made, the cost of
capital is texiiporaraily high at present.33

What really distinguishes the "classical" view of the cost of equity
finance from the "new" view is the choice between (5.6') and (5.16) as the

appropriate cost of capital to use. This choice cannot be made alone on the
basis of whether firms issue new shares or pay dividends, but rather on the

extent to which they can change these policies. Under the new view, a firm for
which q = 1 now but q = qD in the future will issue new shares now and pay divi-

dends in the future. If this firm

decides

to invest more in the future, it will

do so by retaining earnings, and will face a cost of capital as described by

(5.15). Hence,

its

observed payout policy is a result of its optimal investment

policy. However, if the observed payout policy of a firm is predetermined,
additional investment in future periods will incur the initial cost of new

issues

share

before subsequent reinvestment out of retentions. Hence, the cost

of capital in (5.6') is a more accurate description of the firm's incentive to

invest. Intermediate to these situations is one in which the firm may

have

a

range over which it may vary dividends. In this case, q may rise above qD while
dividends are still at some positive level, making it impossible to identify the
firm's

cost

of capital simply

from

its dividend policy.

These different views of equity policy have strikingly different implica-

tions for the cost of capital. Under the new view, for example, the cost of

_14Q_

does not depend directly on the personal income tax rate if firn pay
dividends. Thus, an unanninced change in this tax rate will have no effect on
capital

the incentive to invest: it is a wealth tax.
Empirical evidence on

the

subject of which "view"

of equity

taxation is

more accurate is inconclusive. On the one hand, firn rarely issue new shares
and when they do, appear to require a higher rate of return on the their invest-

ment.35 On the other hand, changes in the tax rate 0 do not appear to influence

q in a manner consistent with the new view.6
An interesting parallel can be drawn between the q that may result from the
taxation of dividends and that resulting from a corporate tax

expensing

policy of partial

and partial economic depreciation, discussed above in Section III.

As can be seen from an examination of (3.1'''), the two policies are formally
equivalent, for 0 = r and c =

pr.

That is, a system with no personal taxes, a

corporate tax equal to e, expensing at rate (.1—0) and the taxation of economic

depreciation at rate c is identical to a system with no corporate income tax, a

personal tax rate 6 andcapital gains tax rate c. The value of the firm's capi-

tal equals (!) = qi), and its cost of capital equals —.
straightforward
1—t

of q equal
the corporate

to show
1—6

that

It

is relatively

the combination of the two systems yields

r
and a discount rate of (1—+t)(1—c)
.

tax rate, holding $t

constant,

a value

Thus, changes in

have precisely the same windfall

effects as changes in the value of 6. Indeed, parallels between the effects of
corporate and personal taxation have been recognized in discussions about the
structure of the corporate income tax under a system of personal consumption
taxation (Institute for Fiscal Studies, 1978).
The lower rate of equity taxation under the new view also makes more plaus-

the Miller equilibrium, since it requires a lower value of 6 for an individual to face equal effective tax rates on debt and equity. In general, for a
ible

—4i—

firm that finances with both debt and equity, the cost of capital (Auerbach,
1979c) is the weighted average of the costs of equity and debt,

(5.17)

c = bi

r

+ (1—b) __________
(J.—t) ti—c)

where
(5.18)

b=

B

______
B +

q
the fraction of debt in the firm's financial structure, taking account of the

undervaluation of equity. As

before,

the weighted average cost of capital con-

cept is interesting only when firms are constrained in their use of debt or

equity or uncertainty is present. Otherwise, the appropriate cost of capital is
simply the mininDlm

of

the costs of equity and debt. An

interior

solution, such

as is predicted by the Miller ndel, is one in which these costs are the same.

C.

Inflation and Personal Taxation
The impact of inflation on the choice of financial policy is not well

understood, and depends on the assumptions one makes about the constraints on

firm behavior with respect to borrowing and dividends. The key factors affecting the cost of capital in the presence of inflation are the basing of depreciation allowances on historic cost (discussed above in Subsection A), the taxation
of nominal, rather than real, capital gains, and the full taxation of nominal
interest payments

received

and full deductibility of those made.

To study the effects of the last three factors, we continue to assume for

the monnt that firms invest in nondepreciating consols with no depreciation

and hence no impact of inflation on the real side. If prices rise at
some constant rate ii, then a consol earning a return in year 1 earns (in
allowances

nominal terms) x(l+ir)t_l in year t. Making this adjustment to the analysis in
the previous section, we obain the analogues to (5.6') and (5.9) for the real
cost of equity capital (under the traditional view of fixed payout policy) and
debt capital:

r—it
+
x = ______________________

—
5.l9a)

(5.19b)

(l—T) [1—(p e + (l—p)c)

—

X

I

lic

(1—'r) [l—(p 6 + (1—p)c)

I

1
1 — —)
= 2. — iT— = r—ir
— + 1T(—
1—T

1—6

1—0

1—t

As noted by Darby (1975) and Feldstein (1976), the nominal interest rate must

rise by more than the inflation rate for the expression in (5.9') to be

invariant with respect to the inflation rate. This has been dubbed "Super
Fisher's Law" to distinguish it from the notion put forward by Fisher (1930)
that the real rate of interest should remain roughly constant through equal

changes in the nominal interest rate and te inflation rate.
The effect of taxing nominal interest payments and capital gains is that
the cost of equity capital rises ?ith ii

for

a given real after—tax discount

rate, r—n, while the cost of debt may increase or decrease, according to whether
the loss from paying taxes on the inflation premium at the personal level

exceeds the gain from its deductibility at the corporate level. Without assumptions about these tax rates, the effects of inflation on the cost of capital as
well as the choice between debt and equity are uncertain.

One may (as in Feldstein etal., 1978) posit representative values of c,
U and r that indicate a cheaper average cost for debt, and assume that some compensating factor, such as an interest rate that rises with leverage, leads to an

interior solution for the cost of capital. Typically, one assumes that 0 <

t,

so that an increase in inflation given r—u raises the average cost of debt, and
upsets the equality of the two marginal costs, leading firma to issue more debt.

—43—

Under this approach, there are real costs and tax benefits to issuing debt.
Inflation increases the benefits but not -the costs.

An alternative approach is to assume the existence of a Miller equilibrium,
and ask what happens to the marginal tax rate 6* at which individuals are indif-

ferent between holding debt and equity. If 0* rises, the number of individuals
wishing to hold debt will

the

increase

and the new equilibrium will be one in which

econon has more debt than before. If the costs of debt and equity are ini-

tially equal for the marginal individual with tax rate 0*, then (5.19) implies
that debt will be cheaper (more expensive) than equity at 0* if and only if:
(5.20)

(1t)(1_c*) (<) (ie*)

where c' is the capital gains tax rate corresponding to 0*. However, by assunip—

tion, (i—t)[i — (p6* +

(l_p)c*)1

=

(l_e*);

hence, (1_t)(l_c*) >

(10*).

In a

Miller equilibrium, inflation induces a shift away from debt finance. Only if

p = 0, or if one adopts the "new" view of equity finance in which the cost of
equity capital is always

independent

of the personal tax rate, will inflation be

neutral with respect to the choice between debt and equity. Thus, the notion
that inflation favors debt finance derives from a view that the marginal

investor is taxed rrre heavily on equity income than debt income. This requires
either explicit constraints or some form of uncertainty.

Evaluation of the cost of capital in the more complicated situation in
which assets do depreciate and receive allowances based on historic cost is

facilitated by the fact that we y express the user cost of capital by
replacing the term r —

I

in (.12) with a term that reflects the more compli—

q

cated tax system we have analyzed:
(5.21)

F'

= C =

(d(1-t)
p

+

o)(i

—

k

-

z)/(1-t)

-

—44—

where d is the firm's real cost of funds before tax, equal to a weighted average
of the costs of debt and equity in (5.19), and Z is the present value of depreciation allowance discounted at the nominal rate d(l—'r) + ii (Auerbach 1981).

For the equity financed firm, and no personal taxes, d(l—t) reduces to

r — ii =
r —.a
(5

22)

r — .i.

in

Similarly, the real cost of capital may be derived by replacing

(L.15) with d(1—'r), and subtracting the inflation rate, to obtain:
—

—

(d(1—it) +

Ic —

it Z) —

(1—it)

When assets don't depreciate' and receive no investment credit or depreciation

allowances, this expression reduces to d, the weighted average of the terms in

(5.19). For given values of S and b (the optimal values of which might change
as a result of a change in rr), one can use (5.22) to measure the total effect of

a change in the inflation rate on the firm's cost of capital, and can isolate
the individual effects of the tax provisions dealing with capital gains,

interest parments and depreciation, as well as the response of the real, after—

tax return, r — it,

One can also calculate the effective total tax rate on an

investment by comparing the cost of capital derived in (5.22) to the net, after—

tax return r — it that is received by holders of securities. Finally, one can
measure the effective corporate tax rate by assuming all investment to be equity

financed and ignoring personal taxes. This amounts to replacing d(1—t) with
r — it in equation (5.22) and conaring the resulting value of p — it with

r — ii or, alternatively, coraring the value of p — it obtained from (5,22) with
the real, after corporate tax discount rate d(l—t). The effective corporate tax
rate is simpler to calculate than the total effective tax rate, and is a useful
device for comparing existing depreciation provisions with economic depreciation
(which would yield an effective rate of it) and expensing (which would yield an

effective rate of zero). It is also helpful in comparing the impact of the tax

—I 5

law on different assets. Under the assumption that real and financial decisions
are separate, differences among investments in the total effective tax rate come
solely from differences in corporate tax treatment.

The most comprehensive measurement of the total effective tax rate on cor-

porate source capital income is provided in a comparative stur by King et al.
(1983) of capital income taxation in the U.S., the U.K., Germany and Sweden.
The approach used is to obtain estimates of real, after—tax rates of return,

financial policy, representative personal tax rates for different classes of
investors, and the rate of inflation, and then calculate the effective tax rate,

following a procedure like the one outlined above. Among other results, the
study found that increases in the rate of inflation, on balance, increase the

effective tax rate in the U.S. (though not in all countries). For example,
under 1970 tax law, a rise in the inflation rate from zero to 6—2/3 percent
would have raised the estimated effective tax rate by 3.5 percentage points,
from l.i3.7 to I7.2 percent. A striking result, for all countries, is the

extent to which effective tax rates differ across investments because of the

pattern of depreciation allowances and investment tax credits. This is consistent with several studies that have looked exclusively at the effective corporate tax rate, starting with some assumed after—corporate—tax discount rate and

comparing it to the cost of capital. Estimates in Auerbach and Jorgenson (1980)
and Jorgenson and Sullivan (1981) suggest great differences in effective corpor-

ate tax rates across investments, with a trend since 195 favoring investment in
equipment relative to structures. This has resulted from several rounds of
acceleration of depreciation schedules, which were more beneficial for equipment, as well as the introduction, in 1962, and increase, in 1975, of the

investment tax credit, which applies dnly to equipment.37 Under the Economic

Recovery Tax Act of 1981 (since amended by the Tax

Equity

and Fiscal Responsi-

bility Act of 1982), the effective corporate tax rate, for a It percent after—tax

corporate return and an 8

percent inflation, is negative for representative

types of equipment but near the statutory rate of It6

percent

for structures

(Auerbach, 1982c; also see Gravelle, 1982). If real and financial decisions are
independent, this suggests a substantial bias in the tax law against investment
in structures.

To calculate the cost of capital, we must know not only the effective tax

rate

but also the after—tax return. For exaxqle, increases in the effective tax

rate may be partially offset by declines in the after—tax return. In such a
case, the increase in the effective tax rate would overstate the increase in the

cost of capital and the decline in the incentive to invest. For debt finance,
it is easy to calculate the real cost of funds; one singly

substitutes

the nomi-

nal interest rate into expression (5.19b). If desired, the return after personal taxes may be calculated using an estimate of the tax rate e. However,
this last step is not required if one is interested in the cost of capital

itself rather than the effective tax rate. For equity, the calculation is ire
difficult. Under a Miller equilibrium, it is also unnecessary, since the interest rate is the cost of capital for all sources of finance. More generally,
though, the weighted average approach gives a more accurate estimate of the cost

of capital if average costs of debt and equity differ. A comnn approach, used
by Feldstein (1982) for the U.S. and Boadway, Bruce and Mintz (1982) for Canada,
is to represent the real return on equity as the ratio of corrected after—tax
corporate profits to equity value.
Unfortunately, the earnings—price ratio differs from the desired, but unob-

servable measure of the retired return on equity for a number of reasons. First
of all, it is a realized return rather than the ex ante expected return.

—47—

Second,

current earnings need not reflect future expected earnings; high price—

earnings multiples may

reflect

the prospect of future rents, rather than a low

discount rate. Third, the use of the earnings price ratio as a real return
assumes an anticipated rise in share prices at the general inflation rate.

Finally, the expected return to equity includes a premium for risk.8 Indeed,
one explanation of the decline in the U.S. stock market during the 1970s was an
increase

in the risk premium demanded by investors in common stocks (Malkiel,

1979). If this were correct, and attributable toan increase in the riskiness
of the stock market (as opposed to increased risk aversion) the rise in earnings
relative to price would not signify any increase in the cost of capital for a
project with given risk characteristics, and would lead to an overstatement of
its

cost of capital during the 1970s.39 In calculating the cost of capital in

the

U.S., Feldstein (1982) finds a general postwar pattern with no obvious

trend. While the tax law with respect to depreciation became steadily more
generous, inflation rose and thereby increased the effective corporate tax rate

relative to the zero inflation tax rate. Finally, his estimate of the real cost
of fumids rose, despite a decline in the real after—tax interest rate, because of

a sharp decline in the price—earnings ratio in the 1970s.
An approach to measuring the effective taxation of corporate source income
to that based on the cost of capital involves the use of observed flows of profits and interest payments and taxes for corporations in a given year to esti—

mate the effective rate of tax at the corporate level. This approach, used by
Feldstein and his collaborators,140 differs from the previous one by focusing on

actual current profits and taxes rather than hypothetical future ones. This may
offer an advantage in presenting a more accurate description of reality, but
gives an average tax rate that may be an inaccurate measure of the effective

corporate tax rate faced by new investment undertaken in a given year. This

error is inevitable whenever accelerated depreciation and investment tax credits
lead to a deferral of tax payments, relative to those under an income tax, into

the later years of an asset's life. A firm with an old capital stock will pay
more taxes as a percentage of income than will one with a young capital stock,

though both may face the same effective tax rate at the margin. The extreme
example of this would occur under a system of expensing, shown above to produce

a zero effective corporate tax rate. A second distinction lies in the fact that
measured income may include economic rents in excess of the reiuired return on

investment. The taxation of these rents does not affect the incentive to
invest, but does show up in measures of the average tax rate. Finally, changes
in the tax law affecting new investment, which typically have offered a lower
effective tax rate to new investment than existing investment, would show up
only gradually over time in an average tax rate measure.

A conparison of the cost of capital and average tax rate approaches in King
et al. (1983) suggests that for the year 1979, the total effective tax rate is
substantially higher when calculated using this average tax rate approach rather
than the cost of capital approach.
The

results of Feldstein and Summers (1979) and Feldatein et

al. (1983)

suggest that the total effective tax rate is more sensitive to the rate of
inflation than results of King at al. For example, Feldstein and Summers estimate that of the total effective tax rate of 67.8 percent in 1970, at an inflation rate of 5.5 percent, 26.6 percent of the taxes collected were due to infla.also

tion. This translates into a 3.3 percentage point increase in the total effective tax rate per percentage point increase in the inflation rate, coixared to
the value of about half a percentage point implied by the results of King at al.
This difference may stem from many sources, but one important one is the different assumptions made by the two studies about the personal tax rate on

_i9...

interest income, 0. Feldstein and Summers use an aggregate value of

per-

cent, which leads to the conclusion that the gains from the full interest
deductibility of debt by corporatiops are roughly offset by the losses of bond-

holders. It is difficult to know whether this tax rate is appropriate, though
evidence on the yield differential on cotarable tax exeupt and taxable bonds

(Gordon and Malkiel, 1981) suggests an ilicit tax rate that is substantially

lower. This is an inortant issue because of the substantial increases in
inflation experienced during the 1970s.

—50—

VI. Uncertainty and the Cost of Capital
Formally,

the

one may analyze problexn of uncertainty

without departing from

model used to study deterministic models. We may think of uncertainty as

adding

an additional dimension to the firm's investment decision; projects have

a pattern of returns across different states of nature as well as across time.
Just as the rate of time preference defines the price in current dollars of output in successive periods, consumers have preferences with respect to output in
different states of nature, described by marginal rates of substitution across
these states, that define the prices of such state—contingent cotnrrodities.

In

the conetitive equilibrium of such an Arrow (1953) — Debreu (1959) economy,
there exist unique prices for each state—contingent commodity at each date, and
assets are priced according to the bundle of returns they offer across these

dates and states. Markets for the individual state—contingent commodities need

not exist for such prices to be defined. Since each investment may yield a different pattern of returns across states of nature, a consumer may be able to
obtain output in a single state through the purchase of a particular combination

of assets. By the requirement that no unexploited arbitrage opportunities can

yield a unit return in a
defines the "implicit price" of

exist in equilibrium, different asset combinations that

given state must have the same total cost. This

the commodity.
However, the ability to obtain each state-contingent commodity separately
rests on the unlikely existence of enough assets relative to the number of corn—

modities. Specifically, there must exist as many assets with linearly independent returns

as there are states of nature for the assets to "span" the space of

returns. Otherwise, only a subspace of lower dimension is spanned, with prices

—51—

defined. For example, with three states of nature and two assets, one can
obtain only combinations of the state—contingent returns that lie on a par-

ticular plane in the three—dimensional state space. The price of a unit of
output in one of the states is not defined unless this unit bundle lies in the
plane of feasible purchases.

Even without spanning, however, there need be no breakdown in the application of the general results of certainty analysis with respect to firm behavior.

As long as fir produce within the subspace spanned by existing assets, and
behave couetitively in that they take prices for feasible combinations of state
contingent returns as given, the Fisher separation theorem still applies, and
each firm's owners will unanimously support a policy of market value maximiza—

tion.1
In this context, the Modigliani—Miller (1958) Theorem may be interpreted as
saying that the way in which a given bundle of state—contingent commodities is
divided between claims of debt holders and equity holders can have no effect on

the bundle's total price. With coilete spanning, this is a trivial result.
Investors can engage in "homemade leverage," maintaining their preferred vector
of consumption across states of nature in the presence of a change in any

firm's financial policy. However, in the absence of corlete spanning, a change
in firm financial policy may result in a change in the dimension of the subspace

of commodities available to consumers. For example, with limited corporate
liability, an increase in firm leverage may cause bankruptcy, and a zero equity

return, in some states of nature. The consumer, by hypothesis not possessing
limited liability, cannot replicate this pattern by borrowing on his own. Thus,
firm leverage may widen the choice of return bundles available to the consumer,

and thereby have real effects (Stiglitz, 1969). This result is similar to the

—52—

one already discussed in Section II in which firms

and households

face different

borrowing rates.

There are many other reasons why the introduction of uncertainty may influ-

ence the leverage decision. Aside from changing the available rnu of state—
contingent return bundles, bankruptcy may involve real social costs, rather than
just a change in the distribution of returns between owners of debt and equity.
Further,

there is an information problem not dealt with in the simple

Arrow—Debreu nxdel. Firms subject to limited liability may misrepresent

return

their

bundle as very safe, and hence with a low probability of bankruptcy, and

sell large amounts of debt at a higher price than the actual pattern of returns
could dictate.
However,

if

In this sense, truth telling is

managers

not "incentive compatible."

face a particular compensation structure, such as a stiff

financial penalty if the firm goes bankrupt, investors may

in

equilibrium be

able to infer the firm.'s real prospects from the manager's leverage decision.
This application of "market signal.ng" (Spence, 197)4) is discussed in Ross
(1977). The actual design of incentive—compatible compensation structures for
managers

("agents") by asset holders ("principals") is referred to as the

"principal—agent" problem (Ross, 1973) or, simply, the "agency" problem. For a
given compensation structure, a manager typically will find there to be a unique

optimum for the debt equity ratio. Thus, the leverage decision and the
resulting cost of capital is very

dependent

on the information structure of the

economy and the incentives faced by decision_mkers.)42
As with the choice of financial policy, firms will choose to maximize

decisions if they are competitive
the investments produce returns that lie in the subspace already spanned by

market value

and

existing

with respect

to real investment

securities. If a new investment produces returns that are "large"

relative to the existing markets for such returns, perhaps because it offers a

—53—

previously

unobtainable state—contingent commodity bundle, the firm

can

influence the opportunity set of its investors at the same time it alters their
wealth (Ekern and Wilson, 19714; Radner, 19714). In general, once it is allowed

that a firm can influence the inlicit prices of state—contingent conunodities

faced by its stockholders, the Fisher separation theorem breaks down because an
increase in wealth no longer leads to a parallel outward shift in a consumer's

budget line. Thus the sign of the change in welfare caused by a change in
wealth depends on the preferences of the individual consumer, and stockholders
with different preferences or shares in the firm will normally oppose wealth

maximization and disagree about what the firm should do (King, 1977). Indeed,

the entire concept of wealth is ambious when relative prices change, since it
depends on the choice of units.

If one defines the cost of capital to be the expected return a firm
requires for a project with given risk characteristics, this cost is uniquely

defined only if the competitive assumptions are satisfied. Otherwise, the different objectives supported by different stockholders translate into different

rates of return they would require the firm to earn on a project. Furthermore,
if firm policy
voting,

is determined by

some collective decision rule such as majority

an announced policy may lead to a change in shareholder composition,

which in turn may lead to a new vote and policy. Hence, it
say

that

a

is

not sufficient

to

firm's behavior is determined by its stockholders.

One inortant case in which the conditions for conetitive behavior are met
(Ekern and Wilson, 19714) is the mean variance model, in which individual pre-

ferences are assumed to depend only on the mean and variance of the distribution

of state—contingent returns.14 This case forms the basis of the Capital Asset
Pricing Model (CAPM) (Sharpe, 1964; Lintner, 1965) in which each asset i has an
equilibrium expected rate of return:

514 —

(6.1)

i

=r f

+P

where rf is the risk—free return, Ci,m is the covariance of the firm's return
with the economy's aggregate return (and hence the part of its risk that is

undiversifiable) and P is the "price of risk" that depends on the distirbution

of wealth and risk preferences across individuals. Using the fact that (vI.i)
also holds for the aggregate, or "market" return r, we may rewrite it as

r =

(6.2)

1

where

rf

+

(rm

—

rf

is the regression coefficient of the firm's return on the market return,

Ci,m/Cm,m: its "beta."
Since the standard CAPM is a model in which stockholders will unanimously
favor market value maximization, expression (vi.i) also defines the cost of

capital for a prospective project with the same risk characteristics. Any project yielding greater than r

per dollar will sell for more than one dollar and

increase wealth.

An ixrortant characteristic of equilibrium in the CA1 is that all
investors hold the same portfolio of risky assets, regardless of their attitudes

toward risk: the market portfolio. Differences in willingness to bear risk are
reflected solely in the fraction of wealth placed in the risk—free asset, debt,

as opposed to the risky equity portfolio. Thus, one may think of the
investor's decision between debt and equity as a trade—off between risk and

return. This distinction is inortant because it introduces an additional element to the firm's leverage decision in the presence of differential taxation.

—55—

VII.

Uncertainty and Taxation
The analysis of the previous section showed that there are a number of

reasons wby financial policy may influence firm valuation and the cost of capi-

tal with uncertainty present. Two additional arguments rest on the interaction
of taxes and uncertainty. One involves the fact that there may be complete markets for state—contingent commodities, but only if one is willing to hold debt

as well as equity. The other relates to a realistic modelling of the corporate
tax as one with asymmetric treatments of gains and losses.

Recall that the Miller model of capital market equilibrium under certainty
predicts that investors will specialize their holdings in debt or equity

according to whether their personal tax rate is less than or greater than some

critical value e* (see Section v). In this equilibrium, firn are indifferent
between debt and equity finance, and the cost of capital for each source is the

interest rate. In contrast, the Capital Asset Pricing Model predicts that individuals will choose a combination of riskless debt and the nrket portfolio of
risky equity according to their willingness to bear risk. However, here too,
the choice of debt—equity ratio by firm has no effect on market value, by the
Modigliani—Miller

expected

theorem. The

cost of capital, measured as the required

rate of return for the firm, exceeds the risk—free interest rate by a

risk premium (see equation

(vi.i)), but

is independent of the firm's debt—equity

ratio.

It

may seem

something of a paradox, then, that the combined effect of risk

and taxation would lead to a situation in
this

firm,

which financial policy matters, but

indeed is the outcome that occurs. For a given financial policy for each
both tax and risk preferences will influence-an investor's choice between

debt and equity, as well as the specific equity portfolio held. Investors who
would prefer to hold only equity for tax purposes (0 >

0*) may nevertheless hold

—56—

some debt because a portfolio containing only equity may be too risky.

will

also tend

They

to concentrate more in less risky ty-pes of equity for a given

amount of risk (Auerbach and King, l983))6 A corollary is that investors with
a tax preference for, say, debt would prefer to hold more debt themselves, and

have the firms in which they hold equity borrow more. This merely generalizes
the result of Modigliani and Miller (1963) that a corporate tax alone should

cause investors to prefer that firms do whatever borrowing is done. The difference here is that only some individuals have a tax preference for debt (0 <

0*)

when personal taxes are taken into account. Thus, a high—bracket investor may
gain if a firm in which he holds equity chooses to borrow less, for then he can
purchase less debt and hold shares in the now less risky firm in greater amounts,
while a low bracket investor

will

lose for the same reason. Only when "tax

spanning" occurs, i.e., the firm's action has no tax consequences for investors
because the same state contingent returns are available from holding debt as
from holding equity, will the disagreement dissolve and the Miller equilibrium

be reestablished (Auerbach and King, 1983). Otherwise, the usual problem of
determining the cost of capital with incomplete markets is present.'
Evidence certainly suggests that investors do diversify as this ndel would
predict. The model also predicts that the equity portfolios of investors will
vary systematically with their tax rates, with higher bracket investors pur-

chasing less risky stocks and,

given risk, stocks with lower dividend payout

rates. While evidence based on the behavior of share prices around ex dividend
days appears to support the latter proposition, which was first put forward by
Miller and tvbdigliani (1961) (Elton and Gruber, 1970), it does not seem to sup-

port the former (Auerbach, l983).

—57—

A second way

in

which taxes influence the leverage decision in the presence

of uncertainty is through the asymmetric treatment of gains and losses under the

corporate income tax. In the U.S., as in most countries, negative taxable
income does not entitle the corporation to a tax refund at the corporate tax
rate.

Rather, losses may

be used immediately to offset previously taxed income

to a limited extent ("carried back") and held on account, without interest, to

offset future taxable income ("carried forward"). The lack of full refundability means that the more a firm finances with debt, the more likely it will
lose some of the value of the interest deduction through having to carry a loss
forward

for one or more years.5°

This led De Angelo and Masulis (1980a) to sug-

gest that the optimal debt—equity ratio occurs at a point where the marginal
loss in value of interest deductions just offsets the normal tax advantage of

debt finance. An inlication of this model is that, even in the absence of personal taxes, the cost of capital exceeds the interest rate, because of the par-

tial expected deductibility of expected interest payments. Another implication
is that assets with different risk characteristics may have different optimal
fractions of debt finance. For example, a firni investing in completely safe
capital may lever irore fully because there is no possibility of losing an inter-

est deduction. This potential outcome of greater debt finance for safer investments also characterizes other models of optimal capital structure, such as the

bankruptcy cost model, for similar reasons.51 Such a breakdown in the separation between real and financial decisions may have important implications for

effective tax rate calculations, such as those presented in Section V. For
example, the result that investment in structures relative to equipment is discouraged may be overturned if leverage costs are lower for investments in struc-

tures. Little work has been done on this issue.

—58—

Uncertainty also influences the meaning of measured effective tax rates.

For example, a project that yields 10 percent before tax but 6 percent after tax

would face a 0 percent tax rate if both returns were certain. However, if both
returns are uncertain, the fraction of income extracted by taxation, adjusted
for risk, depends on the risk characteristics of both before—tax and after—tax

returns. A safe return of 6 percent is worth more tiEn a return of 6 percent
with a high beta.

A simple case to start with is a pure income tax. In an Arrow—Debreu
model, an income tax would extract the same fraction of an asset's return in
each state of nature; there would be no ambiguity about the effective tax rate

here. Even in this case, however, one must be careful in interpreting this
effective rate. For example, suppose that the risk free rate of return is zero.
Then, as shown first by Tobin (1958), the investor's welfare is unaffected by

the incom tax. Moreover, as shown by Gordon (1981), if the tax revenue
received by the government is put back into the economy in lump sum fashion,

such a tax will have no effects at all. In general, an income tax on excess
returns above the safe rate will have no real effects. We may hypothetically
separate an asset's return into two parts: a safe return at the riskiess rate,
plus a risk premium that has zero value (Auerbach, 1981c). Taking away part of
the latter does not affect the consumer's welfare. This is easily demonstrated

in a tm—state diagram, as shown in Figure 7.1. Here, the riskless asset yields
rf in both states, as shown at point A, while the risky asset yields r1 in the
"good" state and r2 in the bad state. The budget line between A and B has slope
— p1
—

p2

, where 1 and P2 are the implicit prices of the state contingent cornmodi—

ties. Assuming the risky asset has an expected return in excess of rf, then

1'2 > p1/p2,

where 111

is

the investor's subjective probability of the

—59--

Figure 6.1
A Tax with No Effect

State 2
slope
1+r

—

p1
—

/

p2

slope =

—

f
1+r2

l+rf 1+ 1+r1

State 1

—6o—

occurrence of state i

The risky asset's expected return equals r, as shown

at

point C in the diagram. An income tax assessed on the excess of the risk—free
rate will shift the post—tax return on the risky asset to point D. Though this
yields a lower post—tax expected return, it leaves the consumer on the same
budget line.
This

result has the important implication that taxation matters only to the

extent that an asset's risk—adjusted return before and after taxes differ. Gordon
(1981)

argues

zero in the

that the real risk—adjusted gross return has been approximately

U.S., so that income tax rates, like those estimated in the empiri-

cal studies discussed in Section V, do not impose a loss in welfare on investors
and do not distort the incentive to invest.

There are a number of difficulties with this result, even if the real risk—

adjusted return to investors is zero. If tax revenues are simply valueless risk

premim reductions, then they would have

world.

to be negative in some

states

of the

Since aggregate tax revenues have not displayed this characteristic over

time, something is amiss. One likely problem is the fundamental assumption in
the foregoing analysis that what has no value to the investor also has none to

the government. This would be true if the government was a taker of implicit prices for the state—contingent commodities. However, if markets are incomplete,
as in the case where no private stock market exists for diversifying risks, the
collective tax revenue may be pooled to yield a fund with positive value to

investors. This situation would yield an
positive

even more striking result, that the

expected tax collections not only do not reduce the welfare of

investors but, if

redistributed

to them, actually improve it.

A second problem with the analysis is that it assumes the presence of an

income tax. Since assets depreciate, an income tax would involve stochastic
depreciation allowances, with firms allowed a greater deduction in states of

—61—

nature in which heavy depreciation occurs. (Alternatively, this would require
nonstochastic depreciation allowances based not on expected deprec5ation but

risk—adjusted depreciation (Bulow and Surirrrs, 1981).) Without such depreciation allowances, an asset's effective tax rate will differ across states of
nature, and the value of resources extracted from the investor will depend on the

nature of the asset's depreciation pattern. This means that, even if one expli—
citly

allows

for risk in making

effective

tax rate calculations, the resulting

measure does not apply generally to all assets with a given expected rate of
depreciation.

—62—

VIII. Conclusion
Modigliani and Miller (1958) cut through an extren1y complicated field
with a single result, compelling and intuitively appealing: use the interest
rate as the (risk—adjusted) cost of capital. Thxes have made things more
complicated, though Miller's (1977) attempt to bring back the original message
has exerted some force.

Not

all

taxes need distort the incentive to invest or influence the cost of

capital, either because they nay be capitalized in the value of assets, or
because they may affect only an asset's expected but not risk—adjusted return.

If they do change the cost of capital, they may do so in different ways for dif-

ferent investors. How

these

changes are to be aggregated into a single effect

on the firm is an open question. It is likewise difficult to obtain a simple
result when markets are incomplete, or when firi can use financial policy to
influence the market perception of their characteristics. Indeed, if managers
act in their own interests rather than those of their shareholders, how does the

cost of capital relate to the preferences of these owners of the firm? Though
we have learned xnich in recent years, we have raised many new questions in the

process.

—63—

Footnotes

1. A pure income tax would also tax the initial gain on infra—marginal
investments, purchased for less than the present value of their future

returns. Therefore, (3.1') should be interpreted at t = 0 as the value of
an asset after the payment of the initial tax. This component of the
income tax is simply
2.

a

tax on pure economic rent.

See Andrews (1975) for an initial treatmennt; U.S. Treasury (1977) and

Institute for Fiscal Studies (1978) for rire comprehensive analyses. The
idea of a consumption tax itself goes back to Irving Fisher (1939) and
beyond.
3.

Thus, the outcome for expensing with r fixed is the same as that for economic depreciation with (.1L.) fixed (Hall and Jorgenson, 1971).

4.

This assumes the tax on capital gains and losses to apply as well to initial revaluations after purchase. See Footnote 1. A slightly different
result, that

=

()

'we ignore taxation of initial gains and losses, in which case

This
5.

holds

and gross rents are niltiplied by
=

if

—

corresponds to the approach in Auerbach (1979a).

It is not possible to present here even a partial list of references to

papers on this topic. For early applications and extensions, see Hall and
Jorgenson (1967, 1971), Bishoff (1971), Eisner and Nadiri (1968), and
Feldstein and Flemining (1971).
6.

This

depreciation could also come about as

the

result of a constant rate of

technological growth, n.king new capital goods nre productive
than old ones less so. See Feldstein and Rothschild (1971).
embodied

7.

The function

argument.

is sometimes assumed to have (I/K) rather than

I as its

This is not important for the current expositional purpose.

8. Historically, there have been several 'ways

of

treating the credit in terms

of its impact on an asset's depreciable base. Between 1962 and 1963,
investors were required to write down their basis by the full value of cre-

dits received, under the so—called Long Amendment. Since passage of the
Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982, a fifty percent basis

adjustment has been required. Between these two periods, no adjustment was
requested. We deal primarily with this case in the following analysis.
For further discussion, as well as an analysis of related incentives, see
Auerbach (1982c).

9. Sometimes, investors my do better by selling assets and repurchasing new
ones to take continued advantage of such provisions as accelerated depreciation. This is discussed in Pi.ierbach (1981b) and Auerbach

Kotlikoff

(1982).

10. As in Auerbach (1979a).
11.

For

attempts at estimating economic depreciation from asset resale market

data, see Hulten and Wykoff (1981). Such a procedure is tricky, because of
the special tax treatment of the sale and purchase of used assets and the
"lemons" problem of adverse selection (Akerlof 1970) that owners, knowing
the quality of their assets better than prospective purchasers, will offer
only inferior capital goods at the going price.

12. This follows from the results of Diannd and Mirrlees (1971). For a specific treatment of capital taxation, see Auerbach (1979d; 1982a). The
measurement of the efficiency loss from differential taxation of capital
income was explained first by Harberger (1966) with

tion income tax. Also see Shoven (1976).
13. See Feldstein (1978) for further discussion.

respect

to the corpora-

—65—

l4. This result can be extended to any

type

of capital good with a pattern of

returns over tinE that produces a single internal rate of return, since an
increase in the discount rate makes existing marginal projects unprofitable.
However, for projects with railtiple internal rates of return, such as those

with negative cash flows at the end as well as the beginning of the project's lifetime (as discussed in Hirshleifer, 19T0), an increase in the

discount rate may actually make marginal projects profitable. For example,
a nuclear power plant with large terminal clean—up costs might be made nre
attractive as an investment by an increase in the discount rate that

lessens the wejt of those terminal costs relative to the positive cash
flows generated by

This

the

plant during its operation.

ambiguity relates to the "reswitching controversy", which included a

discussion of whether one c.ild think of capital as a productive factor
receiving

a rate of return.

15. This discussion follows Auerbach (1979a). The general model without
taxes has been used by Swan (19T0) and others to address different issues.

Abel (1981) demonstrates how adjustment costs may be incorporated into the

model

with taxes.

16. This "tree" model goes back to Wicksell (195).). For a general treatment of
taxation in Austrian models, see Lippnan and McCall (1981), Kovenock and
Rothschild (1983) and the references contained therein.

17. It is especially important here to remember that an income tax would col-

lect a constant fraction of annual cash flow plus capital gains. With an
appreciating asset such as this, such a tax would amount to a tax on

capital gains, with no tax on the cash flow at date T, as it is
offset by the decline in asset value (from B(T) to zero).
accrued

—66—

18.

The ambiguous concept of tax "neutrality" has been used by different

authors to describe tax systems that impose the same cost of capital on all
projects and those that, in current terms, do not affect the choice of

asset life. These two criteria are obviously inconsistent with each other,

and

both are inconsistent with a third use of the term to refer to tax. sys-

tems,

such as expensing, that have no distortionary effects at all. See

Auerbach (1982a).

19. For early discussion and measurement of this effect, see Shoven and Bulow
(1975) and Tidenan and Tucker (1976).

20. A method of price—level indexing based on the assumption that r—rr is constant, proposed by Auerbach and Jorgensen (1980), would have granted a

single first—year depreciation allowance equal to r—+ó for each asset.
21. This ambiguity has been noticed by Feldstein (1981) and Kopcke (1980),

among others. As with the definition of "neutrality" (footnote 18), one
must be careful when asking how

inflation biases

the choice of asset dura-

bility.

22. An accrual—equivalent capital gains tax rate is one that would yield the
same texinal after—tax wealth for an investor realizing a capital gain.
For example, suppose an asset grows in value at rate g from an initial

value of V0, and is sold at date T. Then the accrual—equivalent, c, of a
capital gains tax rate i is defined by:

V0(l

or

c =

+

T
T =
{(l—i)i(1+g) —

g(l—c))

(l+g)

=

.l3.

—

+

i}V0

1

ii

+

g

For example, if
c

T

{(1—.i)Kl+g)

—

ii

i

= .20

(the

current U.S.

Naturally, c depends on

g

maximum),

T = 10

and T, as well, as ..

and
A

g = .10,

longer holding

—67—

period increases the deferral advantage of a capital gains tax, since only

the sinle gain over basis is taxed. Similarly, a faster growth rate makes
deferral more valuable. Thus, there is no single value of c, given .

Indeed, it is the decline in the value of c as T increases that contributes
to the "lock—in" effect that discourages investors from realizing their

gains. One proposed method of alleviating this effect would be a lifetin
averaging scheme (Vickrey, 1939) that would effectively tax realized gains
at a rate increasing with the holding period.

23. For any T,

V0

=

application of (5.L)

successively up to T yields

r —t i—e
(r_1_T)x
i(1 + r—
T

Thus, we are assuming

+ (1 +

r

—T

•r- VT

in (5.5) that the remainder (1 +

approaches zero as T approaches .
2Li.

See Auerbach (1979c, 1982e).

25. Inframarginal equity may arise in Stiglitz's model through the retention
by the original entrepreneur of the value of his initial "idea" in the form

of equity ownership. For the firm to be entirely debt financed, the owner
would have to receive an initial taxable payment equal to the value of this

idea. No such tax would be due if this residual value were singly retained

in the form of equity ownership. For exanle, a firm which is worth $120
but only invests $100 in capital goods will borrow the $100 to purchase the

capital. If it borrows any more, the proceeds will go to the entrepreneUr

whose

with

26.

idea led to the firm's positive value. He may

the money received but first must pay

a

buy

this extra

debt

tax on it.

Over the past twenty years, dividends as a fraction of corrected, after—tax
profits has averaged over 55 percent (Auerbach, 1982d).

—68—

27. According to calculations done by Gordon and Malkiel (1981), the ratio of
debt to value for U.S. nonfinancial corporations averaged 23.5 percent between 1957 and 1978.

28. This is discussed in greater detail in Auerbach and King (1983).
29. Corporations are the one important exception, since they receive an 85 percent exclusion on intercorporate dividends and hence face an effective tax
rate of only 6.9 percent, while being fully taxed on capital gains at a

rate of 28 percent. Although some authors have used this fact to explain
the payment of dividends, intercorporate holdings do not seem to be suff i—

ciently large to justify such a position.

30. The following line of argument closely follows that in Auerbach (1979b).

31. The derivation of the firm's cost of capital in such a udel has been discussed by Edwards and Keen (1983) and Auerbach (1982e).

32. ,This was

first

pointed out by King (197i).

33. The fact that retentions are a cheaper form of finance than new issues has

been

recognized for a long time (see, for example, Baumol and Malkiel,

1967; Farrar and Selwyn, 1967). However, it is the explanation of the
existence of dividends in light of this advantage that remained unclear.

3. See Bradford (1981). A change in 0 may indirectly influence the cost of
capital through its effect on r via the taxation of alternative assets.

However, one may imagine this neutrality result as applying strictly to a
change in the tax rate on dividends rather than all personal income.

35. Auerbach (1982e) estimated the cost of capital required for different forms
of finance by relating observed earnings to previous financial policy.

—69—

36. Poterba

and Summers (1981) used the relationship of investment to q. (dis-

cussed above) to test the new view. Under the new view, changes in
0 influence q but should not affect investment, while changes in q caused
by other factors (such as expectations about future profitability) should.

They found that investment responds to changes in q that, under the new

view, would have been caused by changes in 0. This led them to reject the
new view in favor of the classical view, where q is not influenced by tax

rate changes. In considering such "q" models of investment, it is important to distinguish between the definition of q used in this section, as
the ratio of market valuation to marginal cost of a new unit of capital,

including any costs of adjustment, and Tobin's q, which is the ratio of

market value to replacement cost excluding such adjustment costs. Indeed,
what lies behind the Poterba—Suininers approach is that it is the difference

between these two notions of q that relates to investment.
37.

See Auebach (l982c) for a more detailed discussion of these changes.

38.

This

is also true of debt, of course, but to a lesser extent, since common

stock is much risker.
39.

This

need to allow explicitly for risk will be dealt with in the remainder

of the paper.
140. Feldstein and Summers (1979); Feldstein, Poterba and Dicks—Mireaux (1983).
141. See, for example, Grossman and Stiglitz (1980).

42. A

particular kind of managerial misrepresentation is in the form of lying

about

the types of

Meckling;

new

investments the firm plans to undertake (Jensen and

1976, Myers, 1977). The explanation of dividend payments as a

signal has also been made (Bhattacharya, 1980).
43.

Ross (1976) discusses alternative assumptions leading to the same asset
pricing structure.

—TO—

144

The static CAPM

has

been extended in many ways. See Jensen (1972) for a

survey. Merton (1973) first considered the extension of the CAPM to a
multiperiod context. More recently, Breeden (1979) showed that the multi—

period

CAPM takes on a partiuclarly simply form if one relates individual

returns to consumption rather than the "market", with the "consumption beta"
determining the expected risk premium.

145. This separation theorem does not always
Cass

146. This

and Stiglitz

hold

in re general urdels. See

(1970).

follows from the solution for equilibrium in a capital asset pricing

model with

taxes.

Earlier work on this topic may be found in Brennan

(1970), Eltbn and Gruber (1978) and Gordon and Bradford (1980).
147.

This

issue has also been discussed by De Angelo

and

Masulis

(l980b)

and

Taggart (1979).

Even this spanning result holds only if equity finance is through new share

issues. If additions to equity come through retentions, then the wealth of
each investor depends on the tax rate he faces on dividends. Thus, the
relationship between firm value and investor wealth differs across
investors in different tax brackets; even if the conditions for weath maximization are net, investors will disagree on the firm's optimal policy.
See Auerbach (1979c, 1983).

148. The use of ex dividend day stock price behavior has been criticized as a

method of determining the tax brackets of stockholder clienteles. See
Miller and Scholes (1981). Also see the discussion in Modigliani (1982).
While some direct evidence is available on portfolio behavior by tax

bracket (Blume etal., l974; Lewellan etal., 1978), these data are not
rich enough to allow the assessment of the partial effects of dividend
policy and risk on clientele composition.

—71—

49.

The nre generous the depreciation deductions of a tax system, and hence nr
likely the occurrence of tax

losses

for a firm with given gross cash flow,

more important an issue this asymmetry becomes. One of the nthods of
diminishing the asymmetry involves permitting the sale of tax

companies with

tax

facilitated

losses. This was

harbor leasing" provisions that

applied

deductions

by

in the U.S. under "safe

briefly in 1981—1983 but has always

been present to a certain extent. See Auerbach (1982b) and Warren and
Auerbach (1982) for further discussion.

50. Cross section data on the extent to which this occurs in the U.S. is presented by Cordes and Sheffrin (1981).
51.

This "limited tax shield" xde1 and

the other ndels of corporate leverage

mentioned above, such as the bankruptcy cost uodel, do have different

implications about certain aspects
characteristics

and,

of

the behavior of firms with different

in the aggregate, over time. See Gordon (1982) for

further discussion and proposed tests.

—72—

References
Abel, Andrew B. Investment and the Value of Capital. New York: Garland Ptib—
lishing Co., 1979.

_________

"Taxes, Inflation and the Durability of Capital," J. Pout. Econ.,

June 1981, 89 (3), pp. 548—560.

Akerlof, George. "The Market for Lemons: ialitative Uncertainty and the

), pp.

Market Mechanism," Quart. J. Econ., Aug. 1970, 84 (

488—500.

Andrews, William D. "A Consumption—type or Cash Flow Personal Income Tax,"
Harvard Law

Rev.,

April 1974, 87 (6),

pp.

1113—1188.

Arrow, Kenneth J. "An Extension of the Basic Theorems of Classical Welfare
Economics," Proc. of the Second Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical

tics and Probability. Ed. J. Neyinan. Berkeley:
___________

U. of Calif. Press, 1951.

"Le role des valeurs beoursieres pour la repartition la meilleure

des risques," Econometrie, Paris: C.N.R.S., 1953, pp. 41—48.

__________•

"Optimal Capital Policy, the Cost of Capital, and Myopic Decision

Rules." Annals of the Inst. of Math. Stats., 1964, 16 (1—2). Tokyo.
Auerbach,

Alan J.

"Neutrality and the Corrate

Res. Working Paper No. 657,

_________

"Inflation

Tax."

irvard Inst. of Econ.

Oct. 1978.

and the Choice of Asset Life." J. Pout. Econ., June

l979a, 87 (3), pp. 621—638.

__________•

"Share Valuation and Corporate Equity Policy." J. Public Econ.,

June 1979b, 11 (3),
_________

August

_________•

pp. 291—305.

"iIealth Maximization and the Cost of

Capital."

Quart. J.

Econ.,

1979c, 93 (3), pp. 433—446.

"The Optirñal Taxation of Heterogeneous Capital." Quart. J. Econ.,

November 1979d, 93 (4), pp. 589—612.

—73—

"A Note on the Efficient Design of Investment Incentives."

__________•

Econ. J., March 1981a, 91 (1), pp. 211—223.

"Inflation

__________•

and the Tax Treatment of Firm Behavior." Am. Econ Rev.,

May 1981b, 71 (2), pp. 419—123.

"Evaluating

__________

the Taxation of Risky Assets." Harvard Inst. of Econ.

Res. Working Paper No. 857, Nov. 1981c.

"Tax Neutrality and the Social Discount Rate."

__________

April 1982a, 17 (

), pp.

J.

Public Econ.,

355—312.

"Whither the Corporate Tax? Reform After ACRS." Nat. Tax J.,

__________•

Sept. 1982b, 35 (3), pp. 275—286.

"The New Economics of Accelerated Depreciation." B.C. Law Rev.,

_________

Sept. 1982c,

(

), pp.

—

"Issues in the Measurement and Encouragement of Business Saving."

__________

Saving and

Government Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 1982d, forth-

coming.

__________

"Taxes, Firm Financial Policy and the Cost of Capital: An Exnpir—

ical Analysis." Harvard Inst. of Econ. Res. Working Paper No. 915, Aug.
1982e.

__________
1983,

"Stockholder Tax Rates and Firm Attributes." J. Public Econ.,

forthcoming.

__________ and t.1e W. Jorgensen. "Inflation—Proof Depreciation

of Assets."

Harvard Bus. Rev., Sep./Oct. 1980, 58 (5), pp. 113—118.

__________ and Mervyn A. King, 1983. "Taxation, Portfolio Choice and
Debt—Equity Ratios: A General Equilibrium Model." Quart. J. Econ., 1983,
forthcoming.

—Th—

__________ and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. "Investment Versus Savings Incentives:
The Size of the Bang for the Buck and the Potential for Self—Financing
Business Tax Cuts," paper presented to the Symposium on the Economic Consequences of Government Deficits, St. Louis, 1982.

Baumol, Wjliam J. and Burton G. Malkiel. "The Firm's Optimal Debt-Equity Ratio
and the Cost of Capital." Quart. J. Econ., Nov. 1967, 81 (4), pp. 547—578.
Bhattacharya, Sudipto. "Nondissipative Signalling Structures and Dividend

Policy." Quart. J. Econ., Aug. 1980, 95

(1),

pp. l—24.

Bishoff, Charles. "The Effects of Alternative Lag
tives and

Capital

Distributions."

Tax

Spending. Ed. G. Fromni. shington: Brookings, 1971.

Blume, Marshall E., Jean Crockett and Irwin Friend. "Stockownership in the

United States: Characteristics and Trends." Sur. Curr. Bus., Nov. 197k,
5)4 (11), pp. 16—)4o.

Boadway, Robin, Neil Bruce and Jack Mintz. "Taxation, Inflation and the User
Cost of Capital in Canada." Queen's University, 1982.

Bradford, t.vid. "Tax Neutrality and the Investment Tax Credit." The Economies

of Taxation. Eds. H.J. Aaron and M.J. Boskin. Washing-ton: Brookings,
1980.

__________

"The

Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax on Corporate Distri-

butions." J.

Public Econ., April 1981, 15 (

), pp.

1—22.

Breeden, Douglas. "An Intertenora1 Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic Con—
suxnption and Investxrent." J. Financial Econ., Sept. 1979, I
Brennan, Michael J.

(3),

pp.

"Taxes, Market Valuation and Corporate Financial Policy."

Nat. Tax J., Dec. 1970, 23 (4),

pp.

417—427.

Brown, E. Cary. "Business Income Taxation and Investment Incentives."

Income, Employment and Public Policy. New York: W.W. Norton, 1948.

—75—

Bulow, Jeremy and Laurence Summers. "The Taxation of Risky Assets." National
Bur. of Econ. Res. Working Paper No. 897, June 1982.

Cass, David and Joseph Stiglitz. "The Structure of Investor Preferences and
Asset Returns, and Separability in Portfolio Allocation: A Contribution to
the Pure Theory of Mutual Funds." J. Econ. Theory, June 1970, 2 (2),
pp. 122—160.

Cordes, Joseph J. and Steven M. Sheffrin. "Taxation and the Sectoral Allocation
of Capital in the U.S." Nat. Tax J., December 1981, 314 (14), pp. 14191432.

Darby, Michael, "The Financial and Tax Effects of Monetary Policy on Interest
Rates." Econ. Inquiry, June 1975, 13 (2), pp. 266—276.

De Angelo, Harry and Ronald Masulis. "Optimal Capital Structure Under Corporate
and Personal Taxation." J. Finan. Econ., March 1980a, 8 (1), pp. 3—81.
___________ and __________.

and Personal

"Leverage and Dividend Irrelevancy Under Corporate

Taxation." J. Finance, May 1980b, 35 (2), pp. 1453—1463.

Debreu, Gerard, "A Social Equilibrium Existence Theorem." Proc. Nat. Acad. of
Sciences U.S.A., 1952, 38, pp. 886—893.

Theory of Value. New Haven: Yale U. Press, 1959.

__________
Diamond,

Peter and James

Amer.

Edwards,

Mirrlees. "Optimal Taxation and Public Production. I"

Econ. Rev., March

1971, 61 (1), pp. 8—27.

Jerexir and Michael Keen. "Wealth Maximization and the

Cost of Capital:

A Comment." Quart. J. Econ., 1983, forthcoming.

Eisner, Robert and M. Ishaq Nadiri. "Investment Behavior and Neoclassical
Theory." Rev. Econ Stat., August 1968, 50 (3), pp. 369—382.

__________ and Robert H. Strotz. "Determinants of Business

Impacts

Investment."

of Monetary Policy. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Commission on Money

and Credit, 1963.

—76—

Ekern,

Steiner and Robert Wilson. "On the the Theory of the Firm in an Econoxr

with Incomplete Markets." Bell J. Econ., Spring 19714, 5

(1),

pp. 171—180.

Elton, Edwin J. and Martin J. Gruber. "Marginal Stockholder Tax Hates and the

Clientele Effect." Rev. Econ Stat., Feb. 1970, 52 (1), pp. 68714.
__________ and

_________. "Taxes and Portfolio Composition." J. Financial

Econ., Dec. 1978, 6

Farrar,

(14),

Donald E. and Lee L.

Returns

pp. 39914l0.

Selwyn. "Taxes, Corporate Financial Policy and

to Investors." Nat. Tax J., Dec. 19614, 20 (14),

Feenberg, De.niel.

ence of

pp.

"Does the Investment Interest Limitation Explain the

Exist-

Dividends?" J. Finan. Econ., Summer 1981, 9 (3), pp. 265—269.

Feldstein, Martin S. "Inflation, Income Taxes and the Hate of Interest: A
Theoretical Analysis." Amer. Econ. Rev., Dec. 1976, 66 (3), pp. 809—820.

_________

"The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation." J. Pout. Econ.,

April 1978, 86 (2), pp. 529—551.

__________

"Adjusting

Depreciation in an Inflationary Econonrj:

Versus Acceleration." Nat. Tax J., 1981, 314 (

__________

"Inflation,

), pp.

Indexing

29.143.

Tax Rules and Investment: Some Econometric Evidence."

Econometrica, July 1982, 50 (14), pp. 825—862.

__________ and John S. Flemming. "Tax Policy, Corporate Saving and Investment
Behavior in Britain." Rev. Econ. Stat., Oct. 1971, 38 (14), pp.
___________

Jerry

Green and rtan Sheshinki. "Inflation and Taxes in a Growing

Econon with Debt and Eq.uity Finance." J. Pout. Econ., April 1978, 86
(2), pp. 553—570.

__________, James Poterba and Louis

Dicks—Mireaux, "The Effective Tax Hate and

the Pre—Tax Hate of Return." J. Public Econ., 1983, forthcoin.ing.
___________ and Michael Rothschild. "Towards an Economic Theory of Replacement

Investment." Econometrica, May 19714, 142 (3), pp. 393—1423.

—77—

__________ and Lawrence Summers. "Inflation and the Taxation of Capital Income
in the Corporate Sector." Nat. Tax J., Dec. 1979, 32 (14), pp. 1445—470.

Fisher, Irving. The Theory of Interest. New York: Macmillan, 1930.

_________

"The Double Taxation of Savings." Amer. Econ. Rev., March 1939,

39 (U, pp. 16—33.
Gordon, Roger. "Taxation of Corporate Capital Income: Tax Revenues Versus Tax

Distortions." Bell
__________

"Interest

Labs, inimeo,

1981.

Rates, Inflation and Corporate Financial Policy." Bell

Labs, minieo, 1982.

__________ and .vid Bradford. "Taxation and the Stock Market Valuation of Capital Gains and Dividends: Theory and Empirical Results." J. Public Econ.,
Oct. 1980, 114 (2), pp. 109—136.

__________ and Burton G. Malkiel, "Corporation Finance." How Taxes Affect Eco—
nomic Behavior. Eds.: H.J. Aaron and J.A. Pechman. .shington:
Brookings, 1981.

Gould, John P. "Adjustment Costs in the Theory of Investment of the Firm."
Rev. Econ. Stud., Jan. 1968, 35 Ci), pp. 147—55.

Gravelle,

Jane G.

"Effects of the 1981 Depreciation Revisions on the Taxation

of Incon from Business Capital." Nat. Tax J., March 1982, 35 (1),
pp. 1—20.

Haig, Robert M. "The Concept of Income: Economic and Legal Aspects." The
eral Income Tax. Ed. R.M. Haig. New York: Columbia U. Press, 1921.
Hall, Robert E. and Dale W. Jorgenson. "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior."
Amer. Econ. Rev., June 1967, 57 (3), pp. 39l14114.

—78—

__________ and

__________.

"Application

of the Theory of Optimum Capital

Accumulation." Tax Incentives and Capital Spending. Ed. G. Froxnm. Washington: Brookings, 1971.
Harberger, Arnold C. "Efficiency Effects of Taxes on Income from Capital."

Effects of the Corporation Tax. Ed. M. Krzyzaniak. Detroit: Wayne St.
Univ. Press, 1966.

Hayashi, Fumlo, "Tobin's Marginal q and Average q:

A Neoclassical Interpreta-

tion." Econometrica, Jan. 1982, 50 (1), pp. 213..224.

Hirshlejfer, Jack. Investment, Interest and Capital. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice—Hall, 1970.
Hotelling, Harold S.

"A General Mathematical Theory of Depreciation." J. Amer.

Stat. Assn., Sept. 1925, 20 (

), pp.

34O353.

Hulten, Charles R. and Frank C. Wykoff. "The Measurement of Economic Depreciation." Depreciation, Inflation and the Taxation of Income from Capital.

Ed. C.R. Hulten. Washington: Urban Institute Press, 1981.
Institute for Fiscal Studies. The Structure and Reform of Direct Taxation.

London: Allen and Unwin, 1978.

Jensen, Michael. "Capital Markets: Theory and Evidence." Bell J. Econ.,
Autumn 1972, 3 (2), pp. 357—398.

_________

and William Meckling. "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,

Agency Costs and Ownership Structure." J. Finan. Econ., Oct. 1976, 3
(4),

pp.

305—360.

Jorgenson, Dale W. "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior." Amer. Econ. Rev.,
May 1963, 53 (2), pp. 247—259.

_________ and Martin A. Sullivan. "Inflation and Cororate Capital Recovery."
Depreciation, Inflation and the Taxation of Income from Captial. Ed.

C.R. Hulten. Washington: Urban Institute Press, 1981.

—79—

King, Mervyn A. "Taxation and the Cost of Capital." Rev. Econ. Stud.,
Jan. 1974, 41 (1), pp. 21—35.

__________

Public

Policy and

the

Corporation. London: Chapman

and

Hall,

1977.
__________

Editor.

The Taxation of Income from Capital: A Comparative Study

of the U.S., U.K., Sweden and West Germany. Chicago: U. of Chicago Press,
forthcoming.

Kovenock, Daniel and Michael Rothschild. "Capital Gains Taxation in an Econoirr

with an 'Austrian Sector'." J. Public Econ., 1983, forthcoming.
Kopcke, Richard W. "Inflation, Corporate Income Taxation and the Demand for

Capital Assets." J. Pout. Econ., Feb. 1981, 89 (1), pp. 122—131.
Lewellen, Wilbur G., Kenneth L. Stanley, Ronald C. Lease and Gary Schlarbauin.

"Some Direct Evidence on the Dividend Clientele Phenomenon." J.Finance,
1978, 33 (5),

pp.

1385—1399.

Lintner, John. "The Valuation of Risky Assets and the Selection of Rislcj

Investments in Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets." Rev. Econ. Stat.,
Feb. 1965, 47

(1),

pp. 13—37.

Lippman, Steven A. and John J. McCall. "Progressive Taxation in Sequential

Decision—making: Deterministic and Stochastic Analysis." J.

Public

Econ.,

Aug. 1981, 16 (i), pp. 35—52.

Lucas, Robert E. "Optimal Investment Policy and the Flexible Accelerator."

mt. Econ.

Merton,

Robert.

Rev., Feb. 1967, 8

pp. 78—85.

"An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model." Econornetrica,

Sept. 1973, 41 (5),

Malkiel,

(1),

Burton G.

pp.

867—887.

"The Capital Formation Problem in the United States."

J. Finance, May 1979, 34

(2),

pp. 291—306.

—80—

Miller, Merton H. "Debt and Taxes." J. Finance, May 1977, 32 (3), pp. 261—275.

__________ and Franco Modigliani. "Dividend Policy, Growth, and the Valuation
of shares." J. Business, Oct. 1961, 314 (3), pp. 1411_1433.

_________ and Myron Scholes. "Dividends and Taxes." J. Financial Econ.,
Dec. 1978, 6 (14), pp. 333—3614.

__________ and __________•

"Dividends and Taxes: Some Empirical Evidence."

University of Chicago, mimeo, 1981.

Modigliani, Franco. "Debt, Dividend Policy, Taxes, Inflation and Market Valuation." J. Finance, May 1982, 37 (2), pp. 255—273.

__________ and Merton H. Miller. "The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance, and
the Theory of Investment." Amer. Econ. Rev., June 1958, 148 (3),
pp. 261—297.

__________ and __________.

"Corporate Income Taxes and the Cost of Capital: A

Correction." Amer. Econ. Rev., June 1963, 53 (3), pp. 143314143.

Myers, Stewart. "Determinants of Corporate Borrowing." J. Public Econ.,
Nov. 1977, 5 (2), pp. 1147—175.

Poterba, James J. and Lawrence H. Summers. "Dividend Taxes, Corporate Invest-

ment, and 'q'." Nat.
Radner,

Roy.

"A

Bureau

of Econ. Res. Working Paper No. 829, Dec. 1981.

Note on Unanimity of Stockholders' Preferences Among Alterna-

tive Production Plans: A Reformilation of the Ekern—Wilson Model." Bell

J.

Econ., Spring 19714, 5 (1), pp. 181—1814.

Ross, Stephen A. "The Economic Theory- of Agency: The Principal's Problem."
Amer. Econ. Rev., May 1973, 63 (2), pp. 1314_139.
__________.

"The Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset Pricing." J. Econ. Theory,

Dec. 1976, 13 (3), pp. 3141—360.

__________

"The Determination of Financial Structure: The Incentive—

Signalling Approach." Bell J. Econ., Spring 1977, 7 (i),
pp. 23—40.

Samuelson, Paul A. "Tax Deductibility of Economic Depreciation to Insure

Invariant Valuations." J. Pout. Econ., Dec. 1964, 72 (6), pp. 604—606.
Sharpe, William. "Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium Under
Conditions of Risk." J. Finance, Sept. 1964, 19 (4), pp. 425—442.
Shoven, John B. "The Incidence and Efficiency Effects of Taxes on Income from
Capital." J. Pout. Econ., Dec. 1976, 84 (6), pp. 1261—1283.

__________ and Jerenr I. Bulow. "Inflation Accounting and Nonfinancial Corporate Profits: Physical Assets." Brookings Papers Econ. Act., 1975 (3),
pp. 557—598.

Simons, Henry C. Personal Income Taxation. Chicago: U. of Chicago Press,
1938.

Spence, A. Michael. Market Signalling. Cambridge: Harvard U. Press, 1974.
Stiglitz, Joseph E.

"A Re—examination of the Modigliani—Miller Theorem."

Amer. Econ. Rev., Dec. 1969, 59 (5), pp. 784—793.

__________

"Taxation,

Corporate Financial Policy and the Cost of Capital."

J. Public Econ., Feb. 1973, 2 (i), pp.1—34.
Sunley, Emil M. "Tax Neutrality Between Capital Services Provided by Long—Lived
and Short—Lived Assets." U.S. Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis Paper
No. 10, Feb. 1976.

Swan, Peter L. "Durability of Consumption Goods." Amer. Econ. Rev., Dec. 1970,
Go (5), pp. 884—894.

Taggart, Robert. "Taxes and Corporate Financial Structure in an Incomplete Market." J. Finance, June 1980, 35 (3), pp. 645—659.

—82—

Tideix.n,

T. Nicholas and Donald P. Tucker. "The Tax Treatment of Business

Profits Under Inflationary Conditions." Inflation and the Income Tax.

Ed. H. Aaron. Washington: Brookings, 1916.
Tobin, James. "Liquidity Preference as Behavior Towards Risk." Rev. Econ.
Stud., Feb. 1958, 25 (1), pp. 65—86.

_________

"A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory." J. Money,

Credit and

Banking,

Feb. 1969, 1 (1), pp. 15—29.

Treadway, Arthur. "On Rational Entrepreneurial

Investment."

Behavior and the Dex.nd for

Rev. Econ. Stud., April 1969, 3 (2), pp. 227—239.

U.S. Department of Treasury. Blueprints for Basic Tax Reform. Washington:
U.S. Gov. Printing Office, 1977.

Vickrey, William. "Averaging Income for Income Tax Purposes." J. Polit. Econ.,
June 1939, 147 (3), pp. 319—397.

Warren, Alvin C. and Alan J. Auerbach. "Transferability of Tax Incentives and

the

Fiction of Safe

Harbor Leasing." Harv.

Law Rev., June 1982, 95 (8),

pp. 1752—1786.

Wicksell, Knut. Value, Capital and Rent. Tr. G.L.S. Shackle. London: Allen
and Unwin, 19514.

