NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTOR BEHAVIOR AND THE OPTION MARKET
Josef Lakonishok
Inmoo Lee
Allen M. Poteshman
Working Paper 10264
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10264
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004

We thank Joe Levin, Eileen Smith, and Dick Thaler for assistance with the data used in this paper. We are
extremely grateful to Phil Teuscher for a number of extensive discussions about the workings of the equity
option market. We also appreciate helpful comments from Nicholas Barberis, Eric Gettleman, Jun Pan, and
seminar participants at the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, the 2003 Allied Korean
Finance Association Meetings, and the Fall 2003 NBER behavioral finance meeting. Lee acknowledges
financial support by the SK Research Fund at Korea University Business School. We bear full responsibility
for any remaining errors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Josef Lakonishok, Inmoo Lee, and Allen M. Poteshman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Investor Behavior in the Option Market
Josef Lakonishok, Inmoo Lee, and Allen M. Poteshman
NBER Working Paper No. 10264
January 2004
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the behavior of investors in the equity option market using a unique and
detailed dataset of open interest and volume for all contracts listed on the Chicago Board Options
Exchange over the 1990 through 2001 period. We document major stylized facts about the option
market activity of three types of non-market maker investors over this time period and also
investigate how their trading changed during the stock market bubble of the late 1990s and early
2000. Our key findings are: (1) non-market maker investors have about four times more long call
than long put open interest, (2) these investors have more short than long open interest in both calls
and puts, (3) each type of investor purchases more calls to open brand new positions when the return
on underlying stocks are higher over horizons ranging from one week to two years into the past, (4)
the least sophisticated group of investors substantially increased their purchases of calls on growth
but not value stocks during the stock market bubble of the late 1990s and early 2000, and (5) none
of the investor groups significantly increased their purchases of puts during the bubble period in
order to overcome short sales constraints in the stock market.
Josef Lakonishok
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
josefla@uiuc.edu
Inmoo Lee
Korea University
1, 5-ga Anam-dong, Sungbuk-gu
Seoul, 136-701
Korea
inmoo@korea.ac.kr

Allen M. Poteshman
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
poteshma@uiuc.edu

1. Introduction

The seminal work of Black and Scholes (1972) and Merton (1973) generated an
explosion of research into methods for computing theoretical option prices and hedge ratios. By
contrast, relatively little is known about the trading of this important class of securities. This
paper uses a unique option dataset to investigate investor behavior in the equity option market.
There are two main goals. The first is to document major empirical facts about the option market
activity of different types of investors. The second is to investigate changes in option market
activity during the stock market bubble of the late 1990s and early 2000.
The dataset contains detailed daily open interest and volume information for each equity
option listed at the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) from 1990 through 2001. All of
the data are broken down by different types of investors: firm proprietary traders, customers of
full-service brokers, and customers of discount brokers. The open interest data provide both long
and short positions for each investor type. The volume data are classified according to whether
an investor type is buying or selling and also according to whether the investor type establishes
brand new option positions or closes existing ones. Most other datasets, by contrast, provide
only aggregate daily open interest and volume for each option.1
Our analysis begins by determining the average daily long and short, put and call open
interest for different types of investors and various categories of stocks such as large
capitalization stocks and value and growth stocks. We also compute for the different investor
types and categories of stocks average daily volume of purchases and sales of both calls and puts
1

The Berkeley Options Database and the CBOE MDR data provide time-stamped trade-by-trade information on
option transactions. They do not, however, break down option volume by different investor types or according to
whether it is being used to open a new option position or close an existing one. They also do not indicate whether
option transactions are buyer or seller initiated – although an approximate classification into buyer and seller
initiated can be achieved through the use of the Lee and Ready (1991) algorithm.

1

that open new positions. Next, each of these four volume categories is regressed on the
underlying stock returns over various past horizons, underlying stock book-to-market (BM)
ratios, and underlying stock volatilities in order to understand the factors that drive option market
activity. We also use the regression results to investigate the impact on daily option volume of
shocks to the independent variables. The analyses are first performed over our entire sample
period from 1990-2001 and then over subperiods to see how option trading changed over time.
We are especially interested in changes in the behavior of the different investor types during the
stock market bubble of the late 1990s and early 2000.
Our first set of finding about option market activity pertains to the entire sample period
from 1990 through 2001. We summarize several of them here. First, non-market maker
investors have about four times more long call than long put open interest. Second, for both calls
and puts the three investor types in aggregate have more short than long open interest. Third, the
differences in open interest and trading volume across options with underlying growth and value
stocks are small. Fourth, all investor types buy more calls to open new positions after positive
returns on underlying stocks at horizons from one week to two years in the past. For the most
part, a similar relation also holds between past returns and the selling of new calls and the buying
and selling of new puts. A noteworthy exception, however, is that sales of puts to open new
short positions are negatively related to returns on the underlying stock for short horizons up to
one quarter in the past.
Given the diversity of the participants and the complexity of the instruments in the
option market, there are surely a number of factors which yield the empirical regularities that we
document. Although formal testing for the contributions of various factors lies beyond the scope
of this paper, when presenting our findings we do make some suggestions about what might be

2

generating them. For example, behavioral factors may play an important role in producing
greater short than long open interest for calls and puts. As we explain below, the high level of
short call open interest is consistent with loss-averse investors who focus on individual
investments rather than their aggregate portfolios preferring covered calls (which consist of long
stock positions combined with short call positions) to long stock positions. Regret avoidance
might partially explain the high level of short put open interest. This would be the case if
investors sell out-of-the-money puts on stocks that they believe are trading at attractive prices,
reasoning that either the stock will sink below the strike price and they will buy the stock even
more cheaply or the stock will remain above the strike price and they will just keep the put
premium. As another example, trend-chasing may account for the fact that all three investor
types buy more calls to open brand new long positions after positive returns on the underlying
asset over a variety of past horizons.
We also establish a number of key facts about option market activity during the stock
market bubble of the late 1990s and early 2000. First, the volume of calls purchased by
customers of discount brokers to open brand new positions was highly elevated for underlying
growth stocks, but there was no corresponding increase for underlying value stocks. Second, in
contrast to the discount customers, there was no increase in call purchases to open new positions
for firm proprietary traders or customers of full-service brokers. Third, even though open buy
call volume did not increase for the full-service customers, the positive relationship between
open buy call volume and past returns strengthened for this group of investors. Finally, the
purchase of puts to open new positions did not increase for any of the investor classes during the
bubble.

3

We will argue below that discount customers are probably the least sophisticated of the
three groups of option investors. Consequently, our results from the bubble period suggest that
the least sophisticated investors were speculating that the price of growth stocks would continue
to rise and that their speculation contributed to the bubble. More sophisticated investors, by
contrast, at most had a mild bet that the price of the growth stocks would continue to go up. The
fact that the open buy put volume did not increase for any of the investor groups during the
bubble is consistent with there having been little appetite for betting against the bubble, even
though it would have been easy to do so by purchasing puts. Hence, our results provide a
different perspective on the bubble than Ofek and Richardson (2003) which argues that the
existence of short sales constraints contributed to the development of the bubble and that the
loosening of those constraints played a role in deflating it. At the same time, our results tend to
reinforce Brunnermeier and Nagel’s (2003) finding that hedge funds rode rather than attacked
the bubble. It seems that even sophisticated investors do not want to take contrarian positions
during a bubble.
In addition to other research on the bubble, our paper is also related to a broader literature
that studies investor behavior in the stock market. In a recent paper Barber, Odean, and Zhu
(2003) investigate the stock market activity of investors at a discount and full-service brokerage
house. They find that discount and full-service customers are contrarians over short horizons but
trend-chasers over longer horizons. Although broadly consistent with these findings, our result
on the relationship between option activity and past returns on the underlying stock differ along
several important dimensions. Beyond the obvious fact that we study the option rather than the
stock market, our results may also have greater generality since they are derived from all
discount and full-service traders in the market rather than from those at a single discount or full-

4

service brokerage house.2 It is also important to note that since the supply of stock is fixed (at
least in the short-run), stock market studies provide information on the relative desire of different
groups of market participants to trend-chase or act as contrarians. For example, if both
individuals and institutions become more positive on stocks after price increases but the
institutions become more bullish than the individuals, then the institutions will buy stock from
the individuals. In this case, the individuals will appear to be contrarians, even though price runups make both parties more positive about stocks. In the option market, on the other hand, it is
easy to create and destroy contracts, so we can get a clearer picture of different groups’ absolute
desire to trend-chase or act as contrarians. That is, in the option market it is possible to find that
both individuals and institutions act as either trend-chasers or contrarians. Consequently, the fact
that in Barber, Odean, and Zhu (2003) discount investors act as contrarians with respect to
returns over the most immediate past two quarters but in our work they act as trend-chasers is
consistent with discount customers becoming more bullish on stocks that have done well over the
last six months (and hence buying brand new calls on them) but not becoming as bullish as other
investors (and hence selling stock to the more bullish stock market participants.)3
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the data. The
third section defines our measures of option market activity. Section 4 investigates the level and
cross-sectional determinants of option market trading over our entire sample period. The fifth
section examines changes during the bubble period, and Section 6 concludes.

2

In addition, we present results for firm proprietary traders.
There also have been a number of papers that investigate whether institutions and individuals are trend-chasers or
contrarians in the stock market (e.g., Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992), Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers
(1995), Nofsinger and Sias (1999), Wermers (1999), and Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001).) These papers also
measure relative rather than absolute trend-chasing and collectively have yielded inconclusive results.
3

5

2. Data

The main data for this paper were obtained from the CBOE. The data cover option open
interest and trading volume broken down by different types of investors from the beginning of
1990 through the end of 2001. The open interest data provide a daily record of closing short and
long open interest for all CBOE listed options. When a CBOE listed option is also listed on
other exchanges, the open interest data is inclusive of all exchanges at which it trades. Options
that trade only at exchanges other than the CBOE, however, are not included in the dataset. The
trading volume data consists of daily information for all trades that actually occur at the CBOE.
It is broken down into four categories: volume from buy orders that open new long positions
(open buy volume), volume from sell orders that open new short positions (open sell volume),
volume from buy orders that close existing short positions (close buy volume), and volume from
sell orders that close existing long positions (close sell volume).
The Option Clearing Corporation (OCC) assigns one of three origin codes to each option
transaction: F for firm proprietary traders, C for public customers, and M for market makers.
An example of a firm proprietary trader would be an employee of Goldman Sachs trading for the
bank’s own account. An analyst at the CBOE further subdivided the public customer data into
orders that originated from discount customers, full-service customers, or other customers.
Clients of E-Trade are an example of discount customers, and clients of Merrill Lynch are an
example of full-service customers. The other customers category consists of all OCC public
customer transactions that are not designated by the CBOE analyst as originating from discount
or full-service customers.4 In the empirical work below, we study option activity on individual

4

The other customer category includes option activity from transactions that originated from registered brokerdealer’s personal accounts, foreign broker-dealer accounts, CBOE floor broker error accounts, and specialist

6

equities from the firm proprietary trader, discount customer, and full-service customer
categories.
We maintain that among the three groups of option investors, the firm proprietary traders
have the highest level of sophistication, the full-service customers have an intermediate level of
sophistication, and the discount customers have the lowest level of sophistication. Evidence that
the firm proprietary option traders have the highest level of sophistication is provided in
Poteshman and Serbin (2003) which demonstrates that firm proprietary traders never engage in
irrational early exercise of stock options while the full-service and discount customers do so with
some regularity. One reason to believe that full-service option traders are on average more
sophisticated than discount option traders is that most hedge funds trade through full-service
brokerage houses. In addition, Pan and Poteshman (2003) find that full-service option traders
have a greater propensity than discount option traders to open new long call (put) positions
before stock price increases (decreases). Further evidence that full-service option customers are
more sophisticated than discount option customers is provided in Mahani and Poteshman (2003)
which shows that discount customers have a greater propensity for entering option positions that
load up on growth stocks relative to value stocks in the days leading up to earnings
announcements despite the fact that at earnings announcements value stocks outperform growth
stocks by a wide margin. (LaPorta, Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1997)
We obtain return, price, and number of shares outstanding data for the stocks that
underlie the options from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). We use data from
CRSP as well as COMPUSTAT to classify underlying firms into value and growth categories
based upon their book-to-market (BM) equity ratios. In order to ensure that we are not using BM

accounts as well as customers of brokerage houses that were not classified as discount or full-service by the CBOE
analyst.

7

values before the data were actually available to investors, we assume a four month reporting lag
for accounting data. Book value of equity is obtained from COMPUSTAT annual data item
number 60. Market value of equity is computed by multiplying the CRSP share price and the
number of shares outstanding. When calculating BM, the most recently available market value
of equity is used.

3. Measuring option market activity

We define a quantity that measures on a trade date the open interest on an underlying
stock (delta-adjusted, so that we can compare option positions to stock positions) by one of the
investor types as a percentage of the shares of the underlying stock outstanding. We denote this
quantity, OpenInterestPercentageSharessk,,t i , where s is an underlying stock, t is a trade date, k is
a kind of open interest, and i is an investor type. The open interest kind k is either long call, long
put, short call, or short put. The investor type i is either firm proprietary traders, discount
be the number of different call contracts listed
customers, or full-service customers. Let N sCall
,t
on stock s on trade date t, ∆ Call
s , j ,t be the delta of the jth call on underlying stock s on trade date t,
and N sShares
be the number of shares of stock s outstanding on trade date t. In addition, let
,t
OpenInterestsk,,ji,t be the number of contracts of open interest of kind k for investor type i on the

jth call on underlying stock s on trade date t. We then define OpenInterestPercentageSharessk,,t i
by

8

 N s ,t

k, i
Call
 ∑ 100 × OpenInterests , j ,t × ∆ s , j ,t 
 × 100.
≡  j =1


N sShares
,t




Calls

OpenInterestPercentageSharessk,,t i

(1)

In this expression, the factor of 100 and the delta in the numerator convert the open interest into
an equivalent number of shares of the underlying stock.5 The final factor of 100 converts the
quantity into a percentage.
We measure option volume in a similar way. For example, let OptionVolsk,,ji,t be the
option volume of kind k by investor type i on the jth call on underlying stock s on trade date t.
Now k is either open buy call volume, open buy put volume, open sell call volume, or open sell
put volume. We then define OptionVolPercentageSharessk,,t i by
 N s ,t

k, i
Call
 ∑ 100 × OptionVols , j ,t × ∆ s , j ,t 
 × 100.
≡  j =1
Shares


N s ,t




Calls

OptionVolPercentageSharessk,,t i

(2)

To illustrate the computation of these measures, suppose that on June 1, 1998, XYZ has
23,000,000 shares outstanding and that firm proprietary traders have 120 contracts of long open
interest in XYZ calls that expire in June 1998 with a strike price of $130 and 35 contracts of long
open interest in XYZ calls that expire in July 1998 with a strike price of $125. Suppose further
that on June 1, 1998 the Black-Scholes deltas of the June 1998 strike $130 call and the July 1998
strike $125 call are, respectively, 0.55 and 0.60. Then for firm proprietary traders, the long call
5

Each option contract is written on 100 shares of stock. In the empirical work we use Black-Scholes deltas for

∆ Call
s , j ,t . The volatility of the underlying asset for the Black-Scholes delta computation is set to the annualized
sample volatility from its weekly log returns over the last 52 weeks excluding the two most extreme values. The
assumptions of the Black-Scholes model are violated in a number of ways (e.g., the options are American rather than
European and the volatility of the underlying stocks is not constant.) However, since our main results are not altered
if we do not delta adjust at all, we believe the Black-Scholes model provides an adequate approximation to delta for
our purposes.

9

open interest as a percentage of shares outstanding on XYZ for June 1, 1998 is 0.0378%. This
percentage is computed as
 100 × 120 × 0.55 + 100 × 35 × 0.60 
Long Call , Firm Prop .
OpenInterestPercentageShares XYZ
=
, June 1, 1998
 × 100
23,000,000


= 0.0378%.

(3)

Finally, it should be noted that (holding other things fixed) stock price changes will not
substantially impact our measures, but stock price changes would have an important impact on
variables defined to gauge option market activity in dollar terms.

4. Investor behavior in the option market: 1990-2001

This section of the paper characterizes option market activity over our entire data period
from 1990 to 2001. We begin by examining option open interest and trading volume by different
types of investors for options on various categories of underlying stocks. We then investigate
some cross-sectional determinants of option market trading.

4.1. Levels of option open interest
Table 1 presents average daily long and short, put and call open interest as a percentage
of shares of underlying stock outstanding over the 1990-2001 period. These averages are
computed for four groups of underlying stocks: all those in the database, large stocks, large
growth stocks, and large value stocks. Large stocks are defined as those in the top 500 by market
capitalization in the CRSP universe as of the end of the previous calendar quarter. Large growth
and large value stocks are defined at the end of each quarter as, respectively, the lowest and
highest BM quartile of the 500 largest stocks by market capitalization. We focus on large stocks

10

which account for the bulk of the market capitalization and most of the option activity. The
results for smaller companies are similar. In order to prevent the statistics from being too
heavily influenced by smaller companies with fewer options or by periods of unusually high
option activity, we use the following procedure to compute averages. First, for each trade date
we use equation (1) to compute the delta-adjusted open interest for each underlying stock. Next
for each calendar month we compute a market capitalization weighted average of the deltaadjusted open interest for each underlying stock on each trade date. Finally, we calculate a
simple average over the months. All averages reported in the paper are computed in this way.6
We note first that option market activity represents a reasonably large fraction of activity
in the underlying asset. For example, for large underlying stocks the average open interest
aggregated across types of open interest and types of investors is about 0.56% of the shares
outstanding. Although this may initially seem like a small quantity, the contracts are actively
traded, and the annual option market turnover corresponds to contracts on about 6% of the
underlying shares.7 Since the turnover in the market for the underlying shares is on the order of
60% a year and the three investor types that we examine do not comprise the entire option
market, the option trading is appreciable when compared to the direct trading in the underlying
stock.
We next evaluate whether investors take more long call or long put positions. For
concreteness, in the discussion we focus on options on large underlying firms, but the findings
are not much different for options on smaller stocks. On an average trade date for large

6

The results are not sensitive to reasonable variations in the procedure for computing the averages.
We calculate this percentage in the following way. We first multiply the average daily open interest aggregated
across types of open interest and types of investors for large stocks (i.e., 0.56%) by two, since there are two
transactions for a given amount of open interest (one to open the position and the other to close it.) We then
multiply this number by 5.3 (= 252/47.5), where 47.5 is the open interest-weighted average trade dates to turnover
for large stocks which implies that 5.3 is the average number of times new positions are opened in a year.
7

11

underlying stocks, full-service customers have long call open interest that controls 0.126% of the
underlying shares while they have long put open interest that controls only 0.029% of the
underlying shares. Discount customers have an even stronger relative preference for long call
positions. Their long call open interest controls 0.031% of the underlying shares while their long
put open interest controls only 0.004% of the underlying shares. Overall, across our three types
of investors, the long call open interest is about four times larger than the long put open interest.8
This finding is somewhat surprising, because it is more costly and difficult to go short
than long in the stock market. For example, retail customers receive low interest rates on the
proceeds from their short sales, and short stock positions can only be established on an uptick.
In addition, it is sometimes difficult to borrow stocks to short, and this was especially true during
the stock market bubble. At the same time, the difference between the cost or difficulty of taking
short and long positions in the option market by buying puts or calls is not as large.9 Since we
have seen that for a typical firm open interest in the option market is quite small in comparison to
the number of shares of stock outstanding, it is easy to imagine that the difficulty of establishing
short positions directly in stocks would result in a meaningful increase in the demand for long
put relative to long call positions. However, as the results indicate, other forces, perhaps more
behavioral in nature, make calls more attractive than puts. For example, financial analysts issue
far more positive than negative recommendations on stocks. Insofar as investors want to follow
these recommendations by taking positions in the option market, they will be inclined to buy
8

For each type of investor and for each type of underlying stock the long call open interest is statistically greater
than the long put open interest at the one percent level using either a t-test for the difference in means or a Wilcoxon
signed-rank test for the difference in medians.
9
It might be thought that the obstacles to shorting in the stock market will be transferred to the option market
through the following mechanism. When an investor buys a put to take a short position on a stock, the market
maker who sells the put will typically hedge his position by shorting the stock. Consequently, it might appear that
any obstacles to shorting the stock will be transmitted through the market maker to an option market investor who
wants to buy a put. This is not the case, however, because option market makers earn higher interest rates on the
proceeds from their short sales and are able to short shares without actually locating anybody who is willing to lend
them. On the latter point see Evans, Geczy, Musto, and Reed (2003).

12

calls rather than puts. Another factor that makes it more likely that investors will buy calls rather
than puts is that long call positions are easier to understand and manage than long put positions.
Since listed options on individual equities have an American style exercise feature, investors
holding these options must continually evaluate whether they should be exercised. This decision
is far easier for calls than puts, because it is never optimal to exercise calls early, except possibly
just before the underlying stock goes ex-dividend. There is no such simplifying rule for deciding
whether to exercise a put early.
We next examine the extent to which investors short call options. Table 1 reports that
over the 1990-2001 period the three types of investors in aggregate have more short call open
interest (an average of 0.245%) than long call open interest (an average of 0.199%) on large
underlying stocks.10 Although the difference in long and short call open interest is not as great as
that between long call and long put open interest, it should be noted that to some extent market
makers manage risk by setting prices to balance the long and short demands of non-market
maker investors for each type of option. Consequently, when considering the difference between
long and short open interest for calls (or puts), it should be understood that the difference which
is observed is that which survives market maker efforts to balance the demand for long and short
positions. On the other hand, any impact of this effect is moderated by the fact that market
makers can hedge any net option positions which they hold by buying or selling the underlying
stock.
The greater propensity to sell calls short is due to the full-service customers. Since
covered call positions (i.e., long stock combined with short call positions) are heavily promoted
by the brokers who work at the full-service investment firms, the elevated level of short call open

10

This difference is statistically significant at the one percent level using either a t-test or the Wilcoxon signed-rank
test.

13

interest may be generated from the sale of covered calls. That is, an important source of the
short call open interest may be investors selling calls on stocks they already own or
simultaneously selling calls and buying the underlying stock. Brokers do not typically frame the
call sale as taking a short position in the stock. Instead, it is marketed together with the stock
position as a conservative way to take or maintain a long position or as a way for investors to
enhance the income generated from their portfolios. Brokers argue that it is conservative,
because part of the cost of buying the stock is offset by the premium received from selling the
call, or, alternatively, because any loss suffered in the stock position is wholly or partially offset
by the call premium. Brokers typically suggest that clients enter into covered call positions by
shorting calls that are 10 to 15 percent out-of-the-money. Consequently, relative to owning the
stock alone, a covered call position results in an inferior payoff only if the underlying stock
increases in value substantially. However, even in this case investors will not be losing money.
This is illustrated in Figure 1 which depicts the profit to long stock and covered call positions.
Figure 1 makes it clear that in comparison to a long position in the stock, covered call positions
(1) lose money in fewer states of the world, (2) when losing, lose less than the stock, and (3)
underperform the stock only when the stock and the covered call both have large gains. Hence,
if the elevated level of short calls for the full-service customers is largely the result of covered
call positions, the behavior of the full-service customers is consistent with loss aversion and
mental accounting which have been identified by the behavioral finance/economics literature as
important determinants of investor decision-making (see Thaler (1980), Kahneman and Tversky
(1979), Benartzi and Thaler (1999), Rabin and Thaler (2000), Barberis and Huang (2001),
Barberis, Huang, and Thaler (2003), Thaler and Johnson (1990), and Barberis, Huang, and
Santos (2001).)

14

Table 1 also reveals that over our entire time period of 1990-2001 there are no major
differences in open interest for value and growth stocks. This is true for all investor types. For
example, for the full-service customers, the average daily short call open interest as a percentage
of shares outstanding is 0.211% and 0.190%, respectively, for growth and value underlying
stocks. It is interesting to note, however, that the largest percentage difference is observed for
the short put open interest of full-service customers on growth and value stocks. In this case, the
average daily short put open interest for growth and value stocks are, respectively, 0.047% and
0.068% which corresponds to full-service customers selling relatively more puts on stocks which
might be perceived as relatively undervalued. Our discussions with option market participants
suggest that one factor that may help explain this difference is that some investors like to sell
out-of-the-money puts on stocks which they consider to be cheap. They view it as a win-win
situation which will minimize regret. These investors apparently reason that either the buyer will
not exercise and they will just keep the put premium or the buyer will exercise in which case
they will keep the premium and buy the stock at a price lower than the current price which they
already perceive to be attractive. Hence, behavioral considerations may explain the relatively
elevated level of put sales on value stocks.
We will see below that even though the open interest is similar across different types of
underlying stocks over the entire sample period, during the stock market bubble of the late 1990s
and early 2000 there were large differences in option market activity on growth and value stocks
for some investors.

15

4.2. Levels of option volume
Panels A-C of Table 2 report the average daily open volume as a percentage of shares
outstanding over the 1990-2001 period for the three investor classes and four groups of
underlying stocks. The four columns list this average for, respectively, buy call volume, buy put
volume, sell call volume, and sell put volume. The first two columns represent options bought to
establish brand new long positions (and not to close out existing short positions), while the last
two columns represent options sold to establish brand new short positions (and not to close out
existing long positions.) The first thing to note about Table 2 is that across all participants and
groups of underlying stocks there is more opening volume on the buy side than the sell side for
both calls and puts.11 At least for the calls for the full-service customers, this finding is
somewhat unexpected, since Table 1 indicates that on average there is more call short open
interest than long open interest. These findings imply that on average the full-service customers
hold long call positions for substantially less time than short call positions.
Panels D-F of Table 2 report the average number of trade days the various investor
classes hold long and short, call and put positions. Panel F of Table 2 shows that on average the
full-service customers do hold their short option positions substantially longer than their long
option positions. For example, they hold their short call positions on large stocks an average of
56 days and their long call positions on large stocks an average of only 33 days. Panel E shows
that discount customers also hold their short positions longer than their long positions, while
Panel D indicates that firm proprietary traders hold their long and short positions for roughly the
same amount of time. These findings suggest that the full-service and discount customers use
their long option positions more heavily for short-term speculation, whereas their short option
11

All of these differences are significant at the one percent level except for the cases of large value calls for firm
proprietary traders and large value puts for full-service customers. In these two cases, the differences are close to
statistically significant for both the t-test and the Wilcoxon signed-rank test.

16

positions are used more for hedging or as part of longer-term investment strategies. Once again,
no major differences are seen across growth and value stocks in the statistics reported in Table 2.
However, differences will emerge when we focus on subperiods, especially the bubble period.

4.3. Cross-sectional determinants of option market activity
We turn next to an investigation of cross-sectional determinants of option market trading.
We focus on past returns on the underlying stock over various horizons but also consider bookto-market ratios and volatility as control variables.
We want to know what motivates different types of investors to open brand new option
positions. As a result, the dependent variables that we study are open buy call volume, open sell
call volume, open buy put volume, and open sell put volume. These variables are computed by
aggregating the respective option volume type on each underlying stock on each trade date for
each investor class. As in the previous subsections, these variables are normalized so that they
represent the equivalent percentage of shares of the underlying stock traded in the option market.
The first set of explanatory variables are based on returns from the underlying stock: the same
day return (Rsameday), the return from trade dates –1 through –5 (Rweek), from trade dates –6
through –21 (Rmonth), from trade dates –22 through –63 (Rquarter), from trade dates –64
through –252 (Ryear), and from trade dates –253 through –504 (R2years). The log of the BM
ratio and the volatility of the underlying stock are also used as explanatory variables. The
volatility is computed as the annualized sample standard deviation of weekly log returns over the
last 52 weeks excluding the two most extreme values.
Although we present results for all three classes of investors, we focus our discussion on
the discount and full-service customers. We do this because it is not uncommon for firm

17

proprietary traders to place orders to facilitate the trades of their customers. Hence, it is more
difficult to interpret the results for this class of investors. For example, suppose that a client of
an investment bank wants to sell 10,000 IBM calls. It would not be unusual for one of the
bank’s proprietary traders to call the designated primary market maker for IBM options to learn
how much of the order can be filled at reasonable prices. If the firm proprietary trader discovers
that only a portion of the order can be executed, he might facilitate the execution for the client by
placing an order to buy some IBM calls.
Table 3 reports time-series averages of the intercept and slopes from daily FamaMacBeth regressions of the cross-section of option volume on the explanatory variables for large
underlying stocks over the 1990-2001 period. Autocorrelation adjusted t-statistics are provided
in parentheses.12 Panels A-C report the regression results for, respectively, firm proprietary
traders, discount customers, and full-service customers. Panel D shows the time-series average
of the daily cross-sectional standard deviations of the explanatory variables. Table 4 reports the
percentage impact on daily activity for the four types of open option volume from a positive one
standard deviation shock to all of the return variables, to the short-term return variables, and to
the long-term return variables.

4.3.1. Cross-sectional determinants of open buy call volume
For open buy call volume, discount and full-service customers have significantly positive
coefficients on the return variables for all past horizons from one week to two years.13 It appears
that these option market investors develop positive sentiment on stocks that have done well over

12

The autocorrelation adjustment is made using the method in Chopra, Lakonishok and Ritter (1992).
For the discount customers, the coefficient on the past week return is positive but only marginally significant with
a t-Statistic of 1.83.

13

18

the past and bet in the option market that the stocks will continue to increase in value.14 That is,
discount and full-service customers appear to be trend-chasers. Moreover, the impact is
economically very large. Table 4 indicates that a one standard deviation increase in past returns
at all of the past horizons increases daily open buy call volume for discount and full-service
customers by 78% and 57%, respectively. Investors are influenced not only by returns in the
past quarter, but are significantly impacted by longer horizon returns up to two years in the past.
This suggests that the sentiment about a stock developed over extended periods of time
influences investment decisions. The discount customers seem to be especially sensitive to
sentiment developed over longer horizons. A one standard deviation shock for the longer
horizons (Ryear-R2years) increases the open buy call volume of discount customers by 55%.
The response of full-service customers is milder, 24%. In summary, higher past returns increase
the willingness of individual investors to buy calls.
Consistent with our results, Barber, Odean, and Zhu (2003) show that discount and fullservice investors are also generally trend-chasers in the stock market over the past 12 quarters.
They do find, however, that full-service and discount customers are contrarians over the first
couple of quarters in the past. This finding in Barber, Odean, and Zhu (2003) might suggest that
we should also find contrarian behavior with respect to returns over the past couple of quarters.
In fact, we find trend-chasing at these horizons. There is not, however, necessarily a conflict
between the results. As explained above, since stocks are in fixed supply (at least in the shortrun), stock market studies measure relative trend-chasing among different types of investors.

14

Of course, some of the new long call positions are part of larger strategies that include other options or the
underlying stock. We doubt, however, that this is a major factor in the positive coefficient estimates. Covered calls
are the most common hedged positions involving call options, and these involve short, not long, call positions.
Therefore, hedging is not likely to have much of an impact on the results for open buy call volume.

19

Option contracts, on the other hand, can be easily created and destroyed. As a result, our
findings document absolute trend-chasing by the various investor groups.
The open buy call volume of firm proprietary traders is also positively impacted by past
returns. It does not, however, appear to be influenced by returns from the second year in the
past. As discussed above, the motivations of firm proprietary traders are more difficult to pin
down.

4.3.2. Cross-sectional determinants of open sell call volume
As was evident from Tables 1 and 2, short calls are especially important for full-service
customers. Table 3 indicates that for the full-service customers, all of the coefficients on past
returns from the open sell call volume regression are positive and significant. The coefficients
on longer term returns are highly significant. The overall impact of a one standard deviation
increase in returns is a very large 63%.
Several factors may be contributing to the positive relationship between past returns and
open sell call volume for the full-service customers. First, full-service investors may be placing
contrarian bets by selling calls on stocks that have had high past returns. We are somewhat
skeptical, however, that this is an important explanation. Since the profit to selling calls cannot
exceed the call premium, buying puts would be a more natural way for investors to make
contrarian bets. In addition, Table 2 shows that full-service customer hold their short call
positions twice as long as their long call positions. This fact suggests that, relative to long call
positions, short call positions are in general not being entered into for the purpose of short-term
speculation.

20

A second possibility is that the positive relationship between open sell call volume and
past returns comes from the full-service customers selling calls on stocks in their portfolios that
have gains. Behavioral considerations suggest that investors have stronger incentives to write
calls on stocks they hold which have gains than those they hold which have losses. Specifically,
prospect theory maintains that a gain made on an investment that has already done well does not
provide as much of an increase in utility as an equivalent gain on an investment that has done
relatively poorly. Consequently, prospect theory predicts that investors are more likely to sell
calls on their stocks that have done well than to sell calls on their stocks that have done poorly.
Indeed, selling a call on a stock that has decreased in value is particularly unattractive to a
prospect theory investor if the strike price is below the price that was originally paid for the
stock, since such a sale guarantees that the investor will end up losing money on the position.
Hence, our finding of a positive impact of past stock returns on the sale of call options is
consistent with prospect theory. Brokers also aggressively market covered calls as a
conservative way to take a long position in a stock. As a result, some of the trading behind the
positive coefficients probably comes from investors who purchase stock to bet that prices will
continue to increase while offsetting part of the purchase price by simultaneously selling calls.
In Barber, Odean, and Zhu’s (2003) sample, the average discount customer account holds
25% fewer individual stocks than the average full-service customer account. Consequently,
prospect theory would suggest a weaker relationship for the discount customers. Table 3
indicates that the relationship for the discount customers is indeed weaker. In fact, some of the
coefficients of past returns are negative for the discount customers, and the overall impact of a
one standard deviation shock to past returns is less than half of the impact for full-service
customers.

21

A third factor that may contribute to the positive relationship between open sell call
volume and past returns for the full-service customers is the desire of market makers to avoid
large inventories of either short or long call positions. If positive returns cause the full-service
customers to trend-chase by buying calls, then market makers may raise the prices of the calls in
order to avoid building up too large of an inventory of short calls. The higher call prices might
in turn induce some full-service investors to sell calls. The similarity between the regression
coefficients on the returns at various past horizons for the full-service customers in the open buy
call volume and open sell call volume regressions is consistent with the market maker price
adjustment mechanism contributing to the positive relationship between open sell call volume
and past returns. Since the full-service customers constitute the largest part of the market, the
market maker inventory mechanism described here is likely to show its effect most clearly for
the full-service customers. It should be kept in mind, however, that any impact of the
mechanism on the regression coefficients will be moderated by the fact that market makers can
manage the risk they face when holding non-zero net option positions by hedging with the
underlying stock.15

4.3.3. Cross-sectional determinants of open buy put volume
In general, the activity in puts is not very large. Recall that Table 1 indicates that for
discount and full-service customers the open interest in long puts is smaller than for any of the
other three categories. Table 3 reports that discount investors buy more (fewer) new puts on
underlying stocks that have increased (decreased) in value in the past. This is expected from

15

It should also be noted that even if the mechanism were very powerful and forced the regression coefficients to be
the same in the open buy call volume and open sell call volume regressions, it would not force the coefficients to
any particular positive or negative values. Consequently, the fact that the coefficients are reliably positive suggests
that the trend-chasing and covered call factors may be important.

22

prospect theory insofar as investors are insuring (i.e., locking in) gains on stocks that have
increased in price and refraining from insuring stocks that have losses.16 Full-service customers
also buy more (fewer) new puts on underlying stocks that have increased (decreased) in value in
the past, although clear evidence for this effect is limited to returns that are more than three
months in the past. Since discount customers are more likely to be buying naked long put
positions, it appears that there is a stronger strain of contrarian investing among them. It should,
however, be remembered that despite the cost and difficulty of shorting stocks directly, buying
puts, surprisingly, is a relatively unpopular activity.

4.3.4. Cross-sectional determinants of open sell put volume
Relative to buying puts, there is a lot of activity in selling puts. Indeed, Table 1 shows
that the discount and full-service investors have more short than long put open interest. Table 3
reveals that for these investors the coefficients for returns on the underlying stock through the
past quarter are negative while the coefficients for longer term returns are positive. This finding
is consistent with these investors believing that weakness in an underlying stock in the past
quarter is temporary. The results in Table 4 also illustrate that investors sell puts on stocks that
performed poorly in the last quarter but had strong performance in the more distant past. The
investors may be selling the puts reasoning that if the stock price increases they will just keep the
premium while if it declines further and the puts are exercised, they do not mind buying the stock
at an even lower price.17

16

This is akin to Odean’s (1998) finding that in the stock market discount customers sell winners to lock in gains
and hold losers to avoid realizing losses.
17
The purchase price for the stock will be lower if the puts are sold out-of-the-money which is typically the case.

23

4.3.5. Other variables
Finally, we note that higher volatility for the underlying stock is positively related to
more opening of all types of option positions by all types of investors. This is not surprising,
because higher volatility stocks tend to get more attention and because option premia are
increasing in volatility. Indeed, a one standard deviation shock to underlying stock volatility
increases the open buy call volume for full-service customers by 97%. Since returns over the
past two years are present in the regressions, we are hesitant to make any strong interpretation of
the coefficients on the BM variable which is highly correlated with past returns. We think it is
perhaps best simply to regard BM as a control for past returns that are not explicitly included in
our list of explanatory variables.

5. Investor behavior in the option market during the stock market bubble

This section of the paper explores changes in option market activity over time by the
three classes of investors with a special emphasis on the stock market bubble of the late 1990s
and early 2000. We will compare option market activity by the different investor classes during
the bubble period with their activity before and after the bubble. This will enable us to explore
how investors changed their behavior during the bubble and to see how different investor classes
might have contributed to the bubble. In order to simplify the discussion, we define 1990-1994
as the pre-bubble period, 1995-1997 as the beginning of the bubble, 1998-March 2000 as the
height of the bubble, and April 2000-2001 as the post-bubble period. Figure 2 plots the price to
book ratio of the Russell 1000 growth stocks divided by the price to book ratio of the Russell
1000 value stocks from 1990 through 2001. This ratio peaked at the height of the bubble,

24

suggesting excessive valuation of growth stocks relative to value stocks. This plot can be seen to
increase throughout the bubble and to peak at the end of the period which we have defined as the
height of the bubble. It then declines sharply in the post-bubble period.

5.1. Option market activity through time
Table 5 reports the average daily open volume as a percentage of shares outstanding for
each of the three investor types and subperiods of 1990-2001. The open buy call volume for the
discount investors approximately doubles from the pre-bubble period to the beginning of the
bubble and increases by about another 50 percent from the beginning of the bubble to the height
of the bubble. It then falls by a factor of three from the height of the bubble to the post-bubble
period. This pattern suggests that the least sophisticated investors in the market substantially
increased their option market speculation that stock prices would rise throughout the bubble and
then dramatically cut their option market bets that stock prices would increase after the bubble
burst. This evidence is consistent with these investors acting as trend-chasers rather than
contrarians. By contrast, the full-service customer open buy call volume is stable from the prebubble to the beginning of the bubble period and then falls a bit at the height of the bubble and
more substantially in the post-bubble period. Hence, it appears that the full-service customers
did not increase their option market speculation that stock prices would increase during the
bubble period, but that they may have scaled back their normal level of positive option market
bets during the post-bubble period. Finally, the bubble appears to be essentially a non-event for
the firm proprietary traders. Their open buy call volume gradually decreased throughout the four
subperiods.

25

The discount customers increased their activity across the other types of option positions
as well. They increased their selling of calls to open new positions. This may correspond to an
increase in covered call positions which can be viewed as a conservative way of taking a long
position on a stock. However, the main interest of the discount customers is in buying calls
which constitutes 56% of their option activity during the bubble. We conjecture that this activity
of discount customers contributed to an increase in stock prices as market makers who sold the
calls to the discount customer hedged their positions by buying stocks. It may well be the case
that discount customers were buying stocks directly as well, thus contributing further to the
bubble.
One of the most interesting results in Table 5 relates to the put activity of full-service
customers. There is a large literature on the difficulties of establishing short positions in the
stock market. Ofek and Richardson (2003) even suggest that short sales constraints were a major
contributor to the stock market bubble. Our results, however, reveal that at the height of the
speculative bubble option market investors had no special appetite for short positions. We see no
major increase in volume that opens long put positions. Apparently, in such unique periods it is
not easy to be contrarian.
The regressions reported in Table 3 above indicate that when the entire sample period
from 1990-2001 is studied all three investor classes appear to be trend-chasers insofar as they
initiate more (fewer) new long call positions when the underlying stock price increases
(decreases). Table 6 re-runs the open buy call volume regressions for the three investor groups
for each of the four subperiods of 1990-2001, and Table 7 reports the percentage impact of
positive one standard deviation shocks to past returns of different horizons.

26

For the discount and full-service investors (Panels B and C of Table 6) the results for the
various subperiods are less consistent than the results for the entire sample. Many of the
coefficients on past returns are negative. For example, in the last subperiod just the coefficients
for the longer horizons, Ryear and R2years, are positive. Table 7 shows that overall, a one
standard deviation shock to past returns had a positive impact on activity. However, for the nonbubble subperiods, this result is for the most part driven by investor trend-chasing longer horizon
returns. For shorter horizon returns, investors sometimes are contrarian.
The results for the height of the bubble period definitely stand out. The coefficient on
past returns are all positive and highly significant for discount and full-service customers.
Discount customer showed especially strong trend-chasing behavior. For them, the magnitude of
the coefficients are quite a bit larger than when the regression is run for the entire period, and a
one standard deviation shock to past returns during the bubble period resulted in an 154%
increase in trading activity. Noteworthy, is the huge impact on activity related to longer horizon
returns (Ryear-R2year), where a one standard deviation shock resulted in almost doubling the
activity. The results strongly suggest that the least sophisticated investors contributed to the runup in prices of stocks that performed well in the past, which during this period of time happened
to be growth companies.
The full-service customers, based on the results in Table 5, did not increase their activity
in options during the bubble. However, Table 6 and Table 7 reveal that these more sophisticated
investors did not escape the frenzy of the bubble completely. The full-service customers
definitely chased the better performing stocks and a one positive standard deviation shock to past
returns resulted in almost a doubling of their buys of calls to open new positions.

27

A dramatic change in the behavior of the discount and full-service investors is observed
after the bubble. The overall impact of past returns is relatively small, and investors became
somewhat contrarian with respect to short term returns (up to one quarter in the past.)
Interestingly, the impact of longer term returns is still significant and relatively large, although
much smaller than during the bubble period.
The motives of firm proprietary traders are more difficult to sort out. As discussed above
part of their activity is related to facilitating the trades of their larger clients. The results in Table
6 and Table 7 show that the bubble did not impact their behavior in terms of chasing past
winners.
Table 8 runs regressions like those in Table 6 but with open sell call volume rather than
open buy call volume as the dependent variable. For the discount and full-service customers the
coefficients on the past return variables are substantially larger during the height of the bubble
than during any of the other three subperiods. This may be due to investors writing calls on
appreciated stocks that they already owned or opening “conservative” new long positions by
buying the underlying stock and covering it by simultaneously shorting calls.18 It is interesting
to note that there is much more consistency in the positive sign for the coefficients of the return
variables in Table 8 than in Table 6. This is probably because full-service customers, due to
behavioral influences such as caring about the price at which they bought an underlying stock,
like to write call options on appreciated stocks. Therefore, the willingness of full-service
customers to write call options is less period specific than buying call options. For example,
whereas (from Table 7) a one standard deviation positive shock to returns results in only a 15%
increase in open buy call volume for full-service customers during the post bubble period, such a

18

It is possible that another factor is market makers raising call prices in order to manage inventories which results
in call sales.

28

shock produces a 46% increase in open buy sell volume for these customers after the bubble.
The long call results in Table 6, on the other hand, are probably more closely tied to the
sentiment of the full-service customers which varied over the subperiods. On the other hand, in
Table 8 we see less consistency in the positive signs for the coefficients for the return variables
for the discount customers. This may be because discount customers are relatively less likely to
own the underlying stock, and, thus are less affected by the past performance of the stock. For
the firm proprietary traders there is no clear difference between the coefficients on the past return
variables during the height of the bubble and during the other periods.

5.2. Value versus growth
Since the speculation during the stock market bubble of the late 1990s and early 2000
was concentrated in growth stocks, we next investigate the trading by the three investor classes
of options written on large growth and large value stocks in the four subperiods from 1990-2001.
As above, large growth stocks are defined as those in the bottom BM ratio quartile among the
500 largest market capitalization firms. Large value stocks are defined as those in the top BM
ratio quartile among the 500 largest market capitalization firms.
Table 9 contains for each investor group and each of the four subperiods the average
daily open volume as a percentage of shares outstanding separately for underlying growth and
value stocks. Panels B and E of Table 9 shows that for the discount customers, for all of the
subperiods, the most important activity is buying calls. The activity in the other three types of
option positions is much smaller. Discount customer open buy volume for calls on growth
stocks doubled from the pre-bubble to the beginning of the bubble periods and doubled again
during the height of the bubble. It then dropped by nearly a factor of four from the height of the

29

bubble to the post-bubble period. These results are consistent with discount customers chasing
returns and perhaps contributing to the bubble. Interestingly, their activity drops substantially
when the markets start to correct. A natural way to interpret this behavior is that the discount
customers are strategy-chasing as in Barberis and Shleifer (2003). That is, they buy calls on
growth stocks as long as this produces profits, but switch away from the strategy once it becomes
unprofitable.
Panel E of Table 9, on the other hand, indicates that discount customers did not increase
their activity in value stocks during the bubble period. As can be seen in Panel D of Table 5,
according to the Russell indexes, value stocks suffered their worst performance relative to
growth stocks during the bubble period. Thus, the option market evidence is that during the
bubble period discount customers dramatically increased their speculation that underlying
growth stocks would increase in price without increasing at all their speculation that underlying
value stocks would increase in price. This activity probably contributed to mispricing of value
stocks relative to growth stocks and to the bubble. It is also interesting to note from Panel B of
Table 9 that during the height of the bubble discount customers markedly increased their selling
of calls on growth stocks. Some of these call sales may correspond to covered calls which, as
discussed above, are marketed as conservative long positions in stocks. However, the main
activity of discount customers during the bubble was in buying calls. Their call selling activity
was small on a relative basis. Although not of great economic significance, a small population of
discount customers behaved as contrarians as evidenced by the small jump in put buying activity
on underlying growth stocks during the bubble. However, it seems clear that overall discount
customers were not betting that stock prices would decline.

30

Full-service customers, at least relative to discount customers, show a relatively mild
increase in buy call activity on underlying growth stocks during the bubble. The volume
increased from 0.00382% in the pre-bubble period to 0.00482% during the height of the bubble.
The increase in the activity in other options was even smaller. The results for options on value
stocks are quite different. Relative to the earlier periods, there is a noticeable reduction in buy
call activity during the bubble. A similar pattern is observed for other options as well. However,
for options on both value and growth stocks, there is much less activity in the post-bubble period
when the market underwent a substantial correction.
Contrary to the behavior of discount and full-service customers, for firm proprietary
traders the bubble period seems to be a non-event in terms of their option activity. In summary,
discount customers were most impacted by the dramatic rise in the stock market and
substantially increased their activity in growth stocks which performed especially well during
that period. Full-service customers responded in a similar fashion to discount customers,
although their response was much milder. Neither of these investors types found value stocks of
interest during the bubble, and, thus, decreased their activity in this segment of the market.

5.3. Cross-sectional determinants
We have seen that the activity in options on value stocks dropped for full-service
customers during the bubble and showed little change for discount customers. Tables 10 and 11
report the results of regressions run during the bubble period for underlying value and growth
stocks when open buy call volume is the dependent variable. These tables enable us to judge the
extent of trend-chasing of value and growth companies. The coefficients in Table 10 are positive
and generally highly significant for open buy call volume on growth stocks for both discount and

31

full-service customers for past returns of all horizons. The results for value stocks are in general
similar, although the coefficients are less significant and sometimes even negative.
Table 11 shows that a one standard deviation shock to past returns had a huge impact on
the activity of options on growth stocks for discount customers with a jump of 211% in open buy
call volume. The corresponding statistic for options on value companies is 50%. Full-service
customers also showed substantial trend-chasing activity on options of growth stocks, 109%,
whereas the impact on options of value stocks was 51%. These results are consistent with the
notion that individuals were engaged in substantial trend-chasing across the board. This trendchasing, however, was not homogenous across investor types and stock characteristics. Trendchasing was much more pronounced by discount customers who tend to be less sophisticated on
average. In addition, past price changes have a bigger impact on growth companies which in our
study are defined by book-to-market (BM). According to Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1994) companies with low BM are companies that had excellent past performance over a long
period of time. They excelled in their operating performance as well as the returns they
generated for their shareholders. The group also includes companies with shorter records and
extreme growth expectations. Thus, BM can be viewed as a sentiment proxy. Investors during
the bubble were chasing the past returns of companies with positive investment sentiment.
Finally, firm proprietary traders, unlike the other investors, did not particularly favor
growth stocks with high returns. The coefficients for both growth and value stocks are in general
positive and significant in Table 10. Table 11 reveals that if anything firm proprietary traders
were chasing to a greater extent value companies with positive past returns. So, at least relative
to the other investors, the firm proprietary traders exhibited somewhat contrarian behavior –
although, as discussed above, their motives are difficult to judge.

32

We also run regressions with open sell call volume as the dependent variable, and the
results are reported in Table 12. From our previous results we know that full-service customers
are particularly active in selling calls, and they tend to sell calls on stocks that have increased in
price. Hence, we do not expect to find a big difference in sensitivity to past returns for call
options written on value versus growth stocks. We conjecture that what counts more is whether
an investor’s stock holding resulted in a gain or loss and not so much the overall market’s
perception about the stock. The results in the table are consistent with this conjecture. When the
coefficient estimates reported in the table for full-service customers are converted into impacts
on trading activity from shocks to the return variables, we find that a one standard deviation
shock to all past return variables results for the full-service customers in a 104% versus a not
much different 84% change in call options sold for, respectively, growth and value stocks.

6. Conclusion

Despite the tremendous amount of research over the past three decades into methods for
computing the prices and hedge ratios of stock options, very little is known about how investors
actually trade these securities. This paper takes advantage of a unique and detailed data set of
open interest and volume for all CBOE traded options to investigate the option market behavior
of firm proprietary traders, customers of discount brokers, and customers of full-service brokers.
We examine both the entire period covered by the data set, 1990-2001, and also subperiods with
a focus on the stock market bubble of the late 1990s and early 2000. Although we do not
formally investigate the factors that produce the empirical regularities that we document, we do
make some suggestions about what might be lying behind our results.

33

We find that long put positions are comparatively unimportant. In particular, long put
open interest is only one quarter as large as long call open interest. We expected to see relatively
more long put positions because of the cost and difficulty of taking short positions directly in
individual stocks. We also find that long call positions are less prevalent among our three
investor types than short call positions. The popularity of short calls may result from their use in
covered call position in which they are held together with long positions in underlying stocks.
Covered call positions are heavily promoted by brokers as a conservative way to undertake or
maintain long stock positions. Typically, the investor shorts a call that is 10 to 15 percent out-ofthe-money. In this case, relative to owning the stock alone, a covered call position produces a
better outcome when the stock price declines or increases modestly. It yields an inferior
outcome only when the underlying stock increases in value substantially. As a result, the large
number of observed short call positions is consistent with loss aversion and narrow framing
which have been identified by the behavioral finance and economics literature as important
aspects of investor behavior.
Another interesting finding is that for discount and full-service investors short put open
interest is at least 50% higher than long put open interest. Furthermore, short put open interest is
especially high for value stocks. This result is consistent with some contrarian investors being
attracted to short put positions on stocks that they believe are trading at attractive prices. Short
put positions are typically established out-of-the-money, so that the strike price is below the
current stock price. Investors who undertake these short put positions may view them as a winwin situation. If the stock stays above the strike price, the seller just keeps the put premium. If
the stock goes below the strike price and the counter-party exercises the put, then the seller keeps
the premium and acquires the stock by paying the strike price which is lower than the price of the

34

stock at the time the short put position was established. Being forced to buy the stock at this
lower strike price, however, is not painful for the investor, because he already believed the stock
was attractive at the higher price at which it was trading when he originally sold the put.
We also find that firm proprietary traders, customers of discount brokers, and customers
of full-service brokers all display trend-chasing behavior in their purchases of calls to open new
positions. That is, all three types of investors purchase more calls to open new positions when
the past returns on the underlying stocks are higher. Furthermore, the trend-chasing behavior is
not only in response to returns over the last few weeks or months but rather extends as far back
as two years into the past. This fact suggests that investor sentiment about stocks is established
over long horizons. Our results also provide an interesting complement to stock market studies,
both because our tests measure absolute rather than relative trend-chasing and also because the
stock market studies have been inconclusive.
Finally, we assess option trading during subperiods of 1990 through 2001. We find that
the volume of calls purchased to open new positions by our least sophisticated investors
increases substantially during the stock market bubble from 1998 through March 2000.
Furthermore, this increase was a result of flocking to options on growth stocks. In fact, these
investors increased their option volume on growth stocks by a factor of four at the height of the
bubble but did not increase their activity in value stocks at all. In addition, during the bubble
period discount customers became much more sensitive to past price changes and thus exhibited
much stronger trend-chasing behavior than in other periods. The more sophisticated full-service
customers, on the other hand, did not increase their overall activity in options during the bubble,
although they did moderately increase their activity in call options on growth companies and
decrease their activity on value companies. Despite the fact that the bubble had little impact on

35

the overall level of full-service customer option activity, it did significantly alter the trendchasing behavior of these investors. Specifically, their appetite for buying calls on strongly
performing stocks increased substantially. In contrast to the other investors, the bubble was a
non-event for the firm proprietary traders in terms of their option market activity. Finally, it is
quite interesting that none of the investor groups showed any substantial increase in put
purchases during the bubble period. Such purchases would have been expected if short sales
constraints in the stock market were preventing investors from betting against stocks which they
viewed as overvalued. It appears that even when appropriate securities are available, investors
have a hard time mustering the courage to bet against a stock market bubble.

36

References

Barber, Brad M., Terrance Odean, and Ning Zhu, 2003, Systematic noise, working paper,
University of California.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Ming Huang, 2001, Mental accounting, loss aversion, and individual
stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 1247-1292.
Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Tano Santos, 2001, Prospect theory and asset prices,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1-53.
Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Richard Thaler, 2003, Individual Preferences, Monetary
Gambles and the Equity Premium, Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, Style investing, Journal of Financial
Economics 68, 161-199.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard Thaler, 1999, Risk aversion or myopia? Choices in repeated
gambles and retirement investments, Management Science 45, 364-381.
Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes, 1972, The pricing of options and corporate liabilities,
Journal of Political Economy 81, 637-659.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Stefan Nagel, 2003, Hedge funds and the technology bubble,
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Chopra, Navin, Josef Lakonishok and Jay R. Ritter, 1992, Measuring abnormal performance: Do
stocks overreact?, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 235-268.
Evans, Richard, Chris Geczy, David Musto, and Adam Reed, 2003, Failure is an option:
Impediments to short selling and option prices, working paper, University of
Pennsylvania.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2001, What makes investors trade? Journal of Finance
56, 589-616.
Grinblatt, Mark, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1995, Momentum investment strategies,
portfolio performance, and herding: A study of mutual fund behavior, American
Economic Review 85, 1088-1105.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, 1979, Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under
risk, Econometrica 47, 263-291.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1992, The impact of institutional trading
on stock prices, Journal of Financial Economics 32, 23-43.

37

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1994, Contrarian investment,
extrapolation, and risk, Journal of Finance 49, 1541-1578.
LaPorta, Rafael, Josef Lakonishok, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1997, Good news for
value stocks: Further evidence on market efficiency, Journal of Finance 62, 859-874.
Lee, Charles M. C., and Mark J. Ready, 1991, Inferring trade direction from intraday data.
Journal of Finance 46, 733-746.
Mahani, Reza S., and Allen M. Poteshman, 2003, Overextrapolation of stock growth rates and
misperception of equilibrium stock prices by unsophisticated investors: Evidence from
the option market, working paper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Merton, Robert C., 1973, Theory of rational option pricing, Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science 4, 141-183.
Nofsinger, John, and Richard Sias, 1999, Herding and feedback trading by institutional and
individual investors, Journal of Finance 54, 2263-2295.
Odean, Terrance, 1998, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? Journal of Finance 53,
1775-1798.
Ofek, Eli, and Matthew Richardson, 2003, Dotcom mania: The rise and fall of internet stock
prices, Journal of Finance 58, 1113-1137.
Pan, Jun, and Allen M. Poteshman, 2003, The information in option volume for stock prices,
working paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign.
Poteshman, Allen M., and Vitaly Serbin, 2003, Clearly irrational financial market behavior:
Evidence from the early exercise of exchange traded stock options, Journal of Finance
58, 37-70.
Rabin, Matthew, and Richard Thaler, 2000, Anomalies: Risk aversion, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 15, 219-232.
Thaler, Richard, 1980, Toward a positive theory of consumer choice, Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 1, 39-60.
Thaler, Richard, and Eric Johnson, 1990, Gambling with the house money and trying to break
even: The effects of prior outcomes on risky choice, Management Science 36, 643-660.
Wermers, Russ, 1999, Mutual fund herding and the impact on stock prices, Journal of
Finance 54, 581-622.

38

Table 1
Average Daily Open Interest as a Percentage of Shares Outstanding, 1990-2001
This table reports the average daily open interest of individual stock options traded at the Chicago Board Options
Exchange (CBOE) during 1990-2001. The data were obtained directly from the CBOE and include information on
the type of investor behind each transaction. Here, three types of investors, firm proprietary traders, customers of
discount brokers and customers of full-service brokers, are analyzed. All refers to all stocks with CBOE traded
option contracts and available stock price data on CRSP. Large refers to the largest 500 market capitalization stocks
in the CRSP universe at the end of the previous calendar quarter. Large growth (value) stocks are those in the
lowest (highest) book-to-market equity ratio quartile of the 500 largest stocks based on the ratios at the end of each
quarter. For the calculation of average, average daily delta-adjusted open interest as a percentage of shares
outstanding is first calculated for each underlying stock. Then, for each calendar month, market capitalization
weighted average daily open interests are calculated over each group for each investor type. Finally, the average
across all calendar months during 1990-2001 is calculated and reported in this table.

Type of Open Interest
Underlying Stocks Long Call Long Put Short Call Short Put
Panel A: Firm Proprietary Traders
All
0.041%
0.014%
0.030%
0.010%
Large
0.042%
0.014%
0.031%
0.010%
Large Growth
0.044%
0.015%
0.032%
0.011%
Large Value
0.039%
0.019%
0.041%
0.011%
Panel B: Discount Customers
All
0.032%
0.004%
0.025%
0.009%
Large
0.031%
0.004%
0.023%
0.008%
Large Growth
0.039%
0.004%
0.027%
0.009%
Large Value
0.032%
0.004%
0.024%
0.010%
Panel C: Full-Service Customers
All
0.130%
0.031%
0.195%
0.048%
Large
0.126%
0.029%
0.191%
0.046%
Large Growth
0.134%
0.032%
0.211%
0.047%
Large Value
0.159%
0.036%
0.190%
0.068%

Table 2
Average Daily Open Volume as a Percentage of Shares Outstanding and Average Turnover
Time in Trade Dates, 1990-2001
This table reports the average daily trading volume and average turnover time of individual stock options traded at
the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) during 1990-2001. Only those transactions that are used to open new
positions are included in this table. The data were obtained directly from the CBOE and include information on the
type of investor behind each transaction. Here, three types of investors, firm proprietary traders, customers of
discount brokers and customers of full-service brokers, are analyzed. All refers to all stocks with CBOE traded
option contracts and available stock price data on CRSP. Large refers to the largest 500 market capitalization stocks
in the CRSP universe at the end of the previous calendar quarter. Large growth (value) stocks are those in the
lowest (highest) book-to-market equity ratio quartile of the 500 largest stocks based on the ratios at the end of each
quarter. For the calculation of average, average daily delta-adjusted open trading volume as a percentage of shares
outstanding is first calculated for each underlying stock. Then, for each calendar month, market capitalization
weighted average daily open trading volumes are calculated over each group for each investor type. Finally, the
average across all calendar months during 1990-2001 is calculated and reported in this table. The average trade
dates to turnover is calculated by simply dividing the average daily open interest by the average daily open trading
volume.

Underlying Stocks
Buy Call
Buy Put
Sell Call
Sell Put
Panel A: Firm Proprietary Trader Average Daily Open Volume
All
0.00078%
0.00032%
0.00065%
0.00026%
Large
0.00077%
0.00032%
0.00064%
0.00026%
Large Growth
0.00070%
0.00032%
0.00057%
0.00028%
Large Value
0.00084%
0.00038%
0.00079%
0.00027%
Panel B: Discount Customers Average Daily Open Volume
All
0.00071%
0.00016%
0.00032%
0.00012%
Large
0.00067%
0.00016%
0.00029%
0.00011%
Large Growth
0.00085%
0.00017%
0.00036%
0.00014%
Large Value
0.00056%
0.00014%
0.00026%
0.00010%
Panel C: Full-Service Customers Average Daily Open Volume
All
0.00407%
0.00137%
0.00360%
0.00109%
Large
0.00383%
0.00130%
0.00339%
0.00102%
Large Growth
0.00391%
0.00133%
0.00359%
0.00107%
Large Value
0.00443%
0.00133%
0.00357%
0.00125%
Panel D: Firm Proprietary Trader Average Trade Dates to Turnover
All
53
43
46
38
Large
55
44
48
38
Large Growth
63
46
56
40
Large Value
46
51
51
43
Panel E: Discount Customers Average Trade Dates to Turnover
All
45
23
79
73
Large
46
23
81
71
Large Growth
46
22
73
63
Large Value
56
32
92
105
Panel F: Full-Service Customers Average Trade Dates to Turnover
All
32
23
54
44
Large
33
23
56
45
Large Growth
34
24
59
44
Large Value
36
27
53
54

Table 3
Large Stock Regressions 1990-2001
This table reports the time-series average coefficients from Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions of daily
trading volume on various independent variables for large underlying stocks during 1990-2001. Large underlying
stocks are the largest 500 market capitalization stocks in the CRSP universe at the end of the previous calendar
quarter. Explanatory variables are returns of underlying stocks, the same day return (Rsameday), the return from
trade dates –1 through –5 (Rweek), from trade dates –6 through –21 (Rmonth), from trade dates –22 through –63
(Rquarter), from trade dates –64 through –252 (Ryear), and from trade dates –253 through –504 (R2years). In
addition, the log of the book-to-market equity ratio and the volatility of the underlying stock are also used as
explanatory variables. Autocorrelation adjusted t-statistics are provided in parentheses. In Panels A-C, the
regression results for, respectively, firm proprietary traders, customers of discount brokers and customers of fullservice brokers, are reported. In Panel D, the time-series average of the daily cross-sectional standard deviations of
the explanatory variables is reported.
Independent Variables
Dependent Variable Intercept Rsameday Rweek Rmonth Rquarter Ryear
Panel A: Firm Proprietary Traders
Open Buy Call
-0.0002
0.0074
0.0048 0.0023 0.0011 0.0005
Volume
(-1.69)
(5.03)
(4.85)
(3.96)
(2.71)
(3.20)

R2years ln(B/M) Volatility
0.0000
(-0.09)

0.0002
(4.08)

0.0048
(5.69)

Open Sell Call
Volume

-0.0001
(-1.26)

0.0064
(4.78)

0.0025
(2.55)

0.0016
(2.81)

0.0010
(3.03)

0.0007
(5.39)

0.0002
(2.43)

0.0002
(5.18)

0.0038
(6.02)

Open Buy Put
Volume

-0.0001
(-1.39)

-0.0057
(-8.04)

-0.0017
(-6.23)

0.0000
(-0.01)

0.0001
(0.80)

0.0001
(1.63)

0.0002
(3.82)

0.0001
(5.54)

0.0019
(7.21)

Open Sell Put
Volume

-0.0001
(-1.76)

-0.0074
(-11.36)

0.0001
(3.83)

0.0001
(2.51)

0.0000
(4.09)

0.0014
(9.38)

Open Buy Call
Volume

-0.0013
(-16.40)

-0.0015 -0.0003 0.0000
(-6.47) (-1.63)
(0.49)
Panel B: Discount Customers
0.0023
0.0007 0.0006 0.0006
(4.11)
(1.83)
(2.59)
(3.94)

0.0008
(9.49)

0.0005
(8.49)

0.0000
(0.65)

0.0062
(24.17)

Open Sell Call
Volume

-0.0007
(-26.70)

0.0066
(22.79)

0.0009
(6.25)

-0.0002
(-1.89)

-0.0002
(-2.98)

0.0001
(3.12)

0.0002
(7.03)

0.0000
(2.18)

0.0037
(33.10)

Open Buy Put
Volume

-0.0003
(-11.98)

-0.0005
(-3.08)

0.0004
(4.12)

0.0002
(2.69)

0.0001
(1.75)

0.0002
(7.83)

0.0001
(5.88)

0.0000
(-1.96)

0.0014
(20.13)

Open Sell Put
Volume

-0.0003
(-20.65)

0.0001
(4.44)

0.0001
(7.36)

0.0000
(0.33)

0.0015
(26.96)

Open Buy Call
Volume

-0.0048
(-13.68)

-0.0023 -0.0008 -0.0004 -0.0001
(-17.60) (-11.24) (-8.54) (-5.04)
Panel C: Full-Service Customers
0.0411
0.0089 0.0050 0.0030
(8.23)
(2.64)
(2.95)
(2.53)

0.0021
(4.98)

0.0010
(4.11)

0.0005
(4.80)

0.0360
(18.28)

Open Sell Call
Volume

-0.0035
(-13.43)

0.0496
(14.20)

0.0145
(5.61)

0.0051
(3.70)

0.0018
(2.15)

0.0015
(4.45)

0.0011
(4.55)

0.0003
(4.02)

0.0285
(19.02)

Open Buy Put
Volume

-0.0015
(-14.28)

-0.0278
(-17.94)

-0.0031
(-3.69)

-0.0004
(-0.53)

0.0003
(0.95)

0.0009
(7.32)

0.0006
(5.32)

0.0002
(4.89)

0.0117
(21.25)

Open Sell Put
Volume

-0.0016
(-10.01)

-0.0188 -0.0061 -0.0019 -0.0005 0.0002
(-15.35) (-5.61) (-2.74) (-1.65)
(1.75)
Panel D: Average Standard Deviation
0.0224
0.0488 0.0843 0.1344 0.2832

0.0007
(5.25)

0.0002
(5.93)

0.0118
(18.26)

0.3335

0.8200

0.1027

Table 4
Percentage Impact on Daily Volume of One Standard Deviation Shock to Independent
Variables, Large Stocks 1990-2001
This table reports the percentage impact on daily volume of one standard deviation shocks to independent variables.
The numbers in this table are based on the Fama-MacBeth regressions results reported in Table III. The impact is
calculated as the sum of the products of coefficients and standard deviations for all relevant independent variables
divided by the average daily trading volume for each investor type.

Dependent Vars. Receiving Positive One Std. Dev. Shock
Rweek-R2years Rweek-Rquarter
Ryear-R2years
Panel A: Firm Proprietary Traders
Open Buy Call Volume
93.99
74.34
19.65
Volume
Variable

Open Sell Call Volume

102.38

60.55

41.82

Open Buy Put Volume

7.42

-22.34

29.76

Open Sell Put Volume
Open Buy Call Volume

-8.63
-35.36
Panel B: Discount Customers
78.28
23.46

26.73
54.83

Open Sell Call Volume

30.41

1.28

29.13

Open Buy Put Volume

77.86

25.58

52.28

Open Sell Put Volume
Open Buy Call Volume

-34.82
-77.97
Panel C: Full-Service Customers
57.18
32.93

43.15
24.26

Open Sell Call Volume

63.22

40.54

22.68

Open Buy Put Volume

24.36

-10.53

34.90

Open Sell Put Volume

-23.22

-52.16

28.95

Table 5
Large Stock Average Daily Open Volume as a Percentage of Shares Outstanding and
Stock Index Returns for Subperiods of 1990-2001
Panels A through C of this table reports the average daily trading volume of individual stock options traded at the
Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) for large underlying stocks during subperiods of 1990-2001. Only those
transactions that are used to open new positions are included in this table. The data were obtained directly from the
CBOE and include information on the type of investor behind each transaction. Three types of investors, firm
proprietary traders, customers of discount brokers and customers of full-service brokers, are analyzed. The large
underlying stocks are the largest 500 market capitalization stocks in the CRSP universe at the end of the previous
calendar quarter. For the calculation of average, daily average delta-adjusted open trading volume as a percentage of
shares outstanding is first calculated for each underlying stock. Then, for each calendar month, daily market
capitalization weighted average open trading volumes are calculated over each group for each investor type. Finally,
the average across all calendar months during each subperiod is calculated and reported in this table. Panel D
reports the annualized return for the S&P 500 index, the Russell 1000 growth index, and the Russell 1000 value
index for the subperiods. The data on the S&P 500 index are from Standards and Poor’s, and the data on the Russell
indexes are from the Frank Russell Company.

Type of Open Volume
Buy Call
Buy Put
Sell Call
Panel A: Firm Proprietary Traders
1990-1994
0.00091% 0.00034% 0.00078%
1995-1997
0.00077% 0.00024% 0.00062%
1998 - March 2000 0.00065% 0.00028% 0.00055%
April 2000 - 2001
0.00050% 0.00042% 0.00041%
Panel B: Discount Customers
1990-1994
0.00047% 0.00014% 0.00018%
1995-1997
0.00082% 0.00018% 0.00029%
1998 - March 2000 0.00119% 0.00023% 0.00049%
April 2000 - 2001
0.00034% 0.00009% 0.00034%
Panel C: Full-Service Customers
1990-1994
0.00432% 0.00141% 0.00388%
1995-1997
0.00433% 0.00137% 0.00353%
1998 - March 2000 0.00380% 0.00125% 0.00316%
April 2000 - 2001
0.00165% 0.00095% 0.00207%
Panel D: Average Annualized Return
S&P 500
Growth
Value
1990-1994
8.34%
8.92%
8.23%
1995-1997
27.12%
26.34%
27.40%
1998 - March 2000
20.67%
30.33%
9.81%
April 2000 - 2001
-13.98%
-31.50%
0.31%
Time Period

Sell Put
0.00029%
0.00020%
0.00020%
0.00035%
0.00006%
0.00011%
0.00021%
0.00011%
0.00103%
0.00104%
0.00114%
0.00078%

Table 6
Large Stock Regressions with Open Buy Call Volume as Dependent Variable for
Subperiods of 1990-2001
This table reports the time-series average coefficients from Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions of daily open
buy call option trading volume on various independent variables for large underlying stocks during subperiods of
1990-2001. Large underlying stocks are the largest 500 market capitalization stocks in the CRSP universe at the end
of the previous calendar quarter. Explanatory variables are returns of underlying stocks, the same day return
(Rsameday), the return from trade dates –1 through –5 (Rweek), from trade dates –6 through –21 (Rmonth), from
trade dates –22 through –63 (Rquarter), from trade dates –64 through –252 (Ryear), and from trade dates –253
through –504 (R2years). In addition, the log of the BM ratio and the volatility of the underlying stock are also used
as explanatory variables. Autocorrelation adjusted t-statistics are provided in parentheses. In Panels A-C, the
regression results for, respectively, firm proprietary traders, customers of discount brokers and customers of fullservice brokers, are reported.

Intercept Rsameday

R2years

ln(B/M)

Volatility

1990-1994

-0.00029
(-0.86)

Independent Variables
Rweek
Rmonth Rquarter
Ryear
Panel A: Firm Proprietary Traders
0.01120 0.00758 0.00362 0.00165 0.00078
(3.57)
(3.41)
(2.77)
(1.78)
(2.01)

0.00006
(0.27)

0.00030
(3.61)

0.00655
(3.31)

1995-1997

-0.00044
(-4.66)

0.00595
(2.87)

0.00429
(3.97)

0.00193
(3.98)

0.00103
(2.74)

0.00034
(2.20)

-0.00033
(-2.68)

0.00004
(0.74)

0.00498
(9.61)

1998 - March 2000

-0.00011
(-1.36)

0.00461
(2.53)

0.00202
(2.74)

0.00107
(2.48)

0.00056
(3.17)

0.00048
(3.04)

0.00016
(1.41)

0.00015
(2.60)

0.00348
(6.38)

April 2000 - 2001

0.00004
(0.35)

0.00239
(3.00)

0.00030
(6.36)

0.00014
(1.90)

0.00000
(-0.06)

0.00141
(6.68)

1990-1994

-0.00064
(-13.63)

0.00215
(2.99)

0.00124 0.00041 0.00023
(4.36)
(2.06)
(2.04)
Panel B: Discount Customers
0.00033 0.00063 0.00064
(0.65)
(2.15)
(3.17)

0.00021
(3.30)

0.00004
(0.76)

-0.00003
(-2.24)

0.00457
(20.95)

1995-1997

-0.00164
(-18.13)

0.00212
(1.51)

-0.00040
(-0.42)

-0.00060
(-1.20)

-0.00030
(-0.76)

0.00073
(5.06)

0.00060
(6.09)

0.00011
(3.14)

0.00940
(20.84)

1998 - March 2000

-0.00283
(-10.32)

0.00615
(4.07)

0.00401
(4.21)

0.00257
(4.43)

0.00206
(8.26)

0.00248
(9.65)

0.00132
(7.51)

-0.00007
(-1.95)

0.00892
(12.10)

April 2000 - 2001

-0.00034
(-8.60)

-0.00196
(-4.66)

0.00030
(7.85)

0.00004
(3.38)

0.00153
(12.36)

1990-1994

-0.00519
(-6.78)

0.05502
(5.15)

-0.00068 -0.00025 -0.00002 0.00021
(-3.55)
(-2.25)
(-0.40)
(8.01)
Panel C: Full-Service Customers
0.01482 0.00937 0.00630 0.00309
(2.01)
(2.53)
(2.40)
(3.38)

0.00092
(1.71)

0.00092
(4.24)

0.04506
(10.92)

1995-1997

-0.00616
(-20.70)

0.04728
(7.06)

0.00586
(1.31)

0.00142
(0.59)

-0.00084
(-0.48)

-0.00030
(-0.68)

0.00013
(0.42)

0.00011
(0.52)

0.04455
(27.42)

1998 - March 2000

-0.00510
(-12.36)

0.02975
(5.21)

0.00795
(2.43)

0.00450
(3.09)

0.00345
(4.57)

0.00407
(10.00)

0.00269
(8.17)

0.00070
(4.39)

0.02740
(13.90)

April 2000 - 2001

-0.00084
(-5.99)

0.00457
(2.10)

-0.00201
(-2.72)

-0.00072
(-1.64)

-0.00024
(-1.07)

0.00064
(6.58)

0.00076
(4.96)

-0.00006
(-0.67)

0.00575
(16.78)

Time Period

Table 7
Percentage Impact on Daily Open Buy Call Volume of One Standard Deviation Shock to
Independent Variables, Large Stocks Subperiods 1990-2001
This table reports the percentage impact on daily open buy call option volume of one standard deviation shocks to
independent variables. The numbers in this table are based on the Fama-MacBeth regressions results reported in
Table VI. The impact is calculated as the sum of the products of coefficients and standard deviations for all relevant
independent variables divided by the daily average trading volume for each investor type.

Subperiod
1990 - 1994

Dependent Vars. Receiving Positive One Std. Dev. Shock
Rweek-R2years Rweek-Rquarter
Ryear-R2years
Panel A: Firm Proprietary Traders
125.50
99.07
26.43

1995 - 1997

64.20

65.94

-1.74

1998 - March 2000

69.14

40.35

28.80

April 2000 - 2001
1990 - 1994

50.96
25.02
Panel B: Discount Customers
48.18
32.81

15.37

1995 - 1997

36.26

-13.60

49.86

1998 - March 2000

153.91

58.00

95.91

April 2000 - 2001
1990 - 1994

31.01
-16.86
Panel C: Full-Service Customers
82.06
54.67

25.94

47.88
27.39

1995 - 1997

5.80

6.77

-0.97

1998 - March 2000

86.43

32.44

53.99

April 2000 - 2001

14.68

-11.57

26.25

Table 8
Large Stock Regressions with Open Sell Call Volume as Dependent Variable for
Subperiods of 1990-2001
This table reports the time-series average coefficients from Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions of daily open
sell call option trading volume on various independent variables for large underlying stocks during subperiods of
1990-2001. Large underlying stocks are the largest 500 market capitalization stocks in the CRSP universe at the end
of the previous calendar quarter. Explanatory variables are returns of underlying stocks, the same day return
(Rsameday), the return from trade dates –1 through –5 (Rweek), from trade dates –6 through –21 (Rmonth), from
trade dates –22 through –63 (Rquarter), from trade dates –64 through –252 (Ryear), and from trade dates –253
through –504 (R2years). In addition, the log of the BM ratio and the volatility of the underlying stock are also used
as explanatory variables. Autocorrelation adjusted t-statistics are provided in parentheses. In Panels A-C, the
regression results for, respectively, firm proprietary traders, customers of discount brokers and customers of fullservice brokers, are reported.

Time Period

Intercept

1990-1994

-0.0002
(-0.68)

Independent Variables
Rweek
Rmonth Rquarter
Ryear
Panel A: Firm Proprietary Traders
0.0076
0.0048
0.0031
0.0016
0.0014
(2.64)
(2.18)
(2.45)
(2.24)
(5.16)

1995-1997

-0.0003
(-2.99)

0.0094
(5.35)

0.0019
(2.07)

0.0010
(2.10)

0.0007
(1.75)

1998 - March 2000

-0.0001
(-0.63)

0.0022
(1.15)

0.0002
(0.17)

0.0000
(-0.05)

April 2000 - 2001

0.0001
(0.55)

0.0033
(4.67)

1990-1994

-0.0005
(-17.10)

1995-1997

Rsameday

R2years

ln(B/M)

Volatility

0.0003
(1.60)

0.0005
(5.98)

0.0054
(3.67)

-0.0002
(-0.95)

-0.0002
(-1.78)

-0.0001
(-1.10)

0.0035
(8.35)

0.0005
(1.77)

0.0006
(3.77)

0.0006
(4.01)

0.0002
(3.04)

0.0028
(5.94)

0.0002
(6.45)

0.0001
(2.43)

0.0000
(0.03)

0.0011
(6.90)

0.0052
(15.44)

0.0000
0.0001
0.0002
(-0.04)
(0.76)
(1.92)
Panel B: Discount Customers
0.0008
-0.0001
-0.0001
(4.64)
(-0.71)
(-1.26)

0.0000
(-1.23)

0.0001
(1.69)

0.0000
(-0.93)

0.0029
(24.19)

-0.0009
(-22.04)

0.0090
(11.25)

0.0009
(2.19)

-0.0009
(-4.07)

-0.0010
(-4.93)

0.0000
(0.51)

0.0003
(4.66)

0.0001
(4.09)

0.0055
(25.14)

1998 - March 2000

-0.0012
(-17.59)

0.0084
(15.77)

0.0014
(5.42)

0.0005
(2.66)

0.0004
(3.68)

0.0005
(7.63)

0.0003
(5.28)

0.0000
(-2.00)

0.0045
(20.63)

April 2000 - 2001

-0.0004
(-12.67)

0.0042
(11.13)

0.0001
(3.04)

0.0002
(6.82)

0.0000
(1.63)

0.0018
(20.09)

1990-1994

-0.0043
(-7.38)

0.0619
(8.61)

0.0018
(2.43)

0.0013
(2.50)

0.0005
(3.04)

0.0377
(11.95)

1995-1997

-0.0036
(-21.68)

0.0564
(11.28)

0.0124
(4.95)

0.0008
(0.56)

-0.0025
(-2.13)

0.0000
(-0.09)

0.0004
(1.68)

0.0002
(1.27)

0.0310
(28.70)

1998 - March 2000

-0.0034
(-12.52)

0.0386
(8.22)

0.0115
(5.71)

0.0042
(4.25)

0.0027
(5.37)

0.0030
(9.77)

0.0017
(6.40)

0.0005
(3.78)

0.0207
(13.30)

April 2000 - 2001

-0.0010
(-5.74)

0.0166
(7.76)

0.0023
(2.25)

0.0012
(2.52)

0.0010
(4.05)

0.0012
(9.51)

0.0008
(5.42)

-0.0001
(-1.17)

0.0073
(15.10)

0.0003
0.0000
0.0000
(1.85)
(-0.43)
(0.07)
Panel C: Full-Service Customers
0.0212
0.0095
0.0042
(3.64)
(3.03)
(2.31)

Table 9
Large Growth (Low BM) and Large Value (High BM) Stock Average Daily Open Volume
as a Percentage of Shares Outstanding for Subperiods of 1990-2001
This table reports the average daily trading volume of individual stock options traded at the Chicago Board Options
Exchange (CBOE) for large growth underlying stocks during subperiods of 1990-2001. Only those transactions that
are used to open new positions are included in this table. The data were obtained directly from the CBOE and
include information on the types of investor behind each transaction. Three types of investors, firm proprietary
traders, customers of discount brokers and customers of full-service brokers, are analyzed. Large growth (value)
stocks are those in the lowest (highest) book-to-market equity ratio quartile of the 500 largest stocks based on the
ratios at the end of each quarter. For the calculation of the averages, daily average delta-adjusted open trading
volume as a percentage of shares outstanding is first calculated for each underlying stock. Then, for each calendar
month, daily market capitalization weighted average open trading volumes are calculated over each group for each
investor type. Finally, the average across all calendar months during each subperiod is calculated and reported in
this table.

Type of Open Volume
Time Period
Buy Call
Buy Put
Sell Call
Sell Put
Panel A: Firm Proprietary Traders, Large Growth Underlying Stocks
1990-1994
0.00073% 0.00029% 0.00057% 0.00028%
1995-1997
0.00075% 0.00021% 0.00064% 0.00020%
1998 - March 2000
0.00067% 0.00027% 0.00057% 0.00019%
April 2000 - 2001
0.00055% 0.00068% 0.00046% 0.00056%
Panel B: Discount Customers, Large Growth Underlying Stocks
1990-1994
0.00046% 0.00012% 0.00019% 0.00007%
1995-1997
0.00092% 0.00018% 0.00036% 0.00012%
1998 - March 2000
0.00188% 0.00033% 0.00070% 0.00031%
April 2000 - 2001
0.00050% 0.00014% 0.00044% 0.00015%
Panel C: Full-Service Customers, Large Growth Underlying Stocks
1990-1994
0.00382% 0.00133% 0.00384% 0.00102%
1995-1997
0.00440% 0.00137% 0.00370% 0.00103%
1998 - March 2000
0.00482% 0.00150% 0.00384% 0.00134%
April 2000 - 2001
0.00216% 0.00105% 0.00237% 0.00094%
Panel D: Firm Proprietary Traders, Large Value Underlying Stocks
1990-1994
0.00105% 0.00045% 0.00107% 0.00036%
1995-1997
0.00080% 0.00029% 0.00067% 0.00016%
1998 - March 2000
0.00066% 0.00031% 0.00059% 0.00016%
April 2000 - 2001
0.00056% 0.00043% 0.00045% 0.00032%
Panel E: Discount Customers, Large Value Underlying Stocks
1990-1994
0.00070% 0.00021% 0.00026% 0.00010%
1995-1997
0.00049% 0.00008% 0.00023% 0.00008%
1998 - March 2000
0.00054% 0.00009% 0.00025% 0.00012%
April 2000 - 2001
0.00032% 0.00008% 0.00032% 0.00011%
Panel F: Full-Service Customers, Large Value Underlying Stocks
1990-1994
0.00633% 0.00185% 0.00469% 0.00159%
1995-1997
0.00382% 0.00101% 0.00330% 0.00102%
1998 - March 2000
0.00312% 0.00096% 0.00260% 0.00114%
April 2000 - 2001
0.00175% 0.00086% 0.00204% 0.00086%

Table 10
Regressions with Open Buy Call Volume as Dependent Variable, 1998-3/2000
This table reports the time-series average coefficients from Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions of daily open
buy call option trading volume on various independent variables for large underlying stocks during the stock market
bubble period of 1998-March 2000. Large underlying stocks are the largest 500 market capitalization stocks in the
CRSP universe at the end of the previous calendar quarter. Large growth (value) stocks are those in the lowest
(highest) book-to-market equity ratio quartile of the 500 largest stocks based on the ratios at the end of each quarter.
Explanatory variables are returns of underlying stocks, the same day return (Rsameday), the return from trade dates
–1 through –5 (Rweek), from trade dates –6 through –21 (Rmonth), from trade dates –22 through –63 (Rquarter),
from trade dates –64 through –252 (Ryear), and from trade dates –253 through –504 (R2years). In addition, the log
of the BM ratio and the volatility of the underlying stock are also used as explanatory variables. Autocorrelation
adjusted t-statistics are provided in parentheses. In Panels A-C, the regression results for, respectively, firm
proprietary traders, customers of discount brokers and customers of full-service brokers, are reported.

Underlying Stocks

Intercept Rsameday

Independent Variables
Rweek
Rmonth Rquarter
Ryear
Panel A: Firm Proprietary Traders
0.0020
0.0011
0.0006
0.0005
(2.74)
(2.48)
(3.17)
(3.04)

R2years

ln(B/M)

Volatility

0.0002
(1.41)

0.0002
(2.60)

0.0035
(6.38)

Large

-0.0001
(-1.36)

0.0046
(2.53)

Large, Growth

0.0003
(1.84)

0.0060
(3.06)

0.0013
(1.61)

0.0004
(1.49)

0.0004
(2.40)

-0.0002
(-1.52)

0.0001
(1.42)

0.0019
(4.62)

Large, Value

0.0000
(0.05)

0.0041
(1.19)

0.0000
(0.07)

0.0009
(3.90)

0.0009
(3.39)

0.0036
(3.45)

Large

-0.0028
(-10.32)

0.0062
(4.07)

0.0039
0.0023
0.0010
(3.88)
(2.47)
(3.75)
Panel B: Discount Customers
0.0040
0.0026
0.0021
(4.21)
(4.43)
(8.26)

0.0025
(9.65)

0.0013
(7.51)

-0.0001
(-1.95)

0.0089
(12.10)

Large, Growth

-0.0085
(-7.61)

0.0124
(3.94)

0.0074
(4.07)

0.0046
(7.42)

0.0014
(5.23)

-0.0017
(-5.95)

0.0098
(6.69)

Large, Value

-0.0005
(-7.79)

0.0034
(3.53)

-0.0003
(-2.56)

0.0004
(3.64)

0.0002
(2.93)

0.0036
(10.91)

Large

-0.0051
(-12.36)

0.0297
(5.21)

0.0041
(10.00)

0.0027
(8.17)

0.0007
(4.39)

0.0274
(13.90)

Large, Growth

-0.0117
(-7.80)

0.0336
(4.53)

0.0065
(1.83)

0.0066
(3.06)

0.0063
(5.90)

0.0068
(7.10)

0.0012
(2.43)

-0.0021
(-4.77)

0.0218
(9.60)

Large, Value

-0.0008
(-1.79)

0.0338
(4.18)

0.0120
(3.07)

0.0031
(1.56)

0.0020
(1.25)

-0.0022
(-2.96)

0.0037
(3.88)

0.0036
(5.09)

0.0196
(7.75)

0.0009
(2.24)

0.0047
(3.77)

0.0041
(7.25)

0.0026
0.0010
0.0002
(4.10)
(2.90)
(0.66)
Panel C: Full-Service Customers
0.0080
0.0045
0.0035
(2.43)
(3.09)
(4.57)

Table 11
Percentage Impact on Daily Open Buy Call Volume of One Standard Deviation Shock to
Independent Variables for Different Types of Underlying Firms, 1998-3/2000
This table reports the percentage impact on daily open buy call option volume of one standard deviation shocks to
independent variables. The numbers in this table are based on the Fama-MacBeth regressions results reported in
Table X. The impact is calculated as the sum of the products of coefficients and standard deviations for all relevant
independent variables divided by the daily average trading volume for each type. Large underlying stocks are the
largest 500 market capitalization stocks in the CRSP universe at the end of the previous calendar quarter. Large
growth (value) stocks are those in the lowest (highest) book-to-market equity ratio quartile of the 500 largest stocks
based on the ratios at the end of each quarter.

Underlying
Stocks
Large
Large, Growth
Large, Value
Large
Large, Growth
Large, Value
Large

Dependent Vars. Receiving Positive One Std. Dev. Shock
Rweek-R2years
Rweek-Rquarter
Ryear-R2years
Panel A: Firm Proprietary Traders
80.14
48.82
31.32
49.66

38.85

10.81

119.08
83.95
Panel B: Discount Customers
173.05
70.16

102.89

210.95

116.92

94.02

50.40
46.73
Panel C: Full-Service Customers
96.77
39.24

35.13

3.67
57.53

Large, Growth

109.12

48.08

61.04

Large, Value

51.28

38.41

12.87

Table 12
Regressions with Open Sell Call Volume as Dependent Variable, 1998-3/2000
This table reports the time-series average coefficients from Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions of daily open
sell call option trading volume on various independent variables for large underlying stocks during the stock market
bubble period of 1998-March 2000. Large underlying stocks are the largest 500 market capitalization stocks in the
CRSP universe at the end of the previous calendar quarter. Large growth (value) stocks are those in the lowest
(highest) book-to-market equity ratio quartile of the 500 largest stocks based on the ratios at the end of each quarter.
Explanatory variables are returns of underlying stocks, the same day return (Rsameday), the return from trade dates
–1 through –5 (Rweek), from trade dates –6 through –21 (Rmonth), from trade dates –22 through –63 (Rquarter),
from trade dates –64 through –252 (Ryear), and from trade dates –253 through –504 (R2years). In addition, the log
of the BM ratio and the volatility of the underlying stock are also used as explanatory variables. Autocorrelation
adjusted t-statistics are provided in parentheses. In Panels A-C, the regression results for, respectively, firm
proprietary traders, customers of discount brokers and customers of full-service brokers, are reported.

Intercept Rsameday

R2years

ln(B/M) Volatility

Large

-0.00007
(-0.63)

Independent Variables
Rweek
Rmonth Rquarter
Ryear
Panel A: Firm Proprietary Traders
0.00215
0.00021 -0.00003 0.00055 0.00063
(1.15)
(0.17)
(-0.05)
(1.77)
(3.77)

0.00063
(4.01)

0.00018
(3.04)

0.00282
(5.94)

Large, Growth

0.00000
(-0.02)

0.00283
(2.01)

-0.00099
(-1.03)

0.00048
(1.14)

0.00064
(2.01)

0.00050
(2.65)

0.00002
(0.35)

0.00116
(2.53)

Large, Value

-0.00023
(-1.23)

0.00218
(0.65)

0.00001
(0.02)

0.00085
(3.50)

0.00075
(3.15)

0.00460
(5.38)

Large

-0.0012
(-17.59)

0.0084
(15.77)

0.00267
0.00043 0.00061
(2.36)
(0.61)
(1.48)
Panel B: Discount Customers
0.0014
0.0005
0.0004
(5.42)
(2.66)
(3.68)

0.0005
(7.63)

0.0003
(5.28)

0.0000
(-2.00)

0.0045
(20.63)

Large, Growth

-0.0026
(-11.59)

0.0115
(11.51)

0.0009
(7.56)

0.0003
(3.73)

-0.0004
(-5.49)

0.0055
(13.77)

Large, Value

-0.0003
(-3.58)

0.0054
(8.43)

-0.0004
(-5.90)

0.0000
(-0.19)

0.0001
(1.88)

0.0022
(9.29)

Large

-0.0034
(-12.52)

0.0386
(8.22)

0.0030
(9.77)

0.0017
(6.40)

0.0005
(3.78)

0.0207
(13.30)

Large, Growth

-0.0075
(-8.24)

0.0505
(10.33)

0.0129
(5.53)

0.0060
(4.29)

0.0042
(4.73)

0.0047
(6.53)

0.0002
(0.44)

-0.0012
(-5.53)

0.0175
(10.55)

Large, Value

-0.0009
(-2.22)

0.0366
(5.19)

0.0129
(4.14)

0.0038
(2.83)

0.0022
(2.07)

-0.0005
(-0.97)

0.0039
(5.10)

0.0032
(5.87)

0.0167
(8.07)

Underlying Stocks

0.0017
(3.75)

0.00028
(0.41)

0.0005
(1.34)

0.0007
(3.59)

0.0017
0.0005
0.0000
(3.50)
(2.77)
(0.23)
Panel C: Full-Service Customers
0.0115
0.0042
0.0027
(5.71)
(4.25)
(5.37)

Profit

Covered Call

Short Call
K

Stock Price at Expir.

Long Stock

Figure 1. Profit to covered call position as a function of the stock price at expiration. The
bold line depicts the profit at expiration to a covered call position as a function of the stock price
at expiration. The covered call position consists of one long share of stock held in combination
with one short call position with strike price K.

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

De
c90
De
c91
D
ec
-9
2
D
ec
-9
3
D
ec
-9
4
De
c95
De
c96
De
c97
D
ec
-9
8
D
ec
-9
9
D
ec
-0
0
De
c01

(Growth P/B)/(Value P/B)

5

Figure 2: Price to book ratio of growth stocks divided by price to book ratio of value
stocks, 1990 through 2001. This figure depicts the ratio of market capitalization to book value
for the Russell 1000 growth stocks divided by the same ratio for the Russell 1000 value stocks
from 1990 through 2001. The data used to construct the figure are from the Frank Russell
Company.

