NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES COMPETITION DESTROY ETHICAL BEHAVIOR?
Andrei Shleifer
Working Paper 10269
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10269
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004

I thank Olivier Blanchard, Mihir Desai, James Hines, Jesse Shapiro, and especially Daron Acemoglu and
Edward Glaeser for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Competition Destroy Ethical Behavior?
Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 10269
January 2004
JEL No. D41, L31, L51
ABSTRACT
Explanations of unethical behavior often neglect the role of competition, as opposed to greed, in
assuring its spread. Using the examples of child labor, corruption, "excessive" executive pay,
corporate earnings manipulation, and commercial activities by universities, this paper clarifies the
role of competition in promoting censured conduct. When unethical behavior cuts costs, competition
drives down prices and entrepreneurs' incomes, and thereby reduces their willingness to pay for
ethical conduct. Nonetheless, I suggest that competition might be good for ethical behavior in the
long run, because it promotes growth and raises incomes. Higher incomes raise the willingness to
pay for ethical behavior, but may also change what people believe to be ethical for the better.
Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

This paper shows that conduct described as unethical and blamed on “greed” is sometimes
a consequence of market competition. I illustrate this observation using examples of five censured
activities: employment of children, corruption, excessive executive pay, corporate earnings
manipulation, and involvement of universities in commercial activities. In all these examples, I show
how competitive pressures lead to the spread of the censured behavior. My point is not to excuse
or condemn any or all of these practices, but merely to pinpoint the crucial role of competition – as
opposed to greed – in their spread.
I focus here on ethics not efficiency. The relationship between the two is complex. In many
cases, ethical norms evolve to sustain cooperative behavior and to thus promote successful
functioning of social institutions. For example, ethical condemnation of corruption is based on the
idea that officials should not selfishly abuse public trust, and that a society functions better when its
government works fairly. Likewise, the ethical norm against the employment of children is driven
in part by the more general concern with abuse of the weak by the strong. When ethics promotes
social cooperation, ethical behavior and efficient behavior typically go together.
In other instances, there is a mismatch between ethics and efficiency, either because ethical
standards which might have had efficiency justifications long ago no longer do, or because the
behavior that is ethical in some idealized society makes matters worse in the real world. For
example, the ethical norm against debt or interest, which might have been justifiable a millennium
ago, is clearly no longer efficient. And while child labor might be a bad idea in a world with good
access to capital markets and educational opportunities, for many families in the developing world
the alternative to child labor is malnutrition and decease. These examples of a mismatch suggest that
behavior condemned as unethical is not always inefficient.
In still other instances, the conduct that is advertized as ethical is the result of political

indoctrination by parochial interests or of simple confusion. For example, the ethical exhortations
to “Buy American!” or to pay the “Living Wage” are underwritten by labor unions serving their
members, not the public. In various times and places, tribalism, racism, anti-semitism, the hatred of
the rich and other unsavory sentiments reflected the dominant ethic. In these instances, what is
considered ethical is very far from what economists would consider efficient.
In some of the examples I discuss below, a credible case can be made that the conduct
perceived to be unethical is also inefficient; in other examples, there is more ambiguity. My interest,
however, is not to evaluate efficiency, but only to bring the crucial role of competition in the
explanation of why activities morally sanctioned by the society spread.
In four of the examples I discuss, censured behavior reduces costs (in the last one, it raises
revenues). I assume that the proprietor of the firm values ethical behavior, but that such behavior is
a normal good. When sanctioned behavior by competitors reduces their costs, it also reduces prices
in the market, and as a result the proprietor’s income falls. When his income falls, so does his own
demand for ethical behavior, leading to the spread of censured practices. The analysis I present is
closely related to the ideas in Gary Becker’s (1957) classic study of discrimination and reveals a
broad range of circumstances where competition promotes censured conduct.

I. Child Labor.
Under many plausible scenarios, the pressures of competition bring children into the labor
force. In hiring children is cheaper than hiring adults (even taking into account differences in
productivity), and if one firm hires children, it can reduce prices. Its competitors must then hire
children also, or be driven out of business (or, in a less extreme world, their willingness to pay for
not hiring children declines when profits fall). On the other side of the market, if parents in one

family can compel their children to work and thereby advantage themselves in competition with other
families (for food or for status), then competition among families forces more children into the labor
force. Either of these two forces of competition – on the demand side or on the supply side – would
bring children into the labor force.
Whether or not child labor is efficient depends on a number of factors, such as whether
children and/or their parents correctly value education, whether education is even available, whether
capital markets are sufficiently developed that families can borrow rather than send children to work,
what the family structure is, etc. Presumably, the more efficient are all these markets, the less likely
we are to see children in the labor force.

II. Corruption.
Robert Vishny and I (1993) distinguish two kinds of corruption: with theft and without theft.
In the first kind, a government official takes money in exchange for reducing the payments, such as
taxes or tariffs, that the briber owes to the government.

In the second kind of corruption, a

government official takes additional money in exchange for giving the briber goods, such as permits,
to which he is entitled without the bribe. Relative to the regime with no corruption, corruption
without theft raises costs, but corruption with theft reduces costs. As a consequence, the latter kind
of corruption spreads when markets are competitive. When a firm’s competitor can reduce his taxes
through corruption, or can import by paying lower bribes rather than higher tariffs, he can pass on
his savings to consumers. In a competitive market, then, every firm must itself pay bribes or go out
of business. Even if the proprietor has some rents, his willingness to pay for ethical conduct declines
as his profits do, leading him to bribe. The keener is the competition, the higher is the pressure to
reduce costs, and the more pervasive is corruption.

Corruption with theft has one additional competitive advantage: both the official and the
briber benefit, and neither has any incentive to report the bribe to the police. In contrast, corruption
without theft raises costs, and hence the potential briber has an incentive to complain.
A further pressure comes from competition for government jobs. In some countries, positions
allowing extensive bribe collection are auctioned off by senior officials. The prospective officials
who will collect the bribes must pay for their jobs. This competition for jobs creates further pressure
on corruption to spread: honest officials simply cannot afford the appointments, and the officials who
get the jobs are the ones who can collect the most bribes.

This source of competitive pressure

applies to corruption both with and without theft, which might explain why corruption without theft
is also pervasive, even though it raises costs.

III. Executive Pay.
Executive compensation has received a great deal of negative attention recently, with an
emerging consensus that a large portion of what top managers get is not incentive pay but rents
extracted by greedy CEOs from dysfunctional boards (Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan
2001, Lucian Bebchuk and Jesse Fried 2003). There is undoubtedly some truth to this view, but
competition for executives has also played a role, at least during the recent stock market bubble.
Suppose that managers can extract no rents, so their pay is determined by their marginal
productivity, or their contribution to the profitability of the firm.

Shareholders care about

maximizing the market value of the firm, which in an efficient market is the present value of expected
profits. Assuming that a given manager does not contribute so much more to the firm than the next
best alternative, his level of compensation would be likewise moderate.
But suppose alternatively that markets are not efficient, and expectations about future growth,

and consequently share values, can be manipulated. Suppose some managers possess a superior
ability to manipulate investor expectations, allowing them to drive up the price of company stock,
at least in the short run. Such temporary price bubbles in their stock can be very valuable to
shareholders: they can sell into the bubble, or their companies can acquire others using over-valued
stock. In other words, managers who can create or sustain a bubble in company stock reduce its cost
of equity capital. If some managers are more able than others to do that, then their compensation is
determined by the competition among firms for this service.
In such a market, the value of having an executive who can reduce the cost of capital through
sustaining a bubble can be enormous, and so will be his competitive pay. The starriest executives
would then be allocated to companies, perhaps in the technology or other glamourous sector, where
persuasion can generate a lot of shareholder value. Companies will pay up for these services, even
when the executives do not contribute to profits or their growth at all.
In this example, the market for executives is perfectly competitive and efficient, yet executive
talent is defined by ability to raise valuations in an inefficient financial market. In recent years,
theory and evidence of stock market inefficiency have grown significantly (Shleifer 2000), especially
with respect to the technology bubble (Eli Ofek and Matt Richardson 2003). The very same period
saw an explosion of executive pay, especially in the high valuation firms. As the bubble collapsed,
these episodes of extraordinary pay were attributed to the greed of the CEOs. Yet it seems equally
plausible that shareholders during the bubble were happy to compensate these executives for
promoting the bubbles in their shares.

IV. Earnings Manipulation.
Parallel to the growth of executive pay during the technology bubble, many observers have

pointed to an increase in a range of unsavory corporate practices, such as manipulation of earnings
reported to shareholders. Companies increasingly reported pro-forma earnings – earnings not
computed according to Generally Accepted Accounting Principles – on their websites (Gene
D’Avolio, Efi Gildor, and Shleifer 2002). For high technology firms in particular, these earnings
tend to be considerably higher than those computed in the standard fashion. Companies have also
increasingly smoothed their earnings growth, used accruals to drive up earnings, and changed pension
rate of return assumptions to show higher earnings (Daniel Bergstresser and Thomas Philippon 2003,
Bergstresser, Mihir Desai, and Joshua Rauh 2003). At least some companies pursued downright
illegal practices in reporting earnings.
There is growing evidence that these accounting tricks in fact represent a conscious attempt
to manipulate shareholder beliefs. Companies tend to use these strategies to show particularly good
earnings numbers right before they make acquisitions, and right before their executives exercise stock
options (Bergstresser, Desai, and Rauh 2003). As this evidence has accumulated, commentators
denounced the degradation of corporate standards of ethics.
The discussion of earnings manipulation has largely ignored the importance of competition
for funds. During the bubble, firms faced powerful incentives to drive up their share prices, largely
by reporting higher earnings growth. If earnings manipulation helps sustain a high valuation, it
reduces the cost of capital, enabling companies to make acquisitions for stock, to attract better
executives and workers with stock options, and even to issue new shares. For some companies, this
was an issue of survival as well. Many young high technology firms, such as Amazon.com, financed
their ongoing operations by issuing equity. Without creative accounting, their cost of capital might
have been too high for them to survive. Likewise, for many mature firms, a high equity valuation
was the matter of survival as an independent company, rather than being acquired for stock by a

company with a higher valuation. Shleifer and Vishny (2003) show that, in the takeover market, the
choice is to acquire or be acquired, and to execute the former strategy a firm needs a high valuation.
In these ways, competitive pressures contributed to the rise of aggressive corporate accounting
practices.
V. Commercial Activities by Universities.
In a provocative recent book, Harvard’s former president Derek Bok (2003) expresses concern
with commercialization of universities. According to Bok, universities are increasingly involved in
highly commercial athletic programs, which generate profits but may undermine academic standards
in admissions. They increasingly pursue purely commercial research efforts, which can interfere with
faculty time, the selection of research priorities, and even the imperative of openness and full
disclosure of results. In recent years, universities have also increasingly pursued commercial
educational efforts through on-line education, which again, in Bok’s opinion, may undermine core
missions of research and teaching their own students.
While Bok regrets these developments, he recognizes the crucial role played by competition.
Universities need resources for their core missions, such as attracting the best faculty and students,
getting these faculty to teach those students, building housing and research facilities, and so on.
Universities compete fiercely for faculty and students, and to the extent that profits from commercial
activities give them an advantage in this competition, they embrace them. And as in the other
examples I have given, competition assures the spread of commercial practices among universities.

VI. What is to be done?
I have presented five examples of activities which many people find ethically objectionable:
child labor, corruption, high executive pay, earnings manipulation, and commercialization of

education. These examples show how competition can encourage the spread of censured conduct.
What can a society do to discourage these activities? As noted earlier, it is sometimes far
from obvious that discouraging them is efficient. Corruption may enable small businesses to get
around unreasonable regulations, and actually encourage economic development. Child labor may
improve the economic circumstances of both children and their families in places where the feasible
alternatives are hunger and malnutrition. High levels of executive pay may allocate the most talented
managers to growing young firms. Some technology entrepreneurs argued that conventional
accounting harmed their companies as investors failed to understand the temporary nature of their
losses, and that therefore some freedom of accounting choice was essential for accuracy. And
commercialization of universities might enable them to better discharge their core duties.
We can think of (at least) three strategies for curtailing unethical conduct, involving
increasing amounts of coercion: long run market pressure, moral suasion, and government regulation.
Some economists express an optimistic view that, in the long run, markets cure the problems we
discussed. If public opinion really turns against child labor, firms that do not hire children will be
able to charge higher prices. Firms which pay executives to pump up their stock, or manipulate their
earnings, will face eventual investor disappointment and a higher, not lower, cost of capital. And
universities that over-commercialize their activities will lose serious faculty and students.
These arguments about long run competition are not compelling. While public opinion may
exert pressure in the long run, in the short run people want cheaper shoes, and most do not care who
makes them. Emerging market subcontractors refusing to hire children counting on the tide in
consumer sentiment for adult-made shoes, surely cannot survive. Likewise, firms that do not
manipulate their earnings or compete for glamourous executives might not survive as independent
entities long enough for reality to intervene. Finally, universities that eschew commercialism may

find themselves too far behind academically to catch up. Competition may take too long to work, and
even in the long run it need not work to promote ethical values.
A more aggressive strategy is moral suasion. One can try to convince companies – through
persuasion and perhaps even boycotts – not to hire children, not to manipulate earnings, and not to
pay too much to executives. Derek Bok clearly follows this approach in urging university
administrators to slow down commercialization.
Moral suasion is likely to work better when competition is less keen. Protests can discourage
Nike – with its rents from its name – from hiring children, either on its own or through
subcontractors. Moral suasion can slow down commercialization among the wealthiest universities,
which have significant endowments. The richer the competitor, the more it will pay for being ethical.
But the trouble with moral suasion is that it can rarely stand up to the forces of competition when
competitors have no rents. This is precisely the reason why the phenomena I describe are so
pervasive. Even if managers, boards, or shareholders of companies are convinced that it is bad to
manipulate earnings, pay a lot to executives, or hire children in developing countries, their discretion
is severely circumscribed by the imperative of commercial survival. Even in the richest private
universities, competition for faculty and students is sufficiently keen to at best delay the advance of
commercialization. In most cases, then, moral suasion will not stop the pressures of competition.
What about government regulation? Governments often restrict entry, or ban cost reducing
practices that are deemed unethical. Governments prohibit many kinds of corruption, and impose
criminal penalties on those who are caught. In developed countries, governments ban child labor.
In most countries, governments regulate earnings reporting and are beginning to regulate executive
pay. Finally, even in the U.S. where universities are private, their not-for-profit status severely limits
their pursuit of commercial activities. In all the cases we discussed, the government is involved,

although the nature of its involvement varies.
But here again, one should not expect too much success from regulation, especially where the
state’s enforcement powers are limited. Even if the government pursues benevolent policies (which
is far from universal), when it battles against cost reducing competition, it is likely to lose. This is
partly why corruption, child labor, and unsavory accounting practices remain pervasive.
If this analysis is complete, it leads to a fairly depressing conclusion. Globalization and the
victory of laissez-faire economics has made competition keener in many countries and markets
around the world. Does this imply that unethical conduct is also becoming more pervasive?
The answer, I believe, is NO, for two separate reasons. First, competition is the fundamental
source of technological progress and wealth creation around the world. The very same market forces
that might encourage unethical conduct, also motivate firms to innovate and create new products,
leading to economic growth. As societies grow richer, their willingness to pay for ethical behavior
– through both government enforcement and private choice – increases as well. As a consequence,
both moral and regulatory sanctions work better in the richer countries, leading to more ethical
behavior. Second, as Benjamin Friedman (2004) demonstrates, as societies grow richer their views
of what is ethical change as well. More universalist ethics that emphasize cooperation and inclusion
replace the more tribal and parochial beliefs. As I have argued in the introduction, the ethics of
cooperation is much more likely to coincide with objective notions of efficiency. For both of these
reasons – the increased willingness to pay for ethical behavior and the improving match between
ethics and efficiency – competition is likely to promote ethical behavior in the long run.

References.
Bebchuk, Lucian and Jesse Fried. “Executive Compensation as an Agency Problem.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 2003, 17(3), pp.71-92.
Becker, Gary. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1957.
Bergstresser, Daniel, Mihir Desai, and Joshua Rauh. “The Gerstner Effect.” Mimeo, Harvard
Business School, 2003.
Bergstresser, Daniel, and Thomas Philippon. “CEO Incentives and Earnings Management.” Mimeo,
Harvard Business School, 2003.
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. “Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck? The Ones without
Principals are.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116(3), pp. 901-932.
Bok, Derek. Universities in the Marketplace: The Commercialization of Higher Education.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.
D’Avolio, Gene, Efi Gildor, and Andrei Shleifer. “Technology, Information Production,
and Market Efficiency,” in Economic Policy For The Information Economy, A Symposium
Sponsored by The Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2002.
Friedman, Benjamin. The Moral Consequences of Economic Growth. Forthcoming, 2004.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Andrei Shleifer. “The Market for News.” Mimeo, Harvard, 2003.
Ofek, Eli and Matt Richardson. “DotCom Mania: The Rise and Fall of Internet Stocks.”
Journal of Finance, 2003, 58(3), pp. 1113-1138.
Shleifer, Andrei. Inefficient Markets. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny. “Corruption.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1993, 108(3),
pp. 599-617, 1993.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny. “Stock Market Driven Acquisitions.” Journal of Financial
Economics, 2003, 70(3), pp. 295–311.

