                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       CROSS-COUNTRY CONVERSION FACTORS FOR
                        SECTORAL PRODUCTIVITY COMPARISONS

                                       Johannes Van Biesebroeck

                                          Working Paper 10279
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10279


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




I would like to thank Francette Koechlin for providing me with the OECD price data. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Johannes Van Biesebroeck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Cross-country Conversion Factors for Sectoral Productivity Comparisons
Johannes Van Biesebroeck
NBER Working Paper No. 10279
January 2004
JEL No. D24, F14, F31, O47

                                           ABSTRACT

International comparisons of the level of labor or total factor productivity have used exchange rates

or purchasing power parity (PPP) to make output and capital comparable across countries. Recent

evidence suggests that aggregate PPP holds rather well in the long run, making it a good basis for

comparison. At the same time, sectoral deviations from PPP are very persistent, raising the need for

disaggregate price measures to make disaggregate productivity comparisons. Sectoral differences

in the importance of nontradables make it even more important to work with sectoral prices when

country-comparisons are made at the sectoral level. Mapping prices from household expenditure

surveys into the industrial classification of sectors and adjusting for taxes and international trade,

I obtain a sector-specific PPP measure. The few previous studies that used sectoral prices only had

conversion factors available for a single year. With price data for 1985, 1990, 1993, and 1996, I am

the first to test whether the constructed conversion factors adequately capture differential changes

in relative prices between countries. For some industries--Agriculture, Mining, and less sophisticated

manufacturing sectors--the indices prove adequate. For most other industries, aggregate PPP is a

superior currency conversion factor.

Johannes Van Biesebroeck
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
jovb@chass.utoronto.ca
  Aggregate productivity comparisons are performed all the time. A country’s GDP per

capita is cited in news report or newspapers without even providing a definition. A lot

of people, not limited to economists, are aware that the rise to prominence of the United

States’s economy has been accompanied by an accession in the world ranking of GDP per

capita from. While the United Kingdom was approximately one third more prosperous per

capita in 1870, the United States had a lead of approximately one third in 1960. Similarly,

the rapid economic development in a country like South Korea raised its GDP per capita

from only 7% of the U.S. level in 1960 to 44% in 2001. While the United States rules in GDP

per capita, the high productivity of some European workers, like the Belgians and French, is

still apparent from their top spots in the ranking of GDP per hour worked. The impressive

growth performance of Mexico in the last two decades is even more impressive when placed

into the context of their low capital stock. Labor productivity in the business sectors stood

at 32% of U.S. labor productivity in 1995, while they attained 79% of the U.S. total factor

productivity level in the same year.1

  To calculate the previous statistics, domestic output in local currency for each country was

converted to a common denominator, usually the U.S. dollar, using purchasing power parities

(PPP). These are constructed for each country from price surveys, conducted approximately

every three years. Prices of a common basket of goods are aggregated using expenditure

weights, producing a conversion factor that is less volatile than the exchange rate. The prices

of identical goods are collected in each country. Goods are picked to represent the output of

the entire economy, not only tradable and financial assets. This large statistical enterprise is a

coordinated effort of the statistical departments of the United Nations, Eurostat, the OECD,

the IMF and the World Bank. Economists are most familiar with the PPPs from the Penn

  1
      Statistics cited are taken from Maddison (1995), the U.N. web site, and various OECD reports.


                                                      2
World Tables data, collected by Summers, Heston, and Kravis, that has been disseminated

widely.

   While the use of PPP as convergence factor to put nominal amounts in the same currency

is now so ubiquitous to be fairly uncontroversial, their use is limited to aggregate output

comparisons. A separate PPP is calculated for investment goods, to make TFP comparisons

between countries. Prices of investment goods can—and do—evolve differently from the

evolution of the general price level. To compare TFP levels of two countries at different points

in time, changes in the relative price of capital have to be taken into account. To compare

sectoral productivity between countries, one should exert similar caution. Fore example, if the

(relative) prices of textiles and machinery evolve differently in the United States and Japan, it

will obviously not be correct to use the same aggregate PPP to convert both Japanese textile

and machinery output into U.S. dollar. If a constant PPP masks increasing textile prices in

Japan relative to the U.S. and decreasing machinery prices, Japanese productivity growth in

textiles is overestimated and vice versa in machinery. Without a sectoral equivalent to the

PPP, one inevitably gets the productivity comparison wrong.

   One of the most important applications for sectoral productivity comparisons is in the

convergence debate. It is now fairly well established that convergence in labor productivity,

or more broadly in GDP per capita, did not take place for the world at large. Nevertheless,

there was some convergence within the more narrowly defined category of industrialized or

OECD countries.2 A natural question to ask is what is driving convergence in this group

of countries. Are all sectors converging to the same extent? Is it the decline in importance

(share in GDP) of sectors with inherently large productivity differentials, like agriculture?

  2
    A engaging nontechnical account of the convergence debate is in Easterly (2001). A more technical
overview of the debate with recent evidence and arguments can be found in a symposium in the July 1996
issue of the Economic Journal or in Durlauf and Quah (1999).

                                                  3
Or, alternatively, are service sectors that account for an ever larger portion of GDP more

comparable across countries? It is also possible that the increased trade intensity between

developed economies, especially in manufacturing, drives the convergence results. In order

to answer any of the above question, one needs to calculate sectoral productivity differences,

at several points in time.

  While aggregate comparisons are widespread, the same is not true for sectoral comparisons.

First, I illustrate that sectoral prices do change and that it affects productivity comparisons.

I provide a solution—sectoral PPPs—and assess their validity. Finally, I show that sectoral

convergence is happening for the limited set of countries studied here. The remainder of the

paper is organized in eight sections that elaborate on each of the following nine points:


  1. International comparisons of output or productivity require currency converters to ex-

     press output in comparable units, much like productivity comparisons over time require

     deflators to convert nominal values into real ones.


  2. For sectoral comparisons, a proper currency conversion factor should reflects relative

     sectoral prices at the moment of conversion and capture the relative evolution of sectoral

     prices in both countries if it were calculated at different points in time.


  3. Comparing the actual change in sectoral deflation rates between a number of countries

     and the U.S., reveals that relative prices do evolve differently in most countries.


  4. Sector-specific conversion factors can be constructed from unit value ratios, as in van

     Ark and Pilat (1993), or from consumer prices, as in Jorgenson, Kuroda, and Nishimizu

     (1987) or as is done for aggregate PPP.


  5. I construct sectoral PPPs for 14 countries in four different years. Even though conver-

                                               4
      gence factors are only needed in a single year to study sectoral convergence, one needs

      to observe them at different points in time to test their validity.


    6. Sørensen (2001) showed that the convergence results for manufacturing obtained using

      aggregate PPP in Bernard and Jones (1996) are not base year invariant. For some sec-

      tors, e.g. total manufacturing or chemical products, sectoral PPP does not suffer from

      the same problem; for other sectors, e.g. financial services, the problem largely remains.


    7. A direct test for the validity of the sectoral PPPs compares sectoral price deflation

      relative to the U.S. with changes in PPP. Results remain mixed: sectoral PPP per-

      forms well in agriculture, mining and some manufacturing sectors, but in sophisticated

      manufacturing and service sectors aggregate PPP is better.


    8. Four reasons why sectoral PPP might fail to capture relative price changes are explored.


    9. Finally, I show evidence of β- and to a lesser extent of σ-convergence in labor produc-

      tivity for most sectors from 1980 to 1999, using the most appropriate PPP in each sector.




1     International comparisons

To compare output or productivity between countries one needs to convert local currency

values into a common unit of measurement. Exchange rates are often deemed inappropriate

because they fluctuate a lot and are only affected by tradable and financial assets. The proper

conversion factor into U.S. dollar, for example, should measure the price in each country

using that country’s currency for a basket of goods that is representative of the output that

is compared, rescaled such that it would cost $1 in the U.S. For GDP, this is exactly what

the PPP is designed to accomplish. For example, the relative labor productivity level of the

                                               5
Japanese economy relative to the U.S. in 1970 is calculated as:


                                    LP J                J,Y
                                                            =           =/$
                                                                        Y
                                                        LP70  /P P P70
                                                    =           U S,$
                                                                              ,              (1)
                                    LP U S    70              LP70

                   P=
                    Y
with P P P =/$
           Y
               =   P$
                      ,   the number of yen needed to purchase the same basket of goods in Japan

that costs $1 in the U.S. LP is simply total output divided by total employment or any other

input measure that is deemed appropriate.

  To compare the evolution of relative productivity levels over time, say from 1970 to 2000,

two approaches are possible. If we had a lot of faith in the currency conversions, we can

compare the productivity level using current prices in both years and track its evolution.

The following calculation measures the change in relative productivity level between Japan

and the U.S. from 1970 to 2000:

                                                                      J,Y
                                                                        =           =/$
                                                                                    Y
                                                    LP J          LP00  /P P P00
                                   J/U S                          U S,$
                      relative LP00                 U S 00    LP00
                                   J/U S
                                             ≡  LP J  =    J,Y
                                                               =        =/$
                                                                        Y
                                                                            .                (2)
                      relative LP70              LP        LP70  /P P P70
                                                 LP U S 70    LP70U S,$




If we do not observe the currency convergence factors in both periods or if we have more

faith in price deflators, we can calculate real output or productivity growth separately for

each country and compare the growth rates.

                                                                          J,Y
                                                                            =
                                                LP
                                                      00,70 J(Y
                                                            =)         LP00  /( PP00
                                                                                   70
                                                                                      )=Y
                      1 + LP GJ70/00      LP70                LP70 J,Y
                                                                     =
                                     ≡  LP              =                                   (3)
                      1 + LP GU70/00
                                 S
                                            00,70 U S($)
                                                            U S,$
                                                           LP00    /( PP70
                                                                        00 $
                                                                           )
                                          LP70                    U S,$
                                                              LP70

The nominal values for 2000 have to be converted into real (1970) values, which is indicated by

LP00,70 . In equation (2), the yen denominated Japanese production is converted into dollars

                                                        6
at each point in time to track how the relative productivity of Japan evolves. In equation (3),

the change in productivity for Japan and the U.S., in real 1970 prices, is compared directly

to judge the evolution of their relative performance.

  Obviously, for (2) and (3) to produce the same result, the price deflators and currency

converters have to be related. Rearranging both equations reveals that they have to satisfy

                                                   P
                                                        00 =
                                                          Y
                                         =/$
                                         Y
                                    P P P00       P
                                               =  70 $ .                                    (4)
                                         =/$
                                         Y
                                    P P P70       P00
                                                  P70

The ratio of the currency conversions factors at both points in time has to equal the ratio

of price deflation in both countries. If one country experiences more rapid inflation than the
                                                                                         P=
                                                                                          Y
other, its currency should depreciate in PPP terms. In theory, P P P =/$
                                                                     Y
                                                                         is defined as   P$
                                                                                              and

(4) should hold. In practice, both sides of the equation are calculated from different data and

equality is not guaranteed.

  While the country with the highest productivity growth rate should have a higher relative

productivity level in 2000 than in 1970, it does not speak to the level comparison. If the high

growth country was already the productivity leader in 1970, it has unambiguously increased

its lead. If it was lagging in 1970, the gap might have become smaller or the relative ranking

might have reversed. To distinguish each of the three possible scenarios, both comparisons—

(1) and (2) or (3)—have to be carried out.

  This implies that to assess convergence, the currency convergence has to be performed at

least once, but not necessarily more than once. For example, Bernard and Jones (1996) cal-

culate relative productivity levels for one base year (1985) and trace the relative productivity

paths for different countries without further currency conversions, using (3). Sørensen (2001)


                                               7
confirms that for GDP per worker in the entire business sector exactly the same results would

be obtained if the currency conversion would be performed in a different year.

    One of the important predictions of the Solow growth model (Solow 1956) is that growth

rates between countries will only differ in the short run. Assuming technology spills across

borders without impediments, countries will all convergence to the same steady state per

capita growth rate. This prediction has been tested and rejected frequently at the aggregate

level. An obvious explanation is that technology differences are persistent and different

countries will converge to different steady states. An open question is whether convergence

fails to the same extent in all sectors. Intuitively, one might expect technology to spread more

easily in sectors where output is traded intensely. Such sectoral comparison are complicated

by the necessity of currency convergence factors that are appropriate for each sector, which

I turn to next.




2     Sectoral international comparisons

At disaggregate levels, few comparisons of productivity levels between two countries have been

carried out, partly because it is difficult to find proper currency exchange factors. In general,

if prices change differently across sectors, it will not be correct to use the same conversion

factor for different sectors. Continuing with the previous example, the productivity difference

between Japan and the U.S. in 2000 can be written as the product of the difference in 1970

and the relative growth in the intervening period.

                                                             LP00,70 J
                                                                    
                           LP J              LP J 
                                                              LP70
                                          =                         U S                     (5)
                           LP U S              LP U S
                                                           
                                     00                  70 LP   00,70
                                                                LP70




                                                  8
                                                                          LP J,Y= /( P00 )=
                                                                                           Y 
                                                                                  00   P70
                      J,Y
                        =        =/$
                                 Y             J,Y
                                                 =        =/$
                                                          Y
                    LP00  /P P P00           LP70  /P P P70                          J,Y
                                                                                   LP70=

                           U S,$
                                       =            U S,$                 LP U S,$ /( P00 )$ 
                       LP00                     LP70                          00       P70
                                                                                    LP70
                                                                              P
                                                                           00 )=
                                                                               Y −1
                                                                     Y (
                                                            
                                               J,Y
                                                 =                   =/$
                                             LP00       ×       P P P70 PP70
                                                                         ( 00 )$
                                                                              P70
                                       =                          U S,$
                                                                LP00


If convergence is taking place, the two terms on the right hand side of (5) should be negatively

correlated.

  The same relationship between the conversion factors and deflation rates has to hold as

before for both sides of the equation to equal one another. In logarithms, it amounts to


                              =/$
                              Y
                         P P P00            P
                                                 00 =
                                                   Y             P
                                                                       00 $
                                                                         
                   log        =/$
                              Y
                                    = log               − log                 = ṗ =Y − ṗ $ .    (6)
                         P P P70            P70                    P70


The change in the convergence factor has to match the relative inflation rates between the

two countries. For two sectors with different relative price changes the same aggregate PPP,

or even the exchange rate, will not be able to satisfy equation (6).

  As an example of the potential pitfalls from using aggregate PPP, consider photographic

cameras in Japan. In 1985, cameras were relatively expensive in Japan, costing 268 yen per

dollar worth of camera in the U.S., while the aggregate PPP was 218. By 1996, prices dropped

relative to the U.S. and a camera costing $100 in the U.S. could be bought for only 8600 yen

in Japan. Even if convergence in productivity was perfect, it would not be picked up using

aggregate PPP. Assume, for example, that in 1985 Japan was less productive, but that the

entire difference was eliminated through faster productivity growth, such that by 1996 both

countries were equally productive in camera production. The relative productivity growth,

the second term in the decomposition in (5), is not affected by PPP. All that is needed are



                                                   9
deflators that capture the relative price drop of cameras in Japan relative to the U.S. If the
                                                                                  J,Y
                                                                                    =
aggregate PPP of 218 is used to convert the high nominal amount in yen in 1985, LP85  , into

1985 dollars, rather than the true price of 268, we I overestimate Japanese initial productivity.
                                                                       J,Y
                                                                         =
On the left hand side of (5), the low nominal amount in yen in 1996, LP96  , produces an

underestimate of the Japanese productivity level if the aggregate PPP of 166 is used to convert

it into 1996 dollars, rather than the true price of 86. The puzzling conclusion would be that

a country with relatively high productivity level in camera production in 1985 enjoyed higher

productivity growth than the U.S., but has fallen behind in relative productivity by 1996. A

sector with the reverse price trend, such as local transportation, would yield opposite, equally

puzzling results. The sector would appear to improve its productivity level relative to the

U.S., even though it enjoyed lower productivity growth if correct price deflators are used to

compare 1996 and 1985 statistics.

  The principle is more general than might appear from the previous discussion. To com-

paring productivity for some industry in country A at time 1 with country B at time 0, we

need both a price adjustment, to bring units at time 1 back to time 0, and a factor to convert

country A’s currency to country B’s:

                                                 P A
                                                     1              A/B
                                          LP1A /        /P P P0
                              LP1A                  P0
                                     =                                    .
                              LP0B                   LP0B


Alternatively, we can first put country A’s productivity level in country B’s currency at time

1 and perform the price deflation using country B prices:

                                                                P B
                                                         A/B        1
                                          LP1A /P P P1         /
                              LP1A                                 P0
                                     =                                    ,
                              LP0B                   LP0B



                                               10
which will give the same result, as long as

                                                             P A
                                                               1
                                               A/B
                                          P P P1          P
                                                       =  0 B
                                               A/B
                                          P P P0          P1
                                                          P0

which boils down to equation (4) or (6) again. The ratio of price deflation rates between

countries should equal the ratio of currency conversion factors at different points in time.3

    In sum, to compare labor productivity between two countries at one point in time, we

need to observe a currency conversion factor. To see how this relative productivity evolves

over time, we need, in addition, conversion factors in all years or price deflators in each

country. If price deflators are used to track relative productivity over time, it is important

that the currency converter properly captures relative price differences between the countries.

Otherwise, convergence results will depend on the year of currency conversion.




3       Is there a problem?

Bernard and Jones (1996) use aggregate PPPs to investigate convergence among 14 OECD

countries separately for six broadly defined sectors. Sørensen (2001) proposes three tests

to verify whether their convergence results are invariant to the choice of base year for the

    3
    In principle, we can even go one step further and compare different industries, i and ι, in different
countries at different times. In addition to converting country A’s currency to country B’s and bringing units
at time 1 back to time 0, we can adjust the labor productivity statistics of each industry by the relative
capital intensity and compare total factor productivity:
                                       P A            K A /P P P A/B /LA  12 (sA   B K
                                                                                   i +sι )0
                                  A      i1        A/B    i0       K0     i0
                        A       LPi1 /       /P P Pi0 /         B    B
                  T F Pi1               Pi0                   Kι0 /Lι0
                       B
                            =                              B
                                                                                                           (7)
                  T F Pι0                               LPι0

The capital-labor ratio adjustment is weighted by the average capital share of each sector that is compared
and country A’s capital is converted using a capital goods PPP.



                                                     11
currency conversion. If equation (4) holds with equality in each sector the base year would

not matter, but he finds that the aggregate PPPs do not pass the test, especially not for

manufacturing. The price of manufactured goods relative to the aggregate price level must

have evolved differently in different countries.

   A more direct check whether there is any cause for concern compares the deflation rates,

used in real output statistics, across countries and sectors. In two possible situations is the

use of aggregate PPP adequate. If relative prices are stable in all countries, the evolution of

the aggregate price level is all that is relevant and aggregate PPP will be adequate. This is

obviously a matter of degree. The question is how long a time period can one assume that

relative prices do not change. If price inflation in Japan equals U.S. price inflation in every

sector, there is also no problem. Even though the aggregate PPP cannot reflect the relative

price change for each sector, it will not introduce a bias because all countries are affected

similarly. If the currency convergence is only performed once with aggregate PPP, each

convergence test assumes that relative prices between countries, e.g. the price of machinery

in terms of textiles in Japan relative to the U.S., are unchanged from that base year. In each

of the two previous situations, this assumption holds.

   Unfortunately, over a ten year period, neither of the two situations even remotely reflects

the relative price evolution of manufactured products in a set of 14 OECD countries. In

Figure 1, I plot for ten manufacturing sectors the relative rate of inflation from 1985 to 1996

for three countries relative to the price inflation in the U.S.4 The relative rates are normalized

   4
    The manufacturing sectors are ISIC Revision 3 sectors 15-16: Food products, beverages and tobacco; 17-
19: textiles, textile products, leather and footwear; 20: Wood and products of wood and cork; 21-22: Pulp,
paper, paper products, printing and publishing; 23-25: Chemical, rubber, plastics and fuel products; 26:
Other non-metallic mineral products; 27-28: Basic metals and fabricated metal products; 29-33: machinery
and equipment; 34-35: Transport equipment; 36-37: Manufacturing not elsewhere classified (NEC) and
recycling.



                                                   12
by the average relative inflation rate for manufacturing as a whole. If all sectors in a country

experience the same relative inflation evolution, each country should display a horizontal line

at one.

  This is obviously not the case for Canada, Japan, and the Netherlands. Two of these

three countries, Canada and Japan, are large trading partners of the U.S. and had the most

similar inflation experience. On the graph, industries are ranked from low to high U.S.

inflation. Sectors that experienced lower than average inflation in the U.S., e.g. machinery

and equipment and metal products, experienced relatively higher inflation in the other three

countries. Sectors with higher inflation in the U.S., such as food, wood, and paper, generally

experienced less inflation in the other countries. Seven Japanese industries experienced higher

inflation than their U.S. counterparts, while this was the case for only two Canadian and four

Dutch industries.


                                          [Figure 1]


  As a result, it would not be correct to use the same aggregate PPP to convert Dutch

machinery or food output into dollars. Figure 1 indicates that between 1985 and 1996 prices

of machinery relative to the average manufacturing good rose 57% faster in the Netherlands

than in the U.S. This decomposes as follows. The average Dutch price level rose by 11%,

while machinery became only 9% more expensive. In the U.S., the average manufacturing

price level increased more, by 21%, while machinery became 34% cheaper, quality adjusted.

In relative terms, the inflation rate for machinery in the Netherlands was 43% higher than

in the U.S., while the average manufacturing price increase was 10% lower. Combined, this

results in a 57% increase of the relative price of machinery in terms of average manufacturing

goods in the Netherlands relative to the U.S. (1.10*1.43=1.57). The reverse is true for food

                                              13
prices which dropped 32% in relative price in the Netherlands, relative to the U.S.’ relative

price evolution.

  To make the example even more concrete, I look for direct evidence of such price evolutions

in the price surveys. In 1985, a standardized amount of flour costing $1 in the U.S., would

have set a Dutch consumer back 2.39 Dutch guilder. This could have been considered a steal

as the Dutch guilder was trading at 3.3 per $ and the aggregate PPP was 2.48. By 1996, an

amount of flour costing $1 in the U.S. was priced at only 1.46 guilder in the Netherlands even

though the aggregate PPP only dropped to 2.06. The relative price of flour relative to other

goods has thus dropped in the Netherlands, relative to its evolution in the U.S. It went from

4% cheaper than the cost of the average bundle of goods in the U.S. (2.39 versus 2.48), to

29% cheaper (1.46 versus 2.06). A similar pattern holds for a whole range of food products.

  Evidence for the relative increase in Dutch machinery prices is less easy to detect. There

are some products that experience an increase in price relative to the U.S. such as heaters and

air conditioners, vacuum cleaners, and record players. A lot more products such as products

of boilermaking, machinery for working wood, refrigerators, and television sets, have become

cheaper, but the price decline was less than the decrease in aggregate PPP, contributing to

the relative price increase for machinery. Still, examples of products that saw prices decline

faster than the aggregate PPP abound, which works in the opposite direction of the general

trend. One possibility is that manufactured goods experienced more rapid price declines than

service goods, even more so in the Netherlands than in the U.S. An alternative possibility

is that the output price deflators in the U.S. go further in making adjustment for quality

improvements than in other countries. The price surveys look for standardized products and

do not have such a problem. In that case, the price increase for Dutch machinery in Figure



                                              14
1 combines price decreases with quality improvements, for which the Dutch statistical office

makes less adjustment than their American counterparts.

  The differential price evolutions in different sectors is not confined to three countries. Fig-

ure 2 plots the relative price changes in three industries relative to the average manufacturing

price change for all 14 countries. Relative price changes for each country are again normalized

by the relative price change in the U.S. for the respective industry. Inflation in the machinery

and equipment industry was the lowest of all U.S. industries. Not surprising then, that all

other countries saw relatively higher price increases in that industry, but the differences be-

tween countries are very large. In Korea, machinery prices relative to average manufacturing

declined as much as in the U.S., while in Belgium relative machinery prices went though

the roof. The reverse is true for the paper, pulp, printing, and publishing industry, which

experienced the highest inflation of all U.S. industries, but saw relative price decreases in

other countries relative to the U.S. The basic metals and fabricated metal products industry

is intermediate. In some countries, like Norway and Portugal, these goods became cheaper

relative to the U.S., while in the United Kingdom or Korea they became more expensive.


                                          [Figure 2]


  Figure 2 confirms that relative prices evolve differently across countries and sectoral con-

vergence factors are necessary. For some countries, like Belgium, Portugal, or Mexico, the

price evolution differs enormously from that in the U.S. across industries. The bias, if the

same aggregate PPP is used for all industries, will be huge. For other countries, like Japan or

Canada, the relative prices changed somewhat, but the error made by ignoring price trends

will be more limited.

  The evidence presented in this section demonstrates that relative prices of different indus-

                                              15
tries do evolve differently across countries. Accurate productivity comparisons will have to

use currency conversion factors that adequately reflect relative prices. If the same conversion

factor is used for each industry, the relative productivity level at each point in time will be

sensitive to the base year in which the currency conversion is carried out. A sampling of

food product prices provided some idea that price surveys conducted to construct aggregate

PPPs may contain the data needed to construct sectoral PPPs. A cursory look at machinery

prices, reveals that the validity of such conversion factors should be tested and not be taken

for granted.




4     Other sectoral currency conversions

Even though few researchers have actually constructed sector-specific conversion factors, I

am obviously not the first to compare sectoral output across countries. Researchers have

constructed sectoral PPPs from unit values ratios, using producers’ prices, or from consumer

prices, obtained from retail price surveys. The first approach was pioneered by van Ark and

Pilat (1993) and is explained in detail, with recent advances, in van Ark and Timmer (2001).

Its appeal stems from the natural concordance between price and output measures and the

possibility to control accurately for changes in product mix. A drawback is the need for

“double deflation”, to control for changes in intermediary goods prices.

    The second approach is also used to construct aggregate PPP and first applied to sectoral

comparisons in Jorgenson, Kuroda, and Nishimizu (1987). Price and expenditure information

comes from consumer surveys and direct retail price surveys. It has been the more popular

approach, even though the output concept is usually taken from the production side of the

national accounts, while prices correspond to the expenditure side. In a comment on van Ark

                                              16
and Pilat (1993), Jorgenson mentions:

       The unit value ratios are preferable, in principle, because they represent ratios
       of producers’ prices for the two countries being compared. [...] The practical
       disadvantages of unit value ratios largely outweigh their conceptual advantages,
       so the purchasing power parities of Kravis and his associates [...] are far more
       satisfactory. (“Comment” on van Ark and Pilat (1993), p. 53)

   Jorgenson, Kuroda, and Nishimizu (1987) use the approach outlined in Jorgenson and

Kuroda (1990) to compare sectoral productivity between Japan and the U.S. Using the same

methodology, Conrad and Jorgenson (1985) extend the results and include Germany in the

comparison. Lee and Tang (2001) perform similar comparisons between Canada and the U.S.

for Industry Canada. As far as I am aware, this is an exhaustive list of the studies that

construct sectoral prices.5

   Jorgenson and Kuroda (1990) present the methodology to compare prices internationally,

starting from 153 commodity groups compiled by Kravis, Heston, and Summers (1978) for

1970. In the bilateral productivity comparisons between the U.S. and other countries, the

consumer prices are adjusted for trade, indirect taxes and transportation margins, to better

approximate producer prices. These adjustments require inter-industry accounts and pose

great requirements on the data. I will be able to perform some, but not all of the adjustments.

Pilat (1996) applies the methodology to a larger set of countries, starting from more detailed

price surveys compiled by Eurostat and the OECD. Approximately 220 basic headings are

available that aggregate prices on 2500 goods and services for 1990.6 The detailed list of

   5
     Using sectoral PPPs in a productivity comparison using gross output, as in Jorgenson and Kuroda (1990),
or adjusting unit value ratios for “double deflation”, as in van Ark and Timmer (2001), requires detailed and
internationally harmonized input-output tables. This is beyond the scope of this paper and I will limit myself
to comparing value added per worker, using sectoral PPPs to convert value added.
   6
     Harrigan (1999) uses PPPs which are specific for a number of GDP components. These are published by
the OECD and aggregated from the same basic headings. While they are available for the same years as I
work with, they do not correspond well to the industries that provide the output measures.


                                                     17
goods for which price are available are mapped into industrial sectors. Aggregation of the

individual good prices produces a sectoral PPP. A more detailed description of all calculations

and judgement calls involved is presented in the next section.

   The sectoral PPPs are used to compare productivity between countries at different points

in time. For example, to compare sector i at time t between Japan and the U.S. we need


                                                    Pit=Y
                                       P P Pit    ≡       .
                                                    Pit$


For the same comparison at a later time, t + 1, we need in principal


                                                        =Y
                                                       Pit+1
                                     P P Pit+1 ≡         $
                                                                                            (8)
                                                       Pit+1


while in practice one can rely on

                                                                Pit+1 =
                                                                    Y
                                                                 Pit
                              P P Pit+1 = P P Pit ×                 $ .                   (9)
                                                                Pit+1
                                                                Pit



All previously mentioned studies avoid making the price comparisons directly, as in (8), at

multiple dates. Instead, they construct sectoral PPPs for a single year and extrapolate the

comparison forward or backward in time, relying on (9). This is correct as long as the deflation

rates in both countries are equally successful in distinguishing genuine price increases from

output or quality increases. It remains to be seen whether this holds equally well for all

sectors.

   Bernard and Jones (1996) and Dollar and Wolff (1988) ignore the possible differential evo-

lution in relative prices between different countries and use aggregate PPP to convert sectoral



                                                 18
output. Sørensen (2001) showed that equation (9) is violated for the manufacturing sector

if aggregate PPP is combined with sectoral price deflators. Obviously, aggregate PPP does

not necessarily capture the different evolution of relative prices for manufacturing products

in different countries. For the total business sector, equation (9) did hold with aggregate

PPP and the relevant deflation rates. Because PPPs and deflation rates are constructed from

different prices, equation (9) is not even guaranteed to hold if the levels of aggregation match

(approximately). The total business sector results instill some confidence in the expenditure

PPP approach.

    The implicit assumption that differential evolutions of relative prices between countries are

unimportant or that they are equally well captured with contemporaneous cross-country com-

parisons as with relative price changes measured within each country separately, is mirrored

in another comment on van Ark and Pilat (1993) by Frank Lichtenberg:

       Another, less serious limitation of the paper’s approach is that the authors con-
       structed “benchmark” estimates of relative productivity levels for only a single
       year—1987; (“Comment” on van Ark and Pilat (1993), p. 58).

    All studies using sector-specific conversion rates to compare productivity levels between

countries over time have committed the same sin and similarly assumed that (9) holds. As

far as I know, I am the first to actually test the adequacy of sectoral PPPs.




5     My sectoral currency conversions

To control for relative price differences between countries, we need sector-specific currency
                                          =
                                          Y
convergence factors, e.g. P P P =/$
                                Y
                                    ≡ ( PP $ ). I follow the expenditure approach, as Jorgenson

and coauthors did, and construct them from consumer prices. Sectoral PPPs are calculated


                                               19
for 18 OECD countries in four years: 1985, 1990, 1993, and 1996. Even though a convergence

factor is only needed in a single year to study sectoral convergence, we need to observe it

at different points in time to test whether it adequately captures relative price changes. A

number of validity checks are performed in the following two sections.

  The construction of sectoral PPPs has three components to it. First, goods from consumer

expenditures and price surveys are mapped into the industrial classification of sectors. Second,

prices are aggregated to the level of output and input. Third, adjustments are made for trade,

indirect taxes, and differences in retail or wholesale margins.7

  The starting point are surveys conducted in almost all OECD countries that collect prices

and expenditures on approximately 3000 standardized products. A basket of comparable

goods and services are chosen to be representative of the entire economy. Products consumed

by consumers, businesses and government are surveyed and aggregated to 207 basic heading

categories. These are the most detailed product categories for which expenditure weights can

be estimated and which are available for all countries. Background information on the survey

and on the construction of aggregate PPP from only the price and expenditure data can be

found in OECD (1999).

  Similarly as Jorgenson and Kuroda (1990) and Pilat (1996), I map the “basic heading”

expenditures categories into the industrial classification of sectors. I use the two digit ISIC

Revision 3 as this is the level of detail for which comparable output and input statistics

are available across countries. This corresponds roughly to the detail of three digit SIC

industries. Obviously a number of judgement calls have to be made to perform the mapping.

I experimented with different criteria yielding largely similar results.8

  7
      Lack of data forces me to drop the last adjustment.
  8
      A complete list of the mapping is available upon request. Three basic headings were omitted as they


                                                    20
   To calculate a single price index at the most detailed industry classification, some basic

heading categories have to be aggregated. By necessity, this was done using expenditure

shares. Further aggregation—to a more aggregated industry breakdown—uses total sales,

where available, or value added shares. For example, the two basic headings “cigarettes” and

“other tobacco products” are both mapped into ISIC industry 16 “manufacture of tobacco

products”. The PPP for this industry is obtained by weighing the prices for both headings

by expenditure shares. Further aggregation, to construct a PPP for the combined industries

15-16 “food products, beverages, and tobacco” uses output shares as weight.

   Because not all consumption is produced locally, one should adjust for the trade content

of consumption. Similarly, some of the domestic production is sold to other countries, pre-

sumably at world prices. The adjustment is premised on the assumption that exports and

imports are exchanged with the rest of the world using the exchange rate. The pound ster-

ling value of British cigarette production is converted into dollars at the going exchange rate,

when exported to the U.S. Equivalently, if Great Britain imports from the U.S. an amount

of cigarettes that sells for $1 in the U.S., I assume that it costs one over the dollar per pound

exchange rate. For each country, the expenditure PPP that is observed in the price surveys is

the average of the PPP domestic producers receive (P P Pexpend ), which is weighted by the

production over consumption, and the exchange rate (ER), which is weighted by net imports

could not be matched to any specific industry: 1182022 “Other personal goods and effect”, 1431011 “other
products” (the very last, catch-all category), 1500000 “change in stocks”. Two other basic headings were
omitted as they capture purchases abroad: 1191011 and 1600000. One potentially problematic assumption
is to include consumption of fixed capital by hospitals, nonprofit institutions, and educational institutions,
in the sector where they sell their services. Presumably, the cost of these expenditures will be passed on to
consumers in the price of their services. As I don’t know the breakdown between buildings, different types of
equipment, furniture, etc., the only other option is to omit those expenditures.




                                                     21
over consumption. The following identity holds in U.S. dollar prices



P P Pexpend × Consumption = P P Pprod × Production + ER × Imports − ER × Exports,



while in domestic pound prices the following identity holds as well,



                     Consumption = Production + Imports − Exports.



Combining both identities produces the following adjustment for the P P Pexpend s:


                                                                Exports − Imports
         P P Pprod = P P Pexpend + (ER − P P Pexpend ) ×                          .     (10)
                                                                   Production


If the product is more expensive domestically than in the U.S. and the country is a net

importer, the relevant PPP to convert domestic production into U.S. dollar will be even

higher than the observed expenditure PPP. If the country is a net exporter of goods for

which the expenditure PPP exceeds the U.S. exchange rate, the production PPP is adjusted

downwards, because exporters will have to settle for lower prices.

  Finally, prices are adjusted for indirect taxes, because observed PPPs include taxes while

I want to compare output net of taxes. The adjustment for country i follows Pilat (1996),


                                           . 1 +
                                                  
                                                    Tax−Subsidy  
                        i
                   P P Pnet          i
                              = P P Pgross           Production i .                     (11)
                                                
                                                  Tax−Subsidy 
                                                  1+   Production    U SA


The gross prices are divided by the relative net tax difference with the U.S., the comparison

country for all other countries. The observed indirect tax ratios vary by country, industry,




                                             22
and year. They are taken from the ISDB data set, produced by the OECD.9 When sectoral

tax data was missing, the average tax rate over all non-missing years is used. If data was

missing in all years, the tax ratio of the industry one-up in the aggregation is used. For

countries with all tax data missing, no adjustment could be made.

   In some industries, the sectoral PPP measures that I obtain differ quite a lot from the

aggregate PPP. As an example, Table 1 lists the exchange rate, aggregate PPP, and sectoral

PPPs in several industries. The calculated PPP for the “Total Business” sector differs from

the published aggregate PPP because of aggregation differences (production instead of ex-

penditures), the trade and indirect tax adjustment, and the exclusion of government services

and nonprofit activities from “Total Business”. In some countries, e.g. Greece and Portugal,

many government services are heavily subsidized producing a much lower aggregate PPP than

“Total Business” PPP. In theory, the sectoral PPPs should be superior to the aggregate PPP.

In practice, the imperfect aggregation and adjustments for trade and taxes might introduce

biases.


                                                  [Table 1]


   Because I have price survey data for several years, I am able to test the validity of the

sectoral PPPs. In particular, I can verify whether they satisfy the relationship between PPP

and output deflators as described by equations (4), (6), or (9). Appropriate conversion factors

will produce measures of β− or σ−convergence that are independent of the year in which the

currency convergence is carried out. I illustrate this for manufacturing and a number of other

sectors in Section 6. A more direct test is whether changes in the appropriate conversion

factors match changes in relative prices, which I check in Section 7.

  9
      The ISDB data set is discontinued after 1998.

                                                      23
6      Base year invariant convergence results

Commenting on an earlier paper by Bernard and Jones (1996), Sørensen (2001) showed that

aggregate PPP was inappropriate to study convergence in the manufacturing sector. The

initial productivity level (in 1970) for each country relative to the U.S. depended on the year

in which the currency conversion was carried out when aggregate PPP was used to convert

manufacturing output in U.S. dollar. This variation has important consequences for the

convergence results. For the service sector, which accounts for more than 50% of GDP in

most developed economies, the use of aggregate PPP did not pose the same problem. With

the sectoral PPPs, I replicate the tests for manufacturing and show that the results are now

robust to the year in which the currency conversion is carried out. As a result, the β− and

σ− convergence conclusions do not depend on the base year anymore.

    In the top row of Figure 3, I reproduce the three different graphs from Sørensen (2001) for

my data set using aggregate PPP.10 The bottom row shows the corresponding graphs when

sectoral PPP is used for currency conversions. While there are noticeable trends in the top

graphs, these virtually disappear in the bottom graphs. The sectoral PPPs seem to capture

relative price differences and their changes over time reasonably well.

    Each line in the top-left graph represents the initial relative productivity (in 1985) of one

country. The years on the X-axes indicate the year in which the currencies are converted to

U.S. dollar, while real growth rates are used to bring nominal amounts back to 1985. For each

country, the statistics are normalized by the average over the different possible base years.

If the currency conversion did not depend on the base year the lines would be horizontal at

  10
   The analysis is carried out for a larger number of countries, 18 versus 14 in previous work. I limit the
sample to the period 1985-1996, because I can only calculate sectoral PPP for this period.




                                                    24
zero for each country. This is clearly not the case for aggregate PPP. The graph below plots

the corresponding relative productivity numbers when the currency conversion is carried out

using sectoral PPP. Only four estimates can be obtained, one for each year I have sectoral

conversion factors. Relative productivity is fluctuating marginally less in the bottom figure.11

   The middle graphs plot the coefficient estimate and 95% confidence bound for β-conver-

gence, again using the different base years to convert output into U.S. dollar. The relevant

coefficient is obtained from an OLS regression of average real productivity growth over the

sample period on log initial productivity pooling all countries. If the currency conversion were

base year invariant, we would find a horizontal line. A line above zero would be evidence of

divergence, below zero of convergence. The results using aggregate PPP hint at divergence

if an early base year was used and at convergence for later base years. None of the point-

estimates are significantly different from zero, which led Bernard and Jones (1996)—who used

1985 as base year—to conclude no convergence was taking place in manufacturing. Using the

appropriate sectoral PPP for manufacturing, in the middle-bottom graph, suggests neither

convergence nor divergence, independent of the base year.

   Finally, the graphs on the right provide an estimate of σ-convergence. The standard

deviation of productivity levels across countries is plotted for each year normalized by the

standard deviation in 1985. Each base year for the currency convergence generates a different

curve. In the top graph, only four of the twelve possible curves are included, those for

the years with sectoral PPP available. The line using aggregate PPP in 1996 is relatively

flat. The standard deviation of labor productivity hardly changes over the years, suggesting

that countries are neither converging or diverging. Using aggregate PPP from any of the

  11
    While this is hard to gauge from the figures, it does show up in the standard deviation by country,
calculated similarly as in Sørensen (2001). Results are not reported as they are based on only 4 years for
sectoral PPP.

                                                   25
earlier years, on the other hand, produces evidence of slight divergence, because the standard

deviation increases over time. If the conversion factors were time invariant, all four lines

would lie on top of each other. This is largely the case in the bottom graph using sectoral

PPPs. Dispersion across countries has hardly changed over the years.


                                          [Figure 3]


  For illustrative purposes, I include the same convergence tests for two other industries,

“chemical products” and “financial services and real estate” in Figure 4. Products in the

former industry are well defined, relatively homogeneous across countries, and traded rather

intensely. The convergence tests show a clear improvement when sectoral PPP is used instead

of aggregate PPP. The latter industry produces more differentiated products, which are harder

to compare across countries and much less traded internationally. The results with sectoral

PPP turn out to be at least as sensitive to the choice of base year as results for aggregate

PPP.


                                          [Figure 4]


  While it is difficult to decide whether sectoral PPPs are properly capturing relative price

differences based on these graphs, the two examples in Figure 4 illustrate that they are

unlikely to be equally successful for each industry. In the following section, I derive a more

explicit test to what extent changes in sectoral PPPs mirror changes in relative deflation

rates. I also investigate what sectors for which the conversion factors are appropriate have

in common.




                                             26
7     Direct comparison of relative price evolutions

An alternative way to verify the accuracy of the sectoral PPPs, is by looking at price changes

directly. If relative sectoral PPPs correspond to relative prices in the economy, changes in

sectoral PPP should correspond to sectoral deflation rates relative to the corresponding U.S.

deflation rate. If they do, they will automatically produce productivity comparisons that are

invariant to the base year for the currency conversion.

    Changes in sectoral PPP are readily obtained from the PPPs calculated in Section 5.

Sector-specific relative deflation is constructed by differencing the nominal and real output

growth rates from the STAN database. Both price changes are calculated from entirely

different data sources, but they are supposed to measure the same relative price evolution.

To make the comparison more concrete, recall that Japanese PPP for sector i at time t is

calculated as


                                              =/$
                                              Y             Pit=Y
                                         P P Pit        =         .
                                                            Pit$


The change over time is given by

                                                            .
                                  =/$
                                   Y
                             P P Pit                Pit=Y Pit$
                       log        =/$
                                   Y
                                         = log             $
                                                            .
                                                    =Y
                             P P Pit−1             Pit−1 Pit−1
                                                    P =Y               P $
                                                      it                   it
                                         = log                  − log            .       (12)
                                                    Pit−1               Pit−1


The same price change can be calculated from a comparison of real and nominal output




                                                   27
because


                                                       nominal VAJ,Y =
                                      real VAJ,Y
                                             it
                                                =
                                                  =               it
                                                            Pit=Y


and


                           real VAJ,Y
                                  it
                                     =
                                             nominal VAJ,Y
                                                       it
                                                          =
                                                                   Pit=Y
                     log               = log                − log        .
                           real VAJ,Y
                                    =
                                  it−1       nominal VAJ,Y
                                                         =
                                                       it−1
                                                                   =Y
                                                                  Pit−1
                     |       {z          }     |             {z        }
                            ˙ J,Y
                           var it
                                  =
                                                            ˙ J,Y
                                                           va it
                                                                 =




The deflation rate for industry i in Japan is simply the difference in growth rates between nom-

inal and real output. Subtracting the deflation rate for the U.S.—the benchmark country—

produces the same statistic as in (12):


                                                                      P =Y            P $
                                                                        it                it
             ˙ J,Y
           (va   =
                     ˙ J,Y
               it − var
                          =
                                 ˙ Uit S,$ − var
                        it ) − (va            ˙ Uit S,$ ) = log                − log            .   (13)
                                                                      Pit−1            Pit−1


  A first check is whether the two ways to calculate changes in relative sectoral prices, (12)

and (13), produce similar results. Table 2 contains the correlation across countries between

the change in PPP and the relative sectoral deflation and the number of countries for which

both changes have the same sign. Results for both sectoral and aggregate PPP are included.

Most researchers comparing productivity across countries, even at the sectoral level, have done

so using aggregate rather than sectoral PPP. A switch to sectoral PPP is only warranted if

these disaggregate price indices approximate relative price changes across countries better

than the aggregate measures do.

  The evidence is mixed. The results over the entire period, 1985 to 1996 are in Table 2.

Only for Agriculture is sectoral PPP clearly superior, while only for Construction and Total


                                                      28
Services both measures prefer aggregate PPP over sectoral PPP. In Mining and Quarrying the

correlation between sectoral deflation and changes in PPP is higher for the sectoral measure,

while the aggregate PPP measure is more likely to have the same sign. The reverse is true for

Manufacturing and Electricity, Gas, and Water; the correlation is higher for aggregate PPP,

but sectoral PPP is more likely to predict the direction of change correctly.

   Even more troublesome are the results for a shorter period, spanning two consecutive

price surveys, 1993 and 1996, in Table 3. For Agriculture, on one hand, and Construction

and Total Services, on the other hand, the superiority of respectively sectoral and aggregate

PPP is not unambiguous anymore. Moreover, for Mining and Quarrying, sectoral PPP is

now unambiguously preferred, while for Manufacturing the correlation results now prefer the

sectoral measure.

   Results at a finer sectoral decomposition, often limited to a smaller set of countries, clear

up some of the ambiguity. For almost all detailed Agriculture and Mining industries both

measures in both time periods prefer sectoral over aggregate PPP. For most detailed Service

industries aggregate PPP seems more appropriate. Only in Transport and Communication

is sectoral PPP superior between 1993 and 1996, but aggregate PPP has a such a high

correlation, 0.86, with relative sectoral deflation over the longer period that it still seems

preferable.12

   The detailed manufacturing industries fall roughly in three groups. In Food (15), Wearing

Apparel (18), and Petroleum Products (23), the correlation is always at least 0.10 higher for

sectoral PPP than for aggregate PPP. In Wood and Cork (20) and Rubber and Plastics (25)

sectoral PPP also has better indicators, correlations and sign predictions, but the correlation

  12
    More detailed service industries are not listed as the aggregate PPP measure dominates, except for
education.


                                                 29
is not always 0.10 higher than for aggregate PPP. For these five sectors sectoral PPP seems to

be the most appropriate currency convergence factor. In the second group of five industries,

aggregate PPP is preferred, because correlations always exceed those with sectoral PPP

substantially: Leather and Footwear (19), Pulp and Paper (21), Metals (27-28), Machinery

(29-33), and Not Elsewhere Classified (36-37). For the remaining manufacturing industries,

it depends on the criterion or the time period one looks at whether sectoral or aggregate PPP

is preferred. Often the correlation and sign predictions give opposite results and the results

are generally rather close.


                                          [Table 2]


                                          [Table 3]


  The finding in Sørensen (2001) that aggregate PPP is valid for services but not for man-

ufacturing is confirmed in this data set, although I also find that not all manufacturing

subsectors are alike. As an example of the importance of using sectoral PPP when it is ap-

propriate, compare the convergence statistics in the first and second row of the top graph in

Figure 4 for Chemicals and Chemical products (ISIC 23-25). This industry has one of the

largest increases in correlation when moving from aggregate PPP to sectoral PPP, increasing

from 0.65 to 0.78, and 13 of the 14 signs are predicted correctly.

  Another check on the relevance of the sectoral PPP is whether within each country the two

measures for relative price changes are correlated. The results in Table 2 and 3 looked at the

correlation between price changes and changes in PPP across countries separately for each

industry. If the correlation was higher for sectoral PPP, it was deemed more appropriate for

that industry. If aggregate PPPs are used to compare sectoral productivity, it is implicitly


                                              30
assumed that each industry experiences the same deflation rate as the aggregate economy or

that the relative price change for each industry follows the same pattern as in the U.S in each

country. No changes in relative prices are allowed.

    The results in Table 4 look at correlations between the same price changes, but across

industries and separately by country. For aggregate PPP, the change in PPP does not vary

and correlations are zero by definition. Within most countries the change in sectoral PPP is

positively correlated with the difference in deflation rate with the U.S. If the same sectors as

in Table 2 are included, in the first column, the average correlation is 0.15, positive but low.

Only two countries, Australia and Norway, have a negative correlation. If service sectors

are excluded, as aggregate PPP was clearly preferred there, in the second column, most

correlations are larger. If all non-service sectors that I have data on are included, in the third

column, correlation are even higher, with an average across countries of 0.26, but it is much

higher for many countries. The sectoral PPPs clearly pick up relative price changes in the

economy which are ignored by aggregate PPP.


                                            [Table 4]




8     Why sectoral PPP is inadequate for some industries

Before turning to convergence results, I discuss a number of reasons why the sectoral PPPs

might not be adequate measures of relative prices or why the calculations in the previous

section might be a misleading test of their adequacy. The four reasons I consider are interna-

tional trade, imperfections in the mapping, the absence of relative price changes, and quality

adjustments.


                                               31
    Sectoral PPP is derived from expenditure surveys, while consumers not only buy domesti-

cally produced goods. If goods are differentiated, some recorded prices will not be representa-

tive of locally produced goods. The expenditure weights used to aggregate prices at the most

detailed level are also distorted by international trade. An increase in import penetration will

have an effect on sectoral PPP as it changes the weighting within industries away from the

correct one, based solely on domestically produced goods. Similarly, part of the domestically

produced output is exported abroad and will not enter the PPP calculations, even though this

output is still included to calculate relative deflation rates. If goods that are exported differ

in a systematic way from other goods—e.g. they are cheaper than abroad—differences or

changes in export intensity will similarly distort the weighting in the construction of sectoral

PPPs. While the calculations in Section 5 control for trade, the adjustment is imperfect.

Note also that aggregate PPP suffers from the same defect.

    Many industries with high trade intensity did have a low correlation between changes in

sectoral PPP and relative deflation in Table 2. The first industry, Agriculture, is the least

exposed to trade of all the ones on which I had data available in 1996 and sectoral PPP

did perform very well there. Machinery and Equipment, on the other hand, has the greatest

trade exposure and aggregate PPP was clearly superior.13 Results in Table 5 confirm the

negative relationship between trade and the performance of sectoral PPP in a more systematic

way. A regression with as dependent variable the ratio of the correlation between changes

in sectoral PPP and relative sectoral deflation to the same correlation with aggregate PPP,
corr(∆P P Pic ,ṗci −ṗU S
                       i )
            c
corr(∆P P P ,ṗci −ṗU   S ,   and as explanatory variable the average trade intensity produces a negative
                       i )



  13
    Only the Electricity, Gas and Water Supply industry traded less, but these goods are often subject to
large subsidies or taxes and it is unlikely that relative price measures from consumer and producer side
would match up. The average export and import shares as a percentage of production are 7% and 10% for
Agriculture and 30% and 48% for Machinery and Equipment.



                                                         32
coefficient. With only 31 observations the coefficient is not significantly different from zero,

but the sign is as predicted.

  A second reason for the poor results with sectoral PPP in some industries might be errors

in the mapping from expenditure categories to industrial sectors. While the sectoral PPP

measures are fairly robust to the criteria used to make the match, the price data might not

contain sufficiently detailed information to be representative for each industry. Many service

industries had especially few products allocated to them.

  The second column in Table 5 contains results for a similar regression as before, but with

the number of products allocated to the industry and the within-industry standard deviation

of their prices as explanatory variables. The positive coefficient on the number of products

suggests that PPP measures improve if they are based on more data. Perhaps surprisingly,

a large standard deviation of relative prices across products is also associated with better

PPP measures. One interpretation is that observing prices over a wide range, combined with

expenditure weights, allows for a more precise estimate of average prices. Industries with

PPP estimated based on a single product have less accurate measures, as expected.

  A third situation where the use of sectoral PPP might make matters worse is for industries

with low relative price changes. In that case, aggregate PPP will do nicely because aggregate

price changes are invariably low for the countries included. The test in the previous section

might produce misleading results. If relative deflation rates are very low or hardly vary across

countries, correlation are bound to be low. The construction of sectoral PPP inevitably

introduces some randomness, while there is no real problem to start with.

  If the correlation rates are regressed on the size or the standard deviation of the absolute

difference between the sectoral and economy-wide deflation rates across countries, the coef-


                                              33
ficients are both positive, see the third column of Table 5. If sectoral prices change in line

with the aggregate price level, i.e. relative prices do not change, sectoral PPP does not bring

much benefit, as shown already in Section 2. Alternatively, if differences between sectoral

and aggregate prices are relatively homogeneous across countries, there is again no need for

sector-specific conversion factors.

  It turns out that for most service industries the standard deviations are very low. Lower

than for any of the manufacturing industries. While the average relative price change across

countries is high for many service industries, it is very uniform across countries. It is no

surprise then, that aggregate PPP suffices for productivity comparisons in service industries.

For manufacturing sectors, the standard deviations are much larger, on average twice as large,

and in percentage of the total price change almost four times as large. Unfortunately, the

sectors with the highest cross-country differences in relative price changes are also the ones

most exposed to trade and sectoral PPP might not bring much relief, as discussed earlier.

  Including the measures for all three reasons together, in the fourth column of Table 5,

confirms the previous findings. Sectoral PPP performs well if trade is low, if sectoral prices

change a lot and differently across countries, and if a lot of products are used to estimate

PPP.

  Finally, differences in the methods used in different countries to adjust for changes in

product quality is a fourth reason why changes in sectoral PPP are imperfectly correlated with

sectoral deflation rates. The statistical agencies in each country decompose nominal output

changes into price and quantity changes, counting improved quality as higher quantity. Some

countries are more aggressive in counting nominal increases as quality gains and subtracting

them from price changes. This will lead to differences in the way sectoral deflation rates



                                              34
should be interpreted for different countries. The sectoral PPPs we construct do not face the

same problem, because prices of exactly the same goods are compared simultaneously in each

country. The relative price at any point in time is well-defined and easy to measure, as long

as the same products are sold in both countries.

    Industries with the most scope for quality change are sophisticated manufacturing and

service industries. Exactly those where sectoral PPP did worst in Table 2. The computer

industry, in Machinery and Equipment, probably provides the best example. The average

price per computer is relatively constant over time in each country, but this masks a substan-

tial improvement in quality over time. The price per unit for any characteristic consumers

value—calculation speed, storage capacity of the hard drive, quality of the video output—

declines constantly. To account for these quality improvements, statistical agencies estimate

a decrease in the real price and use this to deflate—in this case inflate—industry output. If

the adjustment procedure varies by country, which is very likely, the sectoral deflation rates

cannot be compared across country. The Bureau of Labor Statistics in the U.S., for example,

recently switched from a matched model approach to an adjustment based on hedonic regres-

sions, see Pakes (2003). The relative price changes obtained by comparing sectoral deflation

rates between countries and the ones obtained from changes in sectoral PPP will not measure

the same thing anymore. It will also make the productivity comparison sensitive to the base

year of currency conversion.




9     Sectoral convergence

Finally, I revisit the sectoral convergence results in the sample of OECD countries. I only

look at labor productivity, as Bernard and Jones (1996) indicate that the results for TFP are

                                             35
largely identical. For each industry I use the convergence factor, sectoral or aggregate PPP,

that was found to be most appropriate in Section 6. For industries were the choice of PPP

was ambiguous, I used the correlation from 1985 to 1996 as tie-breaker, generally favoring

aggregate PPP.

   Because not all countries have data on all industries, the number of observations varies by

industry. Some industries from Table 2 were aggregated if employment data was missing in

subsectors. Both manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries are included. The time

period covered is the 19 year period from 1980 to 1999. The period studied is solely deter-

mined by availability of real output and employment data.14 If relative prices are constant or

the PPP measure captures changes in relative prices correctly, a currency conversion factor

is only needed in a single year. PPP in 1996 is used for each throughout.15

   The fourth column in Table 6 contains the β-convergence results. This measures the extent

to which average productivity growth across countries is explained by the initial productivity

level of each country. The reported statistic is the regression coefficient on the initial produc-

tivity level when average productivity growth over the full sample period is the dependent

variable. The least squares regression is run separately by industry with countries as obser-

vations. If convergence is taking place, the regression coefficient will be negative. In Figures

3 and 4, β-convergence statistics with confidence bounds were plotted in the middle graphs

  14
     The data used here are for a more recent time period than in Bernard and Jones (1996). Using sectoral
data classified by ISIC Revision 3 instead of Revision 2 limits the number of years one can go back. Because
Revision 3 is closer to variations of the SIC classification—which are used in the U.S., Canada, the U.K., and
Australia—and also to the more recently used NACE classification in the E.U., it was preferred.
  15
     Results using PPP in 1985 are available upon request. The β-convergence results are almost identical.
The σ-convergence results are less supportive of convergence in some industries. This might be because
outliers matter more for σ-convergence. If the PPPs do not capture relative price changes accurately and
convergence is taking place, this is what one could expect to find. Using the 1985 conversion rates, the
standard deviation in 1980 is higher, not because productivity levels were more dispersed, but because the
use of incorrect relative prices introduced additional variation.




                                                     36
for all different PPP base years. The results in Table 6 show that virtually all sectors have

negative coefficient estimates and that several are significantly different from zero. Manu-

facturing as a whole as well as several manufacturing subsectors display convergence. The

convergence estimates for services industries are almost all significantly different from zero.

   The fifth column in Table 6 contains σ-convergence results. This measures the change over

time in standard deviation of productivity levels across countries. The reported statistic is

the ratio of the standard deviation at the end of the period (1999) over the standard deviation

at the beginning of the period (1980).16 If convergence is taking place, the ratio should be

smaller than one. Using the 1996 PPP, I find convergence for 16 of the 23 industries. The

average ratio is 0.90. There is no obvious pattern in the industries that display the strongest

σ-convergence. It comprises industries that produce highly tradable products—Mining or

Machinery—and at the same time industries that produce nontradables—Electricity-Gas-

Water or Wholesale and Retail Trade. The convergence results are also not related to the

use of sectoral or aggregate productivity.


                                                [Table 6]


   In conclusion, the evolution of relative prices does differ by country and one should account

for it when studying sectoral convergence. The sectoral PPP indices do the job relatively

well for several “industrial” sectors. Using appropriate convergence factors, I showed that

most industries experienced some convergence over the last two decades. A varied bunch of

industries, notably Mining and Quarrying, Machinery and Equipment, Electricity, Gas and

Water, and Restaurants and Hotels, experienced very strong convergence.

  16
    Dividing the average standard deviation for the last two or three years by the average for the first two
or three years produced very similar results.


                                                    37
References
 Bernard, A. B. and C. I. Jones (1996, December). Comparing Apples to Oranges: Pro-
    ductivity Convergence and Measurement Across Industries and Countries. American
    Economic Review 86 (5), 1216–38.
 Conrad, K. and D. W. Jorgenson (1985). Sectoral Productivity Gaps between the United
   States, Japan and Germany, 1960-1979. In H. Giersch (Ed.), Probleme und Perspectiven
   der Weltwirschaftlichen Etwicklung, pp. 335–47. Berlin: Duncker and Humblot.
 Dollar, D. and E. N. Wolff (1988, November). Convergence of Industry Labor Productivity
    among Advanced Economies, 1963-1982. Review of Economics and Statistics 70, 549–
    558.
 Durlauf, S. N. and D. T. Quah (1999). The New Empirics of Economic Growth. In J. B.
   Taylor and M. Woodford (Eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1A, Chapter 4.
   New York: North-Holland.
 Easterly, W. (2001). The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists’ Adventures and Misad-
    ventures in the Tropics. Cambridge: MIT Press.
 Harrigan, J. (1999). Estimation of Cross-country Differences in Industry Production Func-
    tions. Journal of International Economics 47, 267–93.
 Jorgenson, D. W. and M. Kuroda (1990). Productivity and International Competitiveness
    in Japan and the United States, 1960-1985. In C. R. Hulten (Ed.), Productivity Growth
    in Japan and the United States, Volume 53 of NBER Studies in Income and Wealth,
    Chapter 2, pp. 29–57. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
 Jorgenson, D. W., M. Kuroda, and M. Nishimizu (1987, March). Japan-U.S. Industry-
    level Productivity Comparisons, 1960-1979. Journal of the Japanese and International
    Economies 1 (1), 1–30.
 Kravis, I. B., A. W. Heston, and R. Summers (1978). World Product and Income: Inter-
    national Comparisons of Real Growth Product. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
    Press.
 Lee, F. C. and J. Tang (2001). Productivity Levels and International Competitiveness
    Between Canada and the United States. In D. W. Jorgenson and F. C. Lee (Eds.),
    Industry-Level Productivity and International Competitiveness Between Canada and the
    United States, Chapter 5, pp. 155–180. Ottawa: Industry Canada Research Monograph.
 Maddison, A. (1995). Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1992. Paris: OECD.
 OECD (1999). PPPs and Real Expenditures (1996 Results ed.). Paris: OECD.
 Pakes, A. (2003, December). A Reconsideration of Hedonic Price Indexes with an Appli-
    cation to PC’s. American Economic Review 93 (5), 1578–97.
 Pilat, D. (1996). Labour Productivity Levels in OECD Countries: Estimates for Manu-
     facturing and Selected Service Sectors. Economics Department Working Papers 169,
     OECD, Paris.
 Solow, R. M. (1956). A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth. Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 70, 65–94.

                                           38
Sørensen, A. (2001, September). Comparing Apples to Oranges: Productivity Convergence
   and Measurement Across Industries and Countries: Comment. American Economic
   Review 91 (4), 1160–67.
van Ark, B. and D. Pilat (1993). Productivity Levels in Germany, Japan, and the United
   States: Differences and Causes. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeco-
   nomics 2, 1–69.
van Ark, B. and M. Timmer (2001). PPPs and International Productivity Comparisons:
   Bottlenecks and New Directions. Working Paper for Joint World Bank-OECD Seminar
   on Purchasing Power Parities.




                                        39
Figure 1: Relative deflation rates for three countries across industries (1985-1996)

                   Canada                                     The Netherlands
                   Japan

    1.58




    1.25




       1




     .75
       Mach&Eq. Textile Mineral Metal       NEC Chemical Transprt Food           Wood       Paper
                  (Manufacturing industries are ranked by increasing U.S. inflation)




Figure 2: Relative deflation rates for three industries across countries (1985-1996)

                    Machinery and equipment                   Basic metals & fabr. metal prod
                    Pulp, paper, printing, publish

        2




     1.37




        1




      .63
            JAP   NLD FIN AUT BEL CAN DNK ITA GBR NOR KOR PRT                                MEX
                    (Countries are ranked by increasing inflation in total manufacturing)




                                                 40
                          Figure 3: Three convergence tests for the manufacturing sector

              Australia           Austria                             estimate of beta-convergence                                  1985 aggregate PPP          1990 aggregate PPP
              Belgium             Canada, etc.                        95% confidence bounds                                         1993 aggregate PPP          1996 aggregate PPP

1.25                                                    .05                                                        1.11621




 .75                                                    -.05                                                           .89
       1985                                      1996          1985                                         1996             1985                                                    1996
                           YEAR                                                                      YEAR                                                YEAR

              Australia           Austria                             estimate of beta-convergence                                  1985 sectoral PPP           1990 sectoral PPP
              Belgium             Canada, etc.                        95% confidence bounds                                         1993 sectoral PPP           1996 sectoral PPP

1.25                                                    .05                                                           1.11




 .75                                                    -.05                                                           .89
       1985                                      1996          1985                                         1996             1985                                                    1996
                           YEAR                                                                      YEAR                                                YEAR




                                                                                                     41
Figure 4: Convergence tests for “Chemical products” (top graphs) and “Financial services
and real estate” (bottom graphs)

                       Australia               Austria                                     estimate of beta-convergence                                        1985 aggregate PPP           1990 aggregate PPP
                       Belgium                 Canada, etc.                                95% confidence bounds                                               1993 aggregate PPP           1996 aggregate PPP

1.47595                                                                    .05                                                              1.20523




    .75                                                                    -.05                                                             .886893
           1985                                                 1996              1985                                              1996               1985                                                      1996
                                      YEAR                                                                                  YEAR                                                     YEAR

                       Australia               Austria                                     estimate of beta-convergence                                        1985 sectoral PPP            1990 sectoral PPP
                       Belgium                 Canada, etc.                                95% confidence bounds                                               1993 sectoral PPP            1996 sectoral PPP

   1.25                                                                    .05                                                                 1.11




    .75                                                                    -.05                                                                 .89
           1985                                                 1996              1985                                              1996               1985                                                      1996
                                      YEAR                                                                                  YEAR                                                     YEAR




                          Australia              Austria                                     estimate of beta-convergence                                       1985 aggregate PPP          1990 aggregate PPP
                          Belgium                Canada, etc.                                95% confidence bounds                                              1993 aggregate PPP          1996 aggregate PPP

      1.25                                                                    .05                                                               1.11




          .75                                                            -.059158                                                            .809806
                1985                                              1996              1985                                             1996               1985                                                     1996
                                        YEAR                                                                                 YEAR                                                    YEAR

                          Australia              Austria                                     estimate of beta-convergence                                       1985 sectoral PPP           1990 sectoral PPP
                          Belgium                Canada, etc.                                95% confidence bounds                                              1993 sectoral PPP           1996 sectoral PPP

   1.40011                                                                    .05                                                            1.11622




   .596295                                                                 -.0522                                                            .748826
                1985                                              1996              1985                                             1996               1985                                                     1996
                                        YEAR                                                                                 YEAR                                                    YEAR




                                                                                                                            42
                  Table 1: Currency conversion factors in 1996
                 Exchange   Aggregate                 Sectoral PPP
                   rate       PPP       Total Business Manufacturing     Textiles
Austria             0.77       0.99           1.02               1.10     1.81
Belgium             0.77       0.91           0.98               1.12     1.88
Finland             0.77       0.99           1.07               1.36     1.22
France              0.78       1.00           1.06               1.19     1.71
Germany             0.77       1.04           1.05               1.12     1.91
Greece              0.71       0.63           0.80               1.03     0.96
Italy               0.80       0.82           0.93               1.09     1.44
Netherlands         0.77       0.93           0.95               1.06     1.54
Portugal            0.77       0.61           0.76               0.99     1.66
Spain               0.76       0.74           0.81               0.96     1.29
Australia           1.28        1.30          1.36               1.62      1.86
Canada              1.36       1.19            1.23              1.44      1.48
Denmark             5.80       8.33            8.78              10.1      22.4
United Kingdom      0.64       0.64            0.68              0.81      1.13
Japan              108.7       166.0          188.4              204.3    253.4
Norway             6.45        9.11            9.69              11.21     9.06
Sweden              6.71       9.68           10.12              11.32    11.00
United States       1.00       1.00           1.00               1.00     1.00
  For all countries currently in the euro zone, PPPs and exchange rate have been
  expressed in euros.




                                         43
      Table 2: Correlation between both measures of relative price changes (1985-96)


Industry                            ISIC     # of    Sectoral PPP        Aggregate PPP
                                    Rev. 3 countries = sign corr.        = sign corr.
Agriculture, etc                    01-05        16      13      0.80      12      0.78
 Agriculture, hunting, forestry     01-02         8       7      0.87       6      0.77
 Fishing                            05            8       7      0.80       4      0.62
Mining and Quarrying                10-14        14       8      0.53      10      0.46
 M & Q of energy products           10-12         6       4      0.30       6      0.50
 M & Q except energy                13-14         6       2      0.18       2      0.11
Manufacturing                       15-37        16      12      0.78      10      0.86
 Food products and beverages        15            5       4      0.83       3      0.61
 Tobacco products                   16            5       4     -0.74       3     -0.57
 Textiles                           17            7       4      0.12       3      0.59
 Wearing apparel                    18            6       5      0.12       3     -0.17
 Leather and footwear               19           11       4      0.41       4      0.62
 Wood and cork                      20           12      10      0.71       8      0.65
 Pulp and paper                     21            7       5      0.07       5      0.45
 Printing and publishing            22            9       5      0.27       4      0.17
 Coke, petroleum products           23           11       7      0.32       6      0.09
 Chemicals                          24           11       8      0.79       6      0.89
 Rubber and plastic products        25           10       8      0.80       6      0.64
 Other non-metallic minerals        26           14       6      0.66       6      0.71
 Basic and fabricated metals        27-28        13       7      0.65       8      0.82
 Machinery and equipment            29-33        12       2      0.38       5      0.74
 Transport equipment                34-35        12       8      0.69       8      0.78
 Manufacturing nec & recycling      36-37        12       6      0.26       7      0.82
Electricity, gas and water supply   40-41        16      13      0.61      11      0.79
Construction                        45           16       7      0.70      11      0.84
Total services                      50-99        14      10      0.90      12      0.99
 Wholesale and retail; R & H1       50-55        15       7      0.70       9      0.89
 Transport and communication        60-64        15       9      0.58      11      0.86
 Financial and business services    65-74        15       5      0.35      12      0.94
 CSP services1                      75-99        15      14      0.91      13      0.93
1
    H & R: hotels and restaurants; CSP: Community, social, and personnel




                                            44
      Table 3: Correlation between both measures of relative price changes (1993-96)


Industry                            ISIC     # of    Sectoral PPP        Aggregate PPP
                                    Rev. 3 countries = sign corr.        = sign corr.
Agriculture, etc                    01-05        16      10      0.35      12      0.33
 Agriculture, hunting, forestry     01-02        12       7      0.44       8      0.35
 Fishing                            05           12       4      0.07       8     -0.05
Mining and Quarrying                10-14        14      12      0.13      10     -0.02
 M & Q of energy products           10-12         8       6      0.17       5      0.14
 M & Q except energy                13-14         8       6      0.34       5      0.07
Manufacturing                       15-37        16       6      0.76       7      0.64
 Food products and beverages        15            7       3      0.74       7      0.39
 Tobacco products                   16            7       5     -0.22       3     -0.18
 Textiles                           17            9       8      0.62       4      0.69
 Wearing apparel                    18            9       6      0.62       6      0.35
 Leather and footwear               19           13       4      0.09       9      0.23
 Wood and cork                      20           14       4      0.34       8      0.16
 Pulp and paper                     21           12       4     -0.40       7      0.12
 Printing and publishing            22           13       9      0.27      11      0.48
 Coke, petroleum products           23           12       2      0.14       6      0.01
 Chemicals                          24           14      10      0.20      12      0.63
 Rubber and plastic products        25           13       4      0.37       6      0.44
 Other non-metallic minerals        26           16       7     -0.01      12      0.35
 Basic and fabricated metals        27-28        15       6      0.22      10      0.71
 Machinery and equipment            29-33        14       0      0.07       5      0.55
 Transport equipment                34-35        14      11     -0.21      11     -0.18
 Manufacturing nec & recycling      36-37        15       9      0.09      11      0.42
Electricity, gas and water supply   40-41        16      10      0.13       7      0.22
Construction                        45           16      11      0.43      12      0.30
Total services                      50-99        16      11      0.65      12      0.68
 Wholesale and retail; R & H1       50-55        16      14      0.24       9      0.52
 Transport and communication        60-64        16      12      0.62      10      0.36
 Financial and business services    65-74        16      11      0.01      13      0.64
 CSP services1                      75-99        16       9      0.67      13      0.77
1
    H & R: hotels and restaurants; CSP: Community, social, and personnel




                                            45
       Table 4: Correlation between both measures of relative price changes


                     All sectors      Industrial sectors1   All industrial sectors1
                     in Table 2          in Table 2
                   number corr.       number      corr.     number       corr.
Australia             15     -0.35       10      -0.05        13         -0.38
Austria               29      0.25       24       0.25        37          0.28
Belgium               23      0.09       18       0.20        25          0.07
Canada                31      0.12       26       0.15        38          0.00
Denmark               31      0.09       26       0.09        39          0.05
Finland               31      0.13       26       0.19        39          0.28
France                15      0.04       10       0.46        15          0.09
Germany               14      0.06       10       0.04        15          0.01
Great Britain         27      0.22       22       0.24        34          0.22
Italy                 25      0.36       20       0.46        27          0.08
Japan                 27      0.38       22       0.39        33          0.22
Netherlands           20      0.23       18       0.25        27          0.12
Norway                25     -0.05       20      -0.07        27         -0.24
Portugal              20      0.02       15      -0.05        22          0.07
Spain                 10      0.61        5       0.74         6          0.61
Sweden                 8      0.20        5       0.58         6          0.91
Average                       0.15                0.20                    0.26
1
    Subsectors of Agriculture, Mining, and Manufacturing; EGW and Construction.




                                       46
Table 5: Explaining the correlation between sectoral PPP changes and relative sectoral de-
flation

                                               Trade Mapping Price change        All 3
      Average trade share in VA                -0.633                           -1.923
                                                (.61)                            (.49)
      Number of products                               0.007                     0.014
                                                       (.01)                     (.01)
      Standard deviation across products               1.087                     0.800
                                                       (.54)                     (.43)
      Single product                                  -0.138                    -0.089
                                                       (.68)                     (.48)
      Absolute sectoral deflation                                1.129           0.478
                                                                (1.43)          (1.17)
      Stand. dev. of rel. sectoral deflation                     1.604           2.705
                                                                (1.15)          (1.06)
      Observations                                31    31         31              31
      R2                                        0.04   0.16       0.32           0.63
        The dependent variable is the ratio of the sectoral to the aggregate correlation
        coefficient in the fifth and seventh columns of Table 2




                                               47
                                Table 6: Convergence statistics


                                             ISIC             # of     β-convergence σ-convergence
Industry                                     Rev. 3         countries (OLS coefficient) (ratio of S.D.)
Agriculture, etc                             01-05             17         -0.003              0.99
Mining and Quarrying                         10-14             15         -0.008∗∗            0.40
Manufacturing                                15-37             17         -0.003∗             0.96
 Food and tobacco products                   15-16             15         -0.007∗∗∗           1.16
 Textiles, wearing apparel, leather          17-19             15          0.001              0.90
 Wood and cork                               20                13         -0.015∗∗∗           1.13
 Pulp, paper, printing, publishing           21-22             13         -0.014∗∗∗           1.11
 Chemical and plastic products               23-25             15         -0.001              0.95
 Other non-metallic minerals                 26                15         -0.003              0.81
 All metals and machinery                    27-35             13         -0.004∗             0.79
   Basic and fabricated metals               27-28             14         -0.005∗∗∗           1.04
   Machinery and equipment                   29-33             13         -0.013∗∗∗           0.52
   Transport equipment                       34-35             13         -0.006              1.09
 Manufacturing nec & recycling               36-37             13         -0.002              0.78
Electricity, gas and water supply            40-41             17         -0.016∗∗∗           0.80
Construction                                 45                17         -0.002              1.04
Total services                               50-99             15         -0.002∗∗∗           0.95
 Wholesale and retail; R & H                 50-55             16         -0.001              0.74
   Wholesale and retail trade                50-52             14         -0.000              0.76
   Restaurants and hotels                    5500              13         -0.005∗∗∗           0.75
 Transport and communication                 60-64             16         -0.005∗∗∗           1.10
 Financial and business services             65-74             16         -0.004∗             0.92
 CSP services                                75-99             16         -0.003∗∗            0.96
  ∗∗∗                                  ∗∗          ∗
        Significant at the 5% level,        10%,       15%.




                                                       48
