                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THIRTY YEARS OF CURRENT ACCOUNT IMBALANCES,
                  CURRENT ACCOUNT REVERSALS AND SUDDEN STOPS

                                           Sebastian Edwards

                                         Working Paper 10276
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10276


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




This is a revised version of a paper presented as the Fourth Mundell-Fleming Lecture at the International
Monetary Fund, November 6th, 2003. I am grateful to Guillermo Calvo, Eduardo Ley, Ed Leamer, Al
Harberger, Miguel Savastano and Ernesto Talvi for helpful discussions and suggestions. I thank the
participants of theIMF’s Research Conference for helpful comments. Roberto Alvarez provided very able
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current Account Reversals and Sudden Stops
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 10276
January 2004
JEL No. F30, F32

                                            ABSTRACT

In this paper I analyze the anatomy of current account adjustments in the world economy during the

last three decades. The main findings may be summarized as follows: (a) Major reversals in current

account deficits have tended to be associated to “sudden stops” of capital inflows. (b) The

probability of a country experiencing a reversal is captured by a small number of variables that

include the (lagged) current account to GDP ratio, the external debt to GDP ratio, the level of

international reserves, domestic credit creation, and debt services. (c) Current account reversals have

had a negative effect on real growth that goes beyond their direct effect on investments. (d) There

is persuasive evidence indicating that the negative effect of current account reversals on growth will

depend on the country’s degree of openness. More open countries will suffer less n in terms of

lower growth n than countries with a lower degree of openness. (e) I was unable to find evidence

supporting the hypothesis that countries with a higher degree of dollarization are more severely

affected by current account reversals than countries with a lower degree of dollarization. And, (f)

the empirical analysis suggests that countries with more flexible exchange rate regimes are able to

accommodate the shocks stemming from a reversal better than countries with more rigid exchange

rate regime.

Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Business
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sedwards@anderson.ucla.edu
                                                      1


I.   Introduction

         Recent discussions on international macroeconomic policy have centered on the
large current account imbalances experienced by a number of countries, including the
United States with a deficit of 5% of GDP and China with a surplus of almost 3% of
GDP.1 Policy makers, analysts and academics have focused on the international
adjustment process, and have discussed the way in which the correction of these current
account imbalances is likely to affect exchange rates, job creation and economic growth.2
The source of financing of the U.S. current account deficit has also become a source of
concern. A number of analysts have argued that by relying on foreign -- and particularly
Asian -- central banks’ purchases of Treasury securities, the U.S. has become particularly
vulnerable to sudden changes in expectations and economic sentiments.3 The
International Monetary Fund’s former Director of Research, Ken Rogoff, has made a
similar point. In a press conference given in September 18th 2003, a few days before
stepping down from the position, he said:4


         “[L]ooking…to the second half of 2004 and beyond, there are still many risks…
         These include the disturbing pattern of global current account imbalances, which
         is likely to get worse before it gets better, with the United States continuing to
         absorb a large share of world savings, and Asia providing much of it.” (Rogoff,
         2003).


         And from here Rogoff went on to argue that the effects of these imbalances on
currency values are likely to be significant:


1
  Although it has attracted less international attention, Russia’s current account surplus, in excess of 8% of
GDP, is also becoming the subject of some debate.
2
  During his much-publicized trip to China and Japan in September 2003, U.S. Treasury Secretary John W.
Snow tried to persuade the Japanese and Chinese authorities that they should allow their currencies to
appreciate relative to the U.S. dollar. An appreciation of the Yen and the Renminbi, he implied, would
allow for a gradual correction of international imbalances and for a fairer distribution of the burdens of
adjustment. Indeed, many analysts have argued that a strengthening of the Asian currencies is required to
lift some of the pressure from the Euro, whose appreciation during the last year and a half has seriously
affected European competitiveness. See, for example, Hughes (2003)
3
  See, for example, Martin Wolf’s October 1st, 2003 article in the Financial Times, “Funding America’s
recovery is a very dangerous game,” (page 15).
                                                     2


        “[W]hen the dollar falls, the question is, where is the burden of adjustment going
        to be? It is going to be a serious problem regardless of how the fall in the dollar is
        distributed although the more slowly it happens, the better. But, clearly, if the
        euro has to bear the lion's share of the adjustment in the dollar, that is going to
        create a lot more difficulties than if it is more evenly distributed; than if the Asian
        currencies--not just China but all the Asian currencies--also appreciate, allowing
        themselves to appreciate significantly against the dollar.” (Rogoff, 2003).


        Discussions on current account imbalances and on the burden of the adjustment
process are not new in international policy circles. Indeed, in the 1940’s Keynes was
clearly aware of the issue, and his proposal for an international Clearing Union was
based on the notion that in the face of large payments imbalances both deficit and surplus
nations should share the burdens of adjustment.5
        In recent years there have also been concerns regarding current account behavior
in the emerging and transition countries. In particular, a number of authors have asked
whether large current account deficits have been associated with the currency crises of
the 1990s and 2000s. While some authors, including Fischer (2003), have argued that
large current account deficits are a sign of clear (and future) danger, others have argued
that significant deficits do not increase the probability of a currency crisis (Frankel and
Rose, 1996). Recently, much of the discussion on the emerging and transition nations
has moved towards the implementation of appropriate “crisis prevention” policies.
Within that spirit a number of analysts have developed models of current account
sustainability, and have asked what determines the sustainable level of international
financing that a particular country is able to secure over the medium and long run.6 Some
authors have also analyzed episodes of current account reversals, or large reductions in
the current account deficit in a short period of time (Milesi-Ferreti and Razin 2000,
Edwards 2002).

4
  The complete press conference can be found at: http://www.imf.org/external/np/tr/2003/tr030918.htm
5
  See, for example, the discussion in Chapter 6 of Skidelsky’s (2000) third volume of Keynes’ biography,
and the papers, reports and memoranda by Keynes cited in that chapter.
6
  Some of the most influential work on this subject has been done at the IMF by Gian Milesi-Ferreti and his
associates. See Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (1997, 1998, 2000), Ostry (1997), Adedeji (2001), McGettigan
(2000), Knight and Scacciavillani (1998).
                                                       3


         Modern macroeconomic models of the open economy have emphasized the fact
that the current account is an intertemporal phenomenon. These models recognize two
basic interrelated facts. First, from a basic national accounting perspective the current
account is equal to savings minus investment. Second, since both savings and investment
decisions are based on intertemporal factors -- such as life cycle considerations and
expected returns on investment projects --, the current account is necessarily an
intertemporal phenomenon. Sachs (1981) emphasized forcefully the intertemporal nature
of the current account, arguing that to the extent higher current account deficits reflected
new investment opportunities, there was no reason to be concerned about them. An
important and powerful implication of intertemporal models is that, at the margin,
changes in national savings should be fully reflected in changes in the current account
balance (Obstfeld and Rogoff 1996). Empirically, however, this prediction of the theory
has been systematically rejected by the data.7 Typical analyses that have regressed the
current account on savings have found a coefficient of approximately 0.25, significantly
below the hypothesized value of one.
         Numerical simulations based on the intertemporal approach have also failed to
account for current account behavior. According to these models a country’s optimal
response to negative exogenous shocks is to run very high current account deficits, indeed
much higher than what is observed. Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996), for example, develop a
model of a small open economy where under a set of plausible parameters the steady
state trade surplus is equal to 45 percent of GDP, and the steady state debt to GDP ratio is
equal to 15.8 According to a model developed by Fernandez de Cordoba and Kehoe
(2000) the optimal response to a financial reform in an industrial country such as Spain is
to run a current account deficit that peaks at 60% of GDP.9
         In trying to explain the lack of empirical success of intertemporal models a
number of authors have compiled a list of (inadequate) assumptions that can account for
the observed discrepancies between theory and reality. These include non-separable

7
  See, for example, Ogaki, Ostry and Reinhart (1995), Gosh and Ostry (1997), and Nason and Rogers
(2003).
8
   Ostfeld and Rogoff (1996) do not claim that this model is particularly realistic. In fact, they present its
implications to highlight some of the shortcomings of simple intertemporal models of the current account.
9
   Their analysis is carried on in terms of the trade account balance. In their model, however, there are no
differences between the trade and current account balances.
                                              4


preferences, less than perfect international capital mobility, fiscal shocks and changing
interest rates (Nason and Rogers, 2003). In a series of recent papers Kraay and Ventura
(2000, 2002) and Ventura (2003) have proposed some amendments to the traditional
intertemporal model that go a long way in helping bridge theory with reality. In their
model portfolio decisions play a key role in determining the evolution of the current
account balance. When investors care about both return and risk, changes in savings will
not be translated into a one-to-one improvement in the current account. In this case
investors will want to maintain the composition of their portfolios, and only a proportion
of the additional savings will be devoted to increasing the holdings of foreign assets (i.e.
bank loans). In addition, they argue that when short run adjustment costs in investment
are added to the analysis, the amended intertemporal model traces reality quite closely.
In this setting the behavior of countries’ net foreign assets play an important role in
explaining current account behavior. In particular, and as pointed out by Lane and
Milesi-Ferreti (2002, 2003), changes in foreign asset valuation stemming from exchange
rate adjustments will tend to affect the adjustment process and the evolution of current
account balances.
       Models that emphasize portfolio balance are also promising for understanding
current account behavior in emerging countries. In particular, shifts in portfolio
allocations driven by changes in perceived risk in the emerging countries can explain
some of the large changes in current account deficits observed in these countries,
including major current account reversals. As pointed out by Edwards (1999), a
reduction in foreigners’ (net) demand of an emerging country’s assets will result in a
decline in the country’s sustainable current account deficit, forcing it into adjusting.
Indeed, if this reduction in foreigners’ demand for the country’s assets is abrupt and
significant – that is, if the country faces what has become to be known as a “sudden stop”
--, we are very likely to observe a major current account reversal. The magnitude of the
current account adjustment will be particularly large during the transition from the “old”
to the “new” foreign (net) demand for the country’s assets. Although portfolio-based
models of the current account are powerful and show considerable promise, there are still
a number of questions that need to be addressed. As Ventura (2003) has argued, these
include understanding better the role of trade in contingent financial claims, and
                                                     5


understanding why international risk sharing is limited and why countries do not buy
insurance.
         The purpose of this paper is to analyze the historical behavior of current account
imbalances, and the patterns of adjustment followed by countries with large payments
disequilibria.10 Since the focus of the discussion is on adjustment, the analysis mostly
deals with “extreme” observations or episodes when countries have experienced “large”
deficits and, to some extent, large surpluses. I am particularly interested in understanding
the connection between current account adjustments and exchange rates. I am also
concerned with the costs of current account deficit reversals, and their connection to
“sudden stops” of capital inflows.11 I analyze whether openness, the extent of
dollarization, and the exchange rate regime affect the costs of reversals. Broadly
speaking, in addressing these issues I am interested in tackling the question of whether
the current account “matters.” More specifically, I ask whether economic authorities
should be concerned if the country in question runs (large) current account deficits. In
the past, authors that have dealt with this issue have reached different conclusions. Sachs
(1981), for example, argued that to the extent that a (large) deficit was the result of an
increase in investment, there was no cause for concern or for policy action. In an
important article Corden (1994) argues that “[a]n increase in the current account deficit
that results from a shift in private sector behavior – a rise in investment or a fall in
savings – should not be a matter of concern at all (Corden 1994, p. 92, emphasis added).”
This view that large current deficits don’t matter if they stem from private sector behavior
has been associated with former Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson, and is
sometimes referred to as Lawson’s Doctrine. In a series of papers Fischer (1988, 1994,
2003) has taken a different position. For example, in Fischer (1988, p. 115) he argued
that the “primary indicator [of a looming crisis] is the current account deficit. And in
1994, months before the Mexican crisis, he said: “[t]he Mexican current account deficit is
huge, and it is being financed largely by portfolio investment. Those investments can
turn around very quickly and leave Mexico with no choice but to devalue…And as the


10
   This paper is part of a research project on adjustment in the open economy. Other papers in this project
include Edwards (1999), De Gregorio, Edwards and Valdes (2000), Edwards and Susmel (2003) and
Edwards (2003).
11
   On “sudden stops” see Dornbusch et al (1996) and Calvo (2003).
                                                       6


European and especially the Swedish experiences show, there may be no interest rate
high enough to prevent an outflow and a forced devaluation” (1994, p. 306).12
         In terms of the current literature, this paper is (somewhat) in the tradition of the
work by Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (1998, 2000) and Edwards (1999, 2002, 2003) on
sustainability, and of the recent work by Ventura (2003), Kraay and Ventura (2000, 2003)
and Edwards (2002) that emphasizes the role of portfolio asset allocation in
understanding current account behavior. The paper is eminently empirical; readers
interested in models of the current account are referred to Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996)
and Ventura (2003).
         The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section II I provide a broad
analysis of current account behavior in the world economy during the last three decades.
I analyze the distribution of imbalances across regions and countries, and I deal with
imbalances’ persistence through time. Section III is devoted to the adjustment process. I
use frequency tables and non-parametric tests to analyze the most salient aspects of
current account adjustment during the last three decades. In particular, I make a
distinction between exchange rate-based adjustments and reserves-based adjustments,
and I investigate the characteristics of episodes with persistent large deficits. I also
analyze the connection between reversals and “sudden stops” of capital inflows. Section
IV deals with the costs of deficit reversals; in it I extend previous work by Milesi-Ferreti
and Razin (2000) and Edwards (2002) in several directions: First, I use a treatment
regressions approach to estimate jointly the probability of experiencing a reversal and the
effect of reversals on economic growth. Second, I explicitly investigate whether the costs
of reversals – if any -- have been related to the economy’s degree of openness, its degree
of dollarization and its exchange rate regime. Finally, in Section V I provide some
concluding remarks. In the Appendix I provide some tables that complement the analysis
discussed in the text.
II.      Three Decades of Current Account Imbalances
         In this section I analyze the distribution of current account balances in the world
economy during the last thirty-two years. The data are taken from the World Bank data

12
  In Edwards (2002) I argue that there is evidence suggesting that large current account deficits increase
the probability of a balance of payments crisis. For results that point in the opposite direction see Frankel
and Rose (1996).
                                                    7


set and cover all countries – advanced, transition and emerging – for which there is
information.13 In order to organize the discussion I have divided the data into six regions:
(1) Industrialized countries; (2) Latin America and the Caribbean; (3) Asia; (4) Africa;
(5) Middle East and Northern Africa; and (6) Eastern Europe. The data set covers 157
countries during the 1970-2001 period. There are over 3,600 observations, and it is the
largest data set that can be used in empirical work on the current account. There are 643
observations for the industrial countries, 808 for Latin America and the Caribbean, 513
for Asia, 1,108 for Africa, 297 for the Middle East and North Africa, and 286 for Eastern
and Central Europe. As will be explained later, in some of the empirical exercises I have
restricted the data set to countries with population above half a million, and income per
capita above $ 500 in 1985 PPP terms. For a list of the countries included in the analysis
see the Appendix.
II.1 The International Distribution of Current Account Imbalances
        The data on current account imbalances during the last three decades are
summarized in Figures 1 and 2. In these figures, as in all tables in this paper, a positive
number denotes a current account deficit; surpluses have a negative sign. Figure 1
contains “box-and-whisker” plots that summarize the distribution of current account
deficits for each of the six regions. The lines in the middle of each box represent the
median of the current account balance for that particular region. Each box extends from
the 25th percentile of the distribution to the 75th percentile, thus covering the interquartile
range (IQR). The lines that come out from each box are called the whiskers, and extend
to the largest data point up to 1.5 times the corresponding edge of the IQR. The whiskers
capture the so-called adjacent values. Observations beyond the end of the whiskers are
depicted individually. Finally, the width of each box reflects the number of observations
in each region.14 In Figure 2, on the other hand, I present the evolution of the average
current account deficit to GDP ratio by regions for the 1970-2001 period.
        A number of interesting aspects of current account behavior emerge from these
Figures, and from the supporting data (see the Appendix for details on the distributions


13
   When data from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics are used the results are very similar,
however.
14
   See Chambers et. al. (1983). The Stata manual provides a simple and useful explanation of box-and-
whisker graphs.
                                                       8


by region and year). As Figure 1 shows, during this period the median balance was in
every one of the six regions -- including in the industrial countries -- a deficit. For the
complete thirty-two year period (1970-2001) more than one half of the countries had
current account deficits in excess of 3.1% of GDP. For this thirty-two years period the
third quartile corresponds to a current account deficit of 7.2% of GDP. Naturally, and as
Figure 1 shows, the third quartile differs for each region, with the largest values
corresponding to Africa and Latin America, with current account deficits of 9.9% and 8%
of GDP respectively. The industrial countries have the smallest third quartile, with a
deficit of 3% of GDP. Figure 1 also shows that the lowest limit of the interquartile range
– the first quartile -- corresponds to a current account surplus in only three of the regions:
Asia, Industrial Countries and the Middle East. The overall value (for all countries and
years) of the first quartile corresponds to a current account surplus of 0.28% of GDP.
         Out of the 3,655 country-year observations in the sample, 923 correspond to
current account surpluses, and 2,732 correspond to deficits. Moreover, for the period as a
whole the number of deficit countries exceeds the number of surplus countries in every
one of the regions. Naturally, since by construction the sum of all current account
balances around the world should add up to zero, the smaller number of surplus countries
have to run relatively large individual surpluses, when these are measured in currency
terms.15
         Figure 2 shows that after the 1973 oil-shock there were important changes in
average current account balances in the industrial nations, the Middle East and Africa.
Interestingly, no discernible change can be detected in Latin America or Asia. An
analysis of median and third quartile balances, however, shows a different picture, and
indicates that after 1973 there were significant shifts in the distribution of balances (see
the Appendix for year-to-year details). For example, the median balance climbs from a
deficit of 1% to one of 4% in Latin America; in Asia it goes from less than 1% to 3% of
GDP. Interestingly, the median and third quartile deficits for Africa experience a decline
after 1973, reflecting the region’s inability to finance these large shocks. In contrast with
the first oil shock, the 1979 oil shock affected both the means and medians of current

15
  An interesting recent puzzle is that the growing discrepancy between the sum of all recorded deficits and
surplus: as a practical matter, the sum of all current account balances is not equal to zero. Dealing with this
(important) issue is beyond the scope of the current paper, however.
                                                       9


account balances in every region in the world. The impact of this shock was particularly
severe in Latin America, where the deficit jumped from an average of 3.7% of GDP in
1978 to over 10% of GDP in 1981.
         Figure 2 captures vividly the magnitude of the external adjustment undertaken by
the emerging economies during the debt crisis of the 1980s. In Latin America, for
example, the reduction in the average current account deficit amounted to 7.3% of GDP
between 1981 and 1985. As may be seen from Figure 2, during the 1980s adjustment
was not confined to the Latin American region. Indeed, other emerging regions also
experienced severe reductions in their deficits during this period. In Asia, for instance,
the current account adjustment was almost 8% of GDP between 1981 and 1984. As
Figure 2 shows, the late 1990s and early 2000s have also been characterized by very large
adjustments in the emerging and transition countries. These adjustments have been the
related to the recurrent currency crises of the second half of the 1990s and early 2000s,
and have been particularly severe in Asia and Eastern Europe, where average balances
adjusted by 7.5% and 6.3% of GDP, respectively. These tables also show that the
industrialized countries went back to having sustained surpluses only after 1993.16
II.2 High and Persistent Current Account Deficits and Surpluses
         According to modern intertemporal models of the current account, including the
portfolio-based models of Kraay and Ventutra (2000, 2002) and Edwards (1999, 2002),
countries will tend to experience short-term deviations from their long run sustainable
current account levels.17 This implies that large current account imbalances – or large

16
   From the perspective of current controversies on the international adjustment process, it is interesting to
compare the historical behavior of the United States current account to the distribution of current accounts
for the industrial countries as a group. During the 1970s the U.S. run either small surpluses or small
deficits, and the country’s current account was very close to the median of the distribution for the industrial
nations. During most of the eighties the U.S. run a current account deficit. However, in every year but one
(1987) the deficit was below the third quartile threshold for the industrial countries. In 1987 an adjustment
process began; the deficit declined steadily until in 1991 the U.S. ran a small current account surplus.
Starting in 1992 a long period of deficits – which continues until today – began. In 1999, 2000 and 2001
the U.S. current account deficit was among the 25% largest deficits of all industrial countries. There is
little doubt that once data for 2002 and 2003 are collected, the U.S. will again be among the highest deficit
countries’ for those two years. This will make the U.S. the first large industrial country to have persistently
large current account deficits for five or more consecutive years – see the discussion below on persistent
deficits.
17
   In these models changes in current account balances are (largely) the result of efforts by domestic
economic agents to smooth consumption. The sustainable level of the current account balance, in turn, will
depend on portfolio decisions both by foreigners as well as by domestic investors.
                                                      10


deviations from sustainability -- should not be persistent through time. Once the
temporary shocks that trigger the large imbalances have passed, the current account will
return to its long-run sustainable level. In this sub-section I use the data set described
above to analyze the degree of persistence through time of large current account
imbalances. I am particularly interested in finding out whether the degree of persistence
is similar for large deficits and for large surpluses. I do this by estimating a number of
probit regressions on the probability of countries’ having a high deficit (or surplus) in a
particular year. Although this analysis is not a test of the basic intertemporal models, or
their portfolio-based versions, it does provide information on the important issue of
persistence of large current account imbalances. As a first step I constructed two
measures of “high deficits” and two measures of “high surpluses.”
         • “High Deficit 1:” This index takes the value of one if, in a particular year, a
             country’s deficit is higher than its region’s third quartile. The index takes a
             value of zero otherwise.18
         • “High Deficit 2:” This index takes the value of one if, in a particular year, a
             country’s deficit is higher than its region’s ninth percentile. It takes a value of
             zero otherwise. Notice that this definition is “stricter” than the High Deficits 1
             definition.
         • “High Surplus 1:” This index takes the value of one if, in a particular year, a
             country’s surplus is among its region’s 25% highest surpluses. The index
             takes a value of zero otherwise.
         • “High Surplus 2:” This index takes the value of one if, in a particular year, a
             country’s surplus is among its region’s 10% highest surpluses. It takes a value
             of zero otherwise.


         In order to investigate the degree of persistence of high current account
imbalances I estimated a number of panel probit regressions of the following type:


(1)               high j t = α + Σ β k high j t-k + γ X j t + ε j t.

18
  Notice that the thresholds for defining High deficits and surpluses are year-specific. That is, for every
year there is a different threshold for each region.
                                                    11


Where high j t is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if country j has a high surplus
(deficit) in period t; X j t, refers to other covariates including time, country and/or region
fixed effects. ε j t is an error term with the usual properties.19 My main interest is on the β
k    coefficients on lagged high surpluses (deficits): I am interested in finding out whether
having had a high deficit in the past (up to four years) affects the probability of having a
high deficit in the current period. The results are in Table 1, where as is customary I
report the estimated (dF/dx) coefficients, which capture the change in the probability of a
high surplus (deficit) in period t, if there is a high deficit in period t-k.20 As may be seen,
the coefficients of all four years’ lagged high surpluses’ indicators are significantly
different from zero at conventional levels, indicating a certain degree of persistence of
high surpluses. Interestingly, when regressions of this type were estimated for the case of
high deficits – equation 2 in Table 1 --, the results were quite different, and only the first
two lagged coefficients are significantly different from zero. These estimates suggest
that during the last three decades the international adjustment process has tended to be
asymmetric: high current account surpluses have tended to be more persistent than
current account deficits. This conclusion is supported by an analysis of the number of
countries that have experienced high deficits or surpluses for at least five consecutive
years. Table 2 contains such a list for the case of deficits; the case of surpluses is in Table
3.
           As may be seen from Table 2 a rather small number of countries has experienced
long periods of high deficits. Consider the case of Latin America, a region with a
reputation of macroeconomic mismanagement: according to the first definition, only
three countries have had persistently high deficits, and of only one these -- Nicaragua –
has had a high deficit for more than ten consecutive years.i According to the data in
Column A, only 7 out of the 49 African countries are persistent high deficit countries.
Interestingly, New Zealand is the only country in the sample that according to the first
definition has had two episodes of high persistent deficits – 1982-1988 and 1994-2001.
Column A in Table 2 shows that only four countries in the sample – Australia, Nicaragua,

19
   An alternative strategy would be to estimate regressions using the quintiles themselves as the dependent
variable. The results convey the same message as those reported here, however.
20
   The dF/dx have been computed for a discrete change in the dummy variables from 0 to 1, and have been
evaluated for the mean values of all the regressors.
                                                        12


Guinea-Bissau and Mauritania – have had high deficits that have persisted for more than
10 consecutive years.21
         As Column A in Table 3 shows, there are 30 episodes of persistently high
surpluses during the period under study.22 Of these, 9 correspond to advanced nations.
Four of the 30 persistently high surplus episodes took place in major oil producers –
Trinidad-Tobago, Nigeria, Kuwait and Russia --, and five episodes correspond to
countries belonging to the South African currency union (Lesotho, Namibia, South Africa
and Swaziland). Interestingly, neither China nor Japan have been among the persistent
high surplus countries during the last few years– that is, after 1998. Of the 30 high
surplus episodes in Column A of Table 2, 9 have lasted for more than 10 years, and four
countries have had more than one five year-episode with high surpluses. Both of these
figures are significantly higher than the equivalent ones for the case of high deficits;
indeed, as Table 1.A shows, only four countries had high deficits for ten or more
consecutive years, and only one had more than one five-year episode with high deficits
(New Zealand).


III.     The Anatomy of Current Account Adjustments
         In this Section I investigate the anatomy of the adjustment processes in high
deficit countries. I am interested in investigating as many of the main aspects of the
adjustment process as possible. In this section I report empirical results that deal with the
following questions:
         • Has adjustment tended to be gradual, or rather abrupt?
         • How common have large deficit “reversals” been during the last three
              decades?
         • Has the incidence of current account deficit reversals been similar across
              regions?



21
   When different and a stricter definition of high and persistence deficits is used – those countries with
deficits in the 10th decile of the distribution for at least five consecutive years --, the results are broadly
consistent with those discussed here – see Column B of Table 2 for details.
22
   Notice that I am referring to “episodes.” Some countries have had more than one episode of high and
persistent surpluses.
                                                     13



         • Following deficit reversals, have the current account adjustments tended to be
             lasting, or have current account balances deteriorate shortly after the reversal
             episode?
         • Historically, have major current account deficits reversals been associated
             with “sudden stops” of capital inflows?
         • To what extent have deficits’ reversals been associated with balance of
             payments and/or currency crises?
         • Have current account deficit reversals been associated with banking crises?
         • Have current account reversals tended to take place within the context of IMF
             programs?
         • Have current account deficit reversals have a negative effect on growth or
             other forms of real economic activity? The analysis of this particular question
             is the subject to Section IV of this paper.


The analysis presented in this section differs from other work on the subject, and in
particular from studies on current reversals such as Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (2000),
Edwards (2002) and Guidotti et. al. (2003), in several respects. First the coverage, both
in terms of countries and time period, is greater in this paper than in previous work.
Second, I use a methodology based on the calculation of non-parametric tests and
frequency tables. And, third, I analyze aspects of reversals – including their possible
connection to banking crises and “sudden” stops of capital inflows – that have not been
addressed in previous work.
III.1 Current Account Deficit Reversals: Incidence and Duration
         I define current account deficit reversals – reversals, in short -- in two alternative
ways. (1) Reversal A is defined as a reduction in the current account deficit of at least
4% of GDP in one year. (2) Reversal B is defined as a reduction in the current account
deficit of at least 6% of GDP in a three-year period.23


23
  In both cases the timing of the reversal is recorded as the year when the episode ends. That is if a country
reduces its current account deficit by 7% of GDP between 1980 and 1982, the episode is recorded has
having taken place in 1982. Also, for a particular episode to classify as a current account deficit reversal,
the initial balance has to be indeed a deficit. Notice that these definitions are somewhat different from
                                                       14


         In Table 4 I present tabulation tables on current account reversals by region as
well as for the complete sample. These tables include two versions of the Pearson tests
for the independence of the frequency of reversals across the six regions.24 Panel A
includes the results for the Reversal A definition, while Panel B has the results for the
Reversal B definition. As may be seen, for the complete sample the incidence of
Reversals A was 11.8% of all country-year observations, while it was only 9.2% for the
Reversals B definition. The lowest incidence of deficit reversals occurs in the advanced
countries, with 2% and 2.7% incidence for Reversals A and B respectively; the region
with highest incidences is Africa with 16.6% and 11.7% respectively. As the χ2 and the
F statistics indicate, the incidence of deficit reversals is statistically different among the
six different regions. Homogeneity tests also indicate that once the industrial countries’
group is excluded, the incidence of reversals is still significantly different among the
emerging and transition economies. This finding differs from what was found by Milesi-
Ferreti and Razin (2000, p. 292), who found that the occurrence of reversals was similar
across groups of countries.
         From a policy point of view an important question is whether these reversals have
been sustained through time, or whether they have been short lived. I address this issue
by investigating whether at horizons of 3 and 5 years after each reversal the current
account deficit was still lower than what it was the year before the reversal. The results
obtained are reported for in Table 5. As may be seen, these results suggest that in a vast
majority of cases – between 68% to 83% of cases, depending on the definition of reversal
--, the current account deficit was lower three or five years after the reversal than what it
was the year before the reversal started.
III.2 Current Account Deficits Reversals and “Sudden Stops”
         Since the currency crises of the 1990s international economists have had a
renewed interest on the behavior of capital flows around the world. In particular, a
number of authors have argued that in a world of high capital mobility “sudden stops” of
capital inflows can be highly disruptive, forcing countries to implement costly


those used in other studies, including Freund (2000), Milessi-Ferreti and Razin (2000), Edwards (2002) and
Guidotti et al (2003).
24
   The first one is the traditional Pearson χ2 test. The second one is an F-test, that makes a correction in case
the data in the sample are not identically and independently distributed.
                                                      15


adjustments (Dornbusch et al 1995, Calvo 2003, Calvo et al 2003, Mody and Taylor
2002). In this subsection I investigate the connection between “sudden stops” and current
account reversals. The results indicate that, as expected, these two phenomena have been
closely related. However, the relationship is less than one-to-one; historically there have
been many major current account deficit reversals that have not been related to “sudden
stops,” and there have been numerous “sudden stops” that have not been associated to
reversals. This indicates that when facing a “sudden stop” of capital inflows many
countries have been able to effectively use their international reserves in order avoid an
abrupt and major current account reversal. At the same time, these results suggest that a
number of countries have gone through large current account reversals without having
faced a sudden stop in capital inflows. Most of the countries in this group were not
receiving large inflows to begin with, and had financed their large deficits by drawing
down international reserves.
         I defined a “sudden stop” episode as an abrupt and major reduction in capital
inflows to a country that up to that time had been receiving large volumes of foreign
capital. More specifically, I imposed the following requirements for an episode to
qualify as a “sudden stop”: (1) The country in question must have received an inflow of
capital larger to its region’s third quartile during the previous two years prior to the
“sudden stop.” And (2), net capital inflows must have declined by at least 5% of GDP in
one year.25 In Table 6 I present a tabulation of the incidence of sudden stops for the
complete sample as well as by region. As may be seen, the historical occurrence is less
than 6% for the complete sample, and ranges from 3.5% for the advanced nations to
10.6% for the Middle Eastern and North African countries. When alternative and stricter
definitions of sudden stops were used, the incidence for the complete sample declined to
3.9% of all observations. Notice that the non-parametric χ2 and the F statistics indicate
that the incidence of sudden stops is statistically different among the six different regions
in our analysis.



25
  In order to check for the robustness of the results, I also used two alternative definitions of sudden stops,
which considered a reduction in inflows of 3 and 7 of GDP in one year. Due to space considerations,
however, I don’t report detailed results using these definitions.
                                                    16


       In Table 7 I present two-way frequency tables for the “sudden stops” and the
current account deficit reversal definition Reversal A, both for the complete sample as
well as for each one of our six regions. The Table shows that for the complete sample
(2,228 observations) 46.1% of countries subject to a sudden stop also faced a current
account reversal. At the same time, 22.9% of those with reversals also experienced (in
the same year) a sudden stop of capital inflows. The regional data show that joint
incidence of reversals and “sudden stops” has been highest in Africa, where
approximately 62% of sudden stops happened at the same time as current account
reversals, and almost 30% of reversals coincided with sudden stops. Notice that for every
one of the regions, as well as for the complete sample, the Pearson χ2 tests have very
small p-values, indicating that the observed differences across rows and columns are
significant. That is, these tests suggest that although there are observed differences
across these phenomena, the two are statistically related. Interestingly, these results do
not change in any significant way if different definitions of reversals and sudden stops are
used, or if alternative configurations of lags and leads are considered.
III.3 Current Account Deficit Reversals, Adjustment and Currency Crises
       In this subsection I investigate the nature of the adjustment associated with a
current account deficit reversal. I am particularly interested in finding out whether
current account reversals have been associated with broadly defined currency crises.
Authors that have previously looked into this issue have focused on rather narrow
definitions of “crisis.” For example, Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (2000) considered abrupt
devaluations to construct several indexes of crisis. Edwards (2002), on the other hand,
focused on changes in an external condition index, as well as on discrete and large
devaluations. In this paper, and in contrast with previous work on the subject, I
distinguish between two type of crises: “international reserves” crises, and “exchange
rate” crises. The starting point for this analysis is the construction of an index of
“external pressures” along the lines suggested by Eichengreen et al (1996):


(2)             I t = ∆e / e − (σ e / σ R ) * (∆R / R ) .
                                                      17


Where ( ∆e / e ) is the rate of change of the nominal exchange rate, and ( ∆R / R ) is the rate
of change of international reserves. σ e is the standard deviation of changes in exchange
rates, and σ R is the standard deviation of changes in international reserves. Traditional
analyses define a crisis ( C t ) to have taken place when the index in equation (2) exceeds

the mean of the index plus k standard deviations. The crisis indicator C t takes a value of

one (crisis) or zero (no crisis) according to the following rule:26


                       1 if       I t >= mean( I t ) + kσ I
(3)               Ct = 
                       0                 otherwise


Instead of focusing on this single traditional index, in this paper I construct two
alternative crisis indicators, that help understand more fully the nature of the adjustment
process. These alternative indicators make a distinction between changes in C t that stem
from large reductions in reserves, and changes in C t that are the result of massive
devaluations. In the construction of both of these indexes I take the value of k to be equal
to two. These crisis indicators are specifically defined as follows:27
         • International Reserves Crisis (Crisis_Res): In this case the decline in reserves
             by itself accounts for triggering the crisis indicator C t. That is, in this case,
             while the country experiences a major loss in international reserves, its
             nominal exchange rate does not go through a major adjustment.
         • Exchange Rate Crisis (Crisis_Er): In this case it is the nominal exchange rate
             by itself that triggers the C t crisis indicator. Here the country lets the
             exchange rate depreciate significantly, before it has experienced a major loss
             in international reserves.


Table 8 presents a summary of the occurrence of the two types of crises for the complete
sample, as well as for each one of the regions. The table also includes the Pearson tests

26
   The pioneer work here is Eichnegreen et al (1996), who suggested that the index (2) also included
changes in domestic interest rates. Most emerging and transition economies, however, don’t have long
time series on interest rates. For this reason, most empirical analyses are based on a restricted version of
the index, such as 2.
27
   For details see the discussion in Edwards and Magendzo (2003).
                                                     18


for independence. Three conclusions emerge from this table: (a) crises have been a
rather infrequent event.28 (b) The occurrence of both type of crises is statistically
different across regions (see the χ2 statistic). And (c) the incidence of Crisis_ER has
been, in every region, greater than the incidence of Crisis_Res.29
         I use non-parametric tests based on a stratified case-control methodology to
analyze whether current account reversals have been associated to the two types of crises
defined above.30 This approach consists of formally testing – using a χ2 statistic --
whether there is a significant relationship between a particular outcome (the case) and
another variable to which both case and control variables have been “exposed.” The first
step is to separate observations into a “case group” and a “control group.” Countries that
for a given year have experienced a “crisis” are considered to be a “case.” Non-crisis
observations constitute the “control group.” The second step consists of calculating how
many observations in both the case and control groups have been subject to a current
account reversal – these are the “exposed” countries. From this information an odds ratio
is calculated, and a χ2 test is computed in order to determine whether the odds ratio is
significantly different from 1. If the hypothesis that the odds-ratio is equal to one is
rejected, then there is evidence supporting the hypothesis that countries that are subject to
a reversal have a significant probability of experiencing a crisis.
         The results are presented in Table 9 for the Reversal A definition of current
account reversals (4% of GDP in one year) – when the Reversal B definition (6% of GDP
in three years) was used the results were very similar and, thus, are not reported here due
to space considerations. These results may be summarized as follows: (1) the hypothesis
that the odds-ratios are the same across regions cannot be rejected for any of the two
definitions of crisis (see the test for homogeneity). This means that computing a single χ2
statistic is appropriate for the sample as a whole. (2) The hypothesis that the odds-ratio is
equal to one is rejected at conventional levels for the exchange rate definition of crises,

28
   This is, in a way, by construction, since k was chosen to be equal to 2.
29
   As it has been usually been done in empirical work on crises I also built alternative indicators that
considered a three-year window after each crisis. The results, however, are very similar to those obtained
when the basic definitions are used. For this reason, and due to space considerations, I don’t report them in
this paper.
30
   This approach is used frequently by epidemiologists. I became interested in statistical techniques used
by epidemiologists in doing research on financial crisis contagion across countries --see Edwards (2000).
See Fleiss (1981) for details on the actual case-control method.
                                                  19


Crisis_Er. This means that, statistically speaking, countries subject to current account
reversals have a significant probability of suffering a major devaluation of their currency,
even if international reserves do not decline massively. And (3) the hypothesis that the
odds ratio is equal to one cannot be rejected for the reserves definition of crisis
Crisis_Res. This means that the occurrence of current account reversals does not appear
to increase the probability of a country facing a reserve-crisis, as defined above.
III.4 Current Account Reversals, Banking Crises and IMF Programs
        In this sub-section I investigate two final aspects of current account adjustment
processes: (a) whether current account reversals have historically been related to banking
crises. And (b), the relationship between current account reversals and IMF programs. A
number of authors have argued that one of the costliest effects of external shocks is that
they tend to generate banking crises and collapses. Most of the analyses on this subject
have focused on the joint occurrence of devaluation crises and banking crises – see, for
example, the discussion in Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999). In this sub-section I take a
slightly different approach, and I investigate whether major reversals in current account
deficits – not all of which end up in devaluation crises, as established above -- have been
associated with banking crises. I address this issue in Table 10, where I present two-way
tabulations for the Reversals A definition of current account reversals and a dummy
variable that takes the value of one if that year there has been a banking crises.31 The
three panels in Table 10 present two-way tabulations under different structures of lags:
while in Panel A both variables are contemporaneous, in Panel B the dummy for banking
crises is lagged one year. This allows us to consider situations were a banking crisis
follows in time a current account reversal episode. Finally, in Panel C the Reversal A
dummy has been lagged one year. All three Panels – see, in particular the Pearson χ2
tests for independence of rows and columns -- show that there has not been a significant
relation, at any lag or lead, between reversals and major banking crises.
        In Table 11 I present two-way tabulation tables for the Reversals A indicator and
dummy variable (imfprog) that takes the value of one if during that year the country in



31
  The data on banking crises are from Glick and Hutchison (1999). When the Reversals B definition is
used the results are similar to those reported above.
                                                    20


question had an IMF program, and a value of zero otherwise.32 As before, the tabulations
are presented for three different lag-lead structures. The results indicate that, at least
within the leads and lags considered here, there has not been a strong historical relation
between reversals and IMF programs. Indeed, the χ2 tests for independence of rows and
columns have relatively high p-values.


IV. The Costs of Current Account Reversals
        In this section I investigate the extent to which current account reversals have had
an effect on real economic performance. I am particularly interested in analyzing if the
impact of current account reversals on real economic activity depend on variables such as
the country’s degree of openness, its degree of dollarization, and its exchange rate
regime. According to a variety of models stemming form many different traditions –
including models in the Mundell-Fleming tradition, as well as recent ones based on the
“sudden stops” framework --, the real costs of foreign shocks are inversely proportional
to the degree of openness of the economy.33 According to these models, countries that
are less open internationally will have to make a greater effort, in terms of reducing
aggregate demand (absorption) and/or in terms of real devaluations, than counties with a
larger external sector. In models in the Mundell-Fleming tradition, this phenomenon is
reflected in the fact that the expenditure reducing effort, for any given level of
expenditure switching, is inversely proportional to the marginal propensity to import –
see Frenkel and Razin, 1987.
        In a recent analysis of the 2001-02 Argentine crisis, Calvo et al (2003) have
developed a model where a “sudden stop” of capital inflows results in an abrupt current
account reversal, and in a major real exchange rate depreciation. In this model the
“required” real depreciation depends on the country’s degree of openness. Calvo et al
(2003) argue that in Chile – one of the most open countries in Latin America – a “sudden
stop” would require a 32% real depreciation to re-establish external equilibrium.34 The

32
   The variable imfprog takes a vlaue of one if in that year the country any of the following type of
programs: Stand-by, ESAF, EFF and SAF. The raw data for constructing this dummy were taken from
Evrensel (2002) and from the IMF web page: http://www.imf.org/external/np/tre/tad/exfin1.cfm
33
   See, for example, Part II of Frenkel and Razin (1987) and Calvo et. al. (2003).
34
   The authors’ define “new equilibrium” as a situation where the current account deficit is completely
eliminated.
                                                     21


authors’ calculations suggest that in relatively close Argentina the depreciation required
for eliminating the current account deficit is, at 46%, significantly higher than in Chile.
In this model the real depreciation that stems from the “sudden stop” -- and concomitant
current account reversal – has a more negative effect on real performance in countries
with a higher degree of dollarization. This effect takes place through two channels. First,
countries with corporate dollarized liabilities will experience massive jumps in
indebtedness and will be unable to service their debts. Moreover, as Caballero and
Krishnamurthy (2000) have argued, the value of collateral provided by producers of
nontradables will decline significant, further amplifying the costs of the crisis. The
second channel is related to fiscal policy and fiscal sustainability. To the extent that a
proportion of the public sector debt is denominated in foreign currency, the real
depreciation will increase the ratio of public sector debt to GDP.35 In order to maintain
fiscal sustainability the authorities will have to run a higher primary surplus, thus,
reducing aggregate demand and economic activity.
         For a long time economists have argued that the exchange rate regime plays an
important role in the adjustment process. Meade (1951, p. 201-02) argued early on that
countries with a flexible exchange rate regime are able to accommodate better external
shocks, including terms of trade and capital account shocks.36 This suggests that current
account reversals will have a smaller (negative) effect on real economic activity countries
with more flexible regimes. In this section I use a treatment regressions framework to
investigate empirically if these three factors – openness, the extent of dollarization, and
the exchange rate regime – have indeed affected the way in which current account
reversals affect real economic activity.
         Previous empirical work on the (potential) real effects of reversals have reached
different conclusions. Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (2000), for example, used both before–
and-after analyses as well as cross-country regressions to deal with this issue and
concluded that “reversal events seem to entail substantial changes in macroeconomic
performance between the period before and the period after the crisis but are not
systematically associated with a growth slowdown (p. 303, emphasis added).” Edwards

35
   See Edwards (2003) for an analysis of the relationship between fiscal sustainability and the real exchange
rate in very poor HIPC countries.
36
   For a discussion and empirical analysis of this proposition see Edwards and Levy-Yeyati (2003).
                                                     22


(2002), on the other hand, used dynamic panel regression analysis and concluded that
major current account reversals had a negative effect on investment, and that they had “a
negative effect on GDP per capita growth, even after controlling for investment (p. 52).”
Neither of these papers, however, analyzed the interaction between openness,
dollarization or the exchange rate regime and the costs of current account reversals.37
IV.1 Current Account Reversals and Growth: An Empirical Model
         Changes in investment constitute, almost by definition, the main channel through
which current account reversals affect economic activity. Since the current account
deficit is equal to investment minus savings, a major reversal will imply, with a high
degree of probability, a decline in investment and, thus, in economic activity. An
important question is whether reversals affect growth through channels other than
investment. In this section I tackle this issue by using panel data to estimate jointly
growth equations and current account reversal equations.
         My main interest is to understand what is the conditional effect – if any --of a
current account reversal on real macroeconomic performance. In order to do this, I use a
“treatment effects” model to estimate jointly an “outcome equation” on real GDP growth
and a probit equation on the probability that a country experiences a current account
reversal. The empirical treatment effects model may be written as follows:


(4)                        y t j = x t j β + γ δ t j + θ (δ t j ✕Openness t j) + µ j t


                                        1,   if δ * j t > 0

(5)                        δ jt =

                                       0,    otherwise



(6)                        δ * jt =    w jt α + εjt .




37
  In a recent paper, Guidotti et al (2003) consider the role of openness in an analysis of imports and exports
behavior in the aftermath of a reversal. The spirit of their analysis, however, is somewhat different from
that of the other works discussed here.
                                                     23


Equation (4) is the real growth equation, where y j t stands for real GDP growth in
country j and period t; x j t is a vector of covariates that capture the role of traditional
determinants of growth, such as investment, openness and government consumption; δ j t
is a dummy variable (i.e. the treatment variable) that takes a value of one if country j in
period t experienced a current account reversal, and zero if the country did not experience
reversal. Accordingly, γ is the parameter of interest: the effect of the treatment on the
outcome. Whether the country experiences a current account reversal is assumed to be the
result of an unobserved latent variable δ* j t, described in equation (5). Openness is a
variable that measures the extent to which country j in period t is open to international
trade. θ is the coefficient of the interaction between openness and the reversal dummy.
δ* j t, in turn, is assumed to depend linearly on vector w j t. Some of the variables in w j t
may be included in x j t (Maddala 1983, p. 120).38 β and α are parameter vectors to be
estimated. µ j t and ε j t are error terms assumed to be bivariate normal, with a zero mean
and a covariance matrix given by:


                             σ      ς
(7)                          ς      1


If equations (4) and (6) are independent, the covariance term ς in equation (7) will be
zero. Under most plausible conditions, however, it is likely that this covariance term will
be different from zero.
         Greene (2000) has shown that if equation (4) is estimated by least squares, the
treatment effect will be overestimated. Traditionally, this problem has been tackled by
estimating the model using a two-step procedure (Maddala 1983). In the first step, the
treatment equation (5) is estimated using probit regressions. From this estimation a
hazard is obtained for each j t observation. In the second step, the outcome equation (4)
is estimated with the hazard added as an additional covariate. From the residuals of this
augmented outcome regression, it is possible to compute consistent estimates of the
variance-covariance matrix (7). An alternative to the two step approach is to use a

38
   It is assumed, however, that δ * j t does not depend on y j t. Otherwise, as discussed below, the model
cannot be identified.
                                                   24


maximum likelihood procedure to estimate the model in equations (4) through (7)
jointly.39 As shown by Greene (2000), the log likelihood for observation k is given by
equations (5) and (5’):


                               w α + ( y − x β − δ )ς σ  1  y − x β − δ  2
                  L k = log Φ  k                          −                − log 2π σ ,
                                          k    k                  k   k
(8)
                                          1− ς 2
                                                            2     σ       

                 if δ k = 1


                               − w α − ( y − x β )ς σ  1  y − x β  2
                  L k = log Φ                           −            − log 2π σ ,
                                    k       k     k             k   k
(8’)
                                         1− ς 2
                                                          2  σ      

                 if δ k = 0 .


        The model in equations (4) – (7) will satisfy the consistency and identifying
conditions of mixed models with latent variables if the outcome variable y j t is not a
determinant (directly or indirectly) of the treatment equation -- that is, if y is not one of
the variables in w in equation (6).40 For the cases of per capita GDP growth this is a
reasonable assumption.
        Since I am interested in understanding if openness (among other variables) plays a
role in the effect of reversals on growth, one of the x j t variables in equation (4) is a term
that interacts the dummy variable δ t k and an openness variable. The latter is defined as
the ratio of imports plus exports over the country’s GDP. Since the presence of such an
interactive term makes the estimation of the system (4) - (8) somewhat complex, the
results reported here correspond to the two-steps procedure described above. In the
estimation I also impose some exclusionary restrictions; that is, a number of the wj t
covariates included in equation (6), are not included in the outcome equation (4). These




39
   The two-steps estimates yield similar results, and are available from the authors on request.
40
  Details on identification and consistency of models with mixed structures can be found in Maddala
(1983). See, also, Heckman (1978), Angrist (2000) and Wooldridge (2002).
                                               25


exclusionary restrictions are not required for identification of the parameters, but they are
generally recommended as a way of addressing issues of collinearity.41
IV.2 Basic Results: Reversals and Openness
          In this section I report the results obtained from the estimation of the treatment
effects model given by equations (4) through (7). I proceed as follows: I first discuss the
specification used for the first-stage probit equation on the probability of experiencing a
current account reversal. I then discuss the specification for the outcome equations on
GDP growth. Finally, I present the results from the estimation of the treatment models.
In the subsections that follow I discuss some extensions and robustness issues.
IV.2.1 Equation Specification
          a. The Treatment Equation: Following work done by Frankel and Rose (1996),
Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (2000) and Edwards (2002) among others, in the estimation of
the first step probit regressions I included the following covariates: (a) the ratio of the
current account deficit to GDP lagged one, two and three periods. It is expected that,
with other things given, countries with a larger current account deficit will have a higher
probability of experiencing a reversal. The best results were obtained when the one-year
deficit was included. (b) The one-year lagged external debt over GDP ratio. Its
coefficient is expected to be positive in the estimation of the first step probit equation (6).
(c) The ratio of net international reserves to GDP, lagged one year. Its coefficient is
expected to be negative, indicating that with other things given countries’ with a higher
stock of reserves have a lower probability of experiencing a current account reversal. (d)
Short term (less than one-year maturity) external debt as a proportion of external debt,
lagged one period. Its coefficient is expected to be positive. (e) The one-year lagged rate
of growth of domestic credit. Its coefficient is expected to be positive. (f) The lagged
ratio of external debt service to exports. Again, its coefficient is expected to be positive.
(g) Year dummies, and (h) country-specific dummies. In some of the probit regressions I
also included the ratio of FDI to GDP, and the public sector deficit (both lagged). Their
coefficients were not significant, however. Since these variables were available for a
relatively smaller number of observations than the other variables, they were not included
in the final specification of the probit equations (6).

41
     Wooldridge (2002).
                                                    26


         b. The Growth Outcome Equations: The dependent variable was real GDP growth
obtained from the World Development Indicators. In specifying the growth equation I
followed the by now standard empirical growth literature Barro and Sala-I-Martin 1995,
Barro, 1996). As is customary I included the following covariates: (a) the logarithm of
initial GDP: its coefficient is expected to be negative and capture (conditional)
convergence. (b) The investment to GDP ratio; its coefficient is expected to be positive.
(c) The rate of growth of population, as a proxy for the rate of growth of labor. (d) An
openness index defined as the ratio of exports plus imports over GDP. As Sachs and
Warner (1995) have argued its coefficient is expected to be positive. (e) The ratio of
government consumption to GDP, whose coefficient is expected to be negative (Barro
and Sala-I-Martin 1995). (f) Year dummies, and (g) country specific dummies.42
         In addition to the covariates discussed above the outcome growth equation also
includes the two variables of interest: The current account reversal dummy, and the
current account reversal dummy interacted with the openness variable. If current account
reversals have a negative impact on economic activity, beyond their effects on
investment, we would expect the coefficient of the reversals’ dummy to be significantly
negative in the estimation of equation (4). Moreover, if this effect is inversely
proportional to the country’s degree of openness, the coefficient of the interaction
between reversals and openness should be significantly positive.
IV.2.2 Main Results
         In Table 12 I summarize the basic results obtained from the estimation of number
of treatment models for GDP growth (the coefficients of the time-specific and country
specific dummy variables are not reported due to space considerations). The table
contains two panels. The upper panel includes the results from the growth outcome
equation; the lower panel contains the estimates for the “treatment equation,” or probit
equation on the probability of experiencing a current account reversal. As pointed out
above, the treatment observations correspond to current account reversal episodes, and
the untreated group is comprised of all country-year observations were there have been
no reversals. Table 12 also includes the estimated coefficient of the hazard variable in the


42
   These country specific dummies capture the effect of structural variables that do not change
(significantly) through time.
                                              27


second step estimation, as well as the estimated elements of the variance-covariance
matrix (7). The first two equations in the table include current values of the reversal
dummy and of the interactive variable. The last two equations also include lagged values
for these variables. Due to space considerations I only report the results for the Reversal
A definition of current account reversals; those for the alternative Reversal B definition
are similar.
       Probability of Experiencing a Current Account Reversal: The probit estimates are
presented in the lower panel of Table 12. As may be seen, the results are similar across
models and are quite satisfactory. All of the coefficients have the expected signs, and are
statistically significant at conventional levels. These results indicate that the probability
of experiencing a reversal is higher for countries with a large (lagged) current account
deficit, a high external debt ratio, and a rapid rate of growth of domestic credit.
Countries that have a higher level of net international reserves have a lower probability of
experiencing a reversal. The coefficients of the short-term debt and total debt service
have the expected signs, but tend not to be significant.
       GDP Growth Models: The results from the estimation of the growth equation are
reported in Panel A of Table 12. The first equation (12.1) includes the current account
reversal dummy, but does not include a term that interacts the reversals dummy with
openness. The second equation (12.2) includes the interactive term. Equations (12.3)
and (12.4) include lagged terms of the reversal dummy and of the reversal-openness
interactive term. As the Table shows, the lagged values were not significant. Thus, in
the discussion that follows I concentrate on equations (12.1) and (12.2).
       As may be seen, the growth equation results presented in Table 12 are interesting:
The traditional covariates have the expected signs, and with the exception of openness
they are significant at conventional levels. More important for the topic of this paper, in
equation (12.2) the coefficients of the current account reversal dummy is always
significantly negative and the coefficients of the term that interacts openness and
reversals is significantly positive. According to these results, the effects of reversals on
growth depend significantly on the degree of openness of the economy – measured as the
ratio of imports plus exports to GDP --, and may be expressed as follows:
                                                      28


(9)               Growth Effects of Reversals = -4.323 + 0.028 openness.


The variable openness in the data set varies significantly across countries. Its mean for
the complete period is 64%, its standard deviation is 35%, and its median is 57.4%. The
first quartile is 29.3%, and the third quartile is 84.5%. This means that for a country with
a degree of openness equal to the mean, the point estimate of the effect of a current
account reversal on growth is: -2.531% (-4.323 + 0.028 x 64 = -2.531). If the country’s
degree of openness is equal to the first quartile, the (negative) effect of a reversal on
growth is significantly higher at -3.50%. But if the country is very open to international
trade, and its degree of openness corresponds to the third quartile, the effect of a reversal
on growth is much smaller, at –1.96%. To make the point more vividly, consider the case
of two neighboring countries in Latin America: Argentina and Chile. While Argentina is
relatively closed – the average value for openness variable in the 1995-2001 period is
20% --, Chile is quite open, with an average for the openness variable of 60% during the
same period. This implies that a reversal in Argentina will tend to have a negative effect
on growth equal to –3.763%; in Chile, on the other hand, the effect of the reversal on
growth would only be –2.64.
         In the rest of this section I report results from a number of extensions to the
analysis presented in Table 12. In particular I analyze three issues: (a) whether the
effects of reversals on growth depend on the level of external debt of the country in
question. (b) If reversals affect GDP growth differently countries with different
exchange rate regimes. And (c) whether the reduction in growth depends on the actual
magnitude of the reversal.
IV.3 Dollarization and Current Account Reversals
         As pointed out above, many recent discussions on macroeconomic instability in
the emerging economies have centered on the role of dollarized liabilities. According to
a number of authors countries with a high level of dollarized liabilities will be severely
affected by reversals.43 The argument is based on the notion that reversals tend to result


43
  Strictly speaking this argument has been made in terms of “sudden stops.” As I argued above, sudden
stops and reversals are distinctly different phenomena. The analysis in this section is in terms of reversals.
On dollarization and the Argentine crisis see Calvo et al (2003). On a general discussion on the extent of
dollarization in Latin America see Savastano (1992).
                                                       29


(or be associated) with large exchange rate changes. To the extent that the real exchange
rate indeed depreciates, the ratio of foreign currency denominated debt to GDP will
increase massively, forcing the country to implement a deep(er) and costly adjustment.
In order to investigate whether this conjecture is supported by the data I estimated
systems of the type of (4) – (7) where in addition to the regressors described above, I also
included the reversals dummy interacted with the country’s total external debt (both
public and private) denominated in foreign currency. Since (most) advanced countries
are able to issue debt denominated in their own currency they are excluded from the
analysis. If countries with higher dollarized liabilities suffer more from a reversal we
would expect the coefficient of the interactive term to be significantly negative. However,
the results from these regressions (not reported here due to space considerations, but
available on request) indicate that the interactive term is positive (rather than negative)
and not significant at conventional levels. This result was maintained when alternative
estimation methods and different samples were used.
         There are several possible explanation for these results, including that total
external debt is not the best indicator of the extent of dollarized liabilities; that the
channels through which the presence of dollarized liabilities affect growth are complex,
and not captured by a model such as the one estimated in this paper; and that what
matters is the extent of currency mismatches in the financial sector, rather that the actual
extent of dollarization.
         In order to further investigate this issue I included a variable that interacted
Reversals with the ratio of foreign debt to the sum of imports and exports.44 This
interactive variable would be high in countries with a high external debt to GDP and/or a
low degree of openness. If the presence of dollarized liabilities and the lack of openness
jointly amplify the costs of reversals, we would expect the estimated coefficient of this
interactive variable to be significantly negative. This, however, was not the case. It
estimated coefficient was 0.023 with a z-test statistic of 0.23.
         Unfortunately, there are no data for a large panel of countries on the extent of
dollarization of the financial sector. It is possible, however, to use a more limited data set


44
  Of course, this is equivalent to a ratio of two ratios: (a) The foreign debt to GDP ratio, relative to (b) the
imports plus exports to GDP ratio (openness).
                                                      30


– both in terms of years and countries’ coverage – to further investigate this issue. I use
the data set recently assembled by Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003b) that covers
117 countries for the period 1996-201. As before, the results obtained from this analysis
did not provide support to the hypothesis that current account reversals result in higher
real costs in countries with a greater degree of dollarization (detailed results available on
request).45
         The results reported above refer to whether the extent of dollarization affects the
costs associated with current account reversals. An alternative question, and one that is
also important in the current policy debate is whether countries with a higher degree of
dollarization have a higher probability of experiencing a current account reversal, or a
“sudden stop” for that matter. This would indeed be the case if countries with dollarized
financial systems are particularly vulnerable to external shocks (Calvo, Izquierdo and
Mejias2003b). In order to investigate this issue I re-estimated the propensity probit
equation on the probability of experiencing a reversal with Reinhart et al (2003b)
dollarization index as an additional regressor. The following results were obtained (z-
statistic in parenthesis; time and country specific fixed effects not reported):


         δ j t = 0.146 Current Account + 0.214 dollarization + 0.005 external debt
                (8.52)                   (4.72)                (2.18)

              - 0.116 reserves + 0.001 credit growth
                (-0.91)         (0.94)
                                                                                   N = 892


         All in all, I consider these results to be preliminary in nature. I believe that
further research on the subject is required to come to a firmer conclusion on the effect of
dollarization on the adjustment process. This additional research should include an effort
to increase the coverage of the dollarization variables, both in terms of time-span as well
as in terms of countries. Indeed, the fact that the best measure available – calculated by

45
  In investigating this issue I used three procedures. First, I included in the estimation of the treatment
equations a term that interacts Reinhart et al (2003b) composite index of dollarization with the reversal
dummy. Second, I split the sample according to their classification of Very high, high, moderate and low
degree of dollarization. And third, I split the sample according to the authors’ four type of dollarization. In
neither of this case did I find support to the hypothesis that dollarization amplifies the effects of current
account reversals.
                                                      31


Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003b) -- covers only 1996-2001 means that the
regression analysis reported above was undertaken on a limited number of observations.46
IV.4 Exchange Regimes and Current Account Reversals
         A number of recent policy discussions on the future of the international financial
architecture have focused on the role of alternative exchange regimes in helping countries
cope better with the vicissitudes of the international economy. In this section I
investigate whether current account reversals have a different real effect on growth in
countries with different exchange rate regimes. In particular, I analyze whether, as
supporters of flexibility have argued, countries with flexible exchange rates have a
greater capacity to absorb external shocks. If this were the case we would expect that the
real costs of current account reversals would be smaller in countries with flexible regimes
than in those with more rigid one.
         I use the exchange rate regime classification devised by Levy-Yeyati and
Sturzenegger (2003), that considers the actual rather than the official regime for each
individual country at a particular moment in time.47 Countries are classified into four
regimes:
         • Hard pegs (Hard): This group includes counties with currency boards,
             members of currency unions and dollarized countries.
         • Pegged regimes (Peg): This definition includes all alternative versions of
             pegged regimes, including pegged-but-adjustable. It also includes the hard
             regimes described above.
         • Intermediate regimes (Intermediate): This group includes crawling pegs,
             manage floats and other forms of intermediate regimes.
         • Flexible rates: (Flexible): This group includes countries with flexible
             exchange rates, including free floating.




46
   In fact, when I used the Reinhart et al (2003b) dollarization index on the complete sample, the results
were encouraging, and suggested that dollarized liabilities may indeed amplify the costs of reversals.
Naturally, this conclusion is only valid to the extent that the 1996-2001 index also captures the extent of
dollarization during the longer period. At this point, however, I am not prepared to make that claim.
47
   See also Reinhart and Rogoff (2002).
                                             32


I proceeded as follows: For each of the four regimes I estimated treatment regression
systems of the type (4) – (7). I then compared the estimates of both the reversals
treatment dummy, as well as the term that interacts reversals and openness. Formal χ2
tests for the equality of coefficients across regimes were then performed. If more flexible
regimes act as shock absorbers, as their supporters have argued, we would expect that
their coefficient of reversals would be smaller, in absolute value, than that of the more
rigid exchange rate arrangements. In the actual estimation countries were classified
according to the regime they had the year before the reversal was initiated. This was
done as a way of dealing with countries that switched regimes during the sample period,
and to properly classify those countries that as a consequence of -- or in conjunction with
– the reversal moved from one regime to a different one.
       The results obtained are presented in Table 13, where I only report the estimates
for the Reversal A dummy and for the interactive term. As may be seen, the point
estimates for the Reversal A dummy is significantly negative for Hard, Pegged and
Intermediate exchange rate regimes. Moreover the point estimate of this dummy strictly
declines (in absolute value), as the exchange rate regime becomes more flexible. As may
be seen, its estimated coefficient for the Flexible regime group is not significantly
different from zero, suggesting that while reversals are indeed costly (in terms of reduced
GDP growth) under rigid and semi-rigid regimes, they are not significantly so in
countries with exchange rate flexibility. A formal χ2 test on the equality of these
coefficients across different regimes’ equations indicates that the null hypotheses is
rejected: the χ2 had a value of 21.1 for the Reversal A dummies, and 17.9 for the
interactive terms.
       Since, as the results in Table 13 indicate, the point estimates of the interactive
term also vary across regimes, the actual effect of reversals on growth should be
compared for given degrees of openness. The results indicate that for a variety of degrees
of openness – up to 100% of GDP – the costs, in terms of a decline in GDP growth, of
current account reversals has been higher in countries with more rigid exchange rate
regimes, than in countries with more flexible ones.
                                              33


IV.5 The Magnitude of the Reversals
       The empirical results presented in this section has focused on current account
reversals as a phenomenon that can be analyzed using a treatment-based analysis, where
reversal events are captured by a “treatment” dummy variable. A potential limitation of
this analysis is that it does not consider the actual magnitude of the reversal, and
considers that a reversal of 5% of GDP is equal to one of 8% of GDP. In order to deal
with this issue I estimated a number of treatment regressions systems that included terms
that interacts the reversal dummy with the actual magnitude of the reversal. To the extent
that the magnitude of the reversals matters – with higher reversals being more costly –
the coefficient of this interacted term should be significantly negative. The results
obtained from this analysis indicate that the estimated coefficient was indeed negative,
with a point estimate of –0.015. However, it was not significant (z-statistic equal to –
0.21), indicating that once reversals reach a certain level, their effects on growth are
similar.
V.     Concluding Remarks
       In this paper I have analyzed the anatomy of current account imbalances in the
world economy during the last three decades. The analysis proceeded from a general
picture of the distribution of deficits and surpluses, to a detailed investigation of the most
important characteristics of major current account adjustments. The approach followed
has been a combination of graphical displays, tabulation tables, non-parametric tests and
treatment effects regressions. I believe that by combining these different tools, I have
been able to convey a clear and broad picture of the main characteristics of the
adjustment process.
       The main findings of the analysis of the anatomy of current account imbalances
may be summarized as follows: (a) throughout the sample period the vast majority of
countries have run current account deficits. Only in three regions has the median of
current account balances been a surplus – industrial, Middle East and Asia --, and in all of
them this surplus has been small. (b) Large current account deficits have not had a
significant degree of persistence through time. Only a few countries have run persistently
large deficits. (c) The degree of persistence of large surpluses has been higher. A larger
number of countries have run persistently large surpluses, indicating that under the
                                             34


current “rules of the game” the nature of the adjustment process is asymmetrical. (e)
Major reversals in current account deficits have tended to be persistent through time, and
strongly associated to “sudden stops” of capital inflows. (f) There is a high probability
that reversals lead to an exchange rate crisis; the evidence also indicates that countries
that try to face reversals by running down reserves significantly usually do not succeed.
(g) There has been no statistically significant relationship between reversals and banking
crises. (h) Within a three year window there has been no statistically significant relation
between reversals and IMF programs.
       The main results from the econometric analysis of the probability of countries
experiencing a reversal, and of their effects on real economic activity may be summarized
as follows. (i) The probability of a country experiencing a reversal is appropriately
captured by a small number of variables that include the (lagged) current account to GDP
ratio, the external debt to GDP ratio, the level of international reserves, domestic credit
creation, and debt services. (ii) Current account reversals have had a negative effect on
real growth that goes beyond their direct effect on investments. (iii) There is persuasive
evidence indicating that the negative effect of current account reversals on growth will
depend on the country’s degree of openness. More open countries will suffer less – in
terms of lower growth – than countries with a lower degree of openness. (iv) I was
unable to find evidence supporting the hypothesis that countries with a higher degree of
dollarization are more severely affected by current account reversals than countries with a
lower degree of dollarization. And, (v) the empirical analysis suggests that countries
with more flexible exchange rate regimes are able to accommodate the shocks stemming
from a reversal better than countries with more rigid exchange rate regime.
                                            35


                                    REFERENCES


Ades, Alberto and Federico Kaune (1997): “A New Measure of Current Account
    Sustainability for Developing Countries.” Goldman-Sachs Emerging Markets
    Economic Research.

Adedeji, Olumuyiwa S.(2001): “The Size and Sustainability of the Nigerian Current
   Account Deficits”, IMF Working Paper WP/01/87, June.

Angrist, Joshua D. (2000): “Estimation of Limited-Dependent Variable Models with
   Dummy Endogenous Regressors: Simple Strategies for Empirical Practice”,
   NBER TWP 248.

Arteta, Carlos (2003): “Are financially Dollarized Countries more Prone to Costly
 Countries,” International Finance Discussion Paper 753, Borad of Governors of
 the Federal Reserve System.

Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1995): Economic Growth..MIT Press.

Barro, Robert J. (1996): “Detreminants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country
 Empirical Study”, NBER Working Paper 5698.

Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2000): “International and Domestic
 Collateral Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crises”, NBER Working
 Paper 7971.

. Calvo, Guillermo A. 2000. “Balance of Payments Crises in Emerging Markets: Large
     Capital Inflows and Sovereign Governments,” in Paul Krugman, ed. Currency
     Crises, The University of Chicago Press.

Calvo, Guillermo (2001): “Economic Policy in Stormy Waters: Financial
 Vulnerability in Emerging Economies, Journal of Applied-Economics, May 4(1).

Calvo, Guillermo A. (2003): “Explaining Sudden Stops, Growth Collapse and BOP
 Crises: The Case of Distortionary Output Taxes”, NBER Workin Paper 9864.

Calvo, Guillermo A., Izquierdo, Alejandro and Ernesto Talvi (2003): “Sudden
 Stops, the Real Exchange Rate, and Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina's Lessons”,
 NBER, Working Paper 9828.

Calvo,Guillermo A. and Carmen M. Reinhart (2002): “Fear of Floating”, Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, May, 117(2).

Calvo, Guillermo, Izquierdo, Alejandro and Luis Mejia (2003): “On the Empirics of
                                           36


 Sudden Stops,” Working Paper, Interamerican Development Bank.

Chambers, J.M., W.S. Cleveland, B. Kleiner and P.A. Tukey, (1983): Graphical
 Methods for Data Analysis, Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.

De Gregorio, Jose, Edwards, Sebastian and Rodrigo O. Valdes (2000): “Controls on
 Capital Inflows: Do They Work?”, Journal of Development Economics. October,
 63(1): 59-83.

Dornbusch, Rudinger, Goldfajn, Ilan and Rodrigo O. Valdes (1995): “Currency
 Crises and Collapses”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 0(2): 219-70.

Edwards, Sebastian (1989): Real; Exchange Rates, Devaluation and Adjustment, The
 MIT Press .

Edwards, Sebastian (1999): “On Crisis Prevention: Lessons from Mexico and East
 Asia” in Alison Harwood, Robert E. Litan and Micheal Pomerleano eds. Financial
 Markets and Development. Brookings Institution Press.

Edwards, Sebastian (2002): “Does the Current Account Matter?”, in Preventing
 Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey A. Frankel
 (editors), The University of Chicago Press.

Edwards, Sebastian (2003a): “Debt Relief and Fiscal Sustainability”, Review of World
   Economics / Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 139 (1): 38-65.

Edwards, Sebastian (2003b): “Debt Relief and the Current Account: An Analysis of
 the HIPC Initiative”, World Economy, April; 26(4): 513-31.

Edwards, Sebastian and Eduardo Levy Yeyati (2003): “Flexible Exchange Rates as
 Shock Absorbers”, NBER Working Paper 9867.

Edwards, Sebastian and Susmel, Raul (2003): “Interest-Rate Volatility in Emerging
 Markets”, Review of Economics and Statistics, May, 85(2).

Edwards, Sebastian and I.Igal Magendzo (2003): “The Output Cost of Balance of
 Payments Crises: An Empirical Investigation,” Presented at the 8th LACEA
 Meeting, Puebla-Mexico, October, 2003

Evrensel, Ayse Y. (2002): “Effectiveness of IMF-Supported Stabilization Programs
 in Developing Countries, Journal of International Money and Finance, 21( 5)
 October

Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew K. Rose and Charles Wyplosz. (1996): “Contagious
    Currency Crises”, NBER Working Paper No. 5681.
                                            37


Fernandez de Cordoba, Gonzalo and Timothy J. Kehoe. (2000). “Capital Flows and
 Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations Following Spain's Entry into the European
 Community.” Journal of International Economics; 51(1).

Fleiss, J.L. (1981): Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions. John Wiley and
     Sons.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Andrew Rose (1996): “Currency Crashes in Emerging
    Markets: An Empirical Treatment.” Journal of International Economics, 41,
    November 1996.

Fischer, Stanley. (1988). “Real Balances, the Exchange Rate, and Indexation: Real
    Variables in Disinflation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics; 103(1).

Fischer, Stanley. (1994). “Comments on Dornbusch and Werner,” Brookings Papers
    on Economic Activity, No. 1, 304-309.

Fischer, Stanley (2003): “Financial Crises and Reform of the International Financial
    System”, Review of World Economics / Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 139 (1): 1-
    37.

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Assaf Razin (1987): Fiscal policies and the World Economy: An
    Intertemporal Approach. MIT Press.

Freund, Caroline (2000): “Current Account Adjustments in Industrialized
  Countries,” International Finance Discussion Papers Nº 692, Board of Governors
  of the Federal Reserve System.

Glick, Reuven and Michael Hutchison (1999): “Banking and Currency Crises: How
 Common are Twins?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper No.
 PB99-07.

Ghosh, Atish R. and Jonathan D. Ostry. (1995). “The Current Account in
 Developing Countries: A Perspective From the Consumption-Smoothing
 Approach.” World Bank Economic Review 9.

Greene, William H. (2000): Econometric Analysis. Macmillan Publishing Company.

Guidotti, Pablo., Federico. Sturzenegger and A. Villar. (2003). “Aftermaths of
 Current Account Reversals: Exports Growth or Import Compression,” Presented
 at the 8th LACEA Meeting, Puebla-Mexico, October, 2003

Heckman, James (1978): “ Dummy Endogenous variables in a Simultaneous
 Equation System”, Econometrica 46.
                                             38


Hughes, J. (2003): “G-7 Statement Paves Way for Weaker Dollar,” Financial Times,
 September 27-28, 2003. P. 12.

Kaminsky, Graciela-L and Carmen M. Reinhart (1999): “The Twin Crises: The
 Causes of Banking and Balance of Payments Problems”, American Economic
 Review. June, 89(3).

Knight, Malcolm and Scacciavillani, Fabio (1998): “Current Accounts - What is
 Their Relevance for Economic Policymaking? “, IMF Working Paper No. 98/71,
 May.

Kraay, Aart and Jaume Ventura (2000): “Current Accounts in Debtor and Creditor
 Countries”, Quarterly-Journal-of-Economics, November; 115(4).

Kraay, Aart and Jaume Ventura (2002): “Current Accounts in the Long and Short
 Run”, NBER Working Paper 9030.

Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo and Federico Sturzenegger (2003): “To Float or to Fix:
 Evidence on the Impact of Exchange Rate Regimes on Growth,” American
 Economic Review.

Maddala, G. S. (1983): Limited-Dependant and Qualitative Variables in
 Econometrics. Cambridge University Press.

McGettigan, Donal G.(2000): “Current Account and External Sustainability in the
   Baltics, Russia, and Other Countries of the Former Soviet Union”, IMF
   Occasional Paper No. 189, February.

Meade, James E. (1951). The Balance of Payments. London: Oxford University Press.

Lane, Philip and Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria (2002), “Long Term Capital
    Movements” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, MIT Press

Lane, Philip and Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria (2003), “International Financial
    Integration” IMF Staff Papers, 50,1: 82-113

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Assaf Razin. (1996). “Sustainability of Persistent
    Current Account Deficits.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
    Paper No. 5467.

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Assaf Razin. (1998). “Sharp Reduction in Current
    Account Deficits: an Empirical Analysis.” European Economic Review, 42.

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Assaf Razin. (2000), “Current Account Reversals and
    Curreency Crises: Empirical Regularities” in P. Krugman (Ed), Currency Crises,
    U. of Chicago Press.
                                           39




Mody, Ashoka and Mark P. Taylor (2002): “International Capital Crunches: The
   Time-Varying Role of Informational Asymmetries”, IMF Working Paper No.
   02/43, February.

Nason, James M. and John H. Rogers (2002): “The Present Value Model of the
    Current Account has been Rejected: Round Up the Usual Suspects.” International
    Finance Discussion Paper 760, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
    System

Obstfeld Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. (1996). Foundations of International
    Macroeconomics. MIT Press.

Ogaki, Masao, Ostry, Jonathan D. and Carmen M. Reinhart (1005): “Saving Behavior
   in Low and Middle Income Developing Countries: A Comparison” IMF Working
   Paper: 95/3, January.

Ostry, Jonathan D.(1997): “Current Account Imbalances in ASEAN Countries – Are
    they a Problem?”, IMF Working Paper No. 97/51, April 1.

Reinhart, Carmen and Kennet. Rogoff (2002), “The Modern History of Exchange
 Rate Arrangements: A Reinterpretation” NBER WP 8963

Reinhart, Carmen, Rogoff, Kennet, and Miguel Savastano (2003a), “Debt
 Intolerance,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,

Reinhart, C., K. Rogoff and M. Savastano (2003b), “Addicted to Dollars,” NBER
 Working Paper 10015.

Rogoff, K. (2003), “World Economic Outlook Press Conference, September 18,
 2003” in http://www.imf.org/external/np/tr/2003/tr030918.htm

Sachs, Jeffrey (1981): “The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustment in the
 1970s.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity; 1.

Sachs, Jeffrey D. and Andrew M. Warner (1995): "Natural Resource Abundance and
Economic Growth", NBER Working Paper 5398, December.

Savastano, Miguel A. (1992), “The Pattern of Currency Substitution in Latin
 America: An Overview” Revista de Analisis Economico, 7(1), p. 29-72.

Skidelsky, Robert (2000): “John Maynard Keynes”, Volume 3. Fighting for freedom,
 1937-1946, New York: Penguin Putnam, Viking, xxv, 579.

Ventura, Jaume (2003): “Towards a Theory of Current Accounts”, World Economy,
 April; 26(4): 483-512.
                                          40




Wolf, M. (2003), “Funding America’s Recovery is a Very Dangerous Game,”
 Financial Times, October 1, 2003, p. 15.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2002): Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data
 MIT Press.
                                         41



      Figure 1: Distribution of Current Account Deficits as Percentage of GDP,
                              By Regions, 1970-2001
                           (Deficits are Positive Numbers)



        current account deficit as % GDP
40




20




 0




-20


             Africa            Asia      EastEur      Industrial   LatinAmerica MiddleEast
                                               42


                     Figure 2: Average Current Account Deficits
                         as % of GDP by Region, 1970-2001
                            (Deficits are Positive numbers)
          cad_mean
      3




   -1.5 1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000
          1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001


                                   A. Industrial Countries

          cad_mean
10.0531




     0 1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000
         1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001



                           B. Latin America and the Caribbean
                                       43



          cad_mean
11.6444




-3.76875 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001
            1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000


                                    C. Asia

           cad_mean
 11.007




      0 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001
           1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000




                                   D. Africa
                                    44

          cad_mean
9.29091




-9.77778 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000
            1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001




                              E. Middle East

          cad_mean
  9.664




   -1.3 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001
           1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000


                       F. Central and Eastern Europe
                               45




                           Table 1
     Probit Regressions: Deficits and Surpluses Persistence

          Variable                 (1)                (2)
                               High Surplus       High Deficit

          First lag                     0.543          0.403
                                     (12.15)**      (12.25)**
          Second lag                    0.169          0.082
                                      (3.54)**       (3.81)**
           Third lag                    0.143          0.026
                                      (2.77)**        (1.50)
           Fourth lag                   0.153          0.006
                                      (3.15)**        (0.38)
          Pseudo-R2                     0.36           0.39
         Observations                   2,381          2,381
Absolute value of z statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Region and year dummies are included, but not reported
                                             46


                                            Table 2
               List of Countries with Persistent High Current Account Deficits
                                    By Region: 1970-2001
Region                                         (A)                        (B)
                                         High Deficits 1            High Deficits 2
Industrialized Countries
Australia                                   1981-2000                      --
Canada                                      1989-1994                      --
Ireland                                     1976-1984                 1978-1984
New Zealand                          1982-1988 & 1994-2001            1984-1988
Portugal                                    1996-2001                      --
Latin America and Caribbean
Guyana                                      1979-1985                 1979-1985
Honduras                                    1975-1980                      --
Nicaragua                                   1981-2000           1984-1990 & 1992-2000
Asia
Bhutan                                      1981-1999                 1982-1989
Lao PDR                                     1994-1998                      --
Nepal                                       1996-2000                      --
Papua New Guinea                            1980-1984                      --
Singapore                                   1972-1980                      --
Africa
Congo, Rep.                                 1900-1996                      --
Guinea-Bissau                               1982-1996                 1982-1993
Lesotho                                     1995-2001                 1995-2000
Mali                                        1984-1990                      --
Mauritania                                  1975-1988                      --
Mozambique                                  1987-1998                      --
Swaziland                                   1978-1985                      --
Middle East
Cyprus                                      1977-1981                      --
Egypt, Arab Rep.                            1972-1977                      --
Lebanon                                     1992-1998                      --
Saudi Arabia                                1983-1991                      --
Eastern Europe
Armenia                                     1994-1998                      --
Azerbaijan                                  1995-1999                 1995-1999
Source: Author’s elaboration based on World Development Indicators
                                             47


                                           Table 3
             List of Countries with Persistent High Current Account Surpluses
                                    By Region: 1970-2001
Region                                       (A)                          (B)
                                        High Surplus1                High Surplus 2
Industrialized Countries
Switzerland                              1980-2001                     1987-2001
Belgium                                  1986-2001                         --
Finland                                  1995-2001                         --
Japan                                    1983-1992                         --
Netherlands                        1972-1977, 1981-1991 &                  --
                                         1993-2000
Latin America and Caribbean
Trinidad and Tobago                       1990-1996                        --
Asia
China                                     1994-1998                       --
Fiji                                      1985-1989                       --
Hong Kong, China                    1971-1978 & 1980-1994             1984-1990
Singapore                                 1988-2001                   1994-2001
Papua New Guinea                          1992-1996                       --
Africa
Algeria                                   1980-1985                       --
Botswana                                  1985-2001             1985-1989 & 1991-2001
Chad                                      1980-1984                       --
Gabon                               1978-1984 & 1993-1997             1979-1984
Gambia                                    1984-1994                       --
Lesotho                             1980-1984 & 1989-1994             1990-1994
Mauritania                                1995-2001                   1995-2001
Namibia                                   1990-2000                       --
Nigeria                                   1984-1992                       --
South Africa                              1985-1995                       --
Swaziland                                 1986-1991                   1987-1991
Middle East
Kuwait                                    1975-1989                    1980-1989
Eastern Europe
Russian Federation                        1995-2001                        --
Kuwait                                    1980-2001                    1987-2001
Source: Author’s elaboration based on World Development Indicators
                                48


                          Table 4
                   Incidence of Reversals*

                     Panel A: Reversal A
Region                               No reversal    Reversal

Industrial countries                     98.0          2.0
Latin American and Caribbean             87.7         12.3
Asia                                     87.7         12.3
Africa                                   83.4         16.6
Middle East                              85.0         15.0
Eastern Europe                           88.9         11.1

Total                                   88.2          11.8

   Observations                         2678
   Pearson
     Uncorrected χ2 (5)                 65.41
     Design-based F(5, 13385)           13.08
      p-value                            0.00


                     Panel B: Reversal B
Region                                No reversal   Reversal

Industrial countries                     97.3          2.7
Latin American and Caribbean             92.0          8.0
Asia                                     88.3         11.7
Africa                                   88.3         11.7
Middle East                              86.6         13.4
Eastern Europe                           90.7          9.3

Total                                    90.8          9.2

  Observations                           2501
  Pearson
    Uncorrected χ2 (5)                   37.31
    Design-based F(5, 12500)              7.46
     p-value                              0.00
                               49


                           Table 5
  Sustainability Through Time of Current Account Reversals

                                    Sustainability
                    Not sustained     Sustained      Total
                                     At 3 years
Reversal A              16.9            83.1         272

Reversal B              23.7            76.3         198

                                     At 5 years
Reversal A              19.8            80.2         247

Reversal B              32.4            67.6         179
                               50


                             Table 6
                    Incidence of Sudden Stops

Region                              No sudden stop   Sudden stop

Industrial countries                     96.5           3.5
Latin American and Caribbean             95.5            4.5
Asia                                     96.1            3.9
Africa                                   93.1            6.9
Middle East                              89.4           10.6
Eastern Europe                           92.9            7.1

Total                                    94.4            5.6

  Observations                           2193
  Pearson
    Uncorrected χ2 (5)                   18.59
    Design-based F(5, 12500)              3.72
     p-value                             0.002
                          51


                       Table 7
            Reversals and Sudden Stops*

                     All countries
              No sudden stop Sudden stop          Total
No reversal         1892            69            1961
                    96.5            3.5           100
                    90.2           53.1           88.0
 Reversal            206            61             267
                    77.1           22.9           100
                     9.8           46.9           12.0
  Total             2098           130            2228
                    94.2            5.8           100
                    100            100            100
        Pearson χ2 (1) = 159.78 p-value = 0.000


                  Industrial countries
             No sudden stop Sudden stop        Total
No reversal         539             18          557
                   96.8            3.2          100
                   98.2           81.8         97.55
 Reversal            10              4           14
                   71.4           28.6          100
                    1.8           18.2          2.5
  Total             549             22          571
                   96.2            3.8          100
                    100            100          100
        Pearson χ2 (1) = 21.14 p-value = 0.000

             Latin America and Caribbean
             No sudden stop Sudden stop        Total
No reversal         578             23         601
                   96.17          3.83         100
                   87.2           44.2         84.1
 Reversal            85             29         114
                   74.6           25.44        100
                   12.8           55.8         15.9
  Total             663             52         715
                   92.7            7.3         100
                    100            100         100
        Pearson χ2 (1) = 18.35 p-value = 0.000
                         52


               Table 7 (Continuation)

                         Asia
             No sudden stop Sudden stop       Total
No reversal        294             12         306
                   96.1            3.9        100
                   87.5           48.0        84.8
 Reversal           42             13          55
                   76.4           23.6        100
                   12.5           52.0        15.2
  Total            336             25         361
                   93.1            6.9        100
                   100            100         100
        Pearson χ2 (1) = 9.55 p-value = 0.002

                       Africa
             No sudden stop Sudden stop       Total
No reversal        579             21         600
                   96.5            3.5        100
                   85.8           37.5        82.1
 Reversal           96             35         131
                   73.3           26.7        100
                   14.2           62.5        17.9
  Total            675             56         731
                   92.3            7.7        100
                   100            100         100
        Pearson χ2 (1) = 60.63 p-value= 0.000

                    Middle East
             No sudden stop Sudden stop       Total
No reversal        193              12        205
                   94.2            5.8        100
                   87.7           50.0        84.0
 Reversal           27              12         39
                   69.2           30.8        100
                   12.3           50.0        16.0
  Total            220              24        244
                   90.2            9.8        100
                   100             100        100
        Pearson χ2 (1) = 22.38 p-value= 0.000
                         53


               Table 7 (Continuation)

                    Eastern Europe
             No sudden stop Sudden stop       Total
No reversal         159              8         167
                   95.2             4.8       100
                   91.4            57.1       88.8
 Reversal            15              6          21
                   71.4            28.6       100
                    8.6            42.9       11.2
  Total             174             14        188
                   92.6             7.4       100
                   100             100        100
        Pearson χ2 (1) = 10.80 p-value= 0.001
                                  54


                               Table 8
 Incidence of “International Reserves” and “Exchange Rates” Crises


Region                        Exchange-Rate Crises   Reserves Crises

Industrial                             2.8                 2.4
Latin America                          8.6                 2.1
Asia                                    8.2                6.3
Africa                                 10.4                8.1
Middle East                            4.7                 2.3
East Europe                            12.7                3.8

Total                                   8.0                2.6

   Number of Observations              2528               2528

Pearson
   Uncorrected χ2(5)                   32.86             31.26
   Design-based F(5, 12565)             6.57              6.24
   P-value                             0.00              0.00
                                 55


                               Table 9
    Current Account Reversals and Occurrence of Crises

             Panel A: Reversal A and Reserves Crises

Region                                0dd Ratio   95% Conf. Interval

Industrial countries                     0.000     0.000    16.025
Latin American and Caribbean             1.578     0.162     7.877
Asia                                     0.681     0.075     2.974
Africa                                   0.995     0.021     9.006
Middle East                              1.336     0.026    14.064
Eastern Europe                           3.689     0.325    24.370

  Test of homogeneity
    χ2 (5)                               2.86
     P-value                             0.72
  Test odds ratio =1
    Mantel-Haenszel χ2 (5)               0.20
     P-value                             0.65


          Panel B: Reversal A and Exchange-Rate Crises

Region                                0dd Ratio   95% Conf. Interval

Industrial countries                     9.864     0.906    57.612
Latin American and Caribbean             2.716     1.159     5.939
Asia                                     3.006     1.068     7.678
Africa                                   1.160     0.578     2.193
Middle East                              0.000     0.000     1.972
Eastern Europe                           1.693     0.376     5.917

  Test of homogeneity
    χ2 (5)                               4.80
     P-value                             0.44
  Test odds ratio =1
    Mantel-Haenszel χ2 (5)                8.13
     P-value                             0.004
                         56


                      Table 10
  Current Account Reversals and Banking Crisis*

             Panel A: Contemporaneous
Reversal A    No Banking      Banking        Total
                  Crisis       Crisis
No reversal       2220          112          2332
                   95.2         4.8           100
                   88.1        86.2           88.0
 Reversal          299          18            317
                   94.3         5.7           100
                   11.9        13.9           12.0
  Total           2519          130          2649
                   95.1         4.9           100
                   100          100           100
       Pearson χ2 (1) = 0.458 p-value = 0.498

             Panel B: Lagged Bank Crises
Reversal A    No Banking     Banking         Total
                 Crisis       Crisis
No reversal       2332         110           2442
                  95.5          4.5           100
                  88.2         85.3          88.1
 Reversal          312          19            331
                  94.3          5.7           100
                  11.8         14.7          11.9
  Total           2644         129           2773
                  95.4          4.6           100
                  100          100           100
       Pearson χ2 (1) = 1.00 p-value = 0.316

             Panel C: Lagged Reversal A
Reversal A    No Banking      Banking          Total
                 Crisis        Crisis
No reversal       2161          110            2271
                  95.2          4.8             100
                  88.2         85.3            88.1
 Reversal          288          19              307
                  93.8         6.19             100
                  11.8         14.7            11.9
  Total           2449          129            2578
                  95.0          5.0             100
                   100          100             100
        Pearson χ2 (1) = 1.03 p-value = 0.31
                            57


                         Table 11
     Current Account Reversals and IMF Programs*
          PANEL A: Contemporaneous Variables
   Reversal A          No IMF          IMF        Total
                      Programs       Programs
No Reversal               890           761       1651
                         53.9          46.1        100
                         86.2          84.6       85.5
    Reversal              142           138        280
                         50.7          49.3        100
                         13.8          15.4       14.5
     Total               1032           899       1931
                         53.4          46.6        100
                          100           100        100
           Pearson χ2 (1) = 0.98 p-value = 0.32

             PANEL B: IMF Programs lagged
   Reversal A           No IMF         IMF        Total
                       Programs     Programs
No Reversal               866          784        1650
                         52.5          47.5        100
                         84.5          86.6       85.5
    Reversal              159          121         280
                         56.8          43.2        100
                         15.5          13.4       14.5
     Total               1025          905        1930
                         53.1          46.9        100
                          100          100         100
           Pearson χ2 (1) = 1.78 p-value = 0.18

                PANEL C: Reversal A lagged
   Reversal A           No IMF         IMF        Total
                       Programs     Programs
No Reversal               912          768        1680
                         54.3          45.7        100
                         86.0          85.3       85.7
    Reversal              149          132         281
                         53.0          47.0        100
                         14.0          14.7       14.3
     Total               1061          900        1961
                         54.1          45.9        100
                          100          100         100
           Pearson χ2 (1) = 0.15 p-value = 0.69
                                              58


                                          Table 12
                         Growth and Current Account Reversals
                     Treatment Effects Model – Two-Steps Estimates
Variable                                   (12.1)        (12.2)        (12.3)      (12.4)
                                                             Panel A
Population growth rate                      0.299         0.294         0.241       0.274
                                           (1.64)         (1.59        (1.32)       (1.48)
Investment to GDP                           0.176         0.168         0.189       0.173
                                          (6.98)**     (6.58)**      (7.35)**     (6.68)**
Government consumption to GDP              -0.162        -0.146        -0.172      -0.170
                                          (4.81)**     (4.28)**      (4.95)**     (4.84)**
Openness                                    0.006         0.002        -0.006      -0.007
                                           (0.57)        (0.24)        (0.60)       (0.70)
Log initial GDP per capita                 -2.688        -2.733        -2.542      -2.472
                                          (2.73)**     (2.72)**      (2.59)**      (2.48)*
Reversal A                                  -1.82         -4.32        -1.714      -3.931
                                          (2.59)**     (4.11)**       (2.44)*     (3.73)**
Reversal A*Openness                                       0.028                     0.028
                                                       (3.12)**                   (3.03)**
Reversal A (-1)                                                         0.253      -0.033
                                                                       (1.01)       (0.04)
Reversal A (-1)*Openness (-1)                                                       0.007
                                                                                    (0.77)

                                                                  Panel B
Current account deficit to GDP (-1)             0.128         0.128         0.131    0.131
                                             (12.01)**     (12.01)** (11.92)** (11.94)**
External debt to GDP (-1)                       0.004         0.005         0.006    0.006
                                              (2.82)**      (2.95)**      (3.52)** (3.54)**
Net int. reserves to GDP (-1)                  -14.26        -15.07        -14.16   -14.25
                                               (1.83)        (1.97)*       (1.82)   (1.83)
Short term ext. debt to exports (-1)            0.003         0.003         0.003    0.003
                                               (0.50)         (0.43)       (0.45)   (0.43)
Domestic credit growth (-1)                    0.0002        0.0002        0.0001   0.0002
                                               (1.45)         (1.42)       (1.53)   (1.53)
External debt service / exports (-1)            0.002
                                               (0.45)

Hazard lambda                                  0.917          1.122      0.865      0.906
                                              (2.07)*        (2.48)*    (1.96)*    (2.01)*

rho                                            0.214          0.256      0.203      0.209
sigma                                          4.282          4.377      4.268      4.325

Wald chi2 (215)                                637.24         683.31    650.12     638.34
Observations                                    1540           1544      1504       1502
Absolute value of z statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
(-1) denotes a one-period lagged variable
Country-specific and year dummies are included, but not reported
                                          59


                                  Table 13
             Exchange Rate Regimes and Current Account Reversals:
                         Selected Estimated Coefficients*
                             (Treatment Regressions)


   Exchange Rate Regime          Reversal A Dummy          Interactive Term
                                                        (Reversal A * openness)


  Hard Peg                             -9.114                   0.075
                                       (-2.61)                  (3.20)


  Pegged                               -6.770                   0.053
                                       (-4.48)                  (4.15)


  Intermediate                         -4.710                   0.027
                                       (-2.79)                  (1.71)


  Flexible                              2.060                   -0.025
                                        (1.07)                  (-1.05)

* Numbers in parentheses are z-statistics.
Each equation was specified as explained in the text.
                                               60


                                       APPENDIX
                                            Table A.1
                               List of Countries by Region
                                       Industrial Countries
Australia              Finland           Ireland           New Zealand            Switzerland
Austria                France            Italy             Norway                 United Kingdom
Belgium                Germany           Japan             Portugal               United States
Canada                 Greece            Malta             Spain
Denmark                Iceland           Netherlands       Sweden

                                  Latin America and Caribbean
Ant. and Barbuda       Brazil            El Salvador    Mexico                    St. Vinc. & Gren,
Argentina              Chile             Grenada        Nicaragua                 Suriname
Aruba                  Colombia          Guatemala      Panama                    Trin. & Tobago
Bahamas, The           Costa Rica        Guyana         Paraguay                  Uruguay
Barbados               Dominica          Haiti          Peru                      Venezuela
Belize                 Dominican Rep.    Honduras       St. Kitts &Nevis
Bolivia                Ecuador           Jamaica        St. Lucia

                                                 Asia
Bangladesh             Hong Kong             Lao PDR         Pakistan         Solomon Islands
Bhutan                 India                 Malaysia        Papua New Guinea Sri Lanka
Cambodia               Indonesia             Maldives        Philippines      Thailand
China                  Kiribati              Nepal           Singapore        Vietnam
Fiji

                                                Africa
Angola                 Comoros               Guinea-Bissau   Mozambique           Sudan
Benin                  Congo, Rep.           Kenya           Namibia              Swaziland
Botswana               Cote d'Ivoire         Lesotho         Niger                Tanzania
Burkina Faso           Djibouti              Madagascar      Nigeria              Togo
Burundi                Ethiopia              Malawi          Rwanda               Tonga
Cameroon               Gabon                 Mali            Senegal              Tunisia
Cape Verde             Gambia, The           Mauritania      Seychelles           Uganda
Central African Rep.   Ghana                 Mauritius       Sierra Leone         Zimbabwe
Chad                   Guinea                Morocco         South Africa

                                              Middle East
Bahrain                Iran, Islamic Rep.    Kuwait          Oman                 Syrian Arab Rep.
Cyprus                 Israel                Lebanon         Saudi Arabia         Yemen, Rep.
Egypt, Arab Rep.       Jordan

                                            Eastern Europe
Albania                Czech Republic        Latvia          Romania              Turkmenistan
Armenia                Estonia               Lithuania       Russian Federation   Ukraine
Azerbaijan             Hungary               Moldova         Slovak Republic      Uzbekistan
Belarus                Kazakhstan            Mongolia        Slovenia
Bulgaria               Kyrgyz Republic       Poland          Turkey
                                         61


                                   Table A.2
                       Mean Current Account to GDP Ratios
                             By Region: 1970-2001

 Year   Industrial    Latin      Asia         Africa   Middle East   East Europe   Total
                     America

 1970     -0.05       7.52        0.26         0.90      6.67              .       2.62
 1971     -0.28       5.53        0.64         5.25      2.23              .       2.05
 1972     -1.50       3.78        2.43         6.20      -3.40             .       0.75
 1973     -1.17       3.33        1.35         7.20      0.23              .       1.13
 1974     2.97        3.26        4.56        -3.07      -8.04          1.50       0.44
 1975     1.47        2.36        5.44         4.35      -8.62          3.50       2.17
 1976     2.16        1.48        0.25         5.55      -9.78          3.80       1.46
 1977     1.82        4.05       -0.74         3.88      -5.25          5.19       2.09
 1978     0.50        3.70        1.85         8.53      0.80           1.90       4.23
 1979     1.40        4.51       -1.57         6.44      -8.16          1.50       2.76
 1980     2.16        7.05        7.74         7.21      -9.02          0.10       4.92
 1981     2.39        10.05      11.64        10.00      -8.00          1.05       7.35
 1982     2.36        9.10       11.01        11.01      -1.68          0.97       7.82
 1983     1.20        6.33        8.44         8.25      1.63           1.26       5.91
 1984     0.98        4.14        3.69         5.88      1.34           0.15       3.78
 1985     1.15        2.72        5.32         5.90      1.45           1.60       3.79
 1986     0.96        5.44        4.02         6.28      1.30           3.09       4.41
 1987     1.03        5.36        3.25         4.75      0.48           0.08       3.59
 1988     0.91        4.42        2.73         6.01      -0.10          -1.30      3.63
 1989     1.18        5.35        3.82         4.52      -4.36          0.04       3.21
 1990     1.18        4.25        4.31         4.39      -4.13          3.00       3.04
 1991     0.67        7.29        2.48         5.08      28.84          2.67       6.24
 1992     0.43        5.55        3.25         6.34      9.29           0.10       4.45
 1993     -0.46       6.01        4.94         6.58      8.13           1.98       4.71
 1994     -0.35       4.36        2.52         6.77      2.87           1.08       3.52
 1995     -0.85       4.83        3.31         8.84      1.39           2.90       4.30
 1996     -0.78       6.12        3.42         8.71      0.32           7.09       5.09
 1997     -1.18       7.34        4.00         4.80      -0.09          6.97       4.20
 1998     -0.33       7.22       -0.63         6.71       6.16          9.66       5.12
 1999     -0.13       4.81       -2.99         5.16      -2.40           6.14      2.76
 2000     -0.57       2.76       -3.77         4.23      -9.22           2.66      0.84
 2001     -0.45       3.32       -3.51         5.95      -4.16           3.31      1.98

Total     0.62        5.36       3.19         6.34        -0.04         3.87       3.96
                                         62


                                   Table A.3
                      Median Current Account to GDP Ratios
                              By Region: 1970-2001

Year    Industrial    Latin      Asia         Africa   Middle East   East Europe   Total
                     America

1970      -0.40       4.10        0.90         0.90      5.90              .       0.90
1971      -0.50       4.60        1.00         5.25      7.25              .       1.05
1972      -1.00       1.45        1.55         6.20      1.25              .       0.40
1973      0.15        1.05        0.70         7.20      2.25              .       0.85
1974      2.90        4.00        3.00         2.40      -0.80          1.50       2.90
1975      1.35        4.10        3.65         6.50      -3.80          3.50       3.30
1976      2.65        1.40        0.20         5.05      -3.20          3.80       3.30
1977      2.05        3.95       -0.70         4.10      -1.65          5.20       2.80
1978      0.65        3.95        2.55         9.90      3.00           1.90       3.50
1979      0.70        4.70        2.70         6.40      -8.90          1.50       3.20
1980      2.30        5.55        4.80         8.40      -3.95          0.10       4.35
1981      2.70        9.05        8.55        10.00      1.45           1.05       6.85
1982      1.95        7.60        7.80         9.50      -1.55          1.50       6.55
1983      0.90        4.70        7.30         6.40      5.10           0.90       4.30
1984      0.25        3.30        2.10         4.10      4.90           0.65       2.50
1985      1.00        2.10        3.85         4.20      2.60           1.70       2.95
1986      -0.10       3.00        2.40         3.60      2.30           3.30       2.85
1987      0.40        4.15        1.70         5.00      2.45           0.90       2.60
1988      1.15        2.25        2.75         6.00      1.55           1.30       2.60
1989      1.50        4.40        3.45         3.65      -0.50          1.70       2.80
1990      1.40        2.80        4.45         3.80      -1.00          3.65       2.80
1991      0.90        4.80        3.20         3.70      10.10          0.70       3.10
1992      0.80        4.40        2.00         5.80      9.30           -0.10      3.25
1993      0.50        4.70        4.50         6.60      7.15           1.95       3.45
1994      -0.40       3.50        4.60         5.70      4.70           1.60       2.90
1995      -0.75       3.20        4.65         5.50      0.60           1.85       2.70
1996      -0.95       4.60        3.90         4.60      -0.35          5.40       3.65
1997      -0.65       4.90        4.10         5.20      -0.20          6.20       3.60
1998      0.20        4.90        0.70         5.60      3.30           7.00       3.80
1999      -0.50       3.60       -1.60         4.15      -0.30           4.30      2.70
2000      0.50        3.40       -1.75         3.30      -7.30          4.20       2.80
2001      -0.05       3.30       -2.60         3.95      -4.80           4.60      2.10

Total     0.70        4.10       2.70         5.30        1.40          3.00       3.10
                                           63


                                      Table A.4
                     Third Quartile Current Account to GDP Ratios
                                By Region: 1970-2001

Year    Industrial     Latin        Asia        Africa   Middle East   East Europe   Total
                      America

1970      0.60          6.90        1.30         1.90      11.50           .          4.10
1971      0.40          7.80        1.70         8.30      9.30            .          5.70
1972      0.30          2.40        3.60        12.00      4.15            .          2.50
1973      1.30          4.10        1.30        10.00      5.75            .          2.90
1974      4.40          10.00       5.60         4.60      12.40         1.50        5.30
1975      4.40          6.80        9.40         8.40      14.80         3.50        7.60
1976      4.30          4.00        6.20         8.35      3.30          3.80        5.40
1977      3.60          7.30        4.15         7.70      2.60          5.20        5.90
1978      2.50          7.60        3.85        12.40      9.20          1.90        8.90
1979      2.70          6.70        5.80        12.30      5.30          1.50        7.10
1980      3.60          11.60      10.90        13.00      2.60          5.00        10.50
1981      4.30          13.45      13.00        12.90      5.90          2.70        12.20
1982      4.00          11.75      13.10        13.70      8.30          2.30        10.70
1983      2.40          7.45       11.00        12.40      7.70          3.10        8.10
1984      3.00          6.60        4.95         8.80      8.20          1.95        6.35
1985      3.60          6.40        6.65         8.40      7.50          2.05        6.60
1986      3.30          7.80        5.70         8.20      9.40          5.20        6.40
1987      3.20          8.75        5.60         9.65      5.40          2.50        6.30
1988      3.00          7.65        5.80         9.75      4.10          1.70        6.60
1989      3.60          7.10        7.90         7.25      5.20          2.00        5.70
1990      3.40          7.65        6.85         9.00      2.15          8.30        6.40
1991      2.80          12.40       6.75         9.60      20.00         3.50        7.70
1992      2.70          8.00        4.70         8.90      17.20         3.50        7.10
1993      1.70          8.90        7.90         8.30      13.00         4.20        7.90
1994      1.70          7.30        6.20         9.20      6.70          3.70        6.30
1995      1.15          5.50        7.95        11.20      5.05          5.65        7.10
1996      1.85          7.80        7.50        10.40      4.20          9.20        8.10
1997      2.10          10.50       8.10         7.85      2.10          10.80       7.20
1998      2.50          8.90        5.40        10.15      12.35         11.30        8.90
1999      2.80          5.60        2.10        10.75      1.90          8.00        5.90
2000      3.10          5.20        0.60         8.50      1.20          5.90        5.50
2001      2.60          4.65        1.70         8.30      0.00          6.60        4.80

Total     3.00          8.00        6.40        9.90        6.40          6.10       7.20
                                                    64


                                            Table A.5
                          First Quartile Current Account to GDP Ratios
                                      By Region: 1970-2001

    Year    Industrial       Latin           Asia        Africa    Middle East      East Europe         Total
                            America

    1970      -0.70          2.80            0.10         -0.10        2.60                .             0.76
    1971      -1.30          0.10            0.10          2.20        -4.85               .             0.08
    1972      -1.70          0.60           -1.20          0.40       -10.95               .            -1.27
    1973      -2.70          -0.20          -0.70          4.40        -5.30               .             0.28
    1974      -0.10          2.80            0.90        -17.40       -10.90            1.50            -4.75
    1975      -0.30          1.30            0.70          0.40       -30.80            3.50            -1.57
    1976      0.75           -1.10          -3.40          3.05       -12.90            3.80            -0.39
    1977      -0.10          0.40           -4.95          0.60       -12.80            5.20            -0.95
    1978      -1.40          0.25           -0.35          4.20         0.70            1.90             1.26
    1979      0.00           0.40           -4.40          0.00       -13.70            1.50            -1.58
    1980      0.50           0.55            1.20         2.20        -15.80            -4.80           -0.93
    1981      -0.40          5.35            2.70          5.40       -17.00            -0.60            1.50
    1982      -1.00          5.00            3.40          4.70        -6.50            -0.90            2.08
    1983      -0.40          1.70            0.90          3.40        -2.70            -0.20            1.12
    1984      -0.80          1.20            0.50          0.10        -3.40            -1.65           -0.26
    1985      -1.60          -0.50           1.95          1.10        -1.10             1.15            0.38
    1986      -1.60          0.60           -0.15          0.60         0.60            1.00             0.22
    1987      -1.00          1.25            0.20          0.45        0.20             -0.20            0.26
    1988      0.10           0.50           -2.15          1.65        1.40             -1.80            0.07
    1989      -0.20          0.70            0.25          0.95       -12.40            -0.90           -0.71
    1990      -1.00          -1.65           2.15          0.90       -12.40            -1.10           -1.00
    1991      -1.50          0.75            1.10          0.40        2.10             -1.20            0.25
    1992      -2.00          -0.30           0.40          1.60        1.30             -0.90            0.15
    1993      -3.10          0.60            1.30          1.80        -0.10            -0.95            0.27
    1994      -2.80          0.20            0.30          0.30        -4.25            -2.00           -0.83
    1995      -2.95          1.55            1.85          2.10        -4.05            0.15             0.48
    1996      -3.55          1.60            0.40          1.30        -3.20            2.40             0.31
    1997      -4.15          2.60            1.80          1.35        -1.35            2.50             0.84
    1998      -3.20          2.40           -3.00          1.80         0.35            2.50             0.37
    1999      -2.60          2.50           -7.10          0.25        -4.80            1.90            -1.15
    2000      -2.90          3.00           -6.55          0.10       -22.40            2.80            -2.34
    2001      -2.80          1.95           -6.75          0.05       -11.70            1.20            -1.93

    Total     -1.45           1.22          -0.58        0.95         -6.75              0.56           -0.28



i
 Nicaragua’s severe crisis is largely the result of the economic mismanagement during the Sandinista rule
during the 19880s.
