                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE DECLINING EQUITY PREMIUM:
                    WHAT ROLE DOES MACROECONOMIC RISK PLAY?

                                             Martin Lettau
                                         Sydney C. Ludvigson
                                          Jessica A. Wachter

                                         Working Paper 10270
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10270


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




Lettau acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation. Ludvigson acknowledges
financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the National Science Foundation, and the C.V. Starr
Center at NYU. We thank Ravi Bansal, Jacob Boudoukh, John Campbell, John Cochrane, Diego Comin,
George Constantinides, Darrel Duffie, Robert Engle, Raquel Fernandez, Mark Gertler, Robert Hall, Lars Peter
Hansen, Pat Kehoe, Anthony Lynch, Ellen McGrattan, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, Lubos Pastor, B. Ravikumar,
Tom Sargent, Robert Whitelaw, seminar participants at the 2003 CIREQ-CIRANO-MITACS Conference on
Macroeconomics and Finance, the NBER Economic Fluctuations and Growth fall 2003 meeting, NYU,
SUNY Stony Brook, the University of Illinois, and Wharton for helpful comments. Any errors or omissions
are the responsibility of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Martin Lettau, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Jessica A. Wachter. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Declining Equity Premium: What Role Does Macroeconomic Risk Play?
Martin Lettau, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Jessica A. Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 10270
January 2004, February 2006
JEL No. G12

                                             ABSTRACT

Aggregate stock prices, relative to virtually any indicator of fundamental value, soared to

unprecedented levels in the 1990s. Even today, after the market declines since 2000, they remain

well above historical norms. Why? We consider one particular explanation: a fall in macroeconomic

risk, or the volatility of the aggregate economy. We estimate a two-state regime switching model

for the volatility and mean of consumption growth, and find evidence of a shift to substantially lower

consumption volatility at the beginning of the 1990s. We then show that there is a strong and

statistically robust correlation between low macroeconomic volatility and high asset prices: the

estimated posterior probability of being in a low volatility state explains 30 to 60 percent of the post-

war variation in the log price-dividend ratio, depending on the measure of consumption analyzed.

Next, we study a rational asset pricing model with regime switches in both the mean and standard

deviation of consumption growth, where the probabilities of a regime change are calibrated to match

estimates from post-war data. Plausible parameterizations of the model are found to account for a

significant fraction of the run-up in asset valuation ratios observed in the late 1990s.

Martin Lettau                       Sydney C. Ludvigson                  Jessica A. Wachter
Department of Finance               Department of Economics              Department of Finance
Stern School of Business            New York University                  Stern School of Business
New York University                 269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor         New York University
44 West 4th Street                  New York, NY 10003                   44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012                  and NBER                             New York, NY 10012
and NBER                            sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu             and NBER
mlettau@stern.nyu.edu                                                    jwachter@stern.nyu.edu
1         Introduction
It is di¢ cult to imagine a single issue capable of eliciting near unanimous agreement among
the many opposing cadres of economic thought. Yet if those who study …nancial markets are
in accord on any one point, it is this: the close of the 20th century marked the culmination
of the greatest surge in equity values ever recorded in U.S. history. Aggregate stock prices,
relative to virtually any indicator of fundamental value, soared to unprecedented levels.
At their peak, equity valuations were so extreme that even today, after the broad market
declines since 2000, aggregate price-dividend and price-earnings ratios remain well above
their historical norms (Figure 1). More formally, the recent run-up in stock prices relative to
economic fundamentals is su¢ ciently extreme that econometric tests for structural change
(discussed below) provide evidence of a break in the mean price-dividend ratio around the
middle of the last decade.1
        How can such persistently high stock market valuations be justi…ed? One possible ex-
planation is that the equity premium has declined (e.g., Blanchard (1993); Jagannathan,
McGrattan, and Scherbina (2000); Fama and French (2002)). Thus, stock prices are high
because future returns on stocks are expected to be lower. These authors focus less on the
question of why the equity premium has declined, but other researchers have pointed to
reductions in the costs of stock market participation and diversi…cation (Heaton and Lucas
(1999); Siegel (1999); Calvet, Gonzalez-Eiras, and Sodini (2003)).
        In this paper, we consider an alternative explanation for the declining equity premium
and persistently high stock market valuations: a fall in macroeconomic risk, or the volatility
of the aggregate economy. To understand intuitively why macroeconomic risk can a¤ect
asset prices, consider the following illustrative example. By the law of one price, there exists
a stochastic discount factor, or pricing kernel, Mt+1 , such that the following expression holds
for any traded asset with gross return Rt at time t:

                                               Et [Mt+1 Rt+1 ] = 1;                                          (1)
    1
        The full run-up in valuation ratios cannot be attributed to shifts in corporate payout policies that have
led many …rms to substitute share repurchases for cash dividends. Although the number of dividend paying
…rms has decreased in recent years, large …rms with high earnings actually increased real cash dividend
payouts over the same period; as a consequence, aggregate payout ratios exhibit no downward trend over the
last two decades (DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Skinner (2002); Fama and French (2001)). See also Campbell
and Shiller (2003). This, along with the evidence that price-earnings ratios remain unusually high, means
that changes in corporate payout policies cannot fully explain the sustained high levels of …nancial valuation
ratios.


                                                         1
where Et denotes the expectation operator conditional on information available at time t.
Suppose the pricing kernel and returns are jointly lognormal. Then it follows from (1) that
the Sharpe ratio, SRt , may be written
                                                Et [Rt+1 Rf;t+1 ]
                             SRt      max                                      t   (log Mt+1 ) ;
                                     all assets       t (Rt+1 )

where Rf;t+1 is a riskless return known at time t, and                     t   ( ) denotes the standard deviation
of the generic argument “ ,”conditional on time t information. Fixing                              t   (Rt+1 ), the equity
premium, in the numerator of the Sharpe ratio, is approximately proportional to the condi-
tional volatility of the log pricing kernel.2 In many asset pricing models, the pricing kernel
is equal to the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution in aggregate consumption, Ct . A
classic speci…cation assumes there is a representative agent who maximizes a time-separable
power utility function given by u (Ct ) = Ct1 =(1                     ),           > 0: With this speci…cation, the
Sharpe ratio may be written, to a …rst order approximation, as

                                           SRt          t   ( log Ct+1 ) :

Thus, macroeconomic risk plays a direct role in determining the equity premium: …xing
 t   (Rt+1 ), lower consumption volatility,        t   ( log Ct+1 ) ; implies a lower equity premium and
a lower Sharpe ratio. Of course, this stylized model has important limitations, but its very
simplicity serves to illustrate the crucial point: macroeconomic risk plays an important role
in determining asset values. Below, we investigate these issues using a more complete asset
pricing model.
         Why underscore macroeconomic risk? There is now broad consensus among macroecono-
mists of a widespread and persistent decline in the volatility of real macroeconomic activity
over the last 15 years. Kim and Nelson (1999) and McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000)
were the …rst to formally identify structural change in the volatility of U.S. GDP growth,
occurring sometime around the …rst quarter of 1984. Blanchard and Simon (2001), using a
di¤erent set of econometric tools, also …nd a large decline in output volatility over the last
20 years. Following this work, Stock and Watson (2002) subject a large number of macro-
economic time series to an exhaustive battery of statistical tests for volatility change. They
conclude that the decline in volatility has occurred broadly across sectors of the aggregate
economy. It appears in employment growth, consumption growth, in‡ation and sectoral
output growth, as well as in GDP growth. It is large and it is persistent. Reductions in
     2
         Conditioning (1) on time 0 information, the same expression can be stated in terms of unconditional
moments.

                                                            2
standard deviations are on the order of 60 to 70 percent relative to the 1970s and 1980s,
and the marked change seems to be better described as a structural “break,”or regime shift,
than a gradual, trending decline. The macroeconomic literature is currently involved in an
active debate over the cause of this sustained volatility decline.3
      The subject of this paper is not the cause of the volatility decline, but its possible con-
sequences for the U.S. aggregate stock market. Indeed, it would be surprising if asset prices
were not a¤ected by this fundamental change in the structure of macroeconomic volatility.
Consistent with this, we …nd that volatility in consumption is highly correlated with ‡uctu-
ations in the aggregate dividend-price ratio over longer horizons. This phenomenon is not
merely a feature of postwar U.S. data, but is also present in postwar international data for
10 countries, and in prewar U.S. data.
      Our main investigation contains two parts. In the …rst part, we employ the same empirical
techniques used in the macroeconomic literature to characterize the decline in volatility of
various measures of aggregate consumer expenditure growth in U.S. data. In the second
part, we investigate the behavior of the stock market in a theoretical asset pricing model
when empirically plausible shifts in macroeconomic risk are introduced.
      The empirical part of this paper follows much of the macroeconomic literature and char-
acterizes the decline in volatility by estimating a regime switching model for the standard
deviation and mean of consumption growth. The estimation produces evidence of a shift to
substantially lower consumption volatility at the beginning of the 1990s.
      The theoretical part of our study investigates whether an asset pricing model that incor-
porates empirically plausible shifts in both the mean and volatility of consumption growth
can account for the sharp run-up in aggregate stock prices during the 1990s. Using the pref-
erence speci…cation developed by Epstein and Zin (1989, 1991) and Weil (1989), we study
two types of asset pricing models. Our primary focus is on a learning model with regime
switches in both the mean and standard deviation of consumption growth, calibrated to
match our estimates from post-war data. We assume that agents cannot observe the regime
but must infer it from consumption data; this learning aspect is an important feature of the
model, discussed further below. Feeding in the (estimated) historical posterior probabilities
of being in low and high volatility and mean states, we …nd plausible parameterizations of
the model that can account for an important fraction of the run-up in price-dividend ratios
observed in the late 1990s. The model’s predicted valuation ratios move higher in the 1990s
because the long-run equity premium declines, a direct consequence of the persistent decline
  3
      See Stock and Watson (2002) for a survey of this debate in the literature.


                                                       3
in macroeconomic risk in the early part of the decade. A shift to a higher mean growth state
also plays a role in generating the model’s predicted run-up in equity values, but is far less
important than the sharp decline in volatility. Finally, although the volatility of consump-
tion declines in the 1990s, the model predicts that the volatility of equilibrium stock returns
does not–consistent with actual experience.
   The learning model just described has a number of appealing properties that are espe-
cially useful for studying the questions raised in this paper: It can be calibrated to empirical
estimates of how long regimes are expected to last, and it provides a means of explicitly
modelling expectations about future changes in regime, as well as a means of studying inter-
esting transitional dynamics of regime shifts. A drawback of this model, however, is that its
learning aspect makes the numerical solution quite intensive, requiring the that the relation
between consumption and dividends be modeled in a particularly simple manner. Thus, as
a robustness check to our main …ndings, we present additional results in which the learn-
ing aspect of the model is eliminated, but consumption and dividends follow cointegrated
processes. As in the learning framework, we …nd plausible parameterizations of the model
that can account for signi…cant fractions of the run-up in valuation ratios in the 1990s.
   The literature has o¤ered other possible explanations for the persistently high stock mar-
ket valuations observed in the 1990s. One is an increase in the expected long-run growth
rates of corporate earnings or dividends. The plausibility of this explanation has been ques-
tioned by academic researchers who point out that neither recent experience nor historical
data provide any basis for the hypothesis (Siegel (1999); Jagannathan, McGrattan, and
Scherbina (2000); Fama and French (2002); Campbell and Shiller (2003)). Other hypothe-
ses include behavioral stories of “irrational exuberance” (Shiller (2000)), higher intangible
investment in the 1990s (Hall (2000)), changes in the e¤ective tax rate on corporate distri-
butions (McGrattan and Prescott (2002)), the attainment of peak saving years during the
1990s by the baby boom generation (Abel (2003)), and a redistribution of rents away from
factors of production towards the owners of capital (Jovanovic and Rousseau (2003)). We
view the story presented here as but one of several possible contributing factors to the stock
market boom of the 1990s. But in this paper we leave aside these alternative explanations
in order to isolate the in‡uence of declining macroeconomic volatility on the low-frequency
behavior of stock prices at the end of the 20th century.
   Two further points about our theoretical framework bear emphasizing. First, we show
that the fraction of the 1990s equity boom that can be rationalized by declining macroeco-
nomic volatility depends on the perceived persistence of the volatility decline. If the decline is


                                                4
expected to be very persistent, almost all of the boom in asset prices can be explained; if the
decline is expected to be more transitory, less of the boom can be rationalized through this
mechanism. The data provide some guidance, and we discuss this extensively below. Second,
we stress that our concern in this paper is not the short to medium term movements in equity
valuations that may be attributable to cyclical ‡uctuations in the conditional (point-in-time)
expected stock market return.4 Instead, we are interested in the ultra low-frequency move-
ments in valuation ratios corresponding to possible low-frequency movements in the equity
premium, what Fama and French (2002) call the “unconditional”equity premium. Thus,
the model we present below is designed to illustrate the possible impact of a regime shift
in macroeconomic volatility, not to explain high or medium frequency ‡uctuations in valua-
tion ratios. As such, the model we explore is not designed to explain the full run-up in the
price-dividend ratio in the 1990s (and their subsequent decline), but rather that portion of
the run-up that has been sustained, leaving the level of the price-dividend ratio persistently
above its previous historical norm consistent with the type of structural change documented
in Table 1 below.
       A number of existing papers use theoretical and empirical techniques related to those
employed here to investigate a range of asset pricing questions. One group of papers investi-
gates asset pricing when there is a discrete-state Markov switching process in the conditional
mean of the endowment process (Cecchetti, Lam, and Mark (1990); Kandel and Stambaugh
(1991); Cecchetti, Lam, and Mark (1993); Abel (1994); Abel (1999); Wachter (2002)), or in
technology shocks (Cagetti, Hansen, Sargent, and Williams (2002)). None of these studies
investigate the impact of regime switches in the volatility of the endowment process, how-
ever, the focus of this paper. Veronesi (1999) studies an equilibrium model in which the drift
in the endowment process follows a latent two-state regime switching process and …nds that
such a framework is better at explaining volatility clustering than a model without regime
   4
       A large literature …nds that excess stock returns on aggregate stock market indexes are forecastable,
suggesting that the conditional expected excess stock return varies. Shiller (1981), Fama and French (1988),
Campbell and Shiller (1989), Campbell (1991), and Hodrick (1992) …nd that the ratios of price to dividends
or earnings have predictive power for excess returns. Harvey (1991) …nds that similar …nancial ratios predict
stock returns in many di¤erent countries. Lamont (1998) forecasts excess stock returns with the dividend-
payout ratio. Campbell (1991) and Hodrick (1992) …nd that the relative T-bill rate (the 30-day T-bill rate
minus its 12-month moving average) predicts returns, while Fama and French (1988) study the forecasting
power of the term spread (the 10-year Treasury bond yield minus the one-year Treasury bond yield) and
the default spread (the di¤erence between the BAA and AAA corporate bond rates). Lettau and Ludvigson
(2001) forecast returns with a proxy for the log consumption-wealth ratio.



                                                      5
changes. Whitelaw (2000) also investigates an equilibrium economy with regime-switching in
the mean of the endowment process, and he allows for time-varying transition probabilities
between regimes. He …nds that such a model generates a complex nonlinear relation between
expected returns and volatility in the stock market. In contrast to these studies, Bonomo
and Garcia (1994, 1996) and Dri¢ l and Sola (1998) allow for regime changes in the variance
of macroeconomic fundamentals, but their sample ends in 1985 and therefore excludes the
switch to a prolonged period of record-low macroeconomic volatility in the 1990s that is the
focus of this study. Otrok, Ravikumar, and Whiteman (2002) study the temporal distri-
bution of consumption variance and its implications for habit-based asset pricing models.
The study here, by contrast, focuses on low-frequency shifts in the overall level of volatility,
rather than on shifts in its temporal composition. Other papers linking consumption volatil-
ity to movements in equity valuation ratios include Bansal and Lundblad (2002) and Bansal,
Khatchatrian, and Yaron (2003). Bansal and Lundblad argue that there has been a fall in
the global equity risk-premium, and explore a model in which this decline is associated with a
fall in the conditional volatility of the world market portfolio return. Because the conditional
volatility of the world market portfolio is a magni…ed version of the conditional volatility
of world cash ‡ow growth in their model, they indirectly link the decline risk-premia to a
decline in the volatility of underlying fundamentals. By contrast, Bansal, Khatchatrian and
Yaron focus more directly on the volatility of underlying fundamentals and construct quar-
terly measures of volatility for aggregate consumption based on parametric models including
GARCH, and from the residuals of an autoregressive speci…cations for consumption growth.
They …nd that quarterly price-dividend ratios are predicted by these lagged volatility mea-
sures, with R-squared statistics as high as 25 percent. Our analysis di¤ers from both of
these papers in that our emphasis is on the ultra low frequency movements in consumption
risk that have become the subject of a large and growing body of macroeconomic inquiry,
rather than on the cyclical stock market implications of quarterly ‡uctuations in conditional
(point-in-time) consumption volatility.
   The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section we present empirical
results documenting regime changes in the mean and volatility of measured consumption
growth. We then explore their statistical relation with movements in measures of the price-
dividend ratio for the aggregate stock market. Next, we turn to an investigation of whether
the observed behavior of the stock market at the end of the last century can be generated
from rational, forward looking behavior, as a result of the decline in macroeconomic risk.
Section 3 presents an asset pricing model that incorporates shifts in regime, and evaluates


                                               6
how well it performs in explaining the run-up in stock prices during the 1990s. Additional
results from a model without learning but with cointegrated consumption and dividends are
also presented. Section 4 concludes.


2     Macroeconomic Volatility and Asset Prices: Empir-
      ical Linkages
In this section we document the decline in volatility for consumer expenditure growth. We
investigate the volatility decline in total per capita personal consumer expenditures (PCE).
The series is in 1996 chain-weighted dollars. As has been argued elsewhere (e.g., Cecchetti,
Lam, and Mark (1990)), the equilibrium model studied below–in which consumption equals
output–is somewhat ambiguous as to the appropriate time-series for calibrating the endow-
ment process. We use the broad PCE measure of consumption to calibrate the model, since
it exhibits lower volatility at the beginning of the 1990s, by which time the vast majority
of other macroeconomic time-series also exhibited a volatility decline (Stock and Watson
(2002)). This is important because it helps to insure that the timing of the decline in volatil-
ity that we feed into our theoretical model is not driven by measurement error in any one
series. This is important because individual series will be an imperfect measure of the rele-
vant theoretical concept provided by our model, and we are interested in when agents could
have plausibly inferred that macroeconomic volatility reached a new, lower regime. The
Appendix at the end of this paper gives a complete description of the data and our sources.
Our data are quarterly and span the period 1952:1 to 2002:4. We focus our primary analysis
on postwar data because prewar data on consumption and output are known to be measured
with signi…cantly greater error that exaggerates the size of cyclical ‡uctuations in the prewar
period (Romer (1989)).
    We begin by looking at simple measures of the historical volatility of this series. Figure
2 provides graphical evidence of the decline in volatility. The growth rates of this series is
plotted over time along with (plus or minus) two standard deviation error bands in each
estimated volatility “regime,”where a regime is de…ned by the estimated two-state Markov
switching process described below. (For the purposes of this …gure, a low volatility regime
is de…ned to be a period during which the posterior probability of being in a low volatility
state is greater than 50 percent.) All …gures clearly show that volatility is lower in the 1990s
than previously.


                                               7
         Another way to see the low frequency ‡uctuations in macroeconomic volatility is to look
at volatility estimates for non-overlapping …ve-year periods. Figure 3 (top panel) plots the
standard deviation of consumption growth for non-overlapping …ve-year periods. There is
a signi…cant decline in volatility in the …ve-year window beginning in 1992, relative to the
immediately preceding …ve-year window. In particular, the series is about one-half as volatile
in the 1990s as it is in the whole sample. To illustrate how these movements in volatility are
related to the stock market, this panel also plots the mean value of the log dividend-price
ratio in each …ve year period.5 Our measure of the log dividend-price ratio for the aggregate
stock market is the corresponding series on the CRSP value-weighted stock market index.
The bottom panel of Figure 3 plots the same, but with the log earnings-price ratio in place
of the log dividend-price ratio. The data for the price-earnings ratio is taken from Robert
Shiller’s Yale web site.6 The …gure shows how these low frequency shifts in macroeconomic
volatility are related to low frequency movements in the stock market.
         Figure 3 exhibits a striking correlation between the low frequency movements in macro-
economic risk and the stock market: both volatility and the log dividend-price ratio (denoted
dt        pt ) are high in the early 1950s, low in the 1960s, high again in the 1970s, and then be-
gin falling to their present low values in the 1980s. The correlation between consumption
volatility and dt         pt presented in this …gure is 72 percent. A similar picture holds for the
price-earnings ratio (bottom panel).
         The correlations between high asset valuations and low volatility are present in countries
other than the U.S. Figure 4 plots the volatility estimates for non-overlapping …ve-year
periods, along with the mean value of the log dividend-price ratio in each …ve year period, for
ten countries: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Sweden,
Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. The international data on quarterly consumption and
dividend-price ratios are from Campbell (2003), and are typically available over a shorter
time period than for U.S. data.7 Figure 4 uses the longest available sample for each country.
The …gure shows that international data also display a striking correlation between the low
frequency movements in macroeconomic risk and the national stock market for the respective
     5
         Replacing the mean with mid-point or end-points of dt   pt in each …ve year period produces a similar
picture.
   6
     http://aida.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm
   7
     The dataset uses Morgan Stanley Capital International stock market data covering the period since 1970.
Data on consumption are from the International Financial Statistics of the International Monetary Fund.
With the exception of a few countries, starting dates for consumption data in each country range from 1970,
…rst quarter to 1982, second quarter.



                                                        8
country. For every country, the …gure exhibits a strong positive correlation between low
frequency movements in macroeconomic risk and stock market valuation ratios, similar to
that obtained for the U.S. Virtually every country also experiences a signi…cant decline in
macroeconomic volatility and increase in equity valuation ratios in the last decade of the
century relative to earlier decades. The one exception is Australia, which displays no visible
trend in either macroeconomic volatility or the stock market. Hence even for this observation,
the correlation between macroeconomic volatility and the stock market is remarkable. More
generally, Figure 3 and 4 tell the same story: for the vast majority of countries, the 1990s
were a period of record-low macroeconomic volatility and record-high asset prices.
       Moving back to U.S. data, Figure 5 shows that the strong correlation between macroeco-
nomic volatility and the stock market is also present in prewar data. Although consistently
constructed consumption data going back to the 1800s are not available, we do have access
to quarterly GDP data from the …rst quarter of 1877 to the third quarter of 2002. The data
are taken from Ray Fair’s web site,8 which provides an updated version of the GDP series
constructed in Balke and Gordon (1989). Figure 5 plots estimates of the standard deviation
of GDP growth for non-overlapping ten year periods along with the mean value of the log
dividend-price ratio in each ten year period, for whole decades from 1880 to 2000. The ab-
solute value of GDP volatility in pre-war data must be viewed with caution. As mentioned,
we focus our primary analysis on postwar data because volatility in this period is overstated
relative to the postwar period due to greater measurement error, and because consistent
data collection methodologies were not in place until the postwar period. What Figure 5
does reveal, however, is that the strong correlation between macroeconomic volatility and
the stock market is not merely a feature of postwar data or of a single episode in the 1990s.
Rather, it present in over a century of data spanning the period since 1880.
       To characterize the decline in macroeconomic volatility more formally, the macroeconomic
literature has generally taken two approaches: (i) tests for structural breaks in the variance
at an unknown date, and (ii) estimates from a regime switching model.9 We follow both
   8
       http://fairmodel.econ.yale.edu/RAYFAIR/PDF/2002DTBL.HTM
   9
       As mentioned, other methods of modelling changes in volatility, such as GARCH, may be appropriate for
describing high frequency, stationary ‡uctuations in variance, but are not appropriate for documenting pro-
longed periods of moderated volatility like that observed at the end of the last century. For example, results
not reported show that GARCH models do not generate the observed magnitude of volatility decline during
this period. Intuitively, the GARCH model does a reasonable job of modelling changes in volatility within
regimes, once those have been identi…ed by other procedures, but does not adequately capture movements
in volatility across regimes. All observations in a GARCH procedure are treated as having been generated



                                                      9
of these approaches here. Table 1 provides the results of undertaking structural break tests
for the volatility of each consumption measure described above, and for the mean of the
price-dividend ratio on the CRSP value-weighted index.10 Notice that these tests test the
hypothesis of a permanent shift in the volatility or mean of the series in question. The top
panel of Table 1 shows the results of a test for the break in the variance of consumption
growth using the Quandt (1960) likelihood ratio (QLR) statistic employed by Stock and
Watson (2002).11 The null hypothesis of no break is tested against the alternative of one.
The null hypothesis of no break in the variance is rejected at the 1% signi…cance level for
consumption. The break date is estimated to be 1992:Q1, with 67% con…dence intervals equal
to 1991Q3-1994Q4.12 Note that these tests, unlike estimates from the regime switching model
discussed below, are ex post dating tests that use the whole sample and are therefore not
appropriate for inferring the precise timing of when agents would most likely have assigned a
high probability of being in a new, low volatility regime. Nevertheless, they provide evidence
of a persistent shift down in macroeconomic volatility in our sample and give us a sense of
when that break may have actually occurred.
    The bottom panel of Table 1 presents results from considering a supF type test (Bai and
Perron (2003)) of no structural break versus one break in the mean of the price-dividend
ratio.13 The supF test statistic is highly signi…cant (with a p-value less than 1%), implying
structural change in the price-dividend ratio. The break date is estimated to be 1995:Q1,
with a 90 percent con…dence interval of 1994:Q1 to 1999:Q3. The mean price-dividend ratio
before the break is estimated to be 28.22; after the break, the mean is estimated to be 66.69,
from a single distribution with a stationary variance, rather than from a mixture of distinct distributions
with constant variances.
  10
     See Lettau and Nieuwerburgh (2005) for a recent study of the a¤ects of structural breaks on the fore-
casting power of the price-dividend ratio for excess returns.
  11
     This test also allows for shifts in the conditional mean, by estimating an autoregression that allows for
a break in the autoregressive parameters at an unknown date.
  12
     As Stock and Watson point out, the break estimator has a non-normal, heavy-tailed distribution that
renders 95% con…dence intervals so wide as to be uninformative. Thus, we follow Stock and Watson (2002)
and report the 67% con…dence intervals for this test.
  13
     The linear regression model has one break and two regimes:

                                    y t = zt   j   + ut   t = Tj   1   + 1; :::; Tj ;

for j = 1; 2, where yt denotes the price-dividend ratio here, zt is a vector of ones and the convention T0 = 0
and Tm+1 = T has been used. The procedure of Bai and Perron (2003) is robust potential serial correlation
and heteroskedasticity both in constructing the con…dence intervals for break dates, as well as in constructing
critical values for the supF statistic for the test of the null of no structural change.


                                                          10
an over two-fold increase. It is interesting that the break date is estimated to occur after
the estimated break dates for consumption volatility, consistent with the learning model we
present below.
       Next, we follow Hamilton (1989) and much of the macroeconomic literature in using our
postwar data set to estimate a regime-switching model based on a discrete-state Markov
process.14 This approach has at least two advantages over the structural break approach for
our application. First, the structural break approach assumes that regime shifts are literally
permanent; by contrast, the regime switching model provides a quantitative estimate of how
long changes in regime are expected to last, through estimates of transition probabilities.
Second, unlike the structural break estimates, the regime switching model allows one to treat
the underlying state as latent, and provides an estimate of the posterior probability of being
in each state at each time t, formed using only observable data available at time t. The
estimates from this regime-switching model will serve as a basis for calibrating the asset
pricing model we explore in the next section.
       Consider a time-series of observations on some variable Xt and let xt denote log Xt . A
common empirical speci…cation takes the form

                                    ct =     (St ) + ( ct        1    (St 1 )) +      t                     (2)
                                                   2
                                    t      N 0;        (Vt ) ;

where St and Vt are latent state variables for the states of mean and variance and                            ct
denotes the log di¤erence of consumption. We assume that the probability of changing
mean states is independent of the probability of changing volatility states, and vice versa.To
model the volatility reduction we follow the approach taken in the macroeconomic literature
(e.g., Kim and Nelson (1999), McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000)), by allowing the mean
and variance of each series to follow independent, two-state Markov switching processes.
It follows that there are two mean states,               t       (St ) 2 f l ;   hg   and two volatility states,
 t         (Vt ) 2 f l ;   hg ;   where l denotes the low state and h the high state.15 Note that
  14
       We focus on the larger U.S. dataset for this procedure, as it is known to require a large number of data
points to produce stable results.
  15
     Although a greater number of states could be entertained in principle, there are important practical
reasons for following the existing macro literature in a two-state process. On the empirical side, more
regimes means more parameters and fewer observations within each regime, increasing the burden on a
…nite sample to deliver consistent parameter estimates. On the theory/implementation side, we use these
empirical estimates to calibrate our regime switching model discussed below. The two-state model already
takes several days to solve on a work-station computer; a three-state model would more than double the


                                                         11
independent regimes do not imply that the mean and volatility of consumption growth are
themselves independent. Even with a single volatility regime, the volatility of consumption
growth would be higher in recessions than in booms, because the probability of switching
regimes is higher in the low mean state than in the high mean state. Note also that the
posterior regime probabilities inferred by theoretical agents observing data, as well as by the
econometrician, are not independent.
    We denote the transition probabilities of the Markov chains

                                   P            t   =       hj t 1   =       h     = phh
                                       P            t   =   lj t 1       =   l     = pll

and

                                    P(          t   =       hj t 1   =       h)    = phh
                                       P(           t   =   lj t 1       =   l)    = pll

where the probabilities of transitioning between states are denoted phl = 1                                      pll and plh =
1   phh for the mean state, and phl = 1                     pll and plh = 1                phh for the volatility state. Denote
the transition probability matrices
                                                                "                  #
                                                                    phh phl
                                                P           =                          ;
                                                                    plh      pll
                                                                "                  #
                                                                    phh phl
                                                P           =                          :
                                                                    plh      pll

The parameters      =f    h; l;   h;       l;       ; P ; P g are estimated using maximum likelihood, sub-
ject to the constraints   pkij    0 for i = l; h, j = l; h and k = f ; g :
    Let lower case st represent a state variable that takes on one of 23 = 8 di¤erent values
representing the eight possible combinations for St ; St                           1   and Vt . Equation (2) may be written
as a function of the single state variable st .
    Since the state variable, st , is latent, information about the unobserved regime must be
inferred from observations on xt . Such inference is provided by estimating the posterior
probability of being in state st , conditional on estimates of the model parameters                                        and
observations on  xt . Let Yt = f x0 ; x1 ; ::: xt g denote observations in a n
                                                                             sample of sizeoT
based on data available through time t. We call the posterior probability P st = jjYt ; b ;
where b is the maximum likelihood estimate of                                , the state probability for short.
state space and would be computationally infeasible.

                                                                    12
       The estimation results are reported in Table 2. The regime represented by (St ) =                                h   has
average consumption growth equal to 0.611% per quarter, whereas the regime represented by
 (St ) =        l,      has an average growth rate of -0.469% per quarter. Thus, the high growth regime
is an expansion state and the low growth regime a contraction state. These ‡uctuations in the
conditional mean growth rate of consumption mirror cyclical variation in the macroeconomy.
       The volatility estimates give a sense of the degree to which macroeconomic risk varies
across regimes. For example, the high volatility regime represented by                                       (Vt ) =   h,   has
residual variance of 0.541 per quarter, whereas the low volatility regime represented by
 (Vt ) =            l   has the much smaller residual variance of 0.151 per quarter. This corresponds
to a 47 percent reduction in the standard deviation of consumer expenditure growth. The
results for GDP growth (not reported) qualitatively similar.
       How persistent are these regimes? The probability that high mean growth will be followed
by another high mean growth state is 0.971, implying that the high mean state is expected
to last on average about 33 quarters. The volatility states are more persistent than the
mean states. The probability that a low volatility state will be followed by another low
volatility state is 0.992, while the probability that a high volatility state will be followed by
another high volatility state is 0.995. This implies that the low volatility state reached in
the 1990s is expected to last about 125 quarters, over 30 years. In fact, a 95% con…dence
interval includes unity for these values, so we cannot rule out the possibility that the low
macroeconomic volatility regime is an absorbing state, i.e., expected to last forever. This
characterization is consistent with that in the macroeconomic literature, which has generally
viewed the shift toward lower volatility as a very persistent, if not permanent, break.
       Figure 6 shows time-series plots of the smoothed and unsmoothed posterior probabilities
of being in a low volatility state, P (                        t   =   l ),   along with the smoothed and unsmoothed
                                                                                           16
probabilities of being in a high mean state, P (                               t   =   h ).     consumption exhibits a sharp
increase in the probability of being in a low volatility state at the beginning of the 1990s.
The probability of being in a low volatility state switches from essentially zero, where it
resided for most of the post-war period prior to 1991, to unity, where it remains for the rest
of the decade. Thus, the series shows a marked decrease in volatility in the 1990s relative to
previous periods.
  16
       P(   t   =       l)   is calculated by summing the joint probabilities of all states st associated with being in a
low volatility state. P (            t   =   h)   is calculated by summing the joint probabilities of all states st associated
with being in a high mean growth state.




                                                                       13
3     An Asset Pricing Model With Shifts in Macroeco-
      nomic Risk
The results in the previous section show that the shift toward lower macroeconomic risk
coincides with a sharp increase in the stock market in the 1990s. We now investigate whether
such a relation can be generated in a model of rational, forward-looking agents. To do so, our
primary analysis considers an asset pricing model augmented to account for regime switches
in both the mean and standard deviation of consumption growth, with the shifts in regime
calibrated to match our estimates from post-war data. We study the implications of this
model …rst, which posits a particularly simple “levered” relationship between consumption
and dividends. The …nal part of this section considers a model without learning but with
cointegrated consumption and dividends.
    Modelling such shifts as changes in regime is an appealing device for addressing the po-
tential impact of declining macroeconomic risk on asset prices, for several reasons. First,
the macroeconomic literature has characterized the moderation in volatility as a sharp break
rather than a gradual downward trend, a phenomenon that is straightforward to capture in
a regime-switching framework (e.g., McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000); Stock and Watson
(2002)). Second, changes in regime can be readily incorporated into a rational, forward-
looking model of behavior without regarding them as purely forecastable, deterministic
events, by explicitly modelling the underlying probability law governing the transition from
one regime to another. The probability law can be readily calibrated from our previous
estimates from post-war consumption data. Third, the regime switching model provides a
way of modelling how beliefs about an unobserved state evolve over time, by incorporat-
ing Bayesian updating. Finally, notice that the regime switching framework encompasses
a structural break model as a special case, since the model is free to estimate transition
probabilities that are absorbing states.
    Consider a representative agent who maximizes utility de…ned over aggregate consump-
tion. To model utility, we use the more ‡exible version of the power utility model developed
by Epstein and Zin (1989, 1991) and Weil (1989). Let Ct denote consumption and Rw;t
denote the simple gross return on the portfolio of all invested wealth. The Epstein-Zin-Weil
objective function is de…ned recursively as
                              n            1                  1   o1
                                                        1
                          Ut = (1      ) Ct    +    Et Ut+1            ;                  (3)

where      (1    ) = (1   1= ) ;   is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consump-

                                               14
tion (IES), and          is the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion.
       We consider a model of complete markets in which all wealth (including human capital)
is tradeable. In this case, the aggregate wealth return Rw;t can be interpreted as the gross
return to an asset that represents a claim to aggregate consumption, Ct , and aggregate
consumption is the dividend on the portfolio of all invested wealth. For our main learning
model, we follow Campbell (1986) and Abel (1999), and assume that the dividend on equity,
Dt ; equals aggregate consumption raised to a power :

                                                  Dt = Ct :                                             (4)

When        > 1, dividends and the return to equity are more variable than consumption and the
return to aggregate wealth, respectively. Abel (1999) shows that                 > 1 can be interpreted
as a measure of leverage. We refer to the dividend claim interchangeably as the levered
consumption claim. In what follows, we use lower case letters to denote log variables, e.g.,
log (Ct )      ct .
       The speci…cation (4) implies that the decline in the standard deviation of consumption
growth in the 1990s should be met with a proportional decline in the volatility of dividend
growth,       ( ct ) =      ( dt ). In fact, such a proportional decline is present in cash-‡ow data.
The standard deviation of consumption growth declined of 43% from the period 1952:Q1
to 1989:Q4 to 1990:Q1 to 2002:Q4. In comparison, the standard deviation of Standard
and Poor 500 dividend growth declined 58%,17 the standard deviation of NIPA dividends
declined 42% and the standard deviation of NIPA Net Cash Flow declined 40%. We calibrate
the model based on estimates of the consumption process, and model dividends as a scale
transformation of consumption. This practice has an important advantage: we do not need
to empirically model the short-run dynamics of cash-‡ows, which were especially a¤ected in
the 1990s by pronounced shifts in accounting practices, corporate payout policies, and in the
accounting treatment of executive compensation.
       To incorporate regime shifts in the mean and volatility of consumption growth, consider
the following model for the …rst di¤erence of log consumption:

                                             ct = (st ) + (st ) t ;                                     (5)
  17
       The data for Standard and Poor dividend growth are monthly from Robert Shiller’s Yale web site. These
data are not appropriate for calibrating the level of dividend volatility because the monthly numbers are
smoothed by interpolation from annual data. But they can be used to compare changes in volatility across
subsamples of the data, as we do here.



                                                      15
where      t     N (0; 1) and st again represents a state variable that takes on one of N di¤erent
values representing the possible combinations for the mean state St and the volatility state
Vt . This model is the same as the empirical model (2), except that we do not allow for
autocorrelation in the conditional mean process, (st ): As the results in Table 2 suggest, the
estimated autocorrelation coe¢ cient for (st ) is not large for either measure of consumption
and is likely to be in‡ated by time-averaging of aggregate consumption data. The more
parsimonious framework (5) is far more manageable, as it reduces the number of states over
which the model must be solved numerically.
       An important feature of our model is captured by the assumption that agents cannot
observe the underlying state, but instead must infer it from observable consumption data.
This learning aspect is important because it implies that agents only gradually discover over
time very low frequency changes in volatility. As we shall see below, this assumption allows
the model to deliver a sustained rise in equilibrium asset prices in response to a low frequency
reduction in volatility, rather than implying an abrupt, one-time jump in the stock market.18
       When agents cannot observe the underlying state, inferences about the underlying state
are captured by the posterior probability of being in each state based on data available
through date t, given knowledge of the population parameters. De…ne the N 1 vector
^    of unsmoothed posterior probabilities in the following manner, where its jthe element
 t+1jt

is given by
                                     ^            = P fst+1 = j j Yt ; g :
                                      t+1jt (j)

As before, Yt denotes a vector of all the data up to time t and                contains all the parameters
of the model. Throughout it will be assumed that a representative agent knows                          , which
consequently will be dropped from conditioning statements unless essential for clarity.
   Bayes’Law implies that the posterior probability ^    evolves according to
                                                                    t+1jt


                                                        (^tjt 1     t)
                                          ^t+1jt = P                                                        (6)
                                                       10 (^tjt 1    t)

where          denotes element-by-element multiplication, 1 denotes an (N              1) vector of ones, P
  18
       Our model should be contrasted with models in which there is learning, but a constant regime. In such
models, the agent eventually learns the mean and volatility of consumption growth given enough data. By
contrast, in our model the mean and volatility of consumption growth can each switch between two values
with non-zero probability. In fact, the mean state switches relatively frequently given our empirical estimates.
The agent’s belief about what state she is in does not converge to zero or one because the probability of the
state does not converge to zero or one.



                                                        16
is the N       N matrix of transition probabilities and
                                       2                         3
                                         f ( ct j st = 1; Yt 1 )
                                       6             ..          7
                                       6
                                   t = 4              .          7
                                                                 5
                                         f ( ct j st = N; Yt 1 )

is the vector of likelihood functions conditional on the state.19 Given the distributional
assumptions stated in (5), the likelihood functions are based on the normal distribution.
       As in the econometric model, we assume that the mean and variance of consumption
growth follow two-state Markov switching processes. Thus, there are two possible values for
the mean, , and two possible values for the variance, , of consumption growth, implying
four possible combinations of the two. It follows that st takes on one of four di¤erent values
representing the 22 = 4 possible combinations for the mean state St ;and the variance state
Vt .
       As above, let P be the 2           2 transition matrix for the variance and P be the 2   2
transition matrix for the means. Then the full 4 4 transition matrix is given by
                                     "                #
                                        phh P phl P
                                 P=                     :
                                        plh P pll P

The elements of the four-state transition matrix (and the eight-state transition matrix in
Section 2) can be calculated from the two-state transition matrices P and P . The the-
oretical model can therefore be calibrated to match our estimates of P, ^t+1jt and from
the regime switching model for aggregate consumption data, and closed as an general equi-
librium exchange economy in which a representative agent receives the endowment stream
given by the consumption process (5).


3.1        Pricing the Consumption and Dividend Claims
This section discusses how we solve for the price of a consumption and dividend claim. The
Appendix gives a detailed description of the solution procedure; here we give only a broad
outline.
       Let PtD denote the ex-dividend price of a claim to the dividend stream measured at the
end of time t, and PtC denote the ex-dividend price of a share of a claim to the consumption
stream. From the …rst-order condition for optimal consumption choice and the de…nition of
  19
       See Hamilton (1994), Chapter 22.



                                                    17
returns
                                                                       D
                                                                     Pt+1 + Dt+1
                               Et [Mt+1 Rt+1 ] = 1;         Rt+1   =                                               (7)
                                                                          PtD
where Mt+1 is the stochastic discount factor, given under Epstein-Zin-Weil utility as
                                                   1
                                                     !
                                           Ct+1            1
                             Mt+1 =                    Rw;t+1 :                                                    (8)
                                            Ct

Again, Rw;t+1 is the simple gross return on the aggregate wealth portfolio, which pays a
dividend equal to aggregate consumption, Ct . The return on a risk-free asset whose value is
known with certainty at time t is given by

                                            f                         1
                                           Rt+1     (Et [Mt+1 ])           :

       In contrast to Cecchetti et. al (1990, 2000) and Bonomo and Garcia (1994, 1996), we
assume that investors do not observe the state st directly, but must instead infer it from ob-
servable consumption data. Because innovations to consumption growth are i.i.d. conditional
on regime, and because agents cannot observe the underlying state, the posterior probabil-
ities ^t+1jt summarize the information upon which conditional expectations are based. The
price-dividend ratio for either claim may be computed by summing the discounted value
of future expected dividends across states, weighted by the posterior probabilities of being
in each state. The price-dividend ratio for both the consumption and dividend claims are
functions only of ^t+1jt . The Appendix explains how we solve for these functional equations
numerically on a grid of values for the state variables ^t+1jt :
    Given the price-dividend ratio as a function of the state, we calculate the model’s pre-
dicted price-dividend ratio over time by feeding in our time-series estimates of ^t+1jt presented
above.20 We also compute an estimate of the L year equity premium (the di¤erence between
the equity return and the risk-free rate over an L-year period) as a function of time t infor-
mation. For L large, this “long-run”equity premium is analogous to what Fama and French
(2002) call the unconditional equity premium, as of time t. The Appendix provides details
about how these quantities are computed.
  20
       The posterior probabilities from the empirical model (2) are eight rather than four-dimensional because
the mean-state of consumption growth in the previous model is also an element of the state vector. The four
dimensional vector ^     fed into the model is created by summing the appropriate elements of the eight
                       t+1jt
dimensional vector estimated from data. For example, P             t+1 ;       t+1   = h j Yt ;   is created by summing
P fSt+1 = 1; Vt+1 = 1; St = 1 j Yt ; g and P fSt+1 = 1; Vt+1 = 1; St = 2 j Yt ; g.




                                                       18
3.2        Choosing Model Parameters
We calibrate the model above at a quarterly frequency. The rate of time-preference is set to
  = 0:9925. The parameters of the consumption process, (5), are set to match the empirical
estimates reported in Table 2. Other key parameters for our investigation are the leverage
parameter,        , the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion,        , the IES,     , and the transition
probabilities of staying in a high or low volatility state. We discuss these in turn.
       To calibrate the transition probabilities, we use the estimates presented in Table 2. The
probability of remaining in the same volatility state next period exceeds 0.99 regardless of
whether the volatility state is high or low, and indeed a 95% con…dence interval for these
estimates includes unity. Thus, these estimates are statistically indistinguishable from those
that would imply the low volatility regime reached in the 1990s is expected to continue
inde…nitely, and they coincide with evidence from the macroeconomic literature that the
shift to lower macroeconomic volatility is well described as an extremely persistent, if not
permanent, break (Kim and Nelson (1999), McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000), Stock and
Watson (2002)). Indeed, the reduction in volatility in the last decade has been dubbed “the
great moderation,”by Stock and Watson (2002), consistent with a common perception that
this is evidence not of a transitory decline in volatility, but as a structural change in the
economy as a whole.
       In order to capture a very persistent decline in macroeconomic volatility, we set phh =
pll = 0:9999 for the baseline results, but we also examine the sensitivity of these results to
alternative values in Table 3, discussed below. The transition probabilities for the mean
state, phh and pll are set to their samples estimates for consumption.
       To calibrate , we follow Abel (1999) and set the parameter to match the sample standard
                                                                                              (   ln Dt )
deviation of dividend growth relative to that of consumption growth,                     =    (   ln Ct )
                                                                                                          .   As
discussed, this speci…cation has support in the data in that the volatility of dividend growth
has decreased by about the same proportion as that of consumption growth. As reported
in Lettau and Ludvigson (2005), the percent standard deviation of real, per capita dividend
growth constructed from CRSP index returns is 12.2 at an annual rate in post war data,
about 8 times as high as that of real, per capita consumption growth, equal to 1.52 percent.21
  21
       Abel (1999) calculated a smaller value for   (approximately 3), by calibrating his model to the 1889-
1978 sample used in Mehra and Prescott (1985). The reason he obtained a smaller number is that this
sample includes prewar consumption data, which is over three times as volatile, relative to dividends, as
is postwar consumption data. But the greater volatility of prewar consumption data relative to postwar
data has been attributed, not to greater volatility of economic fundamentals in the prewar period, but to



                                                      19
For our benchmark results we set this parameter slightly lower than 8, to                       = 6, but we
also considered values for        as low as 4 and as high as 7; the results of using some of these
parameter permutations are presented below.
    To study the …nancial e¤ects of a secular decline in macroeconomic risk, it is essential
that the model economy we expose to such a shift be consistent with the average levels of
the stock market and the equity premium. Therefore, we calibrate the coe¢ cient of relative
risk aversion, , in order to insure that our model is able to roughly match the mean equity
premium, level of dividend-price ratio, and risk-free rate in post–war data. To do so, the
model presented above requires moderately high risk aversion, around                    = 25.22 We use this
value for the baseline results reported in this paper.
    Finally, to choose parameter values for the IES,                , we consider how macroeconomic
volatility in‡uences the behavior of the equilibrium price-dividend ratio in the model pre-
sented above. A change in macroeconomic volatility has three a¤ects on the equilibrium
price-dividend ratio. First, regardless of the IES, lower macroeconomic volatility reduces
the long-run equity premium because it lowers consumption risk; this e¤ect drives up the
price-dividend ratio. Second, lower macroeconomic volatility reduces the precautionary mo-
tive for saving, increasing the desire to borrow and therefore the equilibrium risk-free rate;
this e¤ect drives down the price-dividend ratio. Third, because we model a regime shift in
the volatility of log changes, lower macroeconomic volatility reduces the mean of dividend
growth in levels, Dt =Dt 1 , because of a Jensen’s inequality e¤ect; this drives down the price-
dividend ratio. The magnitude of the latter two e¤ects relative to the …rst depends on the
value of     and . If      > 1, the …rst e¤ect will dominate the last two only if               > 1.
    Empirical estimates of        using aggregate consumption data often suggest that the IES is
greater measurement error in the prewar consumption and output series (Romer (1989)). For this reason,
we calibrate our model to postwar consumption data.
  22
     Introspection notwithstanding, there is no broadly-accepted body of empirical evidence that provides a
direct measure of risk-aversion. Survey evidence based on thought experiments is controversial and di¢ cult
to interpret. For example, Kandel and Stambaugh (1991) argue that careful scrutiny of common thought
experiments shows that high risk aversion is not as implausible as commonly presumed. Financial markets,
by contrast, provide indirect evidence that risk aversion is unlikely to be low. As a result, high risk aversion
is a common feature of leading asset pricing models (see, for example, Campbell and Cochrane (1999)
and the models discussed in Campbell (1999a) and Cochrane (2005)). A separate objection to high risk
aversion is that it delivers counterfactual implications for the mean and volatility of the risk-free rate in
asset pricing models with power utility and time-separable preferences. But, like the Epstein-Zin-Weil
preference speci…cation employed here, leading asset pricing models that depart from power utility resolve
these di¢ culties by delivering reasonable implications for the risk-free rate even with high risk aversion.



                                                      20
relatively small, and in many cases statistically indistinguishable from zero (e.g. Campbell
and Mankiw (1989), Ludvigson (1999), Campbell (2003)). But there are several reasons to
think that the IES may be larger than estimates from aggregate data suggest. First, other
researchers have found higher values for              using cohort level data (Attanasio and Weber
(1993), Beaudry and van Wincoop (1996)), or when the analysis is restricted to asset market
participants using household-level data (Vissing-Jorgensen (2002)).23 More recently, Vissing-
Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003) estimate the IES using the same Epstein-Zin framework
employed in this study and …nd that this parameter for stockholders is typically above 1
(depending on the speci…cation), with the most common values ranging from 1.17 to 1.75.24
Second, Bansal and Yaron (2004) suggest that estimates of                   based on aggregate data will
be biased down if the usual assumption that consumption growth and asset returns are
homoskedastic is relaxed. Third, Guvenen (2003) points out that macroeconomic models
with limited stock market participation imply that properties of aggregate variables directly
linked to asset wealth are almost entirely determined by stockholders who have empirically
higher values for . For the results reported below, we set                = 1:5, in the mid-range of the
estimates reported by Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003).25


3.3        Model Results
In this section we present results from solving the model numerically. We focus on how stock
prices are in‡uenced by the break in macroeconomic volatility documented in the empirical
macroeconomic literature. To this end, we characterize the behavior of the equilibrium price-
dividend ratio of a claim to the dividend stream by plotting the model’s solution for this
quantity as a function of the posterior probabilities, and by feeding the model the historical
values of ^t+1jt , estimated as discussed above.
  23
       Vissing-Jorgensen emphasizes that even though estimates of the IES for non-asset holders are lower than
those of asset holders, the di¤erence should not be interpreted as evidence of heterogeneity in the IES across
households. The reason is that estimates of the IES are based on Euler equations. Since the Euler equation
for a given asset return cannot be expected to hold for households who do not have a position in the asset,
IES estimates for non-asset holders will be inconsistent estimates of the IES for those households, and may
be substantially biased down.
  24
     Unlike the estimates reported in Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003), which are typically greater
than one, the estimates of the IES reported in Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) are close to but slightly less than
one. Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) explains the reason for this discrepancy: Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) ignored
taxes, which biases estimates of the IES down. Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003) address the downward
bias by assuming a marginal tax rate of 30 percent.
  25
     This value is also used in Bansal and Yaron (2004).

                                                       21
   Figure 7 (left plot) presents the model’s predicted log price-dividend ratio of the dividend
claim as a function of the posterior probability of being in a low volatility state,          =   l,

when the mean state is high either with probability one or with probability zero. The
price-dividend ratio increases with the posterior probability of being in a low volatility state,
regardless of whether the mean state is high or low. The increasing function is not linear, but
is instead a convex function of investor’s posterior probability of being in the low volatility
state.
   The intuition for this convexity is similar to that given in Veronesi (1999) for an as-
set pricing model with regime shifts in the mean of the endowment process. Suppose the
probability of being in a low consumption volatility state is initially zero. News that causes
an increase in the posterior probability of being in a low volatility state has two e¤ects on
the price-dividend ratio. First, because investors believe that the probability of being in
a low volatility state has risen, consumption risk is perceived to be lower, which works to
decrease the equilibrium risk-premium and raise the price-dividend ratio. Second, because
the probability of being in a low volatility state is farther from zero, investors are more
uncertain about which volatility regime the economy is in, which works to lower the equi-
librium price-dividend ratio. The two e¤ects are o¤setting. Consequently, as the posterior
probability of being in a low volatility state increases from zero, the price-dividend ratio rises
only modestly.
   Conversely, suppose the probability of being in a low consumption volatility state is
initially at unity. News that causes a decrease in this posterior probability again has two
e¤ects on the price-dividend ratio. First, consumption risk is perceived to be higher, which
works to increase the equilibrium risk-premium and lower the price-dividend ratio. Second,
because the probability of being in a low volatility state is now farther from unity, investors
are more uncertain about which volatility regime the economy is in, which works to fur-
ther lower the equilibrium price-dividend ratio. In this case, the two e¤ects are reinforcing
rather than o¤setting. Consequently, as the posterior probability of being in a low volatility
state declines from unity, the price-dividend ratio falls dramatically. This explains why the
equilibrium price-dividend ratio is a convex function of the posterior probabilities. But the
degree of convexity is a¤ected by risk-aversion. The more risk-averse agents are, the higher
the posterior probability of being in a low volatility state must be before it has a noticeable
a¤ect on the equilibrium price-dividend ratio.
   Figure 7 (right plot) displays the log price-dividend ratio of the dividend claim as a
function of the posterior probability of being in a high mean growth state,          =   h,   when


                                               22
the volatility state is high either with probability one or with probability zero. The price-
dividend ratio increases with the posterior probability of being in a high mean state. For
reasons similar to those just given, the function is again convex in the investor’s posterior
probability of being in the high mean state, but is substantially less convex than the function
plotted against the low volatility probability. The e¤ect of a change in mean probability on
the price-dividend ratio is also much smaller than the e¤ect of a change in the volatility
probability on the price-dividend ratio. These di¤erences appear to be attributable to the
lower persistence of the mean regimes compared to the volatility regimes. For example,
the probability that a low mean (contraction) state will be followed by another period of
contraction is 0.8 for consumption growth, so that this regime will persist on average for only
5 quarters. The estimated high mean, or expansion, regime is more persistent, but is still
only expected to last 33 quarters on average. By contrast, the volatility regimes we estimate
are far more persistent, and we have calibrated them for this …gure so that the shift to
lower macroeconomic volatility in the early 1990s is expected to persist almost inde…nitely,
consistent with this characterization in the macro literature. Because of this persistence in
regime, asset prices can rise dramatically as investors become increasingly certain that a low
macroeconomic volatility state has been reached.
   How well does this model capture the run-up in asset prices observed in the late 1990s?
To address this question, we feed the model historical values of ^t+1jt for our post-war sample,
1951:Q4 to 2002:Q4. Figure 8 presents the actual log price-dividend ratio on the CRSP value-
weighted index, along with the post-war history of the price-dividend ratio on the dividend
claim implied by the model. The …gure displays plots of the model’s prediction for pt         dt
using the estimated unsmoothed posterior probabilities, for two parameter con…gurations. In
the top panel, benchmark parameter values (discussed above) are used; in the bottom panel,
risk-aversion is increased slightly (to   = 27) and the leverage parameter is decreased slightly
( = 5). The bottom panel also raises the rate of time preference slightly (to         = :996) in
order to keep the mean value of the price-dividend ratio at empirically plausible values and
roughly consistent with a low risk-free rate. All other parameters in the second panel of
Figure 8 are held at their benchmark values. Note that the “model” line in each graph is
produced using only the posterior probabilities estimated from consumption data; no asset
market data are used.
   Using the historical values of the unsmoothed probabilities, the top panel of Figure 8
shows that the benchmark model provides a remarkable account of the longer-term tendencies
in stock prices. In particular, it captures virtually all of the boom in equity values that began


                                                23
in the early 1990s and continued through the end of the millennium. The bottom panel of
Figure 8 shows the same result when risk-aversion is slightly higher but leverage is lower.
This case captures less of the overall boom in asset prices, but still explains all of the run-up
since 1990 that was sustained after the broad market declines since 2000. In fact, the model’s
predicted price-dividend ratio is almost identical to the actual price-dividend ratio reached
at the end of 2002.
       Notice that the increase in valuation ratios predicted by the model is not well described
by a sudden jump upward, but instead occurs gradually over several years, consistent with
the data. This is a result of the learning built in to the model by the assumption that agents
cannot observe the underlying state directly. Thus, the model produces about the right
average value for stock returns during the 1990s.
    We noted above that the model considered here delivers reasonable implications for the
risk-free rate of interest. If we feed the model historical values of ^t+1jt we may compute the
post-war history of the risk-free rate predicted by the model. Using the baseline parameters
discussed above and used to create the results in panel A of Figure 8, this rate has a has
a mean of 3.3 percent and a standard deviation of 0.35 percent per annum, roughly in line
with actual values for an estimate of the real rate of return on a short-term Treasury bill.26
The mean of 3.3 percent is a slightly higher than that suggested by historical estimates, but
this can be recti…ed by using the parameter con…guration employed to obtain the results in
panel B of Figure 9: for this case, the mean risk-free rate generated by the model is 1.59
percent per annum, the standard deviation is again 0.35 percent.
       What drives up the price-dividend ratio in the 1990s in this model? Although the shift
to a higher mean growth state during this period generates a small part of the increase, the
vast majority of the boom is caused by a decline in the equity premium as a consequence
of the shift to reduced macroeconomic volatility. This can be seen in Figure 7. The right
panel shows that, …xing the volatility state, variation in the equilibrium price-dividend ratio
across mean states is quite modest. For example, …xing the probability of being in a low
volatility state at one, the log price-dividend ratio ranges between 3.24 (when the probability
of being in a high mean state is zero), to 3.57 (when the probability of being in a high mean
state is one). Thus, the maximum possible variation in pt                    dt across mean states is about
  26
       Empirical estimates of volatility of the risk-free rate are typically based on the annualized sample stan-
dard deviation of the ex post real return on US Treasury bills–about 2% per annum in postwar data. This
…gure likely overstates the true volatility of the ex ante real interest rate, however, since much of the volatility
of these returns is due to unanticipated in‡ation.



                                                        24
10 percent. Fixing the probability of being in a low volatility state at zero, the maximum
possible variation in pt dt across mean states is even smaller, about 8 percent. This variation
should be contrasted with the results for variation across volatility states, shown in the left
panel. Fixing the probability of being in a high mean state at one, the log price-dividend
ratio ranges between 3.57 (when the probability of being in a low volatility state is zero), to
4.34 (when the probability of being in a low volatility state is one), a range of variation of
over 22 percent. Fixing the probability of being in a high mean state at zero, the maximum
possible variation in pt   dt across volatility states is about 24 percent. In short, large swings
in the price-dividend ratio in this model are generated not by shifts in the mean of the
endowment process, but by changes in the posterior probability of being exposed to a less
volatile endowment process.
   To understand what happens to the equity premium in the model, Figure 9 plots the
L = 50; and 100-year equity premia implied by the model, computed recursively from the
one period equity premium. Given that we calibrate the model at quarterly frequency, the L-
year equity premium is computed as the expectation as of year t of the annualized compound
rate of return from investing in the dividend claim from years t to t + L, less the annualized
compound return from investing in the risk-free rate over years to t to t + L. This is simply
the expected value of the sum of future one-quarter log excess returns on the dividend claim
for L years, reported at an annual rate. (The Appendix provides details about how this
quantity is computed numerically.) We use this quantity for L large to capture the model’s
predicted value for the “unconditional” equity premium as of time t. The …gure displays,
for L = 50 and L = 100, the predicted equity premium of the dividend claim as a function
of the posterior probability of being in a low volatility state,   =   l,   when the mean state is
high either with probability one or with probability zero. In all cases, the predicted equity
premium declines as the probability of being in a low volatility state increases, and drops o¤
sharply once that probability exceeds 90 percent.
   Figure 10 plots the post-war history of the log annual (100-year) equity premium on the
dividend claim implied by the model, feeding in this history of the posterior probabilities.
The model equity premium is relatively ‡at for most of the post-war period, but begins to
decline in the early 1990s. For the benchmark model, premium declines by a little over two
percentage points from peak to trough. We should not be surprised that the percentage
decline is not greater; even small changes in the equity premium can have a large impact on
asset values if they are su¢ ciently persistent.
   The level of the long-run equity premium predicted by this parameterization is a bit higher


                                                25
than estimates based on the historical average return on stocks in excess of returns on money
market instruments. For example, the average annual excess return on the Standard and
Poor 500 Stock market index in excess of a short-term Treasury bill rate is about 8 percent in
data from 1951 to 2000, whereas the model’s predicted premium declines from around 11.7
percent at an annual rate, to 9.7 percent at its trough. Nevertheless, several researchers have
pointed out that the historical average excess return may not result in a good estimate of the
long-run premium that investors actually expect to earn in the future. This is because such
a computation misses any change in stock prices that result in an unexpected decline in the
equity premium (Jagannathan, McGrattan, and Scherbina (2000); Fama and French (2002)).
Jagannathan, McGrattan and Scherbina provide a computation of the expected stock return
(by decade) that takes such changes into account, and …nd that the expected return for the
aggregate stock market in postwar data up to 1990 is higher than that suggested by simple
historical averages of returns, ranging from about 10 percent to 11.4 percent, depending on
which measure of the aggregate stock market is studied. These estimates for the expected
(long-run) equity return are closer to those predicted by the model explored here under the
benchmark parameter values described above. The model’s predicted value of the long-run
equity premium can be altered by changing the model parameterization; we discuss this
further below.
       We emphasize an additional aspect of this model: although the volatility of consumption
declines in the 1990s, the volatility of equilibrium stock returns does not— consistent with
actual experience. In fact, in the data, stock market volatility appears to be, if anything,
slightly higher in the late 1990s than in much of the rest of the postwar sample.27 Figure 11
plots the post-war history of the conditional quarterly standard deviation of the log stock
market return implied by the model at benchmark parameter values, reported at an annual
rate. The …gure shows that stock market volatility in the model is no lower in the 1990s than
previously in the sample, despite the lower macroeconomic volatility. This result is primarily
attributable to the increased uncertainty about which volatility regime the economy was in
during the transition from a high to low macroeconomic volatility state.
       We now explore how the model’s predictions change when we depart from the benchmark
parameter values for         and, importantly, the key posterior probabilities pjj , which denote the
agent’s inference that next period’s volatility state will be j given that this period’s volatility
state is j. The results of permuting these parameters to other values within two-standard
  27
       Updated plots of volatility of aggregate stock market indexes are provided by G. William Schwert at his
University of Rochester web site: http://schwert.ssb.rochester.edu/volatility.htm.


                                                       26
errors of the point estimate are summarized in Table 3, which exhibits the model’s predictions
for the price-dividend ratio and the long-run (100-year) equity premium in 1990:Q1 (before
the estimated volatility shift) and in 2002:Q4 (after the volatility shift). Also shown is
the one-period risk-free rate in 1990:Q1 and 2002:Q4. The values in each time period are
computed by feeding the model the historical values of the posterior probabilities for the
relevant quarters in our sample. The …rst row of Table 3 presents the results from our
benchmark parameter values, used to generate the results reported in Panel A of Figure 8.
Subsequent rows show how those results are changed when we depart from the benchmark
parameter con…guration by assigning the values indicated in the …rst four columns of Table
3, for a subset of the parameters. For each permutation, all of the parameters not listed in
columns of Table 3 are maintained at their benchmark values.
   Several notable aspects of the model are exhibited in Table 3. First, observe that the
price-dividend ratio in the data rises from about 30 to 58.44 over the period 1990:Q1 to
2002:Q4, an increase of 28.44 (Figure 1). Row 1 of Table 3 shows that, at benchmark pa-
rameter values, the model predicts an increase of 33 in the price-dividend ratio over this
same period, larger than that observed. At benchmark parameter values, the model pre-
dicts a higher value for the price-dividend ratio at the end of our sample than what actually
occurred (68.44 versus 58.44). Row 2 shows what happens when the transition probability
of remaining in the same volatility state next period is lowered to the statistically indistin-
guishable level of phh = pll = 0:999; rather than the benchmark phh = pll = 0:9999; now the
model predicts a run-up in stock prices over the period 1990:Q1 to 2002:Q4 equal to roughly
70 percent of that observed. For this parameterization, the equilibrium price-dividend ratio
rises from 35 to 56. The third row shows what happens when we use the exact point es-
timates for these transition probabilities, which are also statistically indistinguishable from
the benchmark values. In this case the model explains about a quarter of the total run-up,
with the equilibrium price-dividend ratio rising from 37 to 44. The result is essentially the
same if we set phh = pll =0:99, slightly lower than the point estimates (row 4). These …ndings
illustrate the importance of the perceived permanence of the volatility decline in determining
the magnitude of the rise in the equilibrium price-dividend ratio. Even a modest decrease
in macroeconomic volatility can cause a dramatic boom in stock prices when the decrease is
perceived to be su¢ ciently permanent.
   Table 3 also shows that when    is lowered from 6 to 4, the model predicts a smaller fraction
of the run-up from 1990:Q1 to 2002:Q2 in price-dividend ratios than does the benchmark
case, but still captures about 44% of the increase. This case also delivers a lower long-run


                                              27
equity premium: the predicted equity premium is 7.7% in 1990:Q1, and falls to 6.5% in
2002:Q4, as a result of the shift toward lower volatility.28 The last row of Table 3 gives
results for the parameter con…guration used in panel B of Figure 8; this case captures about
68 percent of the run-up in asset values from 1990:Q1 to 2002:Q4.
       As the analysis above demonstrates, the model explored here predicts a surge in the price-
dividend ratio on the dividend claim in the 1990s. What about the price-dividend ratio of
the consumption claim (the wealth-consumption ratio)? It turns out that this quantity is far
less a¤ected by the shift to lower consumption volatility. This occurs because the price of an
unlevered consumption claim is much less sensitive to swings in consumption risk than is the
price of a levered claim. Results (not shown) demonstrate that the wealth-consumption ratio
in the benchmark model is hardly a¤ected by the low frequency shift toward lower volatility.
This prediction is consistent with empirical evidence in Lettau and Ludvigson (2004), which
shows that–unlike the log price-dividend ratio–the log wealth-consumption ratio has been
largely restored to its sample mean with the broad market declines since 2000. This feature
of the model is also consistent with evidence presented in Lettau and Ludvigson (2005),
which suggests the presence of a low frequency component in the sampling variation of the
log dividend-price ratio that is not present in the wealth-consumption ratio.
       Of course, these considerations also imply that some short-term ‡uctuations in asset
market valuation ratios are not as well captured by the model studied here. The focus in
this paper is on the low-frequency movements in the stock market and the unconditional
equity premium, and in particular in understanding the boom in the 1990s, an episode that
dominates the post-war sampling variation of the stock market. As such, the model we
investigate is not designed to capture the higher frequency ‡uctuations observed in the log
price-dividend ratio prior to 1990, or the degree to which the price-dividend ratio overshot
its value at the end of our sample, displayed in Figure 8. Although both the mean and the
general direction of these cyclical ‡uctuations are reasonably well captured, the magnitude
of these cyclical ‡uctuations is not. For example, the model correctly predicts a decline in
the price-dividend ratio during the early 1950s and throughout most of the 1970s, but it
misses the magnitude of both declines. One framework that is better able to capture these
shorter-term, cyclical ‡uctuations in equity values is the model explored by Campbell and
  28
       For all parameter-value combinations, price-dividend ratios rise over the period 1990:Q1 to 2002:Q4, not
because the long-run risk-free rate falls, but because the long-run equity premium falls. In fact, results (not
reported) show that the long-run risk-free rate actually rises modestly in each case, but not by enough to
o¤set the decline in the equity premium and cause an increase in the total rate of return.



                                                       28
Cochrane (1999). Unlike the model explored here, this model has time-varying risk-aversion
and therefore generates substantial business cycle movement in the equity risk-premium. A
shortcoming of that model, however, lies with its inability to capture the extraordinary stock
market boom in the 1990s and the low frequency movements in the price-dividend ratio that
dominate its behavior at the close of the last century. It is precisely this behavior that our
model is designed to capture.
   More recently, researchers have focused on the empirical underpinnings of cyclical ‡uctu-
ations in assets values. For example, Du¤ee (2005), suggests that the conditional correlation
between stock returns and consumption growth ‡uctuates over time and reached a peak at
the end of 2000. It is important to note that these …ndings–of interest in their own right–
do not necessarily contradict the conclusions of this paper. The estimates of conditional
moments reported in Du¤ee (2005) are based on a GARCH model for the conditional covari-
ance. As mentioned, the GARCH speci…cation does a reasonable job of modeling cyclical
changes in volatility and covariance within regimes, once those have been identi…ed by other
procedures, but it is not well-suited for capturing prolonged periods of moderated volatility
or covariance. Although we have not modeled it as such here, less persistent shifts in condi-
tional correlations, as captured by GARCH models, could co-exist with rare, but extremely
persistent shifts in regime for volatility. Since regime changes can be expected to have a
much greater impact on asset markets than cyclical ‡uctuations in conditional moments, ev-
idence of GARCH-type increases in the conditional covariance of consumption and returns
is not necessarily inconsistent with a model in which high stock prices relative to measures
of fundamental value are driven by a near-permanent fall in macroeconomic risk.
   We close this section by discussing the importance of the expected persistence of the
volatility moderation in generating a large boom in stock prices. As the results above
demonstrate, if the volatility moderation is perceived to be very persistent–lasting many
decades–a large fraction of the run-up in stock prices can be explained. If the volatility
decline is expected to be more transitory, less of the run-up can be rationalized through this
mechanism. Of course, this feature of our theoretical model is not unique to the volatility
explanation explored here. Given the extraordinary behavior of equity valuation ratios in
the 1990s, any rational explanation of the stock market during this period must rest on an
extremely persistent change in some underlying fundamental. Fortunately, for macroeco-
nomic volatility, we have independent evidence about this persistence, since the Hamilton
procedure provides an empirical estimate of how long a regime is expected to last through
estimates of the transition probabilities. Table 2 shows that the estimated probability of re-


                                             29
maining in a low volatility state once it has been reached is in excess of 0.99 for consumption,
implying that the regime will persist on average more than 40 years.
       How likely is persistence of 80, 100 or even 1000 years? Figure 12 plots the log likelihood
of our empirical model (2), as a function of pll , the probability of remaining in a low volatility
state next period given a low volatility state this period.29 The likelihood has a clear peak
at the point estimate, 0.992, but is almost as high at unity as it is at the point estimate.
Thus values for pll that imply the low volatility regime will persist inde…nitely are just as
empirically defensible, statistically, as those that suggest it will persist for 40 to 80 years.
In the model, the di¤erence between 40 years and inde…nitely is not inconsequential for
equilibrium asset prices, but even the low end of the empirically plausible range implies
extreme persistence. This means that regardless of what value for pll one favors, results
in Table 3 suggest that the decline in volatility plays some role in the rise of equity values
since 1990. One view of these theoretical results is that the stock market appears to be very
informative about the expected persistence of the volatility moderation. These estimates are
obtained without using any stock market data. Had we included data on the stock market in
our estimation such estimates of the persistence would likely have been pushed to the very
high end of the range obtained from pure macroeconomic data.


3.4        A Model With Cointegrated Consumption and Dividends
The learning model above imposes a particularly simple relationship between consumption
and dividends. As a robustness check with our previous results, we solve a model where
consumption and dividends are cointegrated. For simplicity, we abstract away from the
learning aspect of our model. Unfortunately, it is di¢ cult to introduce such a cointegrated
process into the learning model above, since the state space becomes too large.30
       We assume the following error-correction representation for log consumption and log
  29
       We thank Lars Hansen for suggesting this plot.
  30
       An alternative speci…cation that also implies a decline in dividend volatility is

                                                dt+1   =        t   +    t" t

                                                ct+1   =        t   +   t" t:


We …nd this speci…cation produces results that are qualitatively similar to those from the learning model
described in section 3.1-3.3 above.




                                                           30
dividends:

                                     ct+1 =      +   c;t+1                                                                  (9)
                                     dt+1 =      + k(ct          dt ) +   c;t+1   +   d;t+1 ;                             (10)

                                                                                                                      2
where    c;t+1   and      d;t+1   are normal, mean-zero independent shocks, with Var(                   c;t+1 )   =   c    and
                     2
Var(   d;t+1 )   =   d.   Log consumption and dividends are cointegrated, with cointegrating vector
         0
(1; 1) . The leverage parameter               in this model multiplies the consumption innovation                         c;t+1 ,

rather than the overall level of consumption, allowing consumption and dividends to have
the same long-run growth rate. The parameter k is an adjustment parameter that governs
the persistence of deviations from the common long-run trend. The innovation                                      d;t+1    is a
purely idiosyncratic shock to dividends.
   Since consumption and dividends are cointegrated but consumption follows a random
walk, dividend growth must be predictable by last period’s consumption-dividend ratio.
This is so because in this speci…cation consumption de…nes the trend in dividends; thus
shocks to the consumption-dividend ratio must be accompanied by a subsequent adjustment
in dividends in order to move these variables back toward their common long-run trend.
   To study the a¤ects of lower consumption volatility on asset prices in this model, we
assume that the variance of consumption undergoes a perfectly anticipated one-o¤ shift to a
lower value. This amounts to comparing two steady states. The consumption volatilities in
the two steady states are the estimated values in the high and low volatility regime reported
                                                             2
in Table 2. In particular, we assume that                    c   takes on the high volatility regime value in
data up through 1990, and the low value in data after 1990. The value of                                is set to match
                                                                                                2
the average growth of consumption in our sample, and the value of                               d   is set to match the
greater overall level of volatility of dividend growth as compared to consumption growth.
Finally, we allow the adjustment parameter k to take on a number of values ranging from
0.005 to 0.20. These numbers are in line with those calibrated to match consumption and
dividend data in Lettau and Wachter (2005). In particular, using data on consumption and
dividends, Lettau and Wachter …nd that k is 0.09, about the median of the range considered
here. The numerical solution procedure is described in the Appendix.
   Table 4 exhibits the model’s predictions for the price-dividend ratio in the two volatility
regimes for a variety of parameter values of ,                     and k. Other parameters are set as in the
baseline calibration of the learning model above.
   The …rst aspect of note in Table 4 is that risk aversion must be higher than in the learning
model in order to match the overall level of the equity premium and price-dividend ratio

                                                          31
found in the data. This is attributable to the two factors: the presence of cointegration and
the absence of persistent changes in consumption growth. Cointegration ties dividends to
consumption in the long-run. This means that even though dividend growth is much more
volatile than consumption growth in the short-run, it can be no more risky than consump-
tion growth in the long-run (i.e., the annualized volatility of dividend growth must decline
with the horizon over which it is measured to match the lower volatility of consumption
growth). Persistent changes in cash-‡ow growth also make the dividend claim more risky.
These two factors mean that we need to adjust risk aversion upward in this model (Table 4
reports results for   = 40 or 60) in order to match the overall level of the equity premium
and price-dividend ratio found in the data. With this adjustment, the model predicts a sig-
ni…cant fraction of the run-up from 1990:Q1 to 2002:Q2 in price-dividend ratios for a range
of values of k. Moreover, when k is su¢ ciently small, this model can explain more than
100% of the run-up. This is not surprising because when k is small, dividends deviate in a
very persistent manner from the common trend de…ned by consumption, implying that the
annualized volatility of dividend growth is greater than that of consumption growth at all
but the very longest horizons. (In the limit when k = 0, there is no cointegration and the
annualized volatility of dividend growth is greater than that of consumption growth at every
horizon.) But even with k as high as 0:2–a value almost twice as high as that suggested by
empirical estimates–the model predicts almost 80% of the run-up in valuation ratios as a
result of the shift toward lower volatility. We conclude that our main …ndings are robust to
modeling consumption and dividends as cointegrated processes.


4     Conclusions
This paper considers the low frequency behavior of post-war equity values relative to mea-
sures of fundamental value. Such longer-term movements are dominated by the stock market
boom of the 1990s, an extraordinary episode in which price-dividend ratios on aggregate
stock market indices increased three-fold over a period of …ve years. Indeed, Figure 1 shows
this period to be the de…ning episode of postwar …nancial markets. As Campbell (1999b)
notes, the relationship between stock prices and fundamentals in the 1990s appears to have
changed. A growing body of literature is now working to understand this phenomenon,
and explanations run the gamut from declining costs of equity market participation and
diversi…cation, to irrational exuberance, to changes in technology and demography.
    In this paper, we consider a di¤erent explanation for why the relationship between stock


                                             32
prices and fundamentals appears to have changed. We ask whether the phenomenal surge
in asset values that dominated the close of the 20th century can be plausibly described
as a rational response to macroeconomic factors, namely the sharp and sustained decline
in macroeconomic risk. We …nd that, in large part, it can. There is a strong correlation
between the low frequency movements in macroeconomic volatility and asset prices in post-
war data, both in the US and internationally. We show that, when such a shift toward
decreased consumption risk is perceived to be su¢ ciently persistent, an otherwise standard
asset pricing model can explain a large fraction of the surge in equity valuation ratios observed
in U.S. data in the 1990s. In the model economy, a boom in stock prices occurs because
the decline in macroeconomic risk leads to a fall in expected future stock returns, or the
equity risk-premium. An implication of these …ndings is that multiples of price to earnings
or dividends may remain above previous historical norms into the inde…nite future.
   Of course, in the …nal analysis, the complexities of modern …nancial markets leave little
doubt that several factors outside of our model are likely to have contributed to the surge in
asset values relative to measures of fundamental value during the …nal part of the last century.
Nevertheless, the analysis here suggests that the well documented break in macroeconomic
volatility could be an important contributing factor.




                                               33
5     Appendix

                                     I. Data Description

    The sources and description of each data series we use are listed below.

GDP
GDP is gross domestic product, measured in 1996 chain-weighted dollars. Our source is the U.S.
Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

CONSUMPTION
Consumption is measured as total personal consumption expenditures. The quarterly data are
seasonally adjusted at annual rates, in billions of chain- weighted 1996 dollars. Our source is the
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

POPULATION
A measure of population is created by dividing real total disposable income by real per capita
disposable income. Consumption, wealth, labor income, and dividends are in per capita terms.
Our source is the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

PRICE DEFLATOR
Real asset returns are de‡ated by the implicit chain-type price de‡ator (1996=100) given for the
consumption measure described above. Our source is the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau
of Economic Analysis.

PRICE-DIVIDEND RATIO
The price-dividend ratio is that of the CRSP value-weighted index, constructed as in Campbell
(2003). Our source is the Center for Research in Security Prices, University of Chicago.




                                                34
          II. Pricing the Consumption and Dividend Claims, Computation of
                         Unconditional Equity Premium: Learning Model


     This appendix describes the algorithm used to solve for prices.
     The …rst order conditions that the price-dividend ratio of a claim to the dividend stream satis…es
                                          D
                                        Pt+1                        Dt+1  PD
                          Et Mt+1            (^      )+1                 = t (^t+1jt );                    (11)
                                        Dt+1 t+2jt+1                 Dt    Dt
and the price-consumption ratio for the consumption claim satis…es
                                          C
                                        Pt+1                        Ct+1  PC
                          Et Mt+1            (^      )+1                 = t (^t+1jt ):                    (12)
                                        Ct+1 t+2jt+1                 Ct    Ct
              PtC
Notice that   Ct
                    is the wealth-consumption ratio, where wealth here is measured on an ex-dividend
basis. The posterior probabilities ^t+1jt are the only state variables in this framework, so the
price-dividend ratio is a function only of ^t+1jt . We substitute for Mt+1 from (8) and solve these
functional equations numerically on a grid of values for the state variables ^t+1jt :
     Equation (11) can be rewritten as:
                                    "                                    #
                                                    D
                                                  Pt+1          Ct+1           PtD
                                Et Mt+1                +1                    =     ;                       (13)
                                                  Ct+1           Ct            Ct

where Mt+1 is given in (8). Applying the de…nition of returns with                 = 1, Mt+1 can be rewritten
as
                                                     +    1      C           1         1
                                        Ct+1                   Pt+1              PtC
                         Mt+1 =                                     +1                     :               (14)
                                         Ct                    Ct+1              Ct
Plugging (14) into (13) we obtain
          "                                           1         1
                                                                                               #
                            +   1     C                                   D
                  Ct+1              Pt+1                  PtC           Pt+1           Ct+1          PtD
     Et                                  +1                                  +1                    =       (15)
                   Ct               Ct+1                  Ct            Ct+1            Ct           Ct

                                          PtD
The price-dividend ratio on equity,       Ct
                                              ,   is de…ned recursively by (15).
     We write the price-dividend ratio for a levered consumption claim as a function of the state
vector ^t+1jt :
                                                  PtD
                                                      = FD (^t+1jt ):                                      (16)
                                                  Ct
Similarly, the price-dividend ratio for the unlevered consumption claim can be written

                                                  PtC
                                                      = FC (^t+1jt );                                      (17)
                                                  Ct

                                                          35
for some function FC . Notice that the price-dividend ratio in (17) is simply the wealth-consumption
ratio, where wealth is de…ned to be ex-dividend wealth.
     The wealth-consumption ratio is de…ned as the …xed point of (15) for                                             = 1 and P D = P C
                                                                                           PtC
everywhere. Applying this case to (15) and substituting                                    Ct
                                                                                                 = FC (^t+1jt ), the Euler equation for
the consumption claim may be written
                                 "                                                               #
                                                         +
                                          Ct+1
                         Et                                  FC (^t+2jt+1 ) + 1                      = FC (^t+1jt )      :
                                           Ct

From the de…nition of the conditional expectation, the left-hand-side of the expression above is
given by
         "                                                          #
                                  +
                 Ct+1
    Et                                   FC (^t+2jt+1 ) + 1             =
                  Ct
                                                     "                                                                            #
               X
               N
                                                             Ct+1
                                                                                +
                     P fst+1 = j j Yt g E                                               FC (^t+2jt+1 ) + 1       j st+1 = j; Yt ; (18)
               j=1
                                                              Ct        j


                      Ct+1
where exp              Ct
                                           (sj ) + (sj )      t+1   denotes consumption growth in state j . From the
                              j
evolution equation (6) and the stochastic model (5), the distribution of ^t+2jt+1 conditional on
time-t data Yt and on the state st+1 depends only on ^t+1jt and the state. Using the de…nition of
^
 t+1jt ,     (18) can be written
         "                                                          #
                                  +
                 Ct+1
    Et                                   FC (^t+2jt+1 ) + 1             =
                  Ct
                                                         "                                                                                 #
                                  X
                                  N
                                                               Ct+1
                                                                                    +
                                        ^t+1jt (j)E                                       FC (^t+2jt+1 ) + 1          j st+1 = j; ^t+1jt :
                                  j=1
                                                                Ct          j


Thus, the wealth-consumption ratio, FC (^t+1jt ), is de…ned by the recursion:
                                                      "                                                                                #
                                  X
                                  N
                                                              Ct+1
                                                                                 +
     FC (^t+1jt )            =          ^t+1jt (j)E                                      FC (^t+2jt+1 ) + 1          j st+1 = j; ^t+1jt :
                                  j=1
                                                               Ct           j
                                                                                                                                           (19)
     It is straightforward to show that a similar recursion de…nes the price-dividend ratio of a levered
equity claim, FD (^t+1jt ), by allowing                      to take on arbitrary values greater than unity. From (15),
we have
                                                 "                                                                                 #
                                                                    +       1+                                           D
         PtD                                          Ct+1                                                       1     Pt+1
             = FC (^t+1jt )1                Et                                          FC (^t+2jt+1 ) + 1                  +1         :
         Dt                                            Ct      j                                                       Dt+1

                                                                        36
Substituting (16) into the above, we obtain

FD (^t+1jt ) = FC (^t+1jt )1
                 "                                                                                                       #
 XN
                     Ct+1
                                           +   1+                                1
     ^                                               FC (^t+2jt+1 ) + 1              FD (^t+2jt+1 ) + 1 j st+1 = j; ^t+1jt :
      t+1jt (j)E
 j=1
                      Ct           j


The expectation above is computed by numerical integration under the assumption that innovations
to consumption growth are i.i.d., conditional on the state j .
    Denote the log return of the dividend claim from t to t + 1 as log (RD;t+1 ) = rD;t+1 . It is also
possible to compute moments of log returns:
                                                     "                                         !#
                                                             FD (^t+2jt+1 ) + 1         Dt+1
                               Et [rD;t+1 ] = Et log                                                                 (20)
                                                                FD (^      )
                                                                         t+1jt
                                                                                         Dt
                                       2                                              !!2 3
                                                    FD (^t+2jt+1 ) + 1     Dt+1
                 2
                 t [rD;t+1 ]   = Et 4 log                                                  5    (Et [rD;t+1 ])2
                                                       FD (^t+1jt )         Dt

Equation (20) points the way to calculating the expected L period return. For example, suppose we
were interested in the annualized compound rate of return from investing in the levered consumption
claim for thirty years. Because the model is calibrated to t equals a quarter, we would compute

                                            4
                                               Et [rD;t+1 + rD;t+2 +         + rD;t+120 ]                            (21)
                                           120
To compute the thirty-year equity premium, we could subtract out the return from rolling over
                                                     f               f
investments in the risk-free rate. Let rt+1 = log Rt+1 , then

                                                4       f      f               f
                                                   Et [rt+1 + rt+2 +        + rt+120 ]                               (22)
                                               120
             f
Note that rt+1 is known at time t and so could be brought outside the expectation. Subtracting
(22) from (21) gives the thirty-year ahead risk premium.
    The question is how to compute the elements in the sums of (21) and (22)? We show that
these quantities can be computed recursively. Because the one-period ahead expected return and
risk-free rate are functions of ^t+1jt , we can write

                                                    G1 (^t+1jt ) = Et (rD;t+1 )

De…ne
                                                G2 (^t+1jt ) = Et (G1 (^t+2jt+1 ))


                                                                37
By the law of iterated expectations

                      G2 (^t+1jt ) = Et (G1 (^t+2jt+1 )) = Et (Et+1 (rD;t+2 )) = Et (rD;t+2 )

More generally, de…ne Gm recursively as

                                        Gm (^t+1jt ) = Et (Gm 1 (^t+2jt+1 ))

Note that assuming Gm             ^
                                1 ( t+1jt )   = Et [rt+m 1 ] implies,

                Gm (^t+1jt ) = Et (Gm 1 (^t+2jt+1 )) = Et (Et+1 (rD;t+m )) = Et (rD;t+m ):        (23)

So by induction, (23) holds for all L.
   Similarly de…ne
                                                    H1 (^t+1jt ) = rt+1
                                                                    f


and
                                        Hm (^t+1jt ) = Et (Hm 1 (^t+2jt+1 ))

If Hm     ^
        1 ( t+1jt )
                             f
                      = Et [rt+m 1 ],


                      Hm (^t+1jt ) = Et (Hm 1 (^t+2jt+1 )) = Et (Et+1 (rt+m
                                                                        f             f
                                                                            )) = Et (rt+m ):      (24)

So (24) holds for all L. Thus the L-period ahead expected return can be found by recursively
calculating Gm for m = 1; : : : L, summing up, and multiplying by 4=L. The L-period ahead risk
premium can be found by calculating Hm for m = 1; : : : L, summing up the di¤erences Gm           Hm ,
and multiplying by 4=L.

   III. Pricing the Consumption and Dividend Claims: Cointegration Model

   To solve the cointegration model, rewrite the system (9)-(10) as

                                 dt+1 =           + zt +    c;t+1   +   d;t+1

                                 zt+1 = (1           k)zt + k(1         )   c;t+1   k   d;t+1 ;


   The price-consumption ratio Pt =Ct solves the following:
                       "                                #
                                       +      C
                             Ct+1           Pt+1                                    PtC
                    Et                            +1      =
                              Ct            Ct+1                                    Ct

This equation is solved by
                                                      PtC    R
                                                          =     ;                                 (25)
                                                      Ct    1 R

                                                            38
where                                    (                                              )
                                                                                2
                                                      1      1              1       2
                          R = exp             1            +           1            c       :
                                                             2
   The price-dividend ratio then solves the equation
                      "                                                                         #
                                     +   1                                    D
                            Ct+1                  Dt+1                      Pt+1
                   Et                      R1                                    +1                                (26)
                             Ct                    Dt                       Dt+1

This follows from substituting (25) into the equation for the price-dividend ratio. Conjecture
that the price-dividend ratio has a solution of the form

                                        PtD X
                                                  1
                                           =     exp fAn + Bn zt g :                                               (27)
                                        Dt   n=1

Substituting (27) into (26) veri…es the conjecture and implies that An and Bn satisfy

                                                                        1
        An = An   1   +   log + (1            ) log R +           1             +
                                                                                2
                         1                1                                                 1
                                    1             +(       1)(1       Bn 1 k)       2
                                                                                    c   +     (1    Bn 1 k)2   2
                                                                                                               d   (28)
                         2                                                                  2
      Bn = (1         k)Bn   1   + 1;                                                                              (29)

with boundary conditions A0 = B0 = 0.




                                                          39
References
Abel, A. B. (1994): “Exact Solutions for Expected Rates of Return Under Markov Regime Switch-
  ing: Imiplications for the Equity Premium,”Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 26, 345–361.

         (1999): “Risk Premia and Term Premia in General Equilibrium,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 43, 3–33.

         (2003): “The E¤ects of a Baby Boom on Stock Prices and Capital Accumulation in the
  Presence of Social Security,” Econometrica, 71(2), 551–578.

Attanasio, O. P., and G. Weber (1993): “Consumption Growth, the Interest Rate and Aggre-
  gation,” Review of Economic Studies, 60(3), 631–649.

Bai, J., and P. Perron (2003): “The Computation and Analysis of Multiple Structural Change
  Models,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 18, 1–22.

Balke, N. S., and R. J. Gordon (1989): “The Estimation of Prewar Gross National Product:
  Methodology and New Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(1), 38–92.

Bansal, R., V. Khatchatrian, and A. Yaron (2003): “Interpretable Asset Markets?,” Un-
  published paper, Fuqua School, Duke University.

Bansal, R., and C. Lundblad (2002): “Market E¢ ciency, Asset Returns, and the Size of The
  Risk Premium in Global Equity Markets,” Journal of Econometrics, 109, 195–237.

Bansal, R., and A. Yaron (2004): “Risks for the Long-Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
  Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59(4), 1481–1509.

Beaudry, P., and E. van Wincoop (1996): “The Intertemporal Elasticity of Sustitution: An
  Exploration Using a U.S. Panel of States,” Economica, 63(251), 495–512.

Blanchard, O. J. (1993): “Movements in the Equity Premium,”Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, 2, 75–138.

Blanchard, O. J., and J. Simon (2001): “The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output Volatil-
  ity,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 135–174.

Bonomo, M., and R. Garcia (1994): “Can a Well-Fitted Equilibrium Asset Pricing Model
  Produce Mean Reversion?,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 9, 19:29.

        (1996): “Consumption and Equilibrium Asset Pricing: An Empirical Assessment,”Journal
  of Empirical Finance, 3, 239–265.


                                               40
Cagetti, M., L. P. Hansen, T. Sargent, and N. Williams (2002): “Robustness and Pricing
  with Uncertain Growth,” Review of Financial Studies, 15(2), 363–404.

Calvet, L., M. Gonzalez-Eiras, and P. Sodini (2003): “Financial Innovation, Market Par-
  ticipation and Asset Prices,” NBER Working Paper No. 9840.

Campbell, J. Y. (1986): “Bond and Stock Returns in a Simple Exchange Model,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 101, 785–804.

        (1991): “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns,”Economic Journal, 101, 157–179.

        (1999a): “Asset Prices, Consumption and the Business Cycle,”in Handbook of Macroeco-
  nomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, pp. 1231–1303. North-Holland, Amsterdam.

         (1999b): “Comment on John Heaton and Deborah Lucas ’Stock Prices and Fundamen-
  tals’,” in National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual, 1999, ed. by B. S.
  Bernanke, and J. J. Rotemberg, pp. 253–261. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

         (2003): “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing,” in Handbook of the Economics of Finance
  forthcoming, ed. by G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz. North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
  Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,”Journal of Political Economy, 107, 205–251.

Campbell, J. Y., and G. Mankiw (1989): “Consumption, Income, and Interest Rates: Rein-
  terpreting the Time Series Evidence,”in NBER Macroeconomics Annual: 1989, ed. by O. Blan-
  chard, and S. Fischer, pp. 185–216. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller (1989): “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of
  Future Dividends and Discount Factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 1(3), 195–228.

         (2003): “Valuation Ratios and the Long-Run Stock Market Outlook: An Update,” in
  Advances in Behavioral Finance, Volume II forthcoming, ed. by N. Barberis, and R. Thaler.
  Russell Sage Foundation, New York, NY.

Cecchetti, S. G., P. Lam, and N. C. Mark (1990): “Mean Reversion in Equilibrium Asset
  Prices,” American Economic Review, 80(3), 398–418.

        (1993): “The Equity Premium and the Risk-Free Rate: Matching the Moments,”Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 31, 21–45.

Cochrane, J. H. (2005): Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.



                                              41
DeAngelo, H., L. DeAngelo, and D. J. Skinner (2002): “Are Dividends Disappearing?
  Dividend Concentration and the Consolidation of Earnings,” Unpublished paper, University of
  Michigan.

Driffil, J., and M. Sola (1998): “Comparing PredictiveAaccuracy,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 42, 357–373.

Duffee, G. R. (2005): “Time Variation in the Covariances Between Stock Returns and Consump-
  tion Growth,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Epstein, L., and S. Zin (1989): “Substitution Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of
  Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica, 57, 937–968.

         (1991): “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal behavior of Consumption and
  Asset Returns: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Political Economy, 99, 555–576.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1988): “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,”Journal
  of Financial Economics, 22, 3–27.

        (2001): “Disappearing Dividends: Changing Firm Characteristics or Lower Propensity to
  Pay,” Journal of Financial Economics, 60(1), 3–43.

        (2002): “The Equity Premium,” Journal of Finance, 57(2), 637–659.

Guvenen, M. F. (2003): “Reconciling Con‡icting Evidence on the Elasticity of Intertemporal
  Substitution: A Macroeconomic Perspective,” University of Rochester, RCER Working Paper,
  No 491.

Hall, R. E. (2000): “E-Capital: The Link Between the Stock Market and the Labor Market in
  the 1990s,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 73–118.

Hamilton, J. D. (1989): “A New Approach to the Analysis of Nonstationary Returns and the
  Business Cycle,” Econometrica, 57, 357–384.

        (1994): Time Series Analysis. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NY.

Harvey, C. R. (1991): “The World Price of Covariance Risk,” Journal of Finance, 46, 111–117.

Heaton, J., and D. Lucas (1999): “Stock Prices and Fundamentals,”in NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual: 1999, ed. by O. J. Blanchard, and S. Fischer. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Hodrick, R. (1992): “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative Procedures for
  Inference and Measurement,” Review of Financial Studies, 5, 357–386.


                                                42
Jagannathan, R., E. R. McGrattan, and A. Scherbina (2000): “The Declining U.S. Equity
  Premium,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 24(4), 3–19.

Jovanovic, B., and P. L. Rousseau (2003): “Speci…c Capital and the Division of Rents,”
  Unpublished paper, New York University.

Kandel, S., and R. F. Stambaugh (1991): “Asset Returns and Intertemporal Preferences,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 27, 39–71.

Kim, C.-J., and C. R. Nelson (1999): “Has the Economy Become More Stable? A Bayesian
  Approach Based on a Markov-Switching Model of the Business Cycle,”The Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 81, 608–616.

Lamont, O. (1998): “Earnings and Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance, 53, 1563–87.

Lettau, M., and S. C. Ludvigson (2001): “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth and Expected
  Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 56(3), 815–849.

        (2004): “Understanding Trend and Cycle in Asset Values: Reevaluating the Wealth E¤ect
  on Consumption,” American Economic Review, 94(1), 276–299.

         (2005): “Expected Returns and Expected Dividend Growth,” Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics, 76, 583–626.

Lettau, M., and S. V. Nieuwerburgh (2005): “Reconciling the Return Predictability Evidence:
  In-Sample Forecasts, Out-of-Sample Forecasts, and Parameter Instability,” Unpublished paper,
  New York University.

Lettau, M., and J. A. Wachter (2005): “Why is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky? A Duration
  Based Explanation of the Value Premium,” Journal of Finance forthcoming.

Ludvigson, S. C. (1999): “Consumption and Credit: A Model of Time-Varying Liquidity Con-
  straints,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 81, 434–447.

McConnell, M. M., and G. Perez-Quiros (2000): “Output Fluctuations in the United States:
  What Has Changed Since the early 1980s?,” American Economic Review, 90(5), 1464–1476.

McGrattan, E. R., and E. C. Prescott (2002): “Taxes, Regulations, and the Value of U.S.
  Corporations: A General Equilibrium Analysis,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Sta¤
  Report No. 309.

Mehra, R., and E. C. Prescott (1985): “The Equity Premium Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 15, 145–161.

                                               43
Otrok, C., B. Ravikumar, and C. H. Whiteman (2002): “Habit Formation: A Resolution of
  the Equity Premium Puzzle?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 49, 1261–1288.

Quandt, R. E. (1960): “Tests of the Hypothesis that a Linear Regression Obeys Two Separate
  Regimes,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 55, 324–330.

Romer, C. D. (1989): “The Pre-War Business Cycle Reconsidered: New Estimates of Gross
  National Product 1869-1908,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(1), 1–37.

Shiller, R. J. (1981): “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justi…ed by Subsequent Changes
  in Dividends?,” American Economic Review, 71, 421–436.

        (2000): Irrational Exurberance. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Siegel, J. J. (1999): “The Shrinking Equity Premium,” The Journal of Portfolio Management,
  pp. 10–16.

Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (2002): “Has the Business Cycle Change and Why?,” Un-
  published paper, Princeton University.

Veronesi, P. (1999): “Stock Market Overreaction to Bad News in Good Times: A Rational
  Expectations Equilibrium Model,” Review of Financial Studies, 12(5), 975–1007.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2002): “Limited Asset Market Participation and Intertemporal Substi-
  tution,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 825–853.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A., and O. P. Attanasio (2003): “Stock Market Participation, Intetempo-
  ral Substitution and Risk-Aversion,”American Economic Review, AEA Papers and Proceedings,
  93(2), 383–391.

Wachter, J. (2002): “Habit Formation and Returns on Bonds and Stocks,” Unpublished paper,
  Stern School of Business, New York University.

Weil, P. (1989): “The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-Free Rate Puzzle,” Journal of Mon-
  etary Economics, 24(3), 401–421.

Whitelaw, R. F. (2000): “Stock Market Risk and Return: An Equilibrium Approach,” Review
  of Financial Studies, 13(3), 521–547.




                                              44
                        Table 1: Tests for Structural Breaks

                     Stock-Watson Test for Break in Variance
            QLR statistic      p-value   Break Date      67% Confidence Interval
    ∆c          14.34          0.0034      1992Q1        1991Q3        1994Q3
                          Bai-Perron Test for Break in Mean
              supF Test        p-value   Break Date      90% Confidence Interval
  p−d           33.85          < 0.01      1995Q1        1994Q1        1999Q3



Notes: This table reports results from structural break tests. The Quandt Likeli-
hood Ratio test is described in detail in Appendix 1 of Stock and Watson (2002).
The bottom panel reports Bai and Perron’s (2003) supF test statistic for a break
in the mean of the log CRSP-VW price-dividend ratio. Both tests test the null hy-
pothesis of no structural break against the alternative of a single structural break.
The data are quarterly and span the period from 1952 to 2002.
                             Table 2: A Markov-Switching Model



xt       µh         µl         σh2        σl2        φ         pµhh       pµll      pσhh         pσll

∆c     0.611      -0.469     0.541      0.151      0.084      0.971      0.772     0.995      0.992
      (0.061)    (0.439)    (0.080)    (0.048)    (0.088)    (0.020)    (0.154)   (0.006)    (0.012)



     Notes: This table reports the maximum likelihood estimates of the model

                            ∆xt = µ(St ) + φ(∆xt−1 − µ(St−1 )) + t
                             t ∼ N (0, σ 2 (Vt )).

     We allow for two mean states and two volatility states. µh denotes the growth rate
     in the high mean state, while µl denotes the growth rate in the low mean state.
     σh2 denotes the variance of the shock in the high volatility state and σl2 denotes the
     variance of the shock in the low volatility state. St and Vt are latent variables that
     are assumed to follow independent Markov chains. The probabilities of transiting
     to next period’s state j given today’s state i are pµij and pσij , respectively. Standard
     errors are in parentheses. Standard errors are in parentheses. The data are quarterly
     and span the period from the first quarter of 1952 to the fourth quarter of 2002.
                      Table 3: Model Implications in 1990Q1 and 2002Q4


                                                                                 p               p
row       γ     λ       δ         pσj,j    P/D90      P/D02      % of boom      r90 (100)       r02 (100)
 1       25     6    0.9925     0.9999      35.06     68.44         119%          11.32           9.71
 2       25     6    0.9925     0.9990      35.44     55.61         71%           11.26          10.17
 3       25     6    0.9925       est       36.93     44.46         27%           11.14          10.83
 4       25     6    0.9925     0.9900      39.39     45.91         25%           10.91          10.69

 5       25     4    0.9925     0.9999      30.97     43.42         44%           7.69            6.54

 6       27     5    0.9960     0.9999      32.71     51.02         68%           11.05           9.75



      Notes: This table reports the model implications for asset prices using the esti-
      mated state probabilities in 1990:Q1 and 2002:Q4. λ is the leverage factor, δ is
      the discount rate and pσj,j is the probability that next period is a volatility state j
      given that today’s state is volatility state j, j ∈ {l, h}. The elasticity of intertem-
      poral substitution is set to 1.5 for all cases. P/D, rp (100), rf (100) and rf (1) are
      the price-dividend ratio and the 100-year risk premium, respectively. The entry
      for pσj,j labelled "est" show the results when the point estimates for all transition
      probabilities are used All returns are annualized in percent. The variables with sub-
      script “90 (“02) report the model’s predictions using historical state probabilities
      in 1990:Q1(2002:Q4). The columns denoted “% of boom reports the change of
      the P/D ratio from 1990:Q1 to 2002:Q4 in the model relative to the change of the
      CRSP-VW P/D ratio.
                          Table 4: Model with Cointegration

row      γ       λ         k         P/D-high vol.        P/D-low vol.        % of boom
 1       40       6      0.005           20.01                49.27              149%
 2       40       6       0.05           43.05                80.97              112%
 3       40       6       0.20           75.47                95.65              77%

 4       60       4      0.005           20.62                50.58              151%
 5       60       4       0.05           42.96                80.70              110%
 6       60       4       0.20           71.82                94.12              79%



 Notes: This table reports price-dividend ratios for steady states with high and low
 consumption volatility for the model with cointegrated consumption and dividend
 processes. Consumption growth is assumed to be a random walk ∆ct+1 = µ +
 c,t+1 while dividend growth is forecastable by the log consumption-dividend ratio:
 ∆dt+1 = µ + k(ct − dt ) + λc,t+1 + d,t+1 . Consumption volatilities in the two steady
 states are the estimated values reported in Table 2. The volatility of d is chosen to
 match the volatility of dividend growth to that in the data. The mean of growth
 is 2% (annualized). The values of the error correction coefficient k in the fourth
 column are annualized. The preference parameters δ and ψ are set to 0.996 and
 1.5, respectively. The columns denoted “% of boom reports the change of the P/D
 ratio from 1990:Q1 to 2002:Q4 in the model relative to the change of the CRSP-VW
 P/D ratio.
                              Figure 1: Price Ratios




Notes: This figure plots the CRSP-VW price-dividend ratio in the top panel, the
S&P500 price-earnings ratio where earnings are a one-year lagged moving average in
the middle panel and the S&P500 price-earnings ratio where earnings are a 10-year
lagged moving average in the bottom panel. The earnings-ratios are from Robert
Shiller’s webpage. The quarterly data start in the first quarter of 1952 and include
the most recent data available (the fourth quarter of 2002 for the price-dividend
ratio and the third quarter of 2003 for the earnings ratios).
                             Figure 2: Growth Rates




Notes: This figure shows the growth rates of personal consumption expenditures.
The lines in the plot correspond to the volatility regimes estimated from the Hamil-
ton regime switching model. The data are quarterly and span the period from the
first quarter of 1952 to the fourth quarter of 2002.
           Figure 3: 5-Year Volatility Estimates and log Price Ratios




Notes: This figure plots the standard deviation of consumption growth and the
average CRSP-VW log dividend-price ratio in 5-year windows. All series are de-
meaned and divided by their standard deviation. The data are quarterly and span
the period from the first quarter of 1952 to the fourth quarter of 2002.
Figure 4: 5-Year Volatility Estimates and the log D/P Ratio – International Evidence




 Notes: This figure plots the standard deviation of consumption growth and the
 average log dividend-price ratio in 5-year windows for ten countries. The plots in
 each each panel use the longest available data in each country. The data are from
 Campbell (2003).
        Figure 5: GDP volatility and the D/P Ratio - Pre-war Evidence




Notes: This figure plots the standard deviations of GDP growth and the mean
D/P ratio by decade starting in 1880 until 2000. Both series are demeaned and
divided by their standard deviation. The GDP data are from Ray Fair’s web-
site (http://fairmodel.econ.yale.edu/RAYFAIR/PDF/2002DTBL.HTM) based on
Balke and Gordon (1989). The dividend yield data is from Robert Shiller’s website
(http://aida.econ.yale.edu/∼shiller/data/ie_data.htm).
                           Figure 6: State Probabilities




Notes: This figure plots the time series of estimated state probabilities. P(low
variance) is the unconditional probability of being in a low consumption volatility
state next period, calculated be summing the probability of being in a low volatility
state and high mean state, and the probability of being in a low volatility state and
low mean state. P(high mean) is calculated analogously. The data are quarterly
and span the period from the first quarter of 1952 to the fourth quarter of 2002.
                                              Figure 7: The Price-Dividend Ratio

                   µ = high                                                          σ = low
                   µ=low                                                             σ=high
      4.4                                                               4.4
                                                           4.34                                                             4.34



      4.2                                                               4.2


                                                           4.01               4.01
       4                                                                 4
p−d




                                                                  p−d



      3.8                                                               3.8


      3.6   3.57                                                        3.6                                                 3.57



      3.4                                                               3.4

            3.24                                                              3.24
      3.2                                                               3.2
            0            0.2   0.4           0.6   0.8    1                   0            0.2   0.4            0.6   0.8   1
                                     P(σ = low)                                                        P(µ = high)



        Notes: The price-dividend ratio as a function of the probability that consumption
        volatility is low (left panel) and the probability that consumption mean is high
        (right panel). In the left panel, the probability that the consumption mean is high
        is set to be zero (solid line) or one (dashed line). In the right panel, the probability
        that consumption volatility is low is set to be zero (solid line) and one (dashed line).
        The probability of a change in the consumption volatility state is assumed to be
        .0001; otherwise the parameters of the endowment process are set equal to their
        maximum likelihood estimates. The rate of time preference δ = .9925, the elasticity
        of intertemporal substitution, ψ = 1.5, risk aversion γ = 25 and leverage λ = 6.
                           Figure 8: Time Series of the P/D Ratio
                              Panel A: γ = 25, δ = .9925, λ = 6
         4.5
                 data
                 model


          4
   p−d




         3.5




          3




         2.5
          1950   1955    1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005

                                Panel B: γ = 27, δ = .996, λ = 5
         4.5
                 data
                 model


          4
   p−d




         3.5




          3




         2.5
          1950   1955    1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005


Notes: Time series of the log price-dividend ratio from the data and implied by the
model. The probability of a change in the consumption volatility state is assumed
to be .0001; otherwise the parameters of the endowment process are set equal to
their maximum likelihood estimates. The elasticity of intertemporal substitution is
ψ = 1.5. The data are quarterly and span the period from the first quarter of 1952
to the fourth quarter of 2002.
                              Figure 9: The Long-run Equity Premium

                                                                                  50−yr, µ = low
                                                                                  50−yr, µ = high
                                                                                  100−yr, µ = low
                                                                                  100−yr, µ = high
            0.115




             0.11
E (r −r )
     f
     t m




            0.105




              0.1




            0.095
                    0   0.1      0.2   0.3   0.4      0.5       0.6   0.7   0.8      0.9       1
                                                   P(σ = low)

Notes: The conditional long-run equity premium as a function of the probability that
consumption volatility is low. The probability that the consumption mean is high
is set to be zero (solid line) or one (dashed line). The means is reported in annual
terms. The probability of a change in the consumption volatility state is assumed to
be .0001; otherwise the parameters of the endowment process are set equal to their
maximum likelihood estimates. The rate of time preference δ = .9925, the elasticity
of intertemporal substitution, ψ = 1.5, risk aversion γ = 25 and leverage λ = 6.
 Figure 10: Time Series of the Long-run Expected Return and Equity Premium

                        0.15


                        0.14


                        0.13
   log annual returns




                        0.12


                        0.11


                         0.1
                                  100−yr risk premium
                                  100−yr expected return
                        0.09
                           1950   1955    1960     1965    1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005


Notes: Time series of the 100-year expected equity return and equity premium
implied by the model. The probability of a change in the consumption volatility
state is assumed to be .0001; otherwise the parameters of the endowment process
are set equal to their maximum likelihood estimates. The rate of time preference
δ = .9925, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, ψ = 1.5, risk aversion γ = 25
and leverage λ = 6. The data are quarterly and span the period from the first
quarter of 1952 to the fourth quarter of 2002.
                                                             Figure 11: Time series of volatility

                                      0.26

                                      0.24
  annual stand. dev. of log returns




                                      0.22

                                       0.2

                                      0.18

                                      0.16

                                      0.14

                                      0.12

                                       0.1
                                        1950   1955   1960    1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005


Notes: Time series of conditional volatility of one-quarter ahead equity returns.
Volatility is annualized, i.e. 2σt . The probability of a change in the consumption
volatility state is assumed to be .0001; otherwise the parameters of the endowment
process are set equal to their maximum likelihood estimates. The rate of time
preference δ = .9925, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, ψ = 1.5, risk
aversion γ = 25 and leverage λ = 6. The data are quarterly and span the period
from the first quarter of 1952 to the fourth quarter of 2002.
                        Figure 12: The Likelihood Function




Notes: This figure shows the log-likelihood function of the Hamilton regime switch-
ing model. The probabilities of remaining in the high (low) volatility state given
that today’s volatility state is high (low) are set to the same value, P_sig(ii). The
figure plots the log-likelihood as a function of P_sig(ii). All other parameters are
set the optimized values reported in Table 3. The data are quarterly and span the
period from the first quarter of 1952 to the fourth quarter of 2002.
