NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES COPYRIGHT PIRACY PAY?
THE EFFECTS OF U.S. INTERNATIONAL COPYRIGHT LAWS
ON THE MARKET FOR BOOKS, 1790-1920
B. Zorina Khan
Working Paper 10271
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10271
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004

I am grateful for comments from Greg Clark, Catherine Fisk, Kenneth Flamm, Claudia Goldin, Wendy
Gordon, Stan Liebowitz, Peter Lindert, Jacques Mairesse, Michael Meurer, Steve Munzer, Alan Olmstead,
Ivan Png, Elyce Rotella, Kenneth Sokoloff, and Eugene Volokh. I received useful insights from participants
in the Pratiques Historiques d’Innovation Conference in Paris, and the workshop on Fair Use at the University
of Texas, Austin. I also benefitted from presentations at the American Society for Legal History, Boston
University School of Law, the University at Buffalo Law School, University of California_Davis, Colby
College, the British Commission on Intellectual Property Rights, the Economic History Association, Harvard
University, the University of Hawaii, Indiana University at Bloomington and Yale University. This paper was
written while I was on sabbatical from Bowdoin College, and a Visiting Scholar at the UCLA School of Law;
I am grateful to both institutions for providing the resources that supported this research. Liability for errors
is limited to the author. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by B. Zorina Khan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Copyright Piracy Pay? The Effects of U.S. International Copyright Laws on the Market for
Books, 1790-1920
B. Zorina Khan
NBER Working Paper No. 10271
January 2004
JEL No. K0, N0, O1, Z1
ABSTRACT
Does the lack of international copyrights benefit or harm developing countries? I examine the effects
of U.S. copyright piracy during a period when the U.S. was itself a developing country. U.S. statutes
since 1790 protected the copyrights of American citizens, but until 1891 deemed the works of
foreign citizens to be in the public domain. In 1891, the laws were changed to allow foreigners to
obtain copyright protection in the United States if certain conditions were met. Thus, this episode
in American history provides us with a convenient way of investigating the consequences of
international copyright piracy. My analysis is based on copyright registrations, information on
authors, book titles and prices, financial data from the accounts of a major publishing company, and
lawsuits regarding copyright questions. These data are used to investigate the welfare effects of
widespread infringement of foreign works on American publishers, writers, and the public. The
results suggest that the United States benefited from piracy and that the choice of copyright regime
was endogenous to the level of economic development.
B. Zorina Khan
Department of Economics
Bowdoin College
Brunswick, ME 04011
and NBER
bkhan@bowdoin.edu

INTRODUCTION
“In literature ... there is nothing but supply and demand.”
--Mary Abigail Dodge, Battle of the Books (1870)

Debates about economic and social progress have long included questions about the
appropriate institutions to promote creations in the material and intellectual sphere.
Thomas Paine contended that “the country will deprive itself of the honour and service of
letters, and the improvement of science, unless sufficient laws are made to prevent
depredation on literary property.”1 Similarly, scholars such as Douglass North have
suggested that intellectual property systems have had an important impact on the course of
economic development and technological change.2

Policy makers today stress the need

for laws and property rights in intellectual products that are well-defined and wellenforced. Others, however, argue that such institutions are more relevant to the needs of
already developed countries, whereas newly industrializing societies may not benefit from
their adoption.3
The question of property rights is especially important because ideas and
information are public goods characterized by nonrivalry and nonexclusion. Once the
initial costs are incurred, ideas can be reproduced at zero marginal cost and it is difficult to

1

Cited in Bruce Bugbee, The Genesis of American Patent and Copyright Law, Washington, DC, Public
Affairs Press (1967), p. 105.
2
See Douglass C. North, Structure and Change in Economic History, New York, US: Norton (1981); and
Fritz Machlup, An Economic Review of the Patent System, Washington DC, U.S. Govt. Printing Office
(1958).
3
The policies of Britain towards its colonies are instructive. During the nineteenth century British
administered a two-tiered international intellectual property system that attempted to address the needs of its
colonies. In 1847 Britain passed the Foreign Reprints Act which allowed colonies to import the works of
British authors without copyright protection, and also allowed legal price discrimination with significantly
lower prices for overseas editions. See B. Zorina Khan, Intellectual Property and Economic Development:
Lessons from American and European History, Study Paper 1a, British Commission on Intellectual Property
Rights, London (2002).

3

exclude others from their use. Thus, in a competitive market public goods may suffer
from underprovision or may never be created because of a lack of incentive on the part of
the original provider who bears the initial costs but may not be able to appropriate the
benefits. Such market failure can be ameliorated in several ways, for instance through
government provision, rewards or subsidies to original creators, private patronage, and
through the legal creation of private property rights such as patents and copyrights.
Patents and copyrights allow the initial producer a limited period during which he is able
to benefit from a monopoly right. Patent and copyrights can also be traded in the market
place, a process which assigns value and allows transactors to mobilize and allocate
resources to their optimal use. Since private property rights exclude others from the free
use of the output, they also inhibit social diffusion, but if the net present value of social
benefits of exclusion outweigh the social costs of limited diffusion, overall welfare is
increased.
Numerous economic studies have analyzed property rights in inventions from both
a theoretical and empirical perspective. Theoretical models of the optimal structure of the
patent system include examinations of patent scope, the length of protection, and
derivative inventions. Empirical studies have estimated the relationship between patents
and productivity, patenting and firm size, and the question of appropriability. Economic
historians have examined the rate and direction of inventive activity, as well as markets
for invention in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.4 They have highlighted the
significant and conscious differences in the objectives and outcomes of the American
4

Schmookler’s pioneering empirical work suggested that patenting was systematic and varied with the extent
of the market (Jacob Schmookler, Invention and Economic Growth. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1966.) Kenneth Sokoloff extended this approach, and demonstrated that when previously isolated
areas gained access to markets, patenting per capita increased markedly (Kenneth L. Sokoloff, "Inventive
Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence from PatentRecords, 1790-1846." JEH 48 (4) 1988: 813-50.)
Other research also established the existence of a rapidly growing market for patented inventions that was
supported by strong enforcement from the legal system. See, for instance, B. Zorina Khan, "Property Rights
and Patent Litigation in Early Nineteenth-Century America," Journal of Economic History, 55 (1) 1995, 584

patent system relative to the British system, and argued that the former promoted a process
of “democratization.”5
This impressive body of work on patents across time, regions and industries
highlights the lack of empirical research into other aspects of the economics of intellectual
property.6 The need for empirical studies of copyright protection is especially relevant
today for at least two reasons. First, the rapid technological changes of recent years have
created a plethora of new questions for intellectual property regarding the nature and
scope of protection to accord mapping of DNA sequences and other genetic material,
business methods, semiconductor chips, computer software, digital music, and
transactions on the internet, among others. Some have argued that the historical
separation of patent and copyright protection has become outmoded and unworkable given
the current state of the arts, and advocate a new compendium intellectual property system
that integrates both types of protection. Other scholars have recommended the adoption of
“sui generis” protection for each type of technology; while a growing number are so
concerned about the unprecedented enforcement of intellectual property today that they
support its abolition. Under these circumstances, insights into the historical development
of the intellectual property system would seem to be of some utility in understanding
whether there is a need for drastic revision in a system which has incorporated and
adjusted to social and technological innovations in the course of two centuries.7

97. Christine MacLeod and Harold Dutton have produced extensive accounts of the patent system in Britain.
5
See B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Institutions and Democratic Invention in the United States:
Evidence from ‘Great Inventors’, 1790-1930,” AER vol. 94 (May 2004) Pap. And Proc.; B. Zorina Khan
and Kenneth L. Sokoloff , “The Early Development of Intellectual Property Institutions in the United
States,” JEP vol 15 (3) 2001: 233-246. See also B. Zorina Khan, The Democratization of Invention: Patents
and Copyrights in American Economic Development, 1790-1920 (forthcoming Cambridge University
Press).
6
For an empirical study of copyright piracy today, see Kai Lung Hui, I.P.L. Png, & Yan Cui, “Piracy and
the Legitimate Demand for Recorded Music”, March (2001), unpublished.
7
See Stephen Breyer, “The Uneasy Case for Copyright: : A Study of Copyright in Books, Photocopies, and
Computer Programs,” Harvard Law Review, Vol. 84 (2) 1970: 281-351; and Arnold Plant, "The Economic
Aspects of Copyright in Books," Economica, vol. 1 (2), May 1934: 167-195. For relationship between
intellectual property and technological or social change, see B. Zorina Khan, “Innovations in Law and
5

Second, the United States has been at the forefront of efforts to compel developing
countries to recognize foreign copyrights.8 The tendency for “pirates” in other countries to
reproduce American music, textbooks, periodicals, literature and movies without due
compensation is costly to the United States, which is a net creditor in the trade of such
items.9 However, both theory and empirical research are unclear about whether the
optimal policy for developing countries is to import intellectual property legislation and
institutions along with other products of developed countries. Static welfare gains to such
countries from infringement may exceed the costs to the owners of copyright, but the
dynamic consequences of ignoring intellectual property rights are difficult to estimate.
Studies in this area would require information on the costs of imitation and the costs of
adapting pirated material to a different application or environment. One would also need
to specify the role of learning by doing, as well as insights into the extent to which
comparative advantage builds on cumulative technological innovation. At this stage, it is
impossible to know whether intertemporal resource allocation in developing countries is
distorted or affected positively by weaker enforcement of intellectual property laws.
Although the United States today is the leader in the movement for stronger
enforcement of patents and copyrights, it is somewhat ironic that for most of the
nineteenth century federal copyright statutes explicitly condoned “piracy” of foreign
works. However, this episode in American history does provide us with a convenient way
of investigating the likely dynamic effects of ignoring international legal standards. Even
Technology, 1790-1920” in Cambridge History of Law in America, (eds) Michael Grossberg and
Christopher Tomlins, Cambridge University Press (forthcoming); and Fred H. Cate, “The Technological
Transformation of Copyright Law,” 81 Iowa Law Rev. 1395.
8
The movement for international copyright is ostensibly under the aegis of GATT. The Uruguay Round of
GATT established an Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) in 1994,
to be administered by the World Trade Organization. TRIPS protects general copyright clauses, such as the
grant of property in expression and it protects computer programs as literary works.
9
The U.S. copyright industries accounted for foreign sales and exports of $89 billion in 2001. The
International Intellectual Property Alliance (despite the name, a consortium of American copyright holders)
estimated a loss from copyright piracy of over $12.3 billion in 2002 [See http://www.iipa.com.] One might
question the accuracy of these figures, but not the existence of widespread violation of U.S. copyrights both
6

today it would be impossible to obtain all the information that one would like to estimate
the welfare effects of piracy, so the analysis is necessarily constrained by those data that
are available for the period under review. The data are drawn from the financial accounts
of a major publishing company, book titles and prices, and biographical information on
some 750 authors. I use these data sets to address the welfare effects of unauthorized
copying of foreign books on publishers, authors, and the public in general.

INTERNATIONAL COPYRIGHTS AND PIRACY OF CULTURAL GOODS
“Our literary workmen ... ask simply for markets,”
-- G H Putnam (1879)
The period before 1891 may be characterized as one of the most colourful episodes in the
history of U.S. intellectual property largely because of copyright laws. According to
Ainsworth Spofford, Librarian of Congress between 1864 and 1897, “a group of
publishing houses in the United States, which made a specialty of cheap books, vied with
each other in the business of appropriating English and Continental trash, and printed this
under villainous covers, in type ugly enough to risk a serious increase of ophthalmia
among American readers.”10 Unlikely coalitions formed during the nineteenth century,
whose common objective was to change the international copyright laws. Among them
were Americans with international reputations such as Henry Clay, John Jay, Henry
Wadsworth Longfellow, Louisa May Alcott and Samuel Morse; educational institutions,
including Longfellow’s alma mater Bowdoin College, the University of Virginia and the
University of California; miscellaneous groups such as the American Medical Association
and the citizens of Portland, Maine; and Europeans Charles Dickens, Edmund Burke,
Harriet Martineau, and Gilbert and Sullivan. Equally vociferous were groups that lobbied
here and overseas.
10
Cited in The Question of Copyright, (ed) George Haven Putnam, New York, G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1896,
7

against the reforms: concerned citizens from Richmond, Virginia to Bellow Falls,
Vermont; paper producers in Boston, Newark and Pennsylvania; as well as Toledo
printers, typographical unions, New York publishers and Hartford bookbinders.11
The United States in the nineteenth century was a net debtor in flows of material
culture, and engaged in protectionist policies that benefitted its residents at the expense of
authors and artists in other countries, most notably in Europe.12 England engaged in
multilateral treaties with other countries to establish reciprocity in the recognition of
foreign copyrights.

France allowed copyrights to foreigners conditioned on

manufacturing clauses in 1810, granted foreign and domestic authors equal rights in 1852,
and led the movement for international harmonization of copyrights. In marked contrast
to its leadership in patent conventions, the United States declined an invitation to a pivotal
conference in Berne in 1883, and did not sign the 1886 agreement of the Berne
Convention which accorded national treatment to copyright holders. Moreover, until
1891 American statutes explicitly denied copyrights to citizens of other countries and the
United States was notorious in the international sphere as a significant contributor to the
“piracy” of foreign literary products.13 It has been claimed that American companies for
the most part “indiscriminately reprinted books by foreign authors without even the

p. 170.
11
International Copyright petitions (on either side) were submitted on more than 100 occasions in the
Congressional sessions through 1875; see the House and Senate Journals.
12
Senator John Ruggles, who had overseen the reform of the patent laws, pointed out that “American
ingenuity in the arts and practical sciences, would derive at least as much benefit from international patent
laws, as that of foreigners. Not so with authorship and book-making. The difference is too obvious to admit
of controversy.”
13
Copyright policies in this dimension may be contrasted with patent policies designed to attain more
uniformity across countries. The first international patent convention was held in Austria in 1873, at the
suggestion of the United States, and was followed by other agreements including the International Union for
the Protection of Industrial Property in 1884. The efforts of the United States were hampered by a lack of
leverage: it was unable (or unwilling) to offer foreign delegations any concessions in exchange for reforms
that the latter agreed to adopt, since American policy was already the world’s most liberal in granting equal
rights to foreign patentees. Nevertheless, since its patent system was recognized as the most successful, it is
not surprising that patent harmonization implied convergence towards the U.S. model. See Edith Penrose,
Economics of the International Patent System, Baltimore: John Hopkins Press, (1951); and Khan,
Democratization of Invention.
8

pretence of acknowledgement.”14 The tendency to freely reprint foreign works was
encouraged by the existence of tariffs on imported books that ranged as high as 25
percent.15
Proposals to acknowledge foreign copyrights were brought before Congress
repeatedly throughout the 19th century.16 American and European authors, musicians and
artists supported the movement to attain harmonization of U.S. laws with international
copyright policies. Earlier attempts were defeated by publishers, printers, and
representatives of the Democratic Party, and it was not until 1891 that Congress granted
copyright protection to selected foreign residents.17 However, the statute also included
significant concessions to printers’ unions in the form of “manufacturing clauses.” First, a
book had to be published in the U.S. before or at the same time as the publication date in
its country of origin. Second, the work had to be printed here, or printed from type set in
the United States or from plates made from type set in the United States. These clauses
resulted in U.S. failure to qualify for admission to the Berne Convention until 1988,
approximately one hundred years after the initial Convention.18
After a century of lobbying by interested parties on both sides of the Atlantic,
based on reasons that ranged from the economic to the moral, copyright laws were finally
changed to allow foreign artists and authors to obtain copyrights in this country. Figure 1

14

See John Feather, Publishing, Piracy and Politics: An Historical Study of Copyright in Britain, New
York, Mansell, 1994, p. 154.
15
See Donald Marquand Dozer, “The Tariff on Books,” Mississippi Valley Historical Review, Vol. 36, No.
1. (Jun., 1949): 73-96.
16
For instance, S. 223 (1837); H.R. 779 (1868), “A Bill For securing to authors in certain cases the benefit
of international copyright, advancing the development of American literature, and promoting the interests of
publishers and book-buyers in the United States;” H.R. 470 (1871); and S. 688 (1872), among others. On
February 18th, 1853, Millard Fillmore, President of the United States, sent to the Senate “with the view to its
ratification, a convention which was yesterday concluded between the United States and Great Britain for
the establishment of international Copyright,” but the Senate refused to comply with the request. See the
Journal of the executive proceedings of the Senate of the United States of America, 1852-1855, February 24,
1853, p. 35.
17
International Copyright Act of 1891, 26 Stat. 1106.
18
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, opened for signature Sept. 9, 1886,
828 U.N.T.S. 221, S. Treaty Doc. No. 99-27, 99th Cong. (1986) (revised at Paris, July 24, 1979).
9

shows the growth rate in copyrights filed in the United States before and after the 1891
reform. The critical change in the laws to allow foreign authors to obtain American
copyright protection was accompanied by an immediate increase in the growth rate of
registrations from 4.4 percent to 14.3 percent in 1891 and 11.9 percent in the following
year. However, marked changes in the growth rates had been a feature of the time series
for the previous two decades as well, so one cannot credibly attribute the pattern entirely
to statutory changes. In 1900 the U.S. Senate authorized Carroll D. Wright, the
Commissioner of Labor, to investigate the effect of the reforms in the copyright system.
Wright was discouraged from any statistical analysis by the marked lack of data on the
publishing industry, and instead conducted a survey of printers and publishers, to find out
whether the new law was viewed as “detrimental or beneficial.”19
Table 1 classifies the written answers of respondents to the Wright survey. The
impact of the reforms was analyzed in terms of four groups: publishers, authors,
employees in the printing industry, and the book-reading public. Foreign authors, it was
felt, were unambiguously better off as a result of the reforms. American authors were held
to have benefitted because the previous régime had exposed them to “dumping and unfair
competition” in the form of cheap uncopyrighted works, from Britain in particular, which
had discouraged the development of domestic literature. Publishers who dealt in
copyrighted books were also better off because they could now exclude unauthorized
reprinters, whereas the latter class of publishers were quickly driven into bankruptcy by
the passage of the act. Printers’ unions felt that the reforms had not caused any real
change in the circumstances of their members. As for the public, results were mixed:
prices of copyrighted books now increased, fewer books of the “cheap and nasty sort”

19

United States Bureau of Labor, “A report on the effect of the international copyright law in the United
States.”
Washington, Govt. Print. Off., 1901.
10

from the pens of foreign novelists were available, but the overall quality of available
books had improved. In sum, the survey concluded, “piracy” had been costly to the
United States. The consensus was that the United States had benefitted from the reforms,
and was in better standing with other countries as a result of the move towards
harmonization.
The consensus from this survey begs the question of why, if they were so
uniformly beneficient, the reforms in copyright had been so contentious and difficult to
achieve.20 Wright was forced to rely on these subjective assessments because of the lack
of statistical information on books and the publishing industry in the nineteenth century.
Such data are still unavailable or incomplete. However, I intend to present a more
systematic analysis of the impact of international copyright laws in the 19th century on the
book trade than Wright was able to provide. My analysis employs data on books, the
publishing industry, and biographical information about authors. These data are
inadequate to precisely estimate the overall welfare effects of “piracy” in the nineteenth
century, but do allow us to assess the validity of several assertions that featured in the
debate about the impact of lack of legal copyrights in foreign books.
A) BOOKS AND AUTHORS
According to observers such as Arthur Schlesinger, “So long as publishers ... could
reprint, or pirate, popular English authors without payment of royalty, and so long as
readers could buy such volumes far cheaper than books written by Americans, native

20

Indeed, the passage of the Act was in doubt right to the end: “While a member of the Fifty-first Congress,
an international copyright bill was reported by the Judiciary Committee, debated for two days, and failed of
passage by a negative majority of about forty. Mr. Simonds then redrafted the bill, added its famous
thirteenth section, and procured its favorable report to the House. On the third day of the short term he
secured its passage through the House, after a vigorous fight, by a majority of about forty. By reason of
parliamentary tactics and maneuvers, it had to pass the House, in one shape or another, three times
subsequently, each time after a fight over it, the last passage being about two o'clock on the morning of
March 4, 1891, the day on which Congress adjourned. For this service in connection with international
copyright the government of France conferred upon him the Cross of the Legion of Honor.” Scientific
American, vol. 66 (n.s.), 18 June 1892, p 389.
11

authorship remained at a marked disadvantage.”21 Professional authorship was
discouraged because it was difficult to compete with established authors such as Scott,
Dickens and Tennyson, and as a result “much of beauty, value and interest was lost to the
world.”22 In G H Putnam’s view, “an international copyright is the first step towards that
long-awaited-for ‘great American novel.’”23 This argument is somewhat suspect on its
face, for a number of reasons. First, it supposes that the highest valued product was
deterred, rather than works at the margin. Second, it also assumes that there was a high
degree of substitutability between cheap reprints and domestic books. Third, if the claim
were true, one would expect that domestic authors would respond to the competition by
accepting lower royalties and less favourable contracts. Instead, one observes over time
higher royalties and better terms being offered to American writers.24
These observations do not disprove the counterfactual claim that, if the laws had
protected foreign copyrights, even better terms would have prevailed for native writers.
However, one can bring to bear some degree of systematic evidence to address specific
questions that have relevance to this issue. First, consider the claim that foreign books
were dominant because they were sold at lower prices than those by American authors.25

21

Arthur M. Schlesinger, The Rise of the City, 1878-1898, N.Y. 1933, p. 252.
See Aubrey J. Clark, The Movement for International Copyright in Nineteenth Century America, Wash,
DC, Catholic University Press, 1960, p. 49: “Writing as a profession would never be attractive to native
talent as long as the average author had to compete with the great masters of England whose works were
appropriated without cost.” Similarly, “The grant of copyright protection only to American citizens pushed
the publishing industry in a direction that injured those who sought to make a living by creative writing in
America,” p. xxiii, Gilreath.
23
“International Copyright,” in Publishers’ Weekly, Feb. 22 (371) 1879, p. 237. This affirms my personal
conviction that, Moby Dick notwithstanding, there was no great American novel in the 19th century.
24
Many of the earlier books were published at author’s risk, or on commission. “Half-profits” was also a
way of sheltering publishers from risk that prevailed until the 1830s. In the 1840s, reputable authors
received an average of 10 percent, and between 10 to 20 percent. However, there was wide variation in
contracts for unknown authors. For instance, as discussed in Bean v. Carleton et al., 12 NYS 519 1890,
Fanny Bean advanced $900 to publishers George W. Carleton & Co, to be repaid when 2000 copies of the
book were sold, on the expectation of further royalties on sales after 2000. Until the 1890s authors had few
means of monitoring their publisher; the 1896 decision in Savage v. Neely, for the first time gave authors
the right to inspect accounts of their publishers. The improvements in contractual terms could be due to
sample selection, if lower quality authors were selected out of the market.
25
John Tebbel, A History of Book Publishing in the United States, New York, Bowker (1972-1981), vol. 2,
p. 23, cites an 1834 study that stated the average retail price for American authors was $1.20 and for foreign
22

12

Proponents of the copyright reforms frequently referred to the cheap “Libraries,” such as
the Fireside and Franklin Square series that published English reprints at a retail price of
ten cents, and argued that American authors were driven from the market by such prices.
This argument confuses cause and effect, since “dime novels” were quintessentially
American, and reprinters of low-end fiction priced their books to compete in this market.26
The first number of the Lakeside Library that reprinted the works of foreign authors
appeared in 1875 in response to the success of cheap American fiction, and was followed
by the Home, Seaside, and Franklin Square Libraries. 27
Moreover, one cannot compare the price of a gilt-edged volume of history bound
in morocco with a detective story printed on cheap yellow paper. It is necessary to control
for other factors that might influence price, in order to assess whether books by American
authors were indeed more expensive than those by foreign authors. Such factors as the
literary quality of the book are difficult to quantify, especially since there is likely to be
little agreement as to what constitutes a “good book.” In order to control for differences
across publishing firms, I consider within-firm variation in prices for books published by
Ticknor and Fields between 1832 and 1858.28 Ticknor and Fields (the precursor of
Houghton Mifflin) was one of the leading publishers of this period, and was especially
noted for its publication of foreign authors such as Dickens, Thackeray, Tennyson,
Browning, Kingsley, Reade, and de Quincey. The firm also published an impressive
roster of well-known American writers including Hawthorne, Longfellow, Thoreau, and

reprints, 75 cents. However, it is unclear how this price was arrived at, and to what it refers, much less what
a price that averages across all books indicates.
26
Quentin Reynolds, The Fiction Factory, Random House, NY 1955, notes that dime novels were initiated
by Irwin P. Beadle and Co in 1860 to publish American authors : “Its detractors could never deny the fact
that this was a peculiarly American institution and not a pale replica of English tales” p. 72.
27
Quentin Reynolds, The Fiction Factory, Pp. 75-76.
28
See Warren S. Tryon and William Charvat, The Cost Books of Ticknor and Fields and Their Predecessors,
1832-1858 New York: Bibliographical Society of America (1949.) The firm also published an extensive
array of pamphlets, many on commission, which are not included in these data.
13

Lowell.29 Other less eminent figures included Josiah Bumstead, the author of a set of
best-selling children’s readers, and Jacob Abbott, who wrote the popular juvenile “Jonas”
series.
Figure 2 shows the pattern over time in the log of the average annual retail price of
all books by American authors, relative to foreign authors. There is clearly a lot of noise
in the data especially for prices of American books, which is partly to the unsettled state of
the book trade in the 1830s and 1840s, and partly to heterogeneity among books and
authors. However, by the 1850s the two series converge. We need to consider whether
these patterns were caused by differences in nationality, holding other variables constant.
Table 2 presents the results from a multivariate regression, which examines the influence
of variables such as time, gender, type of book, and nationality, on the log of nominal
price. The unit of observation is an edition of an individual book published by the firm
between 1832 and 1858.
The evidence from the regressions does not support the notion that American
books were suffering from competition with cheaper foreign books. First editions are
likely to be less predictable and thus more difficult to price than subsequent editions, but
even here there is no significant difference between the price of a book by an American
and a foreign reprint. Indeed, in the only instance in which the dummy variable for
American nationality is significant, the coefficient is negative. Variation in prices is
mostly explained by average variable cost.30 These results suggest that, after controlling
for the type of publication, the cost of the work, and other objective factors, the prices of
American books were lower than prices of foreign books. American book prices may

29

According to the editors of the Cost Books, “Of the outstanding American writers of the period only three
names are lacking from the Ticknor lists.” These were Poe, Melville, and Whitman. See p. xviii, footnote 7.
30
Average cost of publishing reflected strong economies of scale. Hence, independently of piracy, average
cost in the United States was likely lower than in Britain because the market of readers was much more
extensive in this country. Readers in urban centers in Britain were more likely to belong to commercial
lending libraries or book clubs, which again would suggest a more narrow market for an individual work.
14

have been lower to reflect lower perceived quality or other factors that caused imperfect
substitutability between foreign and local products.31 This is not surprising, since prices
are not exogenously and arbitrarily fixed, but vary in accordance with a publisher’s
estimation of market factors such as the degree of competition and the responsiveness of
demand to determinants. As one of the respondents to the Wright survey remarked: “The
book-purchasing public has not been seriously affected by the act, inasmuch as the
ordinary law of supply and demand is sufficient to protect the general public against unfair
prices...”32
A second question is whether native authors were deterred by foreign competition.
This would depend on the degree to which books by foreign authors were substitutable for
books by American authors. It would also depend on the extent to which foreign works
prevailed in the American market. According to one of the leading histories of publishing
in this era, by 1850 most books in this country were written by Americans.33 However,
this is not entirely true for all classes of publications. Early in American history the
majority of publications were reprints of foreign titles.34 However, nonfiction titles written
by foreigners was less likely to be substitutable for nonfiction written by Americans;

31

Demand might have been lower for a number of reasons, such as the claim that “The difficulties of early
American authorship are often attributed to American prejudice against American literature” (Charvat,
William, Literary Publishing in America, 1790-1850, Phila., University of Pennsylvania Press, 1959, p. 42).
One may ascribe such “prejudice” to the higher perceived quality of foreign literature.
32
United States Bureau of Labor, “A report on the effect of the international copyright law in the United
States.”
Washington, Govt. Print. Off., 1901, p. 44.
33
“In all fields of authorship, American books were supplanting the British works. Goodrich estimates that
in 1820 American authors wrote 30 per cent of the books, while British authors wrote 70 per cent, but for
1850 his estimate is reversed.” (Hellmut Lehmann-Haupt, The Book in America, 2 nd edition, Bowker, N.Y.
1952, p. 124.) Another frequently cited statistic is the claim that, between 1830 and 1842, “nearly half the
publications issued in the United States were reprints of English books,” and that in 1853 there were 733
new titles, which included 278 English reprints and 35 translations; 1854 765 titles and 277 reprints; and
1855, 1092 titles and 250 reprints. These figures were originally produced by a firm of London booksellers,
and reproduced by the Publisher’s Circular and Literary Gazette, Sept 13, 2 (37), 1856, p. 552. However,
the Gazette later expressed doubts about the accuracy of the information, especially since even a casual
count from publishers’ trade lists reveal that the fraction of reprints was manifestly higher.
34
According to David Saunders, Authorship and Copyright, London and NY, Routledge, 1992, p. 156,
“Harper’s first catalogue contained 234 titles of which 90 percent were English reprints, the same pattern
being true for Wiley and for Putnam.”
15

consequently, the supply of nonfiction soon tended to be provided by native authors.
From an early period grammars, readers, and juvenile texts were written by Americans.35
Geology, geography, history and similar works had to be adapted or completely rewritten
to be appropriate for an American market.36 Figure 3 shows the fraction of medical books
that were written by foreigners. Until the middle of the century, about half of all medical
books were written by non-American residents, but this figure fell to approximately forty
percent soon after. This was true even though the high fixed cost of production for
medical volumes deterred rivalry among publishers of reprints, who feared predatory
behaviour would lead to large losses.37 Thus, publishers of schoolbooks, medical
volumes and other nonfiction did not feel that the reforms of 1891 were relevant to their
undertakings.38
On the other hand, foreign authors dominated the field of fiction, so it is worth
exploring whether there might be some validity in the idea that there was no Great
American Novel in the nineteenth century because of the international copyright laws. I
agree that Americans did not produce any great works of literature during this period, but
doubt that the lacuna was due to the lack of copyright protection for foreign books. Figure
4 suggests a gradual decline over time in the role of foreign authorship. In the period
between 1790 and 1829, two thirds of all authors of fiction bestsellers were foreign.39 A
35

See Gilreath, Federal Copyright Records, p. xxii.
For instance, Carey and Lea, the Philadelphia publishers, originally planned to simply pirate the German
encyclopaedia, Konversations-Lexikon, by getting it translated. They soon found that it would need a great
deal of original work to be suitable for the American public. The Enclopaedia Americana appeared after 17
months and, even at a price of $32.50, was an enormous success. See David Kaser, Messrs. Carey & Lea of
Philadelphia, Phila: Univ. of PA Press, 1957.
37
William Wood Co, in the Wright survey, p. 88, testified that “Medical works of English authors have but a
limited sale in the United States, and even when, with rare exceptions, a book of this class is found to prove
unexpectedly popular, the cost of manufacturing such books is so great as to deter one publisher from
reprinting on another, with it absolutely understood that the first party would reduce his price so as to make
any competition ruinous.”
38
Ginn & Co pointed out in the Wright survey, p. 74, “The question of international copyright law is one
which we have not considered very much, as it does not materially affect the schoolbook business. It has
almost wholly to do with general literature. Each country has its own methods of teaching, and the school
books of one country can not be pirated in another to advantage.”
39
See Frank L. Mott, Golden Multitudes: The Story of Best Sellers in the United States. London:
36

16

discrete change in relative success of American writers occurred after the 1830s with the
entrance of such authors as James Fenimore Cooper, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow,
Nathaniel Hawthorne and R H Dana. By the early twentieth century Americans
comprised the majority of best-selling authors in this country.40 This fall over time in the
fraction of foreign authorship may have been due to a natural evolutionary process, or may
have been caused by the change in the copyright laws.
Some have claimed that the cadre of professional Americans authors -- especially
of novels -- was small or nonexistent because of foreign competition. For instance, the
biographer of Edgar Allan Poe states that Poe switched to short story format because he
was unable profit from the market for novels.41 If it were indeed true that professional
authorship was deterred, the reforms in 1891 should have been associated with a discrete
rise in the number of Americans whose profession was writing, holding other factors
constant.42 In order to investigate whether copyright reforms influenced the propensity for
Americans to become professional authors, I compiled a random sample of 758 authors
from biographical dictionaries. Table 3 describes the characteristics of the sample.
Academic and religious books are less likely to be written for monetary returns, and their
authors probably benefitted from the wider circulation that lack of international copyright
encouraged. However, the writers of these works declined in importance relative to
Macmillan, 1947, pp. 92-93.
40
Alice P. Hackett and James Henry Burke, Eighty Years of Best Sellers, 1895-1975, New York, Bowker,
1977, imply a more abrupt change, since they argue that in 1895 American authors accounted for two of the
top ten best sellers, but by 1910 nine of the top ten were written by Americans.
41
See Hervey Allen, Israfel, The Life and Times of Edgar Allan Poe, p. 403, NY, Farrar & Rinehart, 1934.
An alternative view (mine) is that even in the absence of any competition Poe would have been an
indifferent novelist.
42
Some scholars define professional authors as individuals whose sole occupation or source of income was
from writing. However, this definition is problematic since it is biased towards women writers who were
markedly less likely than men to engage in jobs outside the home. It also to some extent equates
professionalism with success, since one is less likely to depend on writing for one’s income unless writing
provides more income than available alternatives. I define a professional author as a person who is listed in
a biographical dictionary as an author, or had written more than ten books. See Lawrence Buell, New
England Literary Culture: From Revolution through Renaissance, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1986, who argues that women writers may have been the first professional writers, because they had few
other sources of employment. Between 1820 and 1865 writing was the sole sou rce of income for 34 percent
17

writers of fiction, a category which grew from 6.4 percent before 1830 to 26.4 percent by
the 1870s. The growth in fiction was associated with the increase in the number of books
per author over the same period. Fifty nine percent of the 98 women writers in the sample
published in the fiction-only category, but they did not account for more than 39 percent
of all fiction authors. Expansions in the market, due to improvements in transportation
and the increase in the literary and academic population, probably played a large role in
enabling individuals who lived outside the major publishing centers to become
professional writers despite the distance.43
The average age of a writer of nonfiction at time of first publication was
approximately forty years, relative to fiction where age at first publication was in the early
thirties. Since the data are organized by birth cohort, this implies that authors of fiction
who were born in the1860s were the most likely to have been influenced in their choices
by the change in the copyright laws. The regressions in Table 4 are directed towards the
question of whether writers were discouraged from choosing authorship as a career by the
lack of international copyright protection. The results do not seem to support this
contention. The first set of regressions report the coefficients from a linear probability
model that estimates the factors that influenced whether an author was a professional
author. The time dummies suggest a fairly steady increase over time in the likelihood of
this occurrence, with the biggest increase in the cohort born in the 1880s, who would have
become writers around 1910 or 1920. For fiction, the biggest increase occurs for the birth
cohort between the 1840s and the 1850s, the members of which would have entered the
market before 1891.
Although these results do not support the hypothesis that the lack of copyright
of women authors, relative to 17 percent for men. 375-92, Buell.
43
For a discussion of the influence of transportation on book distribution, see Ronald J. Zboray, A Fictive
People. Antebellum Economic Development and the American Reading Public, New York : Oxford
University Press, 1993.
18

protection discouraged authors, this does not imply that intellectual property policy in this
dimension was of little economic significance. It is likely that the lack of foreign
copyrights led to some misallocation of efforts or resources, such as in attempting to
circumvent the rules. Authors changed their residence temporarily when books were
about to be published in order to qualify for copyright. Marryat was a resident in the U.S.
in 1838 but the courts ruled that one also must have the intention to become a citizen.
American authors visited Canada in order to satisfy the more lenient British regulations
which permitted copyright protection for books whose authors were within the borders of
Britain or its colonies at time of publication. Others obtained copyrights by arranging to
co-author with a foreign citizen. T H Huxley adopted this strategy, arranging to co-author
with “a young Yankee friend ... Otherwise the thing would be pillaged at once.”44 An
American publisher suggested that Kipling should find “a hack writer, whose name would
be of use simply on account of its carrying the copyright.” Harriet Beecher Stowe
proposed a partnership with Elizabeth Gaskell, so they could “secure copyright mutually
in our respective countries and divide the profits.”45
Courts were somewhat sympathetic to these stratagems, as revealed in a lawsuit
involving the Encyclopaedia Britannica. The British publishers engaged a number of
American contributors for the volumes, and these individuals obtained copyright
protection, which was challenged as a mere evasion of the law by infringers to the
Encyclopaedia. The court ruled that “There was no impropriety in soliciting competent
citizens of the United States to write upon its history, and I can perceive no unfairness or
injustice towards the defendant company in the plaintiffs' use of the copyright laws for
their pecuniary advantage, and as a weapon with which to repel a competition which is
44

Simon Nowell-Smith, International Copyright Law and the Publisher in the Reign of Queen Victoria,
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1968, p. 70.
45
Susan Coultrap-McQuin, Doing Literary Business, Chapel Hill: UNC Press, 1990, p. 89. Elizabeth
Gaskell was not persuaded by the argument.
19

more enterprising than considerate.”46
B) PUBLISHERS
The previous analysis related to authors, but it is widely acknowledged that
copyrights in books during this period tended to be the concern of publishers rather than of
authors (although the two are naturally not independent of each other). Copyright in
Europe was largely enforced to regulate the book trade and to ensure that publications
were non-seditious. Early publishers obtained copyrights in the books they produced, and
authors frequently sold the copyright to the publisher outright, thus transferring all risk in
return for a lower but more certain payment. Similarly, from the first decades U.S.
copyright statutes allowed copyrights to issue to “proprietors” as well as to authors, and
the registrations show that it was a common practice in the United States for the publisher
to file for the initial copyright in a book. However, even when authors retained the
copyright, publishers were most at risk because they were required to make large fixed
investments that might be lost if the sales of the book were low due to piracy.
Publishers in this country were able to prevent unauthorized copying of books by
American authors, and to enforce their property rights in the United States through the

46

See Black v. Henry G. Allen Co., New York, 42 F. 618, June 26, 1890 . “The Encyclopaedia
Britannica, as a whole, was the production of aliens, who could obtain no copyright in this country, and is a
work of great value to the whole people. The employment of citizens of the United States to write articles
which were to be used in some of its volumes, and the purchase of an interest in the copyright of such
articles, were an attempt to deprive the defendant, and other like-minded persons, of a privilege which they
would have otherwise enjoyed, and were for the purpose of giving the foreign owners of the encyclopaedia
an advantage in the sales of the work in this country. The attempt contained an element of unfairness,
because the book, if written by foreigners, could be reproduced here, and the complainants have only a color
of copyright interest, and therefore should not receive the sanction of the courts.... The acts of the Messrs.
Black were for the purpose of making a use of the statutes which might assist them against pecuniary loss,
and give them a more unobstructed field for their large commercial venture. The disputed point is whether
there was an element of fraud or injustice in the scheme which would prevent a court from regarding it with
favor.” See also Carte v. Evans, Circuit Court, D. Massachusetts, 27 F. 861 (1886) which related to a
pianoforte arrangement for Gilbert and Sullivan’s Mikado: “There is nothing in our copyright law to prevent
one of our own citizens from taking out a copyright of an original work composed by him, even though the
work of composition was performed at the procurement and in the employment of an alien; or from
assigning his copyright to an alien under an agreement made either before or after the composing of the
work. A nonresident foreigner is not within our copyright law, but he may take and hold by assignment a
copyright granted to one of our own citizens. The proprietor as well as the author is entitled to enter the
work for copyright.”
20

threat of litigation.47 The growth in litigation was minimal until the 1880s, suggesting
that infringement of domestic authors was within manageable proportions.48 Many of the
early copyright cases deal with genuine questions regarding the boundaries of property
rights in literary, dramatic and artistic works, rather than blatant disregard of the claims of
legitimate property owners. However, the situation was quite different for books by
foreign authors in which no copyright protection existed. If all firms produced rival
editions, competition was likely to drive prices down to marginal cost, in which case the
high initial fixed investments would not be recovered. Throughout the period, publishers
attempted to avoid “ruinous competition” and engaged in numerous unsuccessful attempts
to fix prices. In the early years of the nineteenth century publishers engaged in races in
order to be the first in the market with popular books such as the works of Sir Walter
Scott.49 A Waverley novel could be reprinted within twenty four hours through a gang
system where the book was divided among as many as a dozen printers working at full
capacity. Carey & Lea, a prominent Philadelphia firm, saturated the frontier markets
before selling in New York, where rival printers stood ready to reprint at the first
appearance of the books. If they judged the size of the market accurately, the winners
were able to sell all copies that they had printed, while the other firms lost their initial
outlay.
One of the consequences of such races was a greater likelihood of mistakes or

47

The landmark Supreme Court case Wheaton v. Peters, 33 U.S. 591 (1834) did not recognize state common
law rights for publications, in the interests of a national, uniform policy. Thus, the boundaries of property
in patents and copyrights in this country are specified by federal statute and enforced by litigation in the
federal courts. The Supreme Court found that no common law copyright protection existed for published
works, which were products of the existing statutes. Unpublished works, however, were protected under
common law. The dissenting minority opinion argued that authors held an inherent right in their creations
beyond their statutory right.
48
See Kaser, p. 143, “the second quarter of the nineteenth century saw few copyright violations disturb the
comparative quiet of the domestic publishing scene.” The data on copyright litigation support this claim
(Khan, Democratization of Invention.)
49
The details about the firm of Carey & Lea are from Kaser, 1957.
21

deliberate alterations in the attempt to be first and to reduce costs.50 For instance, Carey &
Lea paid Sir Walter Scott $1475 for an early manuscript copy of his Life of Napoleon.
Subsequently, readers were concerned that Scott had made changes after the proofs had
been pulled, which were not reflected in the American edition. Within one month of the
American publication date, a small New York firm produced an abridged version, without
the author’s consent, which was advertised as preferable to the “voluminous” original.
Complaints were also rife about Carey & Lea’s edition of The Pirate, which had omitted
an entire chapter. Robert Browning sent a list of errata to Ticknor and Fields, in the hope
that the American edition would be updated, but the corrections were never made.51 Other
complaints included charges that the spelling in Macaulay’s History of England was
Americanized, that hack authors were sometimes put to the task of creating a version that
was more likely to appeal to American tastes, or even that enterprising hacks marketed
their work under the guise of a more meritorious foreign author’s name. These allegations
suggest that the lack of formal copyrights and the prevalence of publication races led to
lower quality in the literary market. However, if consumers cared about quality over
price, this created an incentive for sorting among publishers thus leading to appropriation
through reputation and, indeed, the more “reputable” publishers were able to secure
greater returns in part because they offered products that were more likely to be free of
defects.52
To the firm that won the race, profitability of foreign books was likely to be higher

50

“Speed was of the greatest importance in any reprinting venture; and speed bred carelessness. American
editions became more and more sloppily printed and bound. Workmanship degenerated. Proofreaders
corrected only the most obvious errors. Printed sheets and bindings were often not properly pressed.” Kaser,
p. 92.
51
Cost Books, p. 338.
52
The reputational effect may partly explain why foreign pharmaceutical firms in Brazil increased
their share of the domestic market even in the absence of patent protection. See C R Frischtak, “The
Protection of Intellectual Property Rights and Industrial Technology Development in Brazil,” in F W
Rushing and C G Brown (eds), Intellectual Property Rights in Science, Technology, and Economic
Performance, Westview, 1990.
22

than for American works. The market for writers like Scott and Dickens was more
predictable and certain. By trading in on the established reputation of foreign authors, the
publisher also avoided high advertising and marketing costs. Foreign books entailed less
risk at lower cost and higher margins. But competition and the probability of being the
loser in the race decreased these advantages. As the cost of advance payments and the
probability of copying increased, the relative advantage to publishers of some means of
exclusion became greater. Some publishers bought early proof sheets to get an advantage
over others who waited until the first imprinting. Henry Carey paid an agent $250 per
year to send English titles to his firm in Philadelphia, and was so concerned about the
delay of several days at the New York customhouse that he also hired another agent in
New York to expedite the process.53 Ticknor and Fields paid foreign authors significant
sums for early sheets, royalties or simple lump sums out of profits. For instance, the
company offered £60 for the advance sheets for Robert Browning’s Men and Women in
1855, and the following year paid £100 for the early sheets and engravings for Mayne
Reid’s juvenile fiction work, The Bush Boys. The firm also sent several unsolicited
payments to Tennyson over the years out of profits on his poetry reprints. Such payments
might ensure the coincidence of publishers’ and authors’ interests, and were recognized by
reputable publishers as “copyrights.”54 However, they naturally did not confer property
rights that could be enforced at law.55
Publishers in England had faced similar problems before, in the market for books

53

The distance between Philadelphia and New York translated into a significant disadvantage for publishers
in Philadelphia, and may ultimately have granted New York its precedence in the publishing industry.
54
See the exchange between Charles Reade and Ticknor and Fields, p. 372 Cost Books. Reade authorized
the firm to reprint his work It is Never Too Late to Mend. When it seemed that the Appletons would publish
another edition, he wrote to Ticknor and Fields that this was unlikely because Appleton would desist when
they found out that they would have to publish with a one-month delay behind Ticknor: “They might do the
wrong thing for the Tea, but they are too respectable to do it for the Tea leaves!”
55
As late as 1902, this issue was brought before the courts. See Fraser v. Yack et al., 116 F. 285 (1902):
“We are of opinion that the contract conferred no rights of proprietorship in the manuscript, but only the
right of publication coincidently with or in advance of the publication of the work in England.”
23

that were in the public domain, such as Shakespeare and Fielding.56 Their solution was to
collude in the form of strictly regulated cartels or “printing congers.” Cooperation
resulted in risk-sharing and a greater ability to cover expenses. The congers created
divisible property in books that they traded, such as a one hundred and sixtieth share in
Johnson’s Dictionary that was sold for £23 in 1805. The unstable publication races in the
United States similarly settled down during the 1840s to collusive standards that were
termed “trade custom” or “courtesy of the trade.” Publishing houses were acknowledged
to have the exclusive right to reprint specific authors. For instance, Harper Brothers were
associated with Bulwer-Lytton, whereas Marryat was customarily reprinted by Carey &
Lea. In the case of newer authors, the first publisher to receive the item or the first to list
the work in a trade publication was deemed to have the right to exclude other reprinters.
Firms that violated these rules were punished or at least threatened with punishment.57
If publishers were harmed by the lack of legal copyright we would expect that this
would be reflected in their profits, which would tend to be declining or negative as a result
of the competition. Table 5 presents information on the profit margins for Ticknor and
Fields, one of the leading reprinters in the United States during the nineteenth century.
The lack of statistical significance on the time dummies before 1860 in these regressions
do not support the view that profits were declining as a result of unbridled competition.
The firm of Ticknor and Fields was well known for the quality of its poetry publications,
which were apparently a source of profit for the firm relative to other types of books.
Profits were somewhat higher for foreign titles, as shown by the negative coefficient on

56

See A. S. Collins, Authorship in the Days of Johnson, London, Robert Holden and Co., 1927. Aileen
Fyfe, "Copyrights and Competition: Producing and Protecting Children's Books in the Nineteenth Century,"
Publishing History, vol. 45 (1999), pp. 35-59, argues that the “share-book” system survived until the middle
of the 19th century in the market for children’s books. The system served as a means through which
participants could spread and share risk, raise capital, and also control competion.
57
According to Kaser, p. 150, “[Henry Carey] wrote almost weekly to the New York firm [Harpers]
warning them, threatening them, advising them, not to challenge his firm to an all-out war.”
24

the dummy variable representing American nationality, but the magnitude of the effect is
not large, especially since the costs do not include all lumpsum payments to foreign
authors. The publishing industry was able to secure returns because, in the decade before
the Civil War, competition among the major firms had settled into a relatively stable
situation of tacit collusion. American firms, like their British counterparts in the previous
century, were able to appropriate returns from “synthetic copyrights” that were created by
publishers in the absence of legal protection.
The case of Sheldon v. Houghton, 21 F. Cas 1239 (1865), illustrates that these
rights were considered to be “very valuable, and is often made the subject of contracts,
sales, and transfers, among booksellers and publishers.” Henry Houghton, who purchased
the initial synthetic right from O. W. Wight, had formed a partnership with Sheldon & Co
of New York to publish, print and market the “Household Edition” of Charles Dickens’
works. In 1865 Houghton decided to terminate the contract, which Sheldon contested in
court because the market value of the publication right had increased under the partnership
to some thirty thousand dollars. The very fact that a firm would file a plea for the court to
protect its claim indicates how vested a right it had become. The plaintiff argued that
“such custom is a reasonable one, and tends to prevent injurious competition in business,
and to the investment of capital in publishing enterprises that are of advantage to the
reading public.”
The court pointed out that “if anything which can be called, in any legal sense,
property, was transferred to this partnership, it must have been that incorporeal right to
publishing this edition of Dickens.” However, this was based on the custom of the trade,
which “is very far from being a legal custom, furnishing a solid foundation upon which an
inviolable title to property can rest, which courts can protect from invasion. ... It may be
an advantage to the party enjoying it for the time being, but its protection rests in the
25

voluntary and unconstrained forbearance of the trade. I know of no way in which the
publishers of this country can republish the works of a foreign author, and secure to
themselves the exclusive right to such publication ... For this court to recognize any other
literary property in the works of a foreign author, would contravene the settled policy of
Congress.” Thus, synthetic rights differed from copyrights in the degree of security that
was offered by the enforcement power of the courts. Nevertheless, in the absence of legal
property rights in foreign works, synthetic copyrights were able to transform a
competitive environment into a quasi-monopolistic arena. These title-specific rights of
exclusion decreased uncertainty, enabled publishers to recoup their fixed costs, and
avoided the wasteful duplication of resources that would otherwise have occurred. In
short, publishers were able to achieve some degree of appropriation through industry
structure rather than through government mandated monopolies.
CONCLUSIONS
The question of the appropriate role of intellectual property in development is
complex and has failed to be resolved with theoretical models which tend to provide
ambiguous answers to the question of whether “piracy” results in net welfare benefits or
costs, and whether the interests of all parties coincide or conflict. Few studies provide
empirical assessments, especially from the point of view of developing countries. Thus,
some insights may be gleaned from a period when the United States was itself a
developing country. The United States maintained very different policies towards authors
and inventors. In the case of patents, the social good was seen as coincident with the
award of secure and strong patent rights to individual inventors, regardless of their
citizenship. However, the rationale for copyrights was held to be much weaker because of
the lower incentive from their grant, and the higher social costs of restricted access. This
paper investigated the welfare effects of “piracy” of foreign copyrighted material, and
26

focused on the impact on authors, publishers, and the general public in the 19th century.
Claims had been made that prices of foreign books were so low that books by
Americans could not compete; that professional authors were deterred by foreign
competition; that American society suffered from a lack of quality domestic literature as a
result of copyright policies; and that publishers’ profits were driven down over time by the
inability to exclude competitors. I find little support for these contentions. Publishers
appear to have priced in accordance with the dictates of the market, and may have charged
lower prices for American literature because of lower demand or lower perceived quality.
According to conventional economic analysis, in the absence of legal protection the
market prices of books are likely to be competitively bid down to marginal cost, and
publishers would be deterred by their inability to recover fixed costs. This was not the
case for, despite the lack of copyright protection, publishing houses were able to
appropriate returns through cartels, price discrimination across firms, and the creation of
synthetic copyrights. However, the lack of formal enforcement of property rights may
have led to higher costs of production for the industry, lower investments in quality, and a
diversion of resources from production to rent-seeking.
After the copyright reforms in 1891, both English and American authors were
disappointed to find that the change in the law did not lead to significant gains from
foreign royalties.58 This is consistent with the regression results, which suggest that
professional American authorship seems to have developed through a natural evolutionary
process. Foreign authors may even have benefitted from the lack of copyright protection
in the United States. Despite the cartelization of publishing, competition for synthetic
copyrights ensured that foreign authors were able to rachet up payments that American
58

This section is based on “Results of the Copyright Law,” in G. H. Putnam, The Question of Copyright,
New York, G P Putnam’s Sons, 1896: 162-174. After the change in the copyright law, publishers price
discriminated across time rather than across region. They tended to bring out the higher priced, more
elaborately bound volumes first, and the cheaper versions only after a year or two.
27

firms made to secure the right to be first on the market. It can also be argued that foreign
authors were able to reap higher total returns from the expansion of the American market.
For, the lack of copyright protection functioned as a form of international price
discrimination, where the product was sold at a higher price in the developed country, and
at a lower in the poorer country, with the result that the size of the market was larger than
under a uniform pricing strategy. Under such circumstances, returns to authors may be
higher for goods that have demand externalities or network effects, such as “bestsellers”
where consumer valuation of the book increases with the size of the market.59
The inframarginal foreign writers were able to obtain returns through competition
on the part of American publishers to gain their “authorization.” They were able to
exploit network effects as piracy increased the scale of readership in the United States, in
some instances far in excess of the high-priced and restricted European markets. Charles
Dickens, who publicly and in his writings launched bitter diatribes against “the continental
Brigands” in the United States, in fact was a major beneficiary of such bandwagon and
network effects. He played publishers off against each other, and as many as four
companies paid him large sums and had legitimate claims for considering themselves his
sole American representative. Moreover, Dickens was able to parlay his popularity
among readers into a heightened demand for complementary lectures. His U.S. reading
tour of 1867-68 comprised 76 appearances that earned the author the astonishing sum of
$228,000 in total receipts.60
In general, the greater the responsiveness of authors to financial returns, the
stronger the case for copyright protection. Financial incentives to authors tended to be
relatively unimportant in case of nonfiction, whose authors benefitted more from diffusion
59

See Lisa Takeyama, “The Welfare Implications of Unauthorized Reproduction of Intellectual Property in
the Presence of Demand Network Externalities,” Journal of Industrial Economics, v. 42 (2) 1994: 155-166.
60
See Andrew J. Kappel and Robert L. Patten, “Dickens’ Second American Tour and his “Utterly Worthless
and Profitless” American Rights,” in Dickens Studies Annual, vol. 7 (1978), pp. 1-33.
28

(proselytizing and reputational effects), and we noted the predominance of nonfiction
titles in the earlier part of the century. Thus, the market for new American fiction was the
most affected, but from the point of view of many contemporary commentators, fiction
was regarded as a discretionary or luxury good. The movement for international
copyright gained impetus only towards the end of the century because of the growing
importance of popular fiction written by American authors.
The reading public appears to have gained from the lack of copyright, which
increased access to foreign works, especially fiction. After 1891, this “unnatural demand”
for cheap fiction went unsatisfied in the case of new titles, but since the law was not
retroactive formerly unprotected works were still in the public domain. Books were no
longer printed on the “scramble system” and it was argued that these were characterized
by higher quality and accuracy. A number of cheap reprint establishments went bankrupt,
although some observers attributed this not to the law, but to the “cutthroat competition”
that had been prevalent among fringe firms. Thus, after the reforms the prices of some
books were higher, and the range of choices less extensive than would have been the case
if the law remained unchanged. Still, the loss to consumers from this aspect of the
reforms may have been insignificant, since the books and firms that had depended on the
subsidy from lack of copyright in the 1890s were likely of marginal value.
This episode in the history of intellectual property is broadly relevant to the 21st
century, especially in terms of developing countries. The United States today evinces
great concern about the consequences for corporate profits of both domestic and
international “piracy.” However, Congress in the nineteenth century repeatedly rejected
proposals for reform of copyright laws because the emphasis in that era was on fulfilling
the objectives of the Constitution in promoting the progress of social welfare. In a
democratic society this was interpreted as a mandate for ensuring that the public had ready
29

access to literature, information, education and other conduits for achieving equality of
opportunity. Democratic values may even have furthered the interests of those who were
the subject of so-called piracy since, as discussed here, even in the absence of copyright
protection, foreign authors directly or indirectly benefitted from the larger fraction of
literate consumers in the United States. U.S. publishers were not demonstrably harmed by
the lack of formal protection because they were able to create parallel rights that were
privately enforced, and evolved firm-level strategies such as price and quality
discrimination. This finding is borne out by the fact that the highest profit margins in
book publishing today are derived from reprints of out-of-copyright “classics.”
Today there is a narrow emphasis on state-created rights and less on private
market-generated means of exclusion such as private contracts or monitoring. However,
given that firms’ strategies regarding appropriation are endogenous to the security of
copyrights, strong measures by the state to counter “piracy” may lead to social
overinvestment in property rights enforcement. Some scholars have expressed concern
that technological methods of exclusion at the firm level have the capacity to unduly
restrict public access in perpetuity, without the social balance of costs and benefits that
underly welfare maximization. For others, the censure of both copyright “piracy” and
price discrimination may rest on outmoded notions of competition; and in some contexts,
copyright “piracy” may merely constitute fair use by another name. Some lessons may be
derived from the period when the United States flourished as a “continental Brigand,” and
for a century successfully resisted international pressures to conform. It is worth
emphasizing that, once the U.S. had developed its own native stock of literary capital, it
voluntarily had an incentive to recognize international copyrights. In sum, the U.S.
experience during the nineteenth century suggests that appropriate intellectual property
institutions are not independent of the level of economic and social development.
30

Table 1
Effects of Changes in Copyright Law
Survey of Firms in the U.S. Book Trade, 1900

Beneficial
Harmful
Mixed effects
None

Effects on:
American Authors
44
2
2
9

74.6%
6.8
3.4
12.9

Beneficial
Harmful
Mixed effects
None

Foreign Authors
54
0
2
2

93.0%
0.0
3.5
3.5

Beneficial
Harmful
Mixed effects
None

Publishers
52
13
3
2

74.3%
18.6
4.3
2.9

Public
Beneficial
Harmful
Mixed effects
None
Increased
Decreased
Mixed
No change

Beneficial
Harmful
Mixed effects
No effect

35
15
6
3
Prices of Books
25
7
6
16

59.3%
25.4
10.2
5.0
47.2%
13.2
9.4
30.2

Conclusion: Effects of Piracy
15
23.4%
41
64.1
6
9.4
2
3.1

Source: A Report on the Effect of the International Copyright Law in the United States,
Carroll D. Wright, Washington, GPO, 1901.

31

Notes: The survey was conducted in accordance with a resolution of the U.S. Senate in
1900. Questions included: “Has the international copyright law been detrimental or
beneficial to – a. publishers or book manufacturers; b. printers and their employees; c.
American authors; d. foreign authors; e. the book-purchasing public?” “Has the effect of
the law been to increase or reduce the selling price of books?” and “Was “piracy” as
practiced prior to the enactment of the international copyright law, beneficial or injurious
to printers or publishers?” The questions were answered by printers and publishers in
Boston (11), Buffalo and New York (34), Chicago (5), Cleveland (3) and Philadelphia
(17). The respondents gave their opinions in essay form, which I have tabulated, not
including in the totals instances where the question was not addressed.

32

Table 2
Regressions of prices for books published by Ticknor and Fields, 1832-1858
Dependent variable: Log of Retail Price
ALL EDITIONS
Intercept

4.14***
(39.86)

Time Dummies
1840-44
- 0.01
(0.06)
1845-49
0.06
(0.50)
1850-54
0.26**
(2.35)
1855-58
0.31***
(2.85)
Nationality
-0.06
(1.39)
Gender
----------Fiction
------------Poetry
-----------Log(Average cost)
----------R-sq=0.04
F=6.06 ***
N=770

FIRST EDITION

4.10***
(39.88)

1.34***
(15.37)

4.23***
(20.00)

2.08***
(8.95)

-0.02
(0.14)
0.14
(0.12)
0.15
(1.34)
0.15
(1.37)
-0.07
(1.65)
0.10
(1.70)
0.19***
(3.68)
0.30***
(5.80)
------

0.17
(1.56)
0.24***
(3.66)
0.18***
(2.90)
0.18***
(2.90)
-0.12***
(4.97)
0.01
(0.29)
0.02
(0.78)
0.10***
(3.29)
0.84***
(41.54)

0.29
(1.07)
0.02
(0.08)
0.35
(1.62)
0.37
(1.68)
0.01
(0.09)
-0.06
(0.80)
-0.18**
(2.06)
-0.24***
(2.80)
-----------

0.15
(0.76)
0.12
(0.74)
0.21
(1.32)
0.21
(1.30)
-0.01
(0.12)
-0.06
(0.97)
-0.09
(1.42)
0.00
(0.32)
0.61***
(12.53)

R-sq=0.08
F=8.12***
N=756

R-sq=0.72
F=216.15***
N=753

R-sq=0.10
F=2.48***
N=190

R-sq=0.52
F=21.51***
N=189

------

Notes:
*
Significant at 5 percent level
**
between 1 and 5 percent
***
1 percent level or below
Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses. The observations refer to book titles published by Ticknor and
Fields, and do not include annual publications that are not priced such as the firm’s catalogues. The dependent
variable is the log of the stated retail price, unadjusted for inflation. The results for the nontrend variables are
qualitatively the same when adjusted for inflation. Costs are variable costs, excluding expenses that the firm
allocated to “overhead” (salaries, rent, advertising, insurance, interest, taxes, postage and cost of travel). Costs
do not include fixed payments for early sheets made to foreign authors. They predominantly comprise
royalties and production costs (paper, composition and printing, illustrations, and binding.)
Source: Cost Books of Ticknor and Fields. See text.

33

Table 3
CHARACTERISTICS OF AUTHORSHIP

Year of birth of author
1830-49
1850-69

Before 1830

1870-89

Percent of Authors
TYPE OF BOOK
Religion
Fiction and juvenile
Poetry and Drama
Both fiction and nonfiction
Nonfiction

(No.)

9.8%
11.0
4.9
8.0
66.3

5.1%
20.5
11.0
14.6
48.8

6.2%
26.4
9.1
12.5
45.8

98
104
41
75
439

TOTAL NUMBER OF BOOKS PUBLISHED
1-2
35.8%
3-5
37.1
6-10
21.1
More than 10
6.1

37.4%
33.7
19.6
9.2

21.9%
36.5
27.7
13.9

10.3%
34.5
38.6
16.6

218
271
192
77

PROFESSION
Listed as Author
Professional Author

8.0%
7.8

13.5%
12.4

26.3%
17.6

24.5%
18.2

118
88

27.5%
1.9
46.9
12.0
11.7

37.7%
9.9
35.2
6.8
10.5

28.4%
18.7
26.9
14.9
11.2

27.1%
33.3
16.7
12.5
10.4

223
95
262
86
83

45.6%
5.6
29.1
15.4
4.2

46.5%
12.7
33.1
6.3
1.4

36.5%
16.2
35.1
6.8
5.4

39.0%
27.1
20.3
11.9
1.7

246
62
168
65
19

RESIDENCE IN URBAN CENTER
(Phila., Boston, NY, Chicago)

33.2%

31.9%

17.5%

0.7%

181

PERCENT WOMEN

6.4%

19.0%

19.7%

14.5%

99

AVERAGE AGE AT FIRST PUBLICATION (Years)
Nonfiction
42.6
Fiction
30.2

44.6
31.7

41.9
33.9

40.2
34.8

---

SAMPLE SIZE

163

137

145

754

REGION OF BIRTH
Mid-Atlantic
Midwest
New England
South
Foreign
RESIDENCE
Mid-Atlantic
Midwest
New England
South
Foreign

21.1%
6.4
1.6
7.7
63.2

ALL

313

Sources: See Text.

34

Table 4
Factors Influencing Authorship in the Nineteenth Century
Dependent Var: Professional Authors
Variable
Intercept

0.12***
(2.20)
DECADE OF BIRTH
1810-19
0.00
(0.04)
1820-29
0.11*
(1.93)
1830-39
0.11*
(1.95)
1840-49
0.14***
(2.49)
1850-59
0.29***
(4.91)
1860-69
0.28***
(4.45)
1870-79
0.20***
(3.30)
1880-89
0.48***
(4.94)
REGION OF BIRTH
Midwest
-0.12
(1.85)
South
-0.00
(0.04)
Midatlantic
-0.04
(0.81)
New England 0.01
(0.19)
GENDER
----------FICTION
----------R-sq=0.08
F=4.64 ***
N=699

Dependent Var: Fiction Authors

0.09*
(1.92)

0.02
(0.41)

-0.00**
(0.94)

0.02
(0.36)
0.09*
(1.85)
0.03
(0.63)
0.08
(1.49)
0.15***
(2.77)
0.17***
(2.97)
0.09
(1.74)
0.30***
(3.42)

-0.02
(0.27)
0.02
(0.39)
0.12**
(2.22)
0.08
(1.58)
0.26***
(4.73)
0.23***
(4.03)
0.24***
(4.34)
0.35***
(5.94)

0.01
(0.13)
0.01
(0.17)
0.06
(1.29)
0.03
(0.56)
0.19***
(3.68)
0.18***
(3.38)
0.21***
(4.16)
0.29***
(5.24)

-0.12*
(1.96)
-0.04
(0.72)
-0.06
(1.24)
-0.01
(0.29)
0.25***
(5.47)
0.39***
(9.60)

-0.01
(0.13)
0.10
(1.78)
0.06
(1.28)
0.06
(1.34)
--------------------

0.02
(0.34)
0.10*
(1.94)
0.06
(1.42)
0.05
(1.14)
0.41***
(10.57)
-----------

R-sq=0.09
F=6.28***
N=754

R-sq=0.21
F=15.25***
N=754

-

R-sq=0.28
F=19.04***
N=699

Notes:
*
Significant at 5 percent level
** between 1 and 5 percent
***
1 percent level or below
Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses. The dependent variable in first two regressions has the value of 1 if
the individual’s primary occupation was listed as author OR if he or she had published more than 10 books. The
dependent variable in the next two regressions takes on a value of 1 if the individual’s primary occupation was
listed as an author. The excluded regional dummy represents authors who were born in other countries. Gender
is 0 if male, 1 if female. Fiction is a dummy that has a value of 1 if the author published only in the area of
fiction, poetry or drama. The results do not vary if a probit or logit model is used instead of the linear probability
model.
35

Table 5
Profit Margins for Ticknor and Fields, 1832-1858

Variable
Intercept
Time Dummies
1840-44
1845-49
1850-54
1855-58
Gender
Fiction
Poetry
Edition
American

(Weighted by Number of Copies Published)
Parameter
Parameter
-0.61***
-0.57***
(15.99)
(15.34)
0.01
(0.14)
0.03
(0.77)
-0.01
(0.28)
0.01
(0.28)
0.02
(1.12)
0.02
(1.39)
0.08***
(4.95)
0.01***
(3.27)
-----------

-0.01
(0.12)
0.06
(1.43)
0.00
(0.04)
0.01
(0.26)
0.04***
(2.37)
0.01
(0.63)
0.08***
(5.24)
0.01***
(4.66)
-0.08***
(6.71)

R-sq=0.06
F=5.72 ***
N=750

R-sq=0.11
F=10.38***
N=750

Notes:
*
Significant at 5 percent level
**
between 1 and 5 percent
***
1 percent level or below
Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses. The observations refer to editions published by Ticknor and Fields,
and do not include annual publications that are not priced such as the firm’s catalogues. The dependent variable
is the profit margin ((price-average cost)/price). The data are unadjusted for inflation. The conclusions are the
same when the data are adjusted for inflation. The dummy variable American has a value of 0 if foreign, 1 if
American; Gender = 0 if male, 1 if female. Fiction includes drama and juvenile fiction. The regressions are
weighted by the number of copies of each edition that was published. Since some copies may have been sold at a
discount of the retail price, revenues are likely overestimated. The firm made fixed payments to foreign authors
that were not always recorded in the cost books so costs for foreign works are underestimated. Costs refer to
publishing costs, and exclude labour costs and certain fixed expenses such as advertising.
Source: Cost Books of Ticknor and Fields.

36

Figure 1: Copyright Registrations

Figure: Total Copyright Registrations
100000
80000
60000
40000
20000

00

98

19

18

96

18

94

92

18

18

90

18

88

86

18

84

18

18

82

18

18

80

0

Copyright Registrations: Annual Growth
Rate, 1870-1900
20
15
10
5
0
18
70
18
73
18
76
18
79
18
82
18
85
18
88
18
91
18
94
18
97
19
00

-5

-10

Source: Historical Statistics of the United States, Series W 82-95.

37

Figure 2

Log of Average Prices of Works by
American and Foreign Authors
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50

native

foreign

18
32
18
35
18
38
18
41
18
44
18
47
18
50
18
53
18
56

0.00

Source: Cost Books of Ticknor and Fields. See text and notes to Table 3.

38

Figure 3

Percent of Medical Books
by Foreign Authors
80.0
70.0
60.0
50.0
40.0
30.0
20.0
10.0

75
18

70
-

69
60
18

18

50
-

59

49
18

40
-

39
18

30
-

29
18

20
-

19
10
18

18

00
-

09

0.0

Source: F. Cardosco, Medical Publishing in the Nineteenth Century

39

Figure 4

Bestselling Authors:
Percent American, 1790-1945
90
80
70

Percent

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
17901809

18101829

18301849

18501869

18701889

18901909

19101929

19301945

Source: L. Mott, Golden Multitudes, Appendix A. Best sellers are defined as books that had a total sale
of one percent of the population in the relevant decade of publication. The list does not include
Bibles, hymnals, textbooks, almanacs, cookbooks, medical works, manuals and reference books.
Authors’ nationalities are determined by country of birth.

40

