                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              INVESTMENT VERSUS SAVINGS INCENTIVES:
            THE SIZE OF THE BANG FOB THE BUCK AND THE
          POTENTIAL FOR SELF—FINANCING BUSINESS TAX CUTS



                         Alan J. Auerbach
                      Laurence J. Kotlikoff



                      Working Paper No. 102T




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                          November 1982




Paper presented to the Symposium on the Economic Consequences of
Government Deficits, sponsored by Washington University's Center
for the Study of American Business and the Institute for Banking
and Financial Markets, October 29 to 30, 1982. We are grateful to
the National Bureau of Economic Research and the National Science
Foundation for financial support. This research is part of the
NBER's program in Taxation. Andrew Myers provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed are solely those of the
authors.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #1027
                                                       November 1982


                     Investment versus Savings Incentives:
          The Size of the Bang for the Buck and the Potential for
                     Self—Financing Business Tax Cuts


                                  Abstract


     This paper examines the closed economy effects of government policies that

vary with respect to whether they treat newly produced capital differently from

old capital. Policies that do make this distinction are denoted investment

policies, while those that do not are labelled savings policies. While both

types of policies alter marginal incentives to accumulate new capital, investment

incentives can generate significant inframarginal redistribution from current

holders of wealth to those with small or zero claims on the existing capital

stock. Among the principal findings, based on simulations of a general equili-

brium, perfect foresight, overlapping generations life—cycle model, are:

     1)   Investment incentives, even if financed by short run increases in

          the stock of debt, significantly increase capital formation.

     2)   Deficit—financed savings incentives, in contrast, typically reduce

          the economy's long run capital stock.

     3)   Deficit—financed investment incentives can actually be self—financing,

          in that they may lead to a long run surplus without any increase in

          other tax rates.




klan J. Auerbach                                              Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Department of Economics                                       Department of Economics
Harvard University                                            Yale University
Cambridge, MA 02138                                           New Haven, CT 06520
(617) 495—3934                                                (203) 436—4324
 I. Introduction

      in closed economies, saving and investment represent, respectively, the

supply of and demand for new domestic capital. Saving incentives shift the

supply curve for new domestic capital, while investment incentives shift the

demand curve. The basic public finance equivalence theorem that the real

effects of a tax (subsidy) are independent of who noxinally pays the tax

(receives the subsi) applies equally well to the market for new capital.

Hence, in closed economies, saving and investment incentives do not repre-

sent conceptually distinct policies, and the real effects of taxes or sub-

sidies applied to the supply of new capital, saving, can be replicated by

taxes or subsidies applied to the demand for n capital, investment.

      While economically meaningful distinctions between saving and invest-

ment incentives do not arise, there are meaningful distinctions between

policies that affect savings, the sum of past and current saving, and those

that directly affect only current saving, or, in equilibrium, current

investment.

      This paper examines the closed econorrr effects of government policies

that vary with respect to whether they treat newly produced capital dif-

ferently   from old   capital. Policies that distin&iish new capital from old

are   denoted investment policies, while those that   do   not are labelled
savings policies. While both types of policies     alter marginal incen-

tives to accumulate new capital, investment incentiv can generate

significant infraxnarnal redistribution from current holders of wealth

to those with small or zero claims on the existing stock of capital. In

the context of a neoclassical growth model, this redistribution runs, in

large part, from the elderly to young and future generations. The

direction of this intergenerational transfer is opposite to that
                                        —2—




associated   with the "burden of governnrnt debt"; in the case of debt, the

governrrnt passes the tax bill for current expenditures on to future genera-

tions.

      Intergenerational transfers can have important effects on national saving

and capital formation in the life grth cycle rrxdel that posits zero or limited

intergenerational altruism. The process by which these transfers affect capital

formation is often referred to as "crowding out" of investment. A natural

question to pose in a life cycle model is whether the ttcrcMding in" of new capi-

tal formation arising from investment incentives exceeds the crding out pro-

duced by deficits potentially associated with these incentives. This question

has particular relevance to present economic affairs since current U.S. pro-

jected deficits reflect, in large part, business tax cuts.

      In addition to analyzing the net impact on capital formation of deficit—

financed business tax cuts, this paper considers the potential for self—

financing business tax cuts. A self—f inancin6 business tax cut is defined here

as a deficit—financed investment incentive that produces an increase in the

econonry's   long run   tax base sufficient to permit the government to reach long

run   budget balance without ever raising tax rates.
      A third   issue of considerable relevance to current economic policy is
whether   gradual increases in investznt incentives delay investirient until the

incentives have been fully phased in. The 1981 Economic Recovery Tax Act (ERTA)

provided for even greater investment incentives after 1984 than between 1981 and

1984. The 1982 Economic Report of the President indicated a potential decline

in the effective tax rate on equity financed new investment in general

industrial equipment from 21 percent in 1982 to negative 514     percent   in 1986.

In part, these figures reflect steadily declining projected inflation rates

interacting with historic cost depreciation provisions. In addition, ERTA
                                         —3—


authorized more favorable depreciation schedules starting in 195. While the

1982 tax act reduced future increases in the acceleration of depreciation, the

1981 act may,   in   part, be responsible for the historically l investment rate

in 1982.

       The principal findings of this paper with respect to these three issues

are:

       (1) Investment incentives, even those financed by short run     increases
            in the stock of debt, significantly increase capital formation in

            life cycle economies.

       (2) Deficit—financed savings incentives, in contrast, typically reduce

            the economy's rate of capital formation in the long run.

       (3) Deficit—financed investment incentives can be self—financing for

            particular, but not unreasonable, parameterizations of neoclassi-

            cal life—cycle growth models.

       () Gradual     phasing in of investment incentives can actually reduce

            rather than stiimlate short term investment.

       (5) The underlying explanation for the relative efficacy of investment

            as oppOsed to savings incentives in stirailating capital formation

            in life cycle ide1s is that investnnt incentives redistribute

            from the old to the young. Since the old in life cycle models

            have higher marginal propensities to consume out of lifetime

            resources than the young, this transfer reduces current consump-

            tion, permitting the "crowding in" of current investxnt.

       The analysis of investment incentives is based on the Auerbach—Kotlikoff

(1983) life cycle computer siraijation model. The del describes the per-

fect foresight growth path of life cycle economies in response to a wide

variety of fiscal policies. For      purposes of   this study the model has been
                                     —11—




expanded to include full or partial expensing of new capital as a policy

option. Expensing is only one of several types of currently legislated invest—

inent incentives; its use is liniited to a small subset of total U.S. investment.

Ffowever, expensing is a convenient devise for analyzing a variety of other

investment incentives including the investment tax credit and the acceleration

of depreciation; rates of fractional expensing can be chosen that produce effec-

tive tax rates on new investment equal to those arising from these other poli-

cies. In addition, if deficit policy is chosen appropriately, expensing poli-

cies can produce a time path of cash flows to the government similar to those

that would arise from changes in the ITC or depreciation schedules.

     The second substantitive addition to the model is the inclusion of cost of

quickly adjusting the econonv's capital stock. As described b many authors

(including Abel, 1979; Hayashi, 1981; and Summers, 1981), such increasing margi-

nal costs of investment generate inframarginal rents to existing capital. As a

consequence, the market valuation of the econol:v's existing capital stock can

differ from its replacement cost. The assumption of quadratic ad,ustment costs

leads to a theory of' investment in which the rate of investment is a linear

function of' Tobin's q (Tobin, 1969) ,the ratio of the stock market value of capi-

tal to its replacement cost. Tobin's q is also an important variable in deter-

mining household consumption and labor supply decisions. These decisions are

based on the current and future wages and rates of return households foresee,

but also on the householdTs initial wealth, including the market value of its

claims to existing capital.

     Since the elderly are the primary owners of capital in a life cycle model,

consideration of adjustment costs, with their associated implications for

changes in the wealth of the elderly, can be quite iortant in assessing the

redistributive impact of numerous fiscal policies. One example is a switch from
                                      —5—




an   income to an equal revenue consumption tax.  Such a policy suggests a signi-
ficant loss in welfare to the elderly, whose wealth holdings must now be spent,
in part, to meet taxes on the purchase of consumption goods. With capital
adjustment   costs, however, there is a countervailing effect serving to increase

the wealth and welfare of the elderly. The stimulus to capital fornation asso-

ciated with the consumption tax produces an irnnrdiate increase in stock mrket

values, reflecting increased inframarginal rents to the existing capital stock.

The higher initial stock market values obviously redound to the advantage of the

elderly.

       In addition to mitigating the intergenerational redistribution from the old

to   the young in the case of a switch to a consumption tax, the inclusion of
adjustment costs in the rdel cushions the fall in stock market values asso-
ciated with investment incentives that discriminate ainst old capital.
Permitting expensing of new capital at higher rates than were previously allowed

and restricting this expensing solely to new capital is an exarle of a policy

injurious to the elderly, since it places existing capital at a financial disad-

vantage relative to new capital. But the welfare loss to the elderly is miti-

gated to the extent that the econonv's desire for an ultimately greater level of

capital per orker raises infranarginal rents on previously installed, i.e.

existing, capital.

             The next section of this paper igores the issue of adjustment costs

in order to clarify, in a simple framework, differences between investment and

savings incentives. The discussion points out equivalence relationships between

investnt incentives and other fiscal policies. In particular,      permitting 100
percent    expensing of new capital in the presence of a capital income tax (levied

either on individuals or on businesses, in the form of a profits tax) is equiva-

lent to imposing a one tine wealth tax at a rate equal to that of the capital
                                           —6—


income tax. If the econon- also taxes labor income at this same rate, intro-

ducing 100 percent expensing taxes wages          and   initial wealth at the same rate.

This tax structure, in turn, is equivalent to a proportional consumption tax.

       With the exception of the investment tax credit, new U.S. business invest—

inent incentives are available to old as well as new capital; the old capital

must, however, be sold to qualify for the new            incentives.   The sale of old capi-

tal requires payment of recapture taxes calculated on the difference between the

asset's new sale price and its adjusted basis. If the taxes incurred in turning

over old assets exceed the present value gain in investment incentives from such

a transaction, turnover will not be stimulated; in this case the econoxciic out-

come of new investment provisions that do not explicitly exclude old capital

will be identical to that which would have occurred had the new incentives been

restricted   solely to new capital.
       Section III considers the potential        for turning over old capital under the

1981 Tax     Act; for much of U.S. capital       produced prior to 19l the    costs of tur—
foyer exceed the benefits. For the reining assets, however, turnover, in the
absence of transaction costs        is  profitable, but turnover taxes still recapture
most of the gains         from these transactions. Hence, with respect to recent tax

legislation, the effective, if not the nominal, tax treatment of new and old
capital is quite different, and the ne law pririly provides investment as
opposed    to   savings   incentives.

                Section IV   describes the version of the    Auerbach—Kotlikoff simulation
model used to compare savings and investment incentives in both the presence and
absence of capital adjustment costs. The fo11owin section presents simulations
of   these   policies and examines the extent of        short—run   and long—run crowding
out.
                                      —T—


      Section VI considers three alternatives to the deficit—financing of

investment incentives. One involves a delay in the introduction of

expensing. A second involves actually increasing the tax on capital income

in conjunction with full expensing, while a third involves a reduction in

the   extent to which expensing is permitted.
      The first simulation shows that a time path of increasingly generous
investment incentives can be associated with simultaneous declines in stock
market   values, quite low and, possibly, negative short term interest rates and

fairly large, positive long term interest rates. Such a policy actually

suppresses short—run investment. The second simulation dent'nstrates the

somewhat paradoxical result that given a structure of investment incentives,

increases in capital income tax rates (e.g. ,   corporate   or dividend tax rates)

will generally stimulate, rather than retard, capital formation, while requiring

an immediate decline in wage taxes to avoid running surpluses. Finally, our

third simulation shows that the government, through a policy of partial

expensing, can raise investment and generate a surplus without ever raising

either   tile capital income tax or the labor income tax.
      The last section of the paper suxmmrizes ntjor findings and relates these

results to recent economic events.
II. Investment Incentives —          Structural   Relationship

       to Other Fiscal Policies

       A simple two period life cycle model of economic growth provides a. con-

venient framework for examining the underlying nature of investment incen-

tives.    Consider such an econolw with a tax             on labor incoi, a tax
Tr,t             profits, and an expensing rate for new capital of et. The
       on business

subscript t denotes the period in which the three instruments are applied.
To simplify the analysis further, assume individuals work only when            young
and    that the depreciation rate, the rate of population growth, and the rate

of technological change are zero.

       Equations (1) and (2) characterize the econoI.r's process of capital

formation:

(1)              =
                     (w1,_i (1
                                 —
                                     t,i)   —
                                                C1,_1)/q_1
(2)
               Co     it—i K (1 +     rt)
        In (1), W,_i (1 —        twt..i) — 0yt1     is the saving of the young   in
period t—l,     their after   tax wages in period t—l less their consumption

in period in t—1. The net price of a unit of capital in period t—1 is given

by q1• Dividing the financial savin, of the young by q.tl determines
their    purchase of   physical capital. The physical capital acquired by the

young at the end of period t—l equals the econon's capital stock at the

beginning of period t, Kt; the old generation in period t (those young                in
t—l)    hold   claims to all the econoç's capital, since the young       in   period t

have no beginning of period assets.

        For the old in period t, consumption, Cot equals the return of prin-

cipal, Q3            plus the after tax return on the investment, q.l Kt rt.
The after tax return, r, includes capital gains and losses:
                                                 —9—



              —   FKt   (1 —
                                trt)    + t —
                                                     Cit_i.
           -t —
                                 _
In (3) FKt (1 —             equals marginal after tax profits per unit of capi-
                Tr,t)
tal. In combination, (2) and (3) imply:


()               = ct K + Kt FKt      —
                                        trt)
This new   expression is also intuitive: the                  consumption of the old in period t

(the young of period t—1) equals after tax business profits plus the value

of the sale of their capital at the prevailing asset price

      Equation (5) expresses q, the net price of purchasing a unit of capi-

tal, in teris of tr
                        t


               = 1 —
                        trt    et



For new capital the net acquisition cost is 1, the price of new capital,

less the tax rebate frog expensing,              'r,t et. Equation (5) also determines

the price of old capital. Since old capital and new capital are perfect

substitutes in production their net acquisition costs must be identical in

equilibrium; hence, old capital sells for tr,t et less than new capital

because the purchaser of new capital receives tr,.t et from the government,

while the purchaser of old capital receives no tax rebate. Since the value

of old capital depends on the prothct of tr,t et, the price of old capital

falls not only when expensing is increased (and rr,t is positive), but also

when the rate of business profits taxation rises, given an expensing policy.

      Equations (1), (Li), and (5) may now be combined to indicate the life-

time budget constraint of the young in period t—1,

                                      (i —   '   t
(6)                +
                        c0     (i —
                                                     1 et l
                                                                  —   r=   w,_1 (1 —
                                                 —10—


and the old in period t—1:

(fl
            C0   =
                     Kt_i   (1 —
                                       tr,t_l   et1) +   Kt_i   FK     (1 —
                                                                                 'r,t—l
       These equations suffice to describe the relationship of savings and

investment incentives to other tax structures. First, consider the case of

zero expensing (e1 =
                            e      =   a).   This assumption produces an econozzy with

period t capital income and wage tax rates of tr,t and                            respectively. In

such an econoL7, the return to new capital, capital produced in period t—land

old capital, capital produced prior to period t—l, are taxed at the same effec-

tive   rates in period t and beyond. With zero expensing, there is no discrimina-
tion in favor of newly produced capital; the relative price of new and old capi-
tal    is always unity. Changes in the time path of I                      and    Iw, that satisfy the
                                                                     r,t
government's long run budget constraint (see Auerbach and Kotlikoff, 1983) are

classified,   in our taxonony, as savings incentives. Section V indicates that
lowering   capital income tax rates will typically depress rather than stimulate

long—term   capital formation if such savings incentives are deficit—financed.
       The essential feature of investnrnt incentives can be illustrated most
simply by assuming     zero wage taxation, per.nent capital income taxation at

rate , zero      expensing prior to period t—l, and a pernent move to 100

percent expensing starting at time t—l.                  Under these assumptions, all       tax
terms drop out of equation (6); the young of period t—l and all future
generations   face zero     effective taxation over their lifetirrs. While the
young and future     generations nominally pay            business    profits taxes in     their
old age, the reduced cost of purchasing capital when they are young exactly
offsets the present value cost of this taxation. Stated differently, new
generations   starting in year t—l are subsidized when young to purchase
                                                    —11—


capital and taxed when old on its return. The subsidy and tax cancel in

present value and the young face no net taxation on their capital invest-

ments.

       While this new tax structure effectively exets the young of period

t—l and all future generations from paying any taxes over their lifetime,

elderly individuals at time t—l                  suffer   a capital loss on their assets equal

to Ki t According to (7) , the consumption of the elderly falls by this
amount; the Ki tr           capital loss constitutes a one time wealth tax on the

old of period t—l. Considering the tax treatment of the young and old

together,     this new tax system is equivalent to the government's collecting
        (1 + FK        Tr
                            in      taxes from the old in period t—l and abolishing taxa—
                t—l
tion thereafter.1
       This                  the special feature of investment incentives,
              exanle highlights

namely that they tax initial holdings of wealth. A second irortant feature
is that they lower the effective tax on the return to savi.ng of young and

future generations. With 100 percent expensing the effective capital incot

tax rate is reduced to zero.

       The presence of wage taxation alters the analysis somewhat. Let us now

assume   positive and pernEnently fixed values of    and                  t...
                                                                                 In   this case

moving   to full expensing leaves young individuals facing                  a lifetime wage

tax,or equivalently a lifetime consumption tax, since (6)                        can now be

rewritten as:
                                                   1+t
(6')          Cy,t_i(1
                            +           + 0o,t      +
                                                               = w



where

              1+-r              1
                      C-i—          t
                                    U
                                               —12—


The    elderly in period t—l ain face an additional wealth tax of Kt_i tr
in addition to business profits taxes of Kti          FK         Tr   If   t equals        the
                                                           t—1
case   of a. proportional incot tax, (7) becomes:
(7')        C0,_1   (1 +     =
                                 Kt_i   (1 +
                                        FK1)
Equations (6') and (7')    denstrate that the rveaent to full expensing in
the    presence of a proportional income tax produces a consumption tax,              or
eq.uivalently-, a wage tax plus a one time wealth tax on the elderly where the

wage and one time wealth tax rates are identical. This tax structure

corresponds exactly to that proposed by Hall and Rabushka (1982) in their

recent flat tax proposal. While the Hall—Rabushka proposal generates a

genuine consumption tax, other proposals such as unlimited use of IRAs and

abolition of the corporate income tax, which are billed as "providing con-

sumption tax treatment" of income flows, produce wage tax rather than con—

suraption tax structures. In the case of unlimited IRAs, the initial owners

of capital can place all their holdings of capital into IRAs, receiving tax

deductions that equal in present value the taxes on withdrawals of principal

plus interest from the IRA. Thus the owners of existing capital face no

effective taxation on the conversion of their capital into consumption

expenditures; a policy of unlimited IRAs effectively              eliminates the capital
income tax component of the income tax with no         effective wealth tax on
existing assets. For those with no initial assets, wage taxation and con-
sumption taxation are structurally equivalent. Hence, a policy of unlimited
IRAs and    a zero corporate income tax replicates a wage tax. It does not
replicate    a consumption tax.

        Another complication of the foregoing analysis is that the actual U.S. tax

law permits existing assets to qualify for new tax incentives, if they are sold

by the existing owner. For example, the 1981 Accelerated Cost Recovery System

(ACRS) does not explicitly exclude old capital, though application of ACRS
                                                             —13—



to   old capital requires a change in the capital's ownership. It is important

to distinguish here between direct capital ownership and indirect ownership

through firms. One normally thinks of life cycle transfers of assets as

being accomplished by the sale of shares in finns owning capital goods.

This is not considered to be a change in the ownership of the capital goods

themselves, which would require the sale of the actual goods by one firm to

another. Thus, we may imagine that in selling off their assets the elderly

can choose whether to transfer ownership of assets or ownership of firms,

with the only resulting difference being whether sale of the capital goods

themselves is recognized for tax purposes. We refer to the former case as

"turnover"       of assets.
        If    old   capital is eligible for new investoEnt incentives (expensing) sub-
ject    to recapture taxation, the budget constraint facing the elderly is no

longer ('T), but rather:


                          =
(1'')
                c0,1           Kti   (   1   —
                                                 Rt_1)
                                                         +
                                                             Kti FK       (1 +   r,t—l
where       is the recapture tax per unit capital.
     A comparison of (T) and (7'')
                                     implies that sale of old capital to acquire

eligibility for current investriEnt incentives available to new capital will
only occur if tr,t_l ei exceeds Ri. If these two terms are equal,
the elderly are indifferent between selling their capital as old capital, e.g.
selling equity title to previo.isly expensed capital, or selling the actual capi-
tal at       its replacement cost of unity and paying recapture taxes.

        If turnover is advantageous, (7' ') indicates that recapture taxes are

equivalent to lump             sum taxes of equal size on the initial generation of
elderly.        For the       young in period t—l, the              lifetime budget constraint is no

longer       (6) but:
                             Co (1   —
                                     t_1 et_l)
                             ________________                        tw,t _)
(6'')        C
                 y,t—1
                         +
                                 +
                             l_Rt FK(l
                                       —
                                            tt)       = W
                                                        I
                                                              (1 —


        For given values of FK,                         and                                   turn—
                                         r,t—l'   r,t
                                                  t           et..i. values of Rt that make

over profitable imply a larger effective after tax return on the saving of the

young. In the case of a zero recapture tax, expensing implies no additional

taxation of the elderly, and an effective subsidy on capital income to the

young.
III. Recapture Taxes and the Exclusion of'   Old Capital
       From the Accelerated Cost Recovery System

       The extent to which recapture taxation inhibits turnover is an empiri-

cal question that depends on the size of changes in investment incentives.

The set of' new incentives considered here are those provided by the

Accelerated Cost ecovery Systea. Though the business tax provisions have

again been altered by the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of l92,

the more recent legislation represents a small change from previous law, and

introduces no additional incentives to turn over old assets to obtain the

tax treatment accorded new assets. This is because the l9d2 Act maintains

current   depreciat ion allowances indefinitely.
       The 1981 Act introduced a sharp increase in the present value of depre-
ciation allowances relative to   those previously available. Like an increase

in   the expensing fraction restricted to newly produced capital, accelerated
depreciation can lower the value of    existing    assets. While the new ACRS
provisions   are available to owners of old assets provided they sell

(turnover) their old assets, the sale of these assets generates recapture taxes

that   my exceed the net increase in depreciation allowances. To the extent that
such a sale is attractive, the fraction of the loss in value that the seller
recoups   represents a. "leakage" to old capital of the investment incentive

embodied   in CRS.
       The recapture treatment of structures and equipment differs and they
must be considered separately. For structures, the seller must pay a tax on
the difference between sale price and depreciated basis, with the difference
between sale price and hypothetical straight—line basis taxed as a capital

gain, and the additional difference between straight—line basis and actual
                                               —16--



basis (positive if a more accelerated depreciation method has been used),

taxed as ordinary incon. Thus, the total tax due on an asset with a one

dollar sale price is:


(8) R = c (1 —              +         —
               BSL)             (SL
where c is the capital gains tax rate (equal to .28 for corporations) and I is

the inco tax rate (Jt6 for corporations). The basis B and hypothetical

straight—line basis B51 depend on the age of the asset, which deteraines the

extent to which depreciation alliances have been taken, and the asset's initial

purchase price. If a t year old asset physically depreciates at a constant

exponential rate , and the inflation rate is it,       then   its initial purchase price
                                  t
was e     . Thus,        letting bSL and b be the straight—line basis and actual

basis for an asset aged t per initial cost, we have from (b)


(9)       Rt =    c(l   -
                            b1 e(4t) +        I et(bL   -   bt)

in return for this recapture tax, the potential seller receives one dollar

times the number of units of' capital (at replacement cost) for his asset rather

than the value it would coranand with its old depreciation allowances. Since

investors imist be indifferent between old and new capital, the price of an asset

not turned over must reflect the difference in depreciation allowances afforded

new capital and those available to old capital.



(lo'/     q   =    1 — 1 (7               rt (Tt)t

where Z0 is the present lue of reLnining depreciation allowances for an asset

of age t initially purchased for a dollar and               is the present value of

allowance per dollar of new capital under A0±tS. Equation (10) corresponds to

the earlier equation (5) derived for the case of expensing. Here, the expensing
                                                  —17—


fraction e is replaced by the more general expression of the difference between

the values of prospective depreciation allowances on new and old assets.

        Using   (9) and   (10), we may now ask whether the turnover tax Rt exceeds the

increase in sale price (i —           qt)   that the seller can obtain by opting for recap-
ture. In addition, letting Z0 be the present value of depreciation allowances

for    a new asset purchased under pre—1981 law, we my calculate what fraction of
the capital loss generated by ACRS is avoided when turnover is profitable.
Since    the price of an asset of age t would have been

              t                       t (ó_n)t
(ii)         q0 = 1 —     t (z0   —     e

had there been no change in tax regime, the capital loss caused by ACRS for
existing assets not turned over is

(12)         q — qt   =
                          T(ZACRS
                                      —


per    dollar of age t capital.
        Our calculations require parameter values for ô and iT, the depreciation
and inflation rates, and prior depreciation provisions. For
                                                            purposes of
illustration,     we set 6 =      .03 and r = .Ob.       We assume an after tax nodnal
discount rate of .10 and that prior tax depreciaticn followed the 150 per-
cent declining balance forraila with optimal straight—line switch—over, based
on a tax lifeline of 35 years. These estimates of both actual and tax
depreciation     are meant to correspond roughly to a typical structures invest-

ment (see Jorgenson and Sullivan, 1982). We assume assets are purchased six

monthsinto the tax year and that tax payments are made annually, midway
through the tax year as well. Post—1981 tax depreciation follows the 175
percent declining balance fornula with optimal straight—line switch—over,
based on a tax lifetii of 15 years, as dictated by ACES.
                                           —18—



      Table 1 shows the results of calculations of qt and Rt for structures
purchased   t   years before the enactment of PLCRB. The last co1nmn   shows the

fraction   of the capital loss caused by ACRS (equal to 12.1 cents per dollar

of capital) that could be recouped by turnover. Though turnover would not

be   useful for structures alreac' conlete1y written off, it appears advan-
tageous for the bulk     of   structures. Because of growth and   depreciation, a

large fraction of the structure's capital stock is represented by assets

purchased in recent years. For those assets, recoupment is substantial.

For structures purchased within four years of the 1981 tax change, turnover

allows a recouent of over half the capital loss caused by ACR. This

figure is 85 percent for assets only one year old. Overall, if we assume a

constant real rate of annual investment growth      of   3 percent, this recoupment

froLl turnover amoui-its to about one third of the capital loss on.structures,

given our parameterization. This result also suggests that, absent transac-

tion costs, a large fraction of the structures capital stock ought to have

been turned over upon the enactment of ACRb. However, such costs are clearly

substantial for certain assets, such as      factories   and bui1din, cox1ementary

to other productive factors in a compan''s production process. However, one

would expect to see a greater turnover activity in commercial structures, such

as apartment buildings and office buildings.

       We turn next to the recapture treatment of equipment. Here, the analysis

is complicated by the fact that most equipment qualifies for the investment tax

credit, but only if the asset is new. The law greatly restricts the ability of

an investor in used property to obtain the LTC. Moreover, the credit obtained

by the original purchaser is also subject to recapture if the number of years

the asset has been held is less than the miniim number of years required to

qualify for such a credit. For example, equipment purchased before 1961 needed
                                      Table 1

                         THE INCENTIVE TO RESELj.. ASSETS
                                    (St   r,icture)
         Per Dollar of Age t Capital                              Fraction of
Age      Recapture    Value without          Gain fror Resale     Capital Loss
 (t)     Tax — Rt     Resale — q•t           (1 —         — Rt)   Recovered

   1        .021            .876                 .103                .85
   2        o46             .864                 .090                .74
   3        .069            .853                 .on3                .64
   4        .090            .843                 .067                .55
   5        .107            .834                 .059                .49
   6        .124            .825                 .051                .42
   7        .139            .818                 .043                .36
   8        .153            .811                 .036                .30         •
   9*       .164            .805                 .031                .26
  10*       .ii5            .800                 .026                .21
              .                 .                     .

              .                 .                     .
> 35         .280           .727                —.007                 ——




* Once an asset is 100 months  old, the fraction of (BSL — B) subject to ordi-
nary incor taxation declines by one percent per month until it reaches zero at
200 months. This    is
                     accounted for in these calculations.
                                                     —20—


a tax lifetime of at least seven years to qualify for the full 10 percent

credit. Assets with lifetimes of between five and seven years received only a

6—2/3 percent credit, and those with lifetimes between three and five years

received a 3—1/3 percent credit. If an asset with a lifetime exceeding seven

years were sold after, say, six years, the seller would have to repay one—third

of the original credit received; if the sale were after four years, two—thirds of

the original credit would be repaid, and so on.

        A second difference in recapture treatment of equipment is that the entire

differential between sale price and basis is taxed as ordinary incon, unless

sale price exceeds initial purchase price, in which case the gain on purchase

price is taxed as a capital gain. These two differences in the recapture treat-

ment of equipment make turnover less attractive than in the case of structures.

        As long as the sale price of the asset is less than original purchase

price, the total recapture tax on one dollar of equipment aged t is


(13)         Et =   '   (P —      bt   e(6T)t) + (k —       kt) e(1)t

where bt,       iT and T are defined as before, k is the investment tax credit

c1aid originally, and kt the credit that, ex post, the asset lifetinr t would

have dictated for the asset. F, less than unity, is the sale price. It

accounts for the fact that, unlike a dollar of new capital, this asset will only

receive the ACES depreciation deductions and not the investment tax credit.

Thus:2


 (14)        P = 1 —      (it + t           —   IP   ZACRS)

        or
                    1—k —         tzACES
                        1 —   I
If the asset is not sold, then the value of the t—year old capital per dollar of

replacement cost is:
                                            —21—


(15)           = 1 —   (   +   I Zcs   —   tZ   e)
which differs from the equation for structures (10) only in the inclusion of the

investment tax credit.

       The seller of an asset will gain from turning the asset over if          —   qt
exceeds Rt. However, for representative parameters for equipment, this will not

occur. Table 2 shows the values of Rt and              for an asset that depreciates at a

rate of .12 and under old law was written off over a tax lifetime of ten years

using the double—declining balance rrthod with a switch—over to straight line.

The value of P is .839, and the inflation rate and discunt rates are, as above,

set at .08 and .10. As the results show, the prospective seller would always

lose by turning assets over on resale. Thus, owners of equipment can escape

none of the capital loss induced by the liberalization of depreciation allowances

for new capital goods. This loss is described by equation (12) and equals 10.5

cents of capital (rrasured at replacement cost).

       Thus no equipment, but a substantial fraction of structures, could gain by

being brought under ACRS. In the case of structures, a 1are fraction of the

capital loss induced by AORS could be avoided in this way. However, the pres-

ence of transaction costs of unknown magnitude rkes it difficult to know how

mch of this turnover would take place. We may place upper and lower bounds on

the size of the capital loss induced by the introduction of ACRS. With no turn—

over, the loss equals approxiiately 10.5 cents per dollar of existing equipnnt

and 12.1 cents per dollar of existing           stmctures.   With the zxiiiim gain from

turnover, about one third of the loss on structures is recou.>ed. Using estiirates

of the equipment/strctures breakdown of t1• percent and 55.6            percent,    respec-

tively, obtained from data for 19T5, and with an estite of 2.56 trillion

dollars for the value in 1980 of the rep1acernt cost of the business capitai
                      Table 2

            THE INCENTIVE TO RESELL ASSETS
                     (Equipment)




      Per Dollar of Age t Capital
Ae    Recaptu€e   Value withut      Gain f.€om Rsale
(t)   Tax-R        Resale—q         (P—q —R)
  1      .054          .84T           —.062
  2      .135          .T96           —.o
  3      .161          .153           —.OS1
  4      .215          .118           —.io
  5      .220          .690           —.071
  6      .255          .667           —.o8
  7      .246          .645           —.052
           .             .               .




>10      .3b6          .521           —.o6
                                          —23—



stock,   we obtain a range of 233 to 292 billion dollars as the effective wealth

tax inô.ced by   the   introthction of ACR$.

      This result is only a rough calculation, and ignores the actual heterogen-
eity of the capital stock. Moreover, in the presence of adjustment costs (see
below), the prices of all capital goods, including old ones, y rise with a
surge    in der.nd induced by   an investment incentive such as ACRS. This would act
to   offset part of the capital loss induced by the more generous tax treatxint of

new capital versus old. However, the losses just calculated still are rieanin—

ful in that they represent the drop in value of existing capital relative to the

value    such capital would have had, had the additional tax benefits of AC}S
applied to all capital.
IV. The   Simulation Model and Its Parameters

    The Auerbach—Kotljkoff sinulation model calculates the equilibrium growth

path of an econonr consisting of government, household, and production sectors.

The life cycle version of the model used in this study incorporates expensing of

new capital and costs of adjusting the level of the capital stock. In addition

to expensing, the government's policy instruments include capital income, con-

sumption, and wage taxes, the level of government consumption, and the choice of

a deficit policy.

     The household sector consists of fifty—five overlapping generations, with

the total population growing at a constant rate. The fifty—five period life

span corresponds roughly to the life span of an adult. In each generation there

is a single, representative individual, and generations differ only with respect

to their opportunity sets. The production sector is characterized by fir rx—

imizing the present value of their profits by choosing both annual levels of

labor input and annual rates of investment.

     Each household chooses life cycle labor supply and consumption by maxi—

mizin an interteiorally separable CES utility function (Auerbach, Kotlikoff,

and Skinner, l983) with a constant static elasticity of substitution between

consuraption and leisure at a point in tiiae and a constant interteiaporal elasti-

city of substitution between consumption at different points in time, leisure at

different points in time, and consuntion and leisure at different points in

time. The simulation presented below incorporates a one percent population

growth rate, a static elasticity of substitution of .8, and an interteniporal

elasticity of substitution of .25. These elasticities are suggested by recent

eirical studies of saving and labor supply.5

     The production function used here is Cobb—Douglas, ith capital's income

share equal to twenty—five percent. The costs associated with investment are




       ——   -. — — —      c.., £IU.S   ' j. v can 4 0. Id Q a U   LI LUC   I ¼) S LI U A. LI   I., SC .1. U. U 41. C U LI   LI 4 .5.415
                                           —25—


quadratic as in the sirrafiation model of Kotlikoff, Learner, and Sachs (1981),

that is, the mr4nal cost of a new dollar of capital, including Installation

costs is:


(16)         p(') =   1 +
                            bC)

where I is investment and K is existing capital. The term b is the adjustment

cost coefficient. Larger values of b imply greater marginal costs of new capi-

tal goods for a given rate of investment.

       The government choice of policy instruments is constrained by an inter—

temporal budget that holds over infinite tine.        This   budget constraint requires

that   the present value of government capital income, wage, and consumption tax
receipts be sufficient to pay     for   the present value of government consumption,
the present value of expensing deductions, and the value of existinb government
net    debt. The assumption that government debt (surplus) per capita cannot grow

infinitely large is sufficient to generate this constraint on the tine path of

government policies.

       The constraint implies that government policies are necessarily inter-

dependent. A corollary is that certain deficit policies are not feasible. For

example, the government cannot permanently change its expensing policy and per-

manently meet the consequent change in its receipts by simply altering its issue

of debt. Such a policy would lead, over the long term, to either an infinite

debt or an infinite surplus per capita. The probability that the change in the

present value of tax receipts exactly equals the present value loss in revenues

from changes in expensing is zero. hence, to meet its budget constraints, the

government rmist eventually raise or lower a tax instrument or its level of con-

sumption in response to chanes in its expensing policy. The next section indi-

cates that for certain expensing policies the government need never raise any

tax rate and, indeed, must lower tax rates at some point in the future to bring
                                    —26—


government finances into long term balance. Investment incentives that require

no increases in current or future tax rates or reductions in current or future

government consumption are described here as self—financing.
                                        —27—



V.      Investnnt versus Savings Incentives —   Illustrative   Simulations

     No single comparison of policies that do and don't discriminate against old

capital can meaningfully summarize all differences in economic growth paths

associated with investment versus savings incentives; the government's inter—

temporal budget constraint requires adjusting other government policies in

response   to these incentives in order to maintain a present value equality bet-
ween its receipts and expenditures (including interest and principal repayments
on debt). The differences in capital formation arising from the implementation

of investment rather than savings incentives depends on the choice and timing      of
these   other necessary OiCy   adjustments.
     Contrast,    for example, two policies that begin with a proportional incoire
tax, one introducing permanent, 100 percent expensing, and the other permanently
rernovjn   the tax on capital income. The reduction   or possible increase in reve-
nues from either of these policies could be financed by immediate or future

changes in the tax rate on labor income, current or future changes in government

consumption, or some combination of changes in these and/or other available

instruments. Given the range of possible concommitant adjustments in other

policies, statennts such as "investment incentives stiulate more capital for-

mation than savings   incentives"   are meaningless. Comparisons of investment and

savings    incentives for explicitly specified policies of adjusting to the asso-
ciated revenue changes do, however, permit meaningful conditional comparisons of
investrent   and savings incentives.

     The   first similation we present involves of a permanent re!aoval of capital
incoire taxes, with debt policy used to maintain the wage tax      rate at thirty per-

cent for five years, and wage taxes adjusted thereafter to maintain a constant
                                              —25—



level   of debt   per   capita. This simulation also assumes that there are no

adjustment costs involved in changing the capital stock.

       The initial steady state is characterized by a capital—output ratio of 3.04

and a gross interest rate of 8.22 percent. The specified policy leads             to   a

7.35   percent    reduction in capital per capita, and a greater reduction in labor

supply, with      the   resulting drop of 8.90 percent in output per capita. The wage

tax rises to !47.8      percent   in the long run. The path of per capita capital

stocks over the transition period is shown by the solid line            in Figure 1.
        The solid line in Figure 2 shows  welfare effects on transition cohorts
                                              the

of this deficit financed elimination of capital income taxation; the horizontal
axis indexes the cohort's year of birth (relative to the first transition
year, i), and the vertical axis measures the amount by            which the cohort's labor

endowment vector would need to be increased (or decreased) under the old regime

to allow the achievement of the same utility level as that            attained under the

new regime. The long run welfare loss is 8.7           percent,   but, in the short run,

older generations gain relative to their ex ante prospects. This pattern of

gains    and losses is similar to that occurring under a policy (examined in
Auerbach    et a].., 19d3) of     switching immediately to wage taxation without       running

deficits, represented by the dotted line in Figure 2. However,             both the short
run    gains and the long run losses are larger when debt policy is used, because

of   the further shifting of tax liabilities onto future generations. The impact
on capital forrr.tion is       another   difference associated with the use of   deficits

to    finance savings incentives; the dotted line in Figure 1 shows the path of

capital per capita arising from a balanced budget switch from incoue to wage

taxation. Rather than falling, the capital stock rises in the long run.

        The next policy we consider is a move to immediate expensing of all invest-

ment, with the income tax held at 30         percent   for five years and deficits used to
                              CAPITAL INCOME TAX REMOVAL




Capital Stock
(Ratio to
Initial Level)

1.12
                                                                                            Zero
                                                                                  ——S—SS
                                                                                            Deficit
1.10                                                                   S
                                                                           —— —             Policy
                                                                — S5
                                                            S
                                                •0 —
                                                       5•
1.08                                    OS —


                              a   aS
                          S
                      S
1.06


1.04


1.02


1.00


 .98


 .96
                                                                                           Five Year
                                                                                           Deficit
 .94                                                                                       Policy

       0         10                    20               30                  40         50
                                            Year of Transition
                                —30—



                              FIGURE 2
                         WEALTH EQUIVALENTS
                    CAPITAL INCOME TAX REMOVAL




Wealth
Equivalent

1.01



1 .   00
                                   IS
                                        S
  .99                                   II
                                          S
                                              I
                                               I
  • 98




  .97
                                                                  Zero
                                                          ——_e
                                                               a e Def icit
  .96                                              —a—.           Policy


  .95




  .94




  .93
                                                                   Five Year
                                                                   Deficit
                                                                   Policy
  .92


           —55   —35              —15                +5                    +25
                                 Cohort
                                          —31—


finance the loss in revenue. After five years, income taxes rise to mintain a

constant level of debt per capita. The capital stock and welfare transitions

are shown by the solid lines in Figures 3 an 4,     with   corresponding paths under

immediate balanced—budget expensinb (as discussed in Auerbach et al., 1953),

shown by the dotted lines. The effects of the implicit wealth tax on the origi-

nal owners of capital is evident in both diagrams. The utility of older tran—

sition cohorts is decreased, and capital accumulation enhanced by the reduction

in their consumption.

      The five year delay in allowing tax rates to rise again leads to a lower

long—run capital stock, but to a imich smaller degree. The reason for this is

that the deficits created by the policy during its first five years are imich

snaller. The long—run level of debt to capital is just 2.13 percent, compared

to 13.8 percent in the case of the first siinjlation. In fact, the long run        rate
of incon taxation is 28.9 percent —— lower than the value that obtained before

the creation of    the   debt.

      Thus   far in our sixrn.ilations, we have igiored the possibility that the short
run supply curve for capital goods may slope upward. That is, attempts to
increase quickly the amount of capital in response to an increased investment or
savings   incentive may    result in a higher price of capital goods relative to con—
suinption    goods. If this is true, then our results may overstate the capital

loss borne by holders of existing capital arising from an investment incentive

such as expensing.

      Setting the adjustment parameter b (see (16) )    equal to the empirically
plausible value of 5 (see Blanchard, 1951) for the siinilation of a transition to

expensing     with a five year deficit policy yields the following results. First,
the   drop in capital stock values by the full value of expensing is not immed-

iate, because of the offsetting effect of the increasing supply price of new
                                                                                          -32—


                                                                                      FIGURE 3

                                              CAPITAL PATHS (PER CAPITA)
                                              FULL INVESTMENT EXPENSING




Capital Stock
(Ratio to
Initial Level)
1.6                                                                                                                                              Zero Deficit
                                                                                                                                  e — — — eee   Policy
                                                                                                                  a——
                                                                                                                        a—                       Five Year
                                                                                                         as
                                                                                                              a                                  Deficit Policy
1.5                                                                                            50—
                                                                                                     —


                                                                                          0•
                                                                                  S
                                                                                      a
                                                                              S
                                                                          S
                                                                      S
                                                                  S
                                                              S
1.4                                                   S
                                                          S
                                                  S
                                              S
                                          I
                                      S
                                  S
                              p
                          S
                          I
1.3                   S

                 S




1.2



1.1



1.0


 .9
      0          10                                                       20                              30                 40                 50
                                                                              Year of Transition
                             —33—



                           FIGURE 4
                      WEALTR EQUIVALENTS
                 FULL INVESTMENT EXPENSING




Wealth
Equ ival ent

1.06
         —r
                                                        Zero Deficit
1.05 ——                                                 # Policy
                                                      I
                                                          Five Year
                                                  S
                                                         Deficit Policy
1.04 ——                                      I


1 . 03




1 .02




1.01




1 .00




 .99


          —55   —35            —15           +5                  +25
                               Cohort
                                         —34.-



capital   goods. The price drops by 22.5 percent in the first year of the transi-

tion rather than 30 percent. Second, the welfare lOSS     of   older transition

cohorts is smaller and the long—mn gain also sn.ller (5.92 percent) than in the

sizm1ation without adjustment costs (6.29 percent). The welfare paths are corn—

pared   in Fiire 5.   Finally, the   capital stock grows by a smaller amount,
because not   all of the demand induced by the investment incentives translates

into increased output of capital.
                                               —35—



                                           FIGURE 5

                                WEALTH EQUIVALENTS
                          THE IMPACT OF ADJUSTMENT COSTS
               (SWITCH TO EXPENSING U}DER FIVE YEAR DEFICIT POLICY)




Wealth
Equivalent
1.020   —                                                                                               No Adjustmen
                                                                                                       P Costs


                                                                                                   I        Adjustment
1.015                                                                                          I            Costs
                                                                                               I
                                                                                      S
                                                                                          II
                                                                                      I
                                                                                 IS
1.010
                                                                             S
                                                                            S
                                                                           S
                                                                          S
                                                                         S

                                                                      IS I
1.005                                                                I
                                                                 p




                                                             I
1.000




                      S                          pa
 .995
                           S_a
                                 ——S__s——S




                       1
 .990
                                       I                 I                                             —l



         —55         —45             —35              —25            —15                               —5


                                                Cohort
                                              —36—



VI.    Dealing with Deficits

       Various strategies have been offered to reduce short run deficits asso-

ciated with tax cut policies. In this section, we present three simulations

that bear on the feasibility and advisability of avoidin short run deficits

while increasing the incentive to invest.

       A   typical solution to short—run revenue losses is     a phase—in of investment

incentives.         This   characterized the Economic Recovery Tax Act of   1981, which
called     for the acceleration of depreciation allowances to increase in 1981 and

again in 1985 and 1986.6 The problem          with policies of this kind is that they
induce capital losses gradually over the phase—in period. The awareness of
potential investors of such future losses discouras investment in the short
run, defeating the entire purpose of the legislation. This can be seen in the
next   simulation, which measures        the effects of a five—year phase—in of expensing
without     deficits, with the expensing fraction rising linearly from .2 in the

first      transition year to 1 in the fifth. Deficits are avoided by the adjustrcent
of the income tax.
       Though investment eventually expands under this policy, the short run
impact       discourage investment. Figure 6 compares per capital capital
            is to

stocks for the first twenty years of this policy with those arising from an
imidiate balanced budget switch to full expensing. The short—run disincentive
to    invest is also reflected b. the drop in interest rates. The initial steady

state interest rate is 8.22 percent. Under the investment phase—in policy, the

gross      interest rate (the yield that bonds would have to offer to provide the
same after tax return as capital, inclusive of' capital gains         and losses) is

negative      until the phase—in is completed, and then jumps to over       12 percent.

Thus,      such a policy would sharply increase the slope of the yield curve.
                                                                        —37—


                                                                   FIGURE 6

                                                     CAPITAL PATHS
                                               EXPENSING WITHOUT DEFICITS




Capital Stock
(Ratio to
Initial Level)

1.40
                                                                                                                            Immediate
                                                                                                                  a   a .' Switch
1.35                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                 aS
                                                                                                                        Five Year
                                                                                             a
1.30                                                                                     a                                 se—In
                                                                                    S.


                                                                                a
                                                                            a
                                                                        S
1.25                                                                S

                                                               S

                                                           S
                                                       S
1.20
                                                   p

                                               S

                                           S
1.15



1.10                                   S
                                       V

                                   S
                               V
                           V
                       a
1.04               S
               a
               V




1 .   00



  .95:


           0                               5                                10                                         15               20

                                                                   Year of Transition
                                           —35.-



    A more successful way     of   avoiding deficits recognizes that investment

incentives can often be achieved by raising rather than lowering capital income

taxes. Recall that under a policy of full expensing that is effectively

restricted   to new capital the effective tax rate on capital income is zero.
While the return on savin is not taxed at the margin, the increase in the sta-
tutory capital income tax rate increases the implicit wealth tax on existing
capital. This reduces the consumption of wealth holders, permitting an expan-
sion of   national saving and investment. In addition, the extra revenue from the

capital income tax allows the government to lower other taxes. Starting from an

initial   steady state with full expensing and a 30 percent income tax, raising
the capital income tax rate to 50 percent allows an immediate drop in the wage
tax rate to 26.5   percent   (falling eventually to 21.6 percent) and an eventual
increase in capital per person of 34.6 percent.
     Finally,    investment incentives may be self—financing in the long run,
requiring    no current or future increase in statutory tax rates to achieve a rre

capital intensive long run steady state with no debt. As an exale, from an

initial steady state with no expensing consider a policy of moving directly to

50 percent fractional expensing, with the income tax held constant at 30 percent

for twenty years; while there are short run deficits, the expansion of the

income tax base over time raises revenue sufficient to retire this debt.

Indeed, in the twentieth year the debt—capital ratio is —.36 percent. This sur-

plus permits a slight decrease in the income tax thereafter (to avoid an

expanding surplus), to 29.2 percent in the twenty—first year and 29.0 percent in

the long run. The per capita capital stock increases by 25.9 percent in the

long run.

     Part of the explanation of this result is that, while taxes on capital

income and, eventually, labor income decline, existing capital owners face
                                      —39—



increased implicit wealth taxation under this same policy. Their welfare
declines,   thus distinguishing this policy from those offered by the "free lunch"
theorists. A second aspect of this policy is that the econorr has shifted to a
more efficient tax structure, substituting lump sum taxes on initial wealth
holders for distortionary income taxes on current and future generations. These
efficiency gains also provide economic resources to "cut taxes and raise
revenues."
     While this policy of fractional expensing eventually leads to surpluses and
tax rate reductions, a policy of full expensing (discussed at the beginning of
-tne previous section) does not have this feature, indicating the presence of

nonlinearities in the functions determining the ecouon's behavior. One such

nonlinearity is associated with the well—known result that the excess burden of

a tax rises at a rate proportional to the square of the tax rate itself. Thus,

the initial reduction in the effective tax rate on saving induced by a policy of

50 percent expensing does proportionally more to reduce the distortion of

savings behavior than does a policy of nxving froia 50 percent to full expensing.
                                          _140...




VII. Su.mmary

       The key difference between savings and investment incentives in closed eco—

nomies is the applicability of these incentives to old as well as new capital.

Investment incentives discriminate against old capital; savings incentives do

not. This discrimination reduces the market value of old capital and, there-

fore, the economic resources of owners of the existing capital stock. The

reductions in the resources and welfare of initial wealth holders under invest-

ment policies are essential]- identical to those arising from a one time wealth

tax.

       In life cycle economies, the remaining resources of the elderly are held

primarily   in form of non—human as    opposed to human wealth.   The effective wealth
tax generated by     investment   incentives falls, therefore, most heavily on the
elderly. For a given time path of goverrunent consumption and given character-
istics of   tastes   and technolor, extra taxes on   the currently   elderly imply off-
setting receipts of resources by young and future generations. In life cycle

economies, the elderly have a greater marginal propensity to consume than the

young because of their shorter life expectancies; future generations obviously

have zero current marginal propensities to consume. Hence, the intergenera-

tional redistribution of resources away from the elderly, arising from investment

incentives, leads to a major reduction in the econo's current consumption.

The reduction in the consumption of the elderly effectively finances the

"crowding in" of investment.

       For certain ranges of investment policy instruments, the long term tax

revenues arising from the increase in capital intensity are sufficient to

finance the short run loss in revenue from these incentives. Hence, there is a

range of investment incentives that are self—financing. In general, deficits
                                       —41—


associated with investment incentives are less injurious to capital forization

than   those associated with incentives.

       In contrast to investment incentives, savings incentives such as permanent

reductions in the taxation of profits at the corporate level typically redis-

tribute towards rather than away from the elderly. The impetus to current con—

suxnption arising from this redistribution ——the incone effect ——   is   offset to

some extent by the greater marginal incentive to save ——   the   substitution effect

of a   higher after tax rate of return. The net impact of savings incentives on
capital formation   depends on the use of deficits to finance these incentives.

As demonstrated here, deficit—financed reductions in capital income tax rates

can sharply lower national capital formation.

       The policy most conducive to capital accuimlation involves sirmaltaneousJy

increasing investment incentives and capital incone tax rates. Such a policy

caüd eliminate deficits, raise the after tax return to narinal saving, and

produce income and substitution effects that both operate in the direction of

stiilating    capital formation.
                                         —42—



Footnotes
1.   For the government to maintain long term budget balance, it needs to

     choose a path of overnzaent consumption that equals K—i         +
                                                                         FK
                                                                              t—l)
     present value.


2.   After the effective date of the l92 Act, this result would be altered by

     the application of a fifty percent basis adQustraent for new credits taken.


3.   U.S. Department of Conurce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, "Fixed

     Non—Residential     Business and Residential Capital in the U.S.,   1925—1975,"

     PB   253 725, 1976.

4.   Flow   of   Funds, "Balance Sheets for the U.S. Econontr, 1945—19d0," Board of

     Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C., l98].


5.   Auerbach; Kotlikoff and Skinner (l93) survei this literature.

6.   The l95 and 19ö6 changes have been repealed by the Tax Equity and

      Fiscal Responsibility Act of 19b2.
                                            _14 3...



References


Abel, A.B., Investment and the Value of Capital (New York: Garland Publishing,

        1979)


Auerbach, A.J. and L.J. Kotlikoff, "National SAvings, Economic Welfare and the

        Structure of Taxation," in M. Feldsteirt, eci., Behavioral Simulation Methods

        in Tax Policy Analysis (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983), forth-

        coming.


Auerbach, A.J., L.J. Kotlikoff, and J. Skinner, "The       Efficiency   Gains f rota

        Dynamic Tax Reforx," International Economic Review, February 1983, forth-

        Coming.


hail,    R.E. and A. Babushka, "Flat Tax Proposal," 1982, mitaeo.

Hayashi, F. "Tobin's Marginal and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation,"
        Econonietrjca   50   (January 1982), 213—22.

Jorgenson,       D., and M. Sullivan, "Inflation and Corporate Capital Recovery," in

        C. Hulten, ed., Depreciation, Inflation and the Taxation of Income from

        cpita1 (Washington: Urban Institute, 1981).


Kotlikoff,       L.J., E. Leamer and J. Sachs, "The International Economics of Transi-
        tional Growth —— the Case of the United States," NBER Working Paper No. TT3

        (September    1981).

Summers,    1., "Taxation and Cororate Investment: A q Theory Approach," Brookings
        Papers    on Economic Activity II (1:1981) , 67—127.


Tobin, J., "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory," Journal of Money
     Credit Banking 1 (Febraury 1969), 15—29.
