NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENTICE-BR: THE EFFECTS OF BACKSTOP TECHNOLOGY R&D
ON CLIMATE POLICY MODELS
David Popp
Working Paper 10285
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10285
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2004

The author thanks Ian Sue Wing and seminar participants at Rensselaer Poytechnic Institute for helpful
comments. Janna Matlack and Ashley Walter provided excellent research assistance. Financial support for
this work was provided by the National Science Foundation under grant number SES-0001679. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models
David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 10285
February 2004
JEL No. O33, O41, Q42, Q43, Q55
ABSTRACT
Recent attempts to endogenize technology in climate policy models have produced mixed results.
Models including alternative technologies find large gains from induced technological change.
However, technological progress in these models comes through learning-by-doing, which ignores
the potential opportunity costs of technological change. Models using R&D spending as the driver
of technological change address this. However, since these models typically include only a single
representative energy technology, substitution across technologies is not possible. This paper
addresses these shortcomings by including policy-induced energy R&D in a model with a backstop
energy technology. I show that, while induced technological change is important, larger welfare
gains come from simply adding an alternative technology to the model. As in models with a single
technology, opportunity costs of research limit the role induced innovation can play. Moreover,
since the backstop technology improves welfare even without climate policy, accurate policy
analysis depends on a carefully constructed baseline simulation.
David Popp
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
400 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1090
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu

Much debate over climate change policy revolves around the potential costs of such
policies. Many economists argue that policy prescriptions such as those proposed by the Kyoto
Protocol do too much, too quickly. Advocates of more stringent policies often point to the
potential of new technologies to reduce the costs of complying with such stringent regulations.
As much research has shown, environmental policies can be expected to induce technological
change that makes reducing emissions less costly.1 Nonetheless, until recently, most climate
policy models did not explicitly link policy to technological improvements.
Recent attempts to endogenize technological change in climate models have produced
varying results. In general, models predicting strong impacts of induced technological change
(ITC) include several alternative technologies, and model technological improvements through
learning-by-doing. Most models finding a limited role for ITC include only a single energy
technology, and assume technological improvements result from increases in energy research
and development (R&D) spending.
Each modeling strategy has potential drawbacks.

While assuming that technology

evolves via learning-by-doing may fit historical correlations between installed capacity and the
cost of energy technologies, it treats such learning as a black box. As a result, learning-by-doing
models do not address the costs of acquiring new knowledge. This is important because new
energy R&D may crowd out other forms of R&D. Since the social rates of return to R&D are
high, such crowding out has important macroeconomic effects. Models including energy R&D,
such as Popp (2003) and Goulder and Schneider (1999), find that crowding out of other R&D
limits the potential contributions of ITC.

1

See, for example, Lanjouw and Mody (1996), Jaffe and Palmer (1997), Newell, Jaffe, and Stavins (1999), and
Popp (2002).

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

2

Alternatively, models that only include a representative energy technology allow for
technology to increase energy efficiency, but do not offer the opportunity for new, carbon-free
energy sources to develop. Such technologies, which are assumed abundant, and thus available
at constant marginal cost, are commonly referred to as backstop technologies. Currently, the
high costs of technologies such as wind and solar energy limit their potential contribution to
energy consumption. However, one would expect climate policies to induce research lowering
these costs. For example, Popp (2002) shows a dramatic increase in solar energy patents during
the energy crisis of the 1970s. Because these energy technologies allow production to continue
without increased carbon emissions, research that lowers the costs of such technologies could
substantially lower the cost of achieving carbon emissions reductions.
To address these concerns, in this paper I introduce a model including both a backstop
technology and ITC provided via research and development. The paper extends the ENTICE
model (Popp 2003) to include research on both energy efficiency and a carbon-free backstop
technology. I find that adding a backstop technology to the model does lower the costs of
climate policies, and does increase the potential contribution of ITC. As in Popp (2003), the
opportunity costs of R&D limit the role that ITC can play. In fact, the biggest gains come not
from ITC, but from simply adding a backstop to the model. That is, even without ITC, the
presence of a backstop technology lowers the costs of reducing carbon emissions. Moreover,
some consumption of backstop energy technologies occurs even without climate policy. When
considering the gains from policy, one should only consider the marginal changes in usage of the
backstop technology that result. Thus, capturing a baseline scenario that accurately includes
alternative energy sources is important.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

3

I. Literature Review
Despite the growing evidence that environmental policy influences the direction of
technological change, few climate change models directly incorporate links between policy and
technology.

Even fewer include a backstop technology.

Models that include innovation

typically do so in one of two ways. Bottom-up models include a detailed specification of energy
systems, and usually include both traditional fossil fuels and alternative energy technologies.
However, these models typically do not include detailed modeling of the overall macroeconomy,
and typically model induced technological change in a learning-by-doing framework, in which
the costs of various technologies decrease with experience. Examples include Grübler and
Messner (1998), Manne and Richels (2002), and Messner (1997).

Because these models

endogenize technology through learning-by-doing, rather than purposeful R&D investment, they
miss the potential opportunity costs that may result when energy R&D crowds out other
inventive activity.

As Popp (2003) shows, ignoring potential crowding out significantly

overstates the potential role of induced technological change.
In comparison, top-down models focus on the links between environmental policy and
macroeconomic performance.

Endogenous technological change in these models typically

comes through accumulated investment in research and development (R&D). Examples include
Popp (2003), Buonanno et al. (2003), Nordhaus (2002), and Goulder and Schneider (1999). In
these models, potential crowding out between energy and other types of R&D limit the potential
of induced technological change.2 The importance of crowding out is explored in Popp (2003).
That paper includes three simulations with ITC: one with complete crowding out of other R&D,
one with partial crowding out, and one with no crowding out. In the base case, with partial

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

4

(50%) crowding out of other R&D from new energy R&D, ITC improves welfare by 9.4%. This
falls as low as 1.9% with full crowding out, and increases to as much as 45.3% without crowding
out.3
While these models present a more realistic view of the nature of R&D markets, they do
not provide realistic alternatives of energy technologies. Only Goulder and Schneider include
non-fossil fuel alternative energy sources. However, as Gerlagh and van der Zwaan (2003) note,
Goulder and Schneider assume that fossil and non-fossil fuel energy sources are complements,
rather than substitutes. This limits the potential role that fuel-switching may play. Recent work
by Gerlagh and van der Zwaan addresses this shortcoming by including a backstop technology in
a top-down modeling framework. Van der Zwaan et al. (2002) introduces the DEMETER
model, in which induced technological change affects the non-fossil fuel input via learning-bydoing that lowers its costs. This work, as well as Gerlagh and van der Zwaan (2003), finds
greater potential for ITC than other top-down models. However, since technology improves via
learning-by-doing, the potential opportunity costs of R&D are ignored. Thus, it isn’t clear
whether the gains they observe result from the addition of a backstop technology, or from the
assumption of learning-by-doing.4

In comparison, this paper includes both a backstop

technology and technological progress through R&D. Thus, I am able to explore the role that
crowding out may play in limiting the gains from ITC. I find that, while adding alternative

2

The exception is Buonanno et al. (2003), which include a single stock of R&D that improves both total factor
productivity and energy efficiency. Not surprisingly, this complementary (although unrealistic) relationship
between energy R&D and other R&D leads to large welfare gains from induced technological change.
3
Macro level data from the U.S. support the notion of partial crowding out. For example, a regression of nonenergy R&D on energy R&D provides the following results:
(standard errors in parenthesis):
non-energy R&D = -9320.351478 –0.41energy R&D + 19.82GDP + ε
(4762.59) (1.09)
(0.73)
4
A recent working paper by Gerlagh and Lise (2003) modifies the DEMETER model to include both learning-bydoing and R&D spending. However, that model only includes the energy sector, and thus does not allow for
potential macroeconomic feedbacks of climate policy.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

5

technologies to the model is important, crowding out effects still limit the potential gains from
ITC.

II. The Model
This paper extends the ENTICE model of climate change policy (Popp 2003) by adding a
backstop technology. Below I present key equations in the revised ENTICE model, referred to
as ENTICE-BR to note the inclusion of backstop R&D. Appendix A includes a complete list of
all equations in the model.
ENTICE is a modified version of the DICE model (Nordhaus 1994, Nordhaus and Boyer
2000) that includes endogenous links between climate policy and energy innovation. Like
DICE, ENTICE is a dynamic growth model of the global economy that includes links between
economic activity, carbon emissions, and the climate. It includes fossil fuels as an input to
production, as in the more detailed RICE model (Nordhaus and Yang 1996, Nordhaus and Boyer
2000). However, ENTICE retains the global framework of the DICE model, rather than dividing
the world into separate regions.

Given the limited empirical information available on

international diffusion of environmental technologies, calibrating a regional model is left for
future research.
In both the DICE and ENTICE models, the goal of the model is to maximize per capita
utility, equation (1), subject to the economic constraints below [equations (2)-(11)].5
T

(1)

max V = ∑ U t [ct , Lt ]Rt
t =0

5

Environmental equations remain unchanged from the DICE model, and are not presented here. They are included
in an appendix available from the author.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

6

In this equation, Ut represents utility at time t, ct is per capita consumption, Lt represents
population, and is also the measure of labor inputs. Rt is a discount factor to represent the rate of
time preference.6
The objective function, (1), is maximized subject to the following constraints. First,
production is defined. Below, Qt represents output produced at time t. Overall technological
progress comes through changes in total factor productivity, At. Inputs include labor, Lt, the
physical capital stock, Kt, and effective energy units, Et. Effective energy units are a measure of
the productive capabilities of three possible energy inputs: fossil fuels, Ft, a carbon-free backstop
technology, Bt, and knowledge pertaining to energy efficiency, HE,t. pF.t and pB,t represent the
cost of fossil fuels and the backstop fuel, respectively. Note that both prices vary over time. The
cost of these fuels are subtracted from total output in the ENTICE-BR model:7
(2)

Qt = At K tγ L1t − γ − β Etβ − p F , t Ft − p B, t Bt

Labor is determined by exogenous population growth. The capital stock, Kt, equals the
sum of current investment, It, and the previous capital stock, adjusted for depreciation, δ:
(3)

Kt = It + (1-δ)Kt-1.

6

As many economists have recently noted, discount rates that seem appropriate for single-generation projects may
be inappropriate for long term projects that span several generations. Although there is no consensus on how to deal
with this problem, a constantly declining discount factor is consistent with suggestions that a lower discount rate
should be used for the distant future. Thus, following Nordhaus, the pure rate of social time preference, R, declines
over time to capture uncertainty over future conditions, and is given by R (t ) =

10

∏ [1 + R e ]
t

0

− grt

, where gR is a

v =0

parameter defining the growth of R over time. Portney and Weyant (1999) provide a good review of the current
debate on discounting for long-term environmental projects.
7
Energy consumption, represented by fossil fuel usage, F, is measured in tons of carbon. The price of fossil fuels is
thus the price per ton of carbon. Backstop energy units are converted to represent the equivalence of one ton of
carbon-based energy.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

7

A. The Energy Sector
Effective energy units, Et, uses a nested constant elasticity of substitution (CES)
framework to aggregate the contributions of fossil fuels, the backstop energy source, and
knowledge pertaining to energy efficiency.

Popp (2003) uses a similar framework in the

ENTICE model without backstop energy. The second nest, between fossil fuels and the backstop
technology, is introduced in van der Zwaan et al. (2002). One advantage of using this functional
form is that it provides a more realistic evolution of the backstop technology over time. By
modeling the backstop and fossil fuels are imperfect substitutes, it allows for the possibility of
“niche markets” for the backstop technology even when the price of the backstop exceeds fossil
fuel prices. In each nest, the ease of substitution is represented by ρi. The case of perfect
substitution is ρi = 1. The elasticity of substitution is 1/(1–ρi). Given this, effective energy units
are modeled as:

(4)

⎡
⎛
⎢
ρ H ⎜ ⎛ Ft
Et = ⎢α H H E , t + ⎜ ⎜⎜
⎜⎝ αΦΦt
⎢
⎝
⎣

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

ρB

⎞
ρB ⎟
+ Bt ⎟
⎟
⎠

ρH / ρB ⎤

1

ρH

⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

Equation (4) states that the total energy requirements for production must be met either
by the use of fossil fuel or by technological advances that substitute for fossil fuels. Note that
technology enters equation (4) in one of two ways. HE,t represents technological advances that
replace fuels in production, and can thus be thought of as improvements to energy efficiency.
This stock of knowledge responds endogenously to changes in policy, through an invention
possibilities frontier that is described below. αH is a scaling factor that determines the level of
energy savings resulting from new knowledge. Technology also enters exogenously through Φt,
which represents exogenous changes in the ratio of carbon emissions per unit of carbon services.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

8

Φt decreases over time as defined below, where gtz is the (negative) growth rate of Φt per decade,
and δz is the rate of decline of this growth rate.
(5)

⎡⎛ g z
Φ t = exp ⎢⎜⎜ tz
⎣⎢⎝ δ

⎤
⎞
⎟⎟ 1 − exp − δ z t ⎥
⎥⎦
⎠

(

(

))

The parameters defining Φt are first calibrated to match the emissions path of the DICE model in
a model without R&D. αΦ represents the percentage of this exogenous technological change that
remains once R&D is added to the ENTICE model.
This remaining technological change is retained so that emissions in the baseline (no
policy) simulation with R&D replicate the results of the DICE model without R&D. The R&D
modeled in ENTICE-BR captures purposeful short-term efforts to improve energy efficiency or
lower the costs of the backstop technology. However, such R&D is not the only way in which
carbon intensity falls over time. Examples of other potential influences on carbon intensity
include changes in consumption patterns and switching to less carbon intensive fuels (e.g. from
coal to oil to natural gas) over time. Because the DICE model and its variants are a one-sector
macroeconomic growth model, such changes are not explicitly modeled.

Since Nordhaus

calibrates exogenous technological change based on historical rates of decarbonization, it is
impossible to separate out these effects from the effects of R&D in his rate of exogenous
technological change. As a result, long-run emissions simulated without any exogenous decline
in carbon-intensity are unrealistically high.8
Because differences in the costs of fossil fuels and the backstop technology will affect
their relative usage, defining the costs of each is important. Following Nordhaus and Boyer
8

Fortunately, sensitivity analysis suggests that the percentage of exogenous technological change remaining does
not affect the net economic impact of induced technological change. The intuition is that it is the level of R&D
induced between an exogenous and endogenous R&D simulation that affects this difference. Changing the scaling

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

9

(2000), the price of carbon is the sum of the marginal cost of carbon extraction, qF,t, and a
markup that captures the difference between consumer prices and the marginal costs of
extraction. Nordhaus notes that this markup includes transportation costs, distribution costs, and
current taxes. For ENTICE, I use a weighted average of regional markups from RICE, weighting
by each region’s share of total carbon consumption in the base year. This value equals 163.29.
(6)

PF,t = qF,t + 163.29
Following Nordhaus, the marginal cost function, qF,t, takes the following form:

(7)

q F , t = 113 + 700[CumCt / CumC*]4

CumCt represents cumulative carbon extraction up to year t, and CumC* represents the
maximum possible extraction. In this equation, the marginal cost independent of exhaustion is
$113 per ton. Marginal costs increase as extraction increases. Note that the price equation is
extremely convex – the carbon price equation is relatively elastic in the short run.9
Backstop technologies are, by definition, technologies for which scarcity is not a concern.
Thus, cumulative extraction does not affect the price of the backstop technology. Rather, the
price falls over time as technology advances. Defining HB,t as the stock of knowledge pertaining
to the backstop, and using η to represent the relationship between new knowledge and prices, the
backstop price is:
(8)

p B,t =

PB,0
H ηB,t

factor only changes the level of emissions in each simulation, but not the difference between them. This is discussed
more thoroughly in the sensitivity analysis presented in Popp (2003).
9
A more detailed discussion of the derivation of these parameters can be found in Nordhaus and Boyer (2000).

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

10

This specification is similar to that used in experience curves, (see for example, Ibenholt, 2002).
In this specification, 1-2-η provides the cost reduction that occurs from a doubling of the
knowledge stock. This calculation is commonly referred to as the progress ratio.

B. Modeling Technological Change
Technological change enters the model through the two knowledge stocks defined above.
Technological advances can improve energy efficiency (HE,t) or lower the costs of using the
backstop technology (HB,t). Similar to a physical capital stock, these knowledge stocks are
created by the accumulation of previous research and development (R&D) in the manner
described below.
(9)

H i, t = h( Ri , t ) + (1 − δ H ) ⋅ H i, t −1 ,

i = E,B

Equation (9) states that the stock of knowledge, HE,t, increases due to increases in R&D
net depreciation of old knowledge. The function h(Ri,t) is the innovation possibility frontier. It
models the process by which energy R&D, Ri,t, creates new knowledge. The parameter δH
allows for the possibility of knowledge decay over time.10
To define the innovation possibility frontier, I begin with the assumption that there are
diminishing returns to energy R&D over time. The assumption implies that since energy R&D is
specialized within a given field, it becomes more and more difficult to find new inventions as the
knowledge frontier moves out. Popp (2002) provides supporting evidence. Thus, any functional
form for the innovation possibility frontier must have the following properties.

First, the

derivative of h with respect to R should be positive, but the second derivative should be negative,
so that there are diminishing returns to research at any given time. In addition, the derivative
10

Sensitivity to the decay rate is explored in Popp (2003). As in the base model in that paper, I assume a zero decay
rate here, as this best replicates the expected patterns of energy R&D and energy savings in the base model.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

11

∂2H/∂R∂H should be negative, so that there are diminishing returns to research across time
periods. One functional form that satisfies these assumptions is a constant elasticity relationship
between research and knowledge:
(10)

h(Ri,t) = aRbii,tHφii,t,

i = E,B

A similar innovation possibilities frontier is often used in the endogenous growth literature.11
Equation (10) satisfies the two assumptions regarding diminishing returns to R&D as long as
both bi and φi are between 0 and 1.
Because of the public goods nature of knowledge, the role of market failures in R&D
must be considered. Virtually all empirical studies of R&D find that the social returns to R&D
are greater than the private returns to R&D.12 Since firms will invest until the private rates of
return to R&D are equal to the rates of returns on other investments, underinvestment in R&D
will occur. To model the positive externalities that result from the creation of new knowledge,
the return on R&D investment is constrained to be four times that of investment in physical
capital.13 Omitting such market failures implicitly assumes that government policies, such as
R&D subsidies, will sufficiently augment private R&D efforts to correct market failures. Popp
(2003) shows that such an assumption nearly doubles the potential gains from ITC.
Finally, we need to account for the opportunity cost of R&D. This is important because
empirical work suggests that at least some energy R&D will replace other forms of R&D.
Research activities are carried out by highly-trained scientists and engineers. Since years of
11

See, for example, Jones (1995) and Porter and Stern (2000). Romer’s (1990) original specification of the
endogenous growth model is a special case of this where φ = 1. By setting φ = 1, Romer generates increasing
returns to knowledge over time. While this may be appropriate for macro-level R&D, for more specific R&D in a
given field, it is reasonable to assume that the returns fall over time as the pool of potential ideas in the field dries up
(see, for example, Griliches (1989, p. 317)).
12
There is a large body of empirical work that verifies the social returns to R&D are greater than the private returns.
Examples include Griliches (1995), Hall (1995), Jaffe (1986), Mansfield (1977, 1996), and Pakes (1985).
13
This is done by calculating the marginal products of physical capital investment and energy R&D, and
constraining the latter to be four times higher than the former.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

12

training are needed to enter the field, the supply of scientists and engineers available at any one
time is inelastic – it cannot quickly increase when new research needs arise. For example,
Goolsbee (1998) finds that one of the chief beneficiaries of R&D tax subsidies are scientists and
engineers, who receive larger wages when subsidies are increased.
To proceed, note that all output is devoted to either consumption, investment in physical
capital, or R&D:
(11)

Qt = Ct + It + RE,t + RB,t

However, this simple accounting ignores the potential effects of crowding out. The opportunity
cost of a dollar of energy R&D is that one less dollar is available for any of three possible
activities: consumption, physical investment, or investment in other R&D.14 The opportunity
costs of the first two are simply valued at one dollar. However, since the social rate of return on
R&D is four times higher that of other investment, losing a dollar of other R&D has the same
effect as losing four dollars of other investment. Thus, the cost of any research that crowds out
other research is four dollars.
To implement this, four dollars of private investment are subtracted from the physical
capital stock for each dollar of R&D crowded out by energy R&D, so that the net capital stock
is:
(3’)

Kt = {It – 4*crowdout*(RE,t + RB,t)}+(1-δ)Kt-1,

where crowdout represents the percentage of other R&D crowded out by energy R&D. Based on
footnote 3, in the base case I assume new energy R&D crowds out 50% of other R&D.

14

Here, I am referring to R&D designed to increase productivity in other sectors. Accounting for the opportunity
cost of this research is important, since it is not explicitly included in the model.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

13

C. Calibration
Calibration of the R&D sector of the ENTICE-BR model is based on results from the
empirical literature on induced innovation. This section focuses on calibration of the backstop
technology and its associated R&D.

Details of calibration of energy efficiency R&D are

discussed both in Popp (2003) and appendix B of this paper.
To begin, initial values for backstop R&D and backstop energy consumption are needed.
Based on data in Anderson (1997), the initial value of backstop energy research, is set to equal
10 percent of energy efficiency R&D, or 1 billion dollars.15 Following van der Zwaan et al.
(2002), who use results from Nakicenovic et al. (1998), 4 percent of all energy consumption in
1995 comes from the backstop technology, for an initial value of 0.25 equivalent tons of carbon.
To determine the initial price of the backstop technology, two issues arise. First is that a
wide range of possible prices exist. For example, the cost of wind energy varies depending on
local conditions. In ideal conditions, the price of electricity from wind is nearing competitive
levels. Burtraw et al. (1999) report the cost of wind energy to be 44% higher than that of energy
from fossil fuels. This yields an initial price of $400 per carbon ton equivalent (CTE) of
backstop energy. Gerlagh and Lise (2003) report prices for alternative energy sources ranging
from 2 to 5 times that of fossil fuels. Using the upper range of this as a second alternative, I
consider an initial price of $1200 as a second option. Second, because fossil-fuels and the
backstop are imperfect substitutes, their relative prices determine the elasticity of substitution
between energy sources. Unfortunately, the resulting elasticity of substitution using the prices

15

The $10 billion figure for energy efficiency R&D is discussed in Popp (2003), and represents two percent of all
R&D done in OECD countries in 1995.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

14

mentioned above yield very high elasticities of substitution.16 Thus, I also consider a starting
price of $2000 CTE. This provides more reasonable elasticities of backstop energy R&D, as the
resulting elasticity of substitution is similar to that for energy efficiency R&D.17
Next, a value for η, which relates human capital to backstop price decreases, is chosen.
Again, no good empirical estimates exist. Results for two values, 0.4 and 1.0, are presented.
These yield progress ratios of 24 and 50 percent respectively. A 50 percent progress means that
a doubling of the knowledge stock reduces the backstop price by 50 percent. More importantly,
under realistic base case R&D scenarios, the share of energy consumption resulting time paths
for backstop energy R&D are comparable to other studies. Such rapid progress is comparable to
changes in patenting and prices during the past 20 years. The 24 percent progress ratio yields
slightly lower shares of backstop energy than comparable scenarios. However, as shown in the
results section, the marginal returns to R&D are more realistic. Thus, a 24 percent progress ratio
is used for the base case.
Finally, the parameters of the inventions possibilities frontier are chosen as before. Key
goals of the calibration include:
• Based on Popp (2002), the elasticity of energy R&D with respect to changes in energy
prices is inelastic, with a target value of 0.35.
• As noted earlier, there are diminishing returns to energy R&D. Thus, the inducement
effect of energy prices will fall over time.
• Both the response of energy R&D to price changes and the energy savings resulting
from these new technologies occur quickly. Popp (2002) finds that mean lag for the
16

This is important because, as shown later, high elasticities of substitution result in unrealistically high levels of
policy-induced R&D.
17
Although high, keep in mind that, for the elasticity of substitution, what matters is the price of the last backstop
energy unit consumed. One would expect this to be higher than prices for technologies in ideal environments.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

15

effect of energy prices on energy patenting is 3.7 years, and the median lag is 4.9. In
addition, the energy savings resulting from new patents occur quickly. Popp (2001)
finds that it takes just three years for a new energy patent to have its maximum effect
on energy consumption. Since the responses are fairly quick, and since each time
period in the ENTICE model represents one decade, I assume that the full effects of
price changes on energy R&D occur within each decade.
To preserve these assumptions for energy efficiency R&D, the parameters a and b for
energy efficiency R&D change slightly in simulations with and without a backstop technology,
so that base case R&D is comparable in each. Table 1 lists the parameter values used for each
assumption regarding the initial backstop price and the progress ratio.

III. Policy Simulations

With the completed ENTICE-BR model in hand, I proceed to simulate the results of
imposing a carbon emissions policy on the global economy. There are two main questions to be
explored: (1) what impact does adding a backstop technology (and its associated R&D) have on
the model, and (2) does the role of induced technological change increase when a backstop is
considered? The results suggest that the role of ITC does increase somewhat when a backstop is
considered, but the largest welfare gains come not from endogenizing technological change, but
rather from simply adding the backstop in the first place.
Results are considered for three possible scenarios, with three separate simulations
contained with each scenario. The three scenarios are:
1) a business as usual (BAU) case that includes no policy constraints,

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

16

2) an optimal policy scenario in which the marginal costs of carbon abatement equal the
marginal environmental benefits of reduced carbon emissions, and
3) a more restrictive command-and-control policy in which emissions are restricted to
1995 levels.18
Within each policy scenario, I consider three separate simulations:
1) ENTICE: this is the model from Popp (2003) that endogenizes energy R&D but does
not include a backstop technology,
2) ENTICE-B: a backstop technology is added, but with a constant price over time, and
3) ENTICE-BR: a backstop technology is added, along with R&D that lowers the
backstop price over time.
Furthermore, for each of the two policy simulations, I re-run the ENTICE-BR model with R&D
fixed at BAU levels. Comparing this to the full ITC run provides the gains resulting from ITC
under each of the two policies. I calculate the net economic impact of a policy as the present
value of consumption under the policy minus the present value of consumption in the base case,
in which carbon emissions are uncontrolled.

A. Business as Usual
One goal of this paper is to ascertain the impact of adding a backstop technology to the
ENTCIE model. Thus, before examining the effect of the backstop technology under various
policy scenarios, it is important to consider how the presence of a backstop technology alters the
baseline simulation. Two important considerations are the rate at which the backstop price falls
18

The more restrictive policy is included because most climate policies proposed in the policy arena aim for far
greater restrictions than called for in an optimizing economic model. For example, the Kyoto Protocol requires
industrialized country emissions to be reduced by 5 to 8 percent below 1990 levels. Since the DICE model is global,
capturing regional differences, such as the lack of restrictions on developing countries, is not possible. Thus, I use a
slightly higher global emissions constraint to allow for higher emissions from developing countries.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

17

and the contribution that the backstop technology plays in energy markets. Figures 1 and 2
illustrate each, respectively. For reference in the next section, values for the optimal policy
simulation are also included in Figure 2.19
Considering costs first, note that these fall from 4 to 8% by 2025, 8 to 20% by 2055, and
14 to 30% by 2105. With a low initial price, the backstop price falls below the price of fossil
fuels by 2065. To compare this to other projections, van der Zwaan et al. (2002) project cost
decreases of 12% by 2025, and 40% by 2105. Messner (1997) projects cost decreases ranging
from 35% to 60% for solar thermal to 45% to 58% for wind between 1990 and 2050. A study by
the IEA (2002) predicts cost decreases of 30-40% for solar thermal and wind between 2000 and
2030. One reason why ENTICE-BR predicts slightly lower cost savings than these other studies
is that it is the only one in which technological advances are explicitly modeled through R&D.
As a result, it is the only model explicitly considering the opportunity costs of obtaining these
advances.
Comparing the contribution of the backstop technology to total energy consumption, we
find that, even without policy, the backstop contributes between 5 and 13% in 2025, 6 to 29% in
2055, and 8 to 64% in 2105.20 In comparison, van der Zwaan et al. (2002) predict a share of
about 7% by 2025, 12% by 2055, and 30% by 2105.21 By 2050, Messner (1997) predicts shares
of just 1% for solar and wind in a static model, and shares of 19% and 10% respectively under
learning-by-doing. The EIA International Energy Outlook (2003) projects that hydropower and
other renewable resources will contribute 7.8% of energy consumption by 2025. Thus, the short-

19

Changes in price for the optimal policy scenario are not included, as they are very small (less than 1%).
Although these ranges seem large, the big difference is between the low price scenario and the other two. The
share of the backstop technology rises quickly in the low price scenario because the backstop price falls below the
fossil fuel price by 2065. This scenario is likely overly optimistic about the potential contribution of a backstop
technology, but is presented to illustrate the model’s sensitivity to a range of assumptions.
21
These figures are approximate, as they are extrapolated from figures in van der Zwaan et al. (2002).
20

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

18

run projections of the ENTICE-BR model are similar to other studies, and the long-run
projections are slightly more conservative.

B. Optimal Policy
Because the DICE model and its variants incorporate environmental damages into the
model, it is possible to calculate an optimal carbon policy, in which the marginal costs of carbon
abatement equal the marginal benefits of lower emissions. Typically, simulations involving
these models find that the optimal policy is to go slow. Since carbon emissions remain in the
atmosphere for several hundred years, the marginal damages resulting from any new emissions
are modest. Thus, gradually phasing in carbon reduction lowers the opportunity cost of reducing
emissions without having much impact on the global climate. As an example, Nordhaus and
Boyer (2000) calculate an optimal carbon tax in 2005 of $9.13 per ton.

In comparison,

restricting emissions to 1990 levels would require a carbon tax of $52.48.
Table 2 and Figure 3 summarize the welfare gains for the optimal policy scenario. Figure
3 illustrates the welfare gain for each of the three backstop price assumptions. Here, the
comparison is between an optimal policy and BAU simulation with similar assumptions about
the backstop technology.

The welfare gains for the medium and high price scenario are

comparable. Simply adding a backstop at a constant price enhances welfare by nearly 15%, and
considering R&D that lowers the backstop price increases welfare by another 6-8%. In both
cases, simple factor substitution is most important, as the major gains come from a model
without a backstop technology. Gains are higher in the low price scenario, both with and without
R&D, as the low initial price enables the backstop technology to become competitive even under
a policy of moderate carbon taxes. Thus, the share of renewable energy increase more
dramatically. As a result, adding both a backstop and backstop R&D increases welfare by over

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

19

60%, although again the largest gains come from simply adding a backstop technology to the
model.
Table 2 provides more detail, and presents two separate welfare comparisons. First, the
number in each cell on the left provides the welfare gain compared to a BAU simulation with no
backstop technology. For example, with a medium backstop price, adding a backstop increases
welfare by $4.87 billion compared to the BAU without a backstop, and adding a backstop with
R&D increases welfare by $9.36 billion compared to the BAU without a backstop. These
numbers illustrate the important effects of simply adding a backstop to a model. However, it is
not right to say that the welfare gains from an optimal policy are $11.67 trillion when backstop
R&D is added, because the appropriate comparison is across scenarios with similar assumptions
under the policy and in the BAU scenario. Thus, reading across, one obtains the gain from an
optimal policy under each of the three simulations, as presented in Figure 3. This is calculated as
the difference between welfare gains from the no backstop base in the BAU and optimal
scenarios. For example, with a medium backstop price, welfare increases by $1.88 trillion with
no backstop, by $2.15 trillion with a constant price backstop, and by $2.31 trillion with a
backstop and backstop R&D. The fifth column shows that simply adding a backstop increases
welfare by 14.2%, and adding backstop R&D increases welfare an additional 8.6%
Finally, to show the gains from induced R&D, Table 2 also presents results for a policy
simulation that holds both energy R&D and the backstop R&D at BAU levels. Comparing the
welfare gains here to the gains with endogenous R&D shows that induced innovation improves
welfare by 6.8% in the medium backstop price case. This is lower than the 9.4% increase found
in Popp (2003) in a model without a backstop. Note that, in each case, the welfare gains from an
optimal policy in an exogenous R&D model are nearly identical to the welfare gains for a model

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

20

with a backstop technology without R&D. When ignoring the additional R&D induced by
climate policy, the gains from innovation are offset by the opportunity costs of R&D. Moreover,
the relative prices between the backstop and fossil fuels help determine the value of policyinduced R&D. Although the gain from ITC is similar for the medium and high price case, it is
twice as high in the low price case.
To help evaluate the R&D parameter assumptions, Table 3 presents the value of an
additional $1 billion of energy R&D and backstop energy R&D for each set of assumptions
under an optimal policy regime. For energy efficiency R&D, an additional billion dollars
increases welfare by nearly $5 billion. This nearly 5:1 ratio is consistent with the notion that the
social returns to R&D should be significant, due to the public goods nature of research, and is
similar to results in Popp (2003). For backstop R&D, only the returns for the high price
assumption and 24% progress ratio are near same figure. For all other sets of backstop R&D
assumptions, the returns to backstop R&D are higher. As a result, I focus on the high price
assumption in detailed discussion of the results below. In most cases, the pattern of results do
not differ substantially across backstop price assumptions. Those differences that do exist are
discussed in the sensitivity analysis presented in section IV.
Table 4 summarizes key variables for the base scenario. The table shows results for the
base ENTICE model, as well as for runs with a backstop technology and with backstop R&D.
Simulations denoting exogenous R&D eliminate the effects of policy-induced R&D by
constraining R&D in the policy scenarios to the levels of the BAU scenario. Turning first to
R&D, note that the patterns for both energy R&D and backstop R&D are similar to the patterns
found for energy R&D in Popp (2003). Adding backstop R&D to the model results in a small
decrease in other energy R&D. However, this change occurs in both the BAU and policy

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

21

scenarios, so the elasticity of energy R&D across the scenarios remains similar.22 Based on the
results of Popp (2002), the model is calibrated so that the elasticity of energy in the base
ENTICE model equals 0.35 in 2005. Because diminishing returns to energy research reduce the
inducement effect over time, the elasticity of energy R&D falls over time.23 Thus, diminishing
returns to research have the effect of lowering energy R&D somewhat in the long-run. For
backstop energy R&D, the resulting elasticity is somewhat higher, although it too falls in the
long-run due to diminishing returns.
Turning to emissions, note that neither ITC nor the presence of a backstop technology has
a significant impact on emissions reduction. In fact, emissions are initially somewhat higher
when a backstop is considered. Figure 4 presents the emissions control rates over time for the
first 100 years. Control rates (and also carbon taxes) do increase slightly when a backstop is
introduced.

However, they are higher when backstop R&D is exogenous, rather than

endogenous. The intuition here is that additional policy-induced R&D hastens the rate at which
traditional fossil fuels become obsolete. As a result, consuming more fossil fuels in the short-run
makes sense.
Not surprisingly, the small effect on emissions results in small changes in the mean
global temperature as well. This is illustrated in Figure 5, which shows deviation from 1900
global mean temperature levels over time for both the optimal policy scenarios and the restrictive
emissions policy. The top group of lines shows temperature in the BAU scenarios. The middle
group shows temperature under an optimal climate policy, and the bottom line shows
temperature under the restrictive emissions policy. In either the BAU or the optimal policy,

22

The elasticities presented here are calculated for each year based on the difference in both energy R&D and
carbon prices in simulations with and without policy.
23
To account for the effect of economic growth, all elasticities are calculated using the ratio of energy R&D to
output.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

22

adding a backstop technology has almost no impact on atmospheric temperature. This suggests
an important policy lesson: simply relying on alternative technologies is not sufficient to limit
the increases in global temperature – restrictive policy measures will also be needed.

C. Restricting Emissions to 1995 Levels
Compared to the optimal policy scenario, adding a backstop to the ENTICE model is
more important under more restrictive policy scenarios, such as restricting emissions to 1995
levels. Table 5 and Figure 6 present the welfare gains (or losses) for the three backstop price
assumptions from the restrictive emissions policies.

As found in Popp (2003), without a

backstop technology, the restrictive policy reduces welfare by $8.2 trillion. Adding a backstop
reduces this loss. The change is small for the high price assumption, as welfare increases by just
9.1%. However, for the low price assumption, the more restrictive policy increases welfare by
over 100%, so that the net economic impact is now positive, although less than $1 trillion.
Adding backstop R&D is also important, although not as significant as adding the
backstop technology itself. Compared to a constant backstop price scenario, adding backstop
R&D enhances welfare by an additional 10.7% to 27.3%.

Policy-induced R&D increases

welfare from 4.7% to 22.6%. These results are of particular interest, as they are opposite those
found in the ENTICE model without a backstop technology. There, the potential of induced
innovation was smaller under a restrictive emissions policy, as the opportunity costs of the
increased R&D were significant. Here, the potential welfare gains from using the backstop
technology more quickly appear to offset that somewhat, so that induced R&D is more important
under the restrictive policy for both the low and medium price case.
The increased importance of both the backstop technology itself, as well as backstop
R&D, occurs under a restrictive emissions reduction policy because the level of carbon taxes

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

23

necessary to implement such a policy make the backstop competitive with fossil fuels sooner.
Even in the high backstop price scenario, the backstop is competitive with fossil fuels by 2045.
By allowing an option for emissions reduction that can maintain energy use, adding an
alternative energy technology lowers the costs of complying with restrictive emissions
reductions. Thus, incorporating a backstop technology into climate change models is important,
as most proposals considered by policy makers are considerably more restrictive than the optimal
policy presented in the previous section.
Furthermore, the potential of ITC increases in the restrictive policy case because of
changes to the level of energy efficiency R&D. Whereas most backstop energy R&D is new
R&D in the optimal policy simulation, here some backstop energy R&D substitutes for energy
efficiency R&D. Thus, the opportunity costs of this additional energy efficiency research are
avoided. For example, compared to the restricted policy scenario with no backstop technology,
energy efficiency R&D is 6% lower by 2055, and 8% lower by 2105. By comparison, energy
efficiency R&D for each of these years falls by just 1% when backstop R&D is added to the
optimal policy scenario.
Table 6 shows how other variables change when backstop energy R&D is considered.24
By lowering the cost of alternative technologies, backstop R&D lowers the cost of compliance,
and thus reduces carbon taxes. This is more significant in the short run, where carbon taxes fall
by nearly 10%. Unlike the optimal policy, emissions do not change after induced innovation is
included in the model, since this is a command and control policy. Thus, the changes in the
carbon tax provide a guideline as to how much tax rates could potentially fall in the optimal
scenario if the level of emissions did not change.

24

Once again, only results from the high backstop price case are shown.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

24

IV. Sensitivity Analysis

In developing a model such as the ENTICE model, several key assumptions must be
made. Popp (2003) explores the implications of several of these on the base ENTICE model.
Here, I examine two assumptions unique to the ENTICE-BR model: the elasticity of substitution
between fuels and the progress ratio. Also, since Popp (2003) demonstrates the importance of
market imperfections on the effects of R&D, I look at two key assumptions about R&D markets:
deviation between private and social rates of return and potential crowding out of other R&D.
Readers interested in a discussion of other parameters are referred to Popp (2003).

A. Elasticity of Substitution Between Fuels
As illustrated in section III, the initial backstop price has a large impact on the model
results. One reason, of course, is that lower prices mean that the backstop becomes competitive
with fossil fuels more rapidly.

However, changing the initial backstop price has another

important effect. To be consistent with initial conditions, changes in the initial backstop price
imply different rates for the elasticity of substitution between fuels.

This elasticity of

substitution ranges from 1.6 in the high price scenario, to 2.2 in the medium scenario, to 8.7 in
the low price scenario.
This has important implications for the model.

In particular, higher elasticities of

substitution induce more backstop R&D. This is illustrated in Figure 7, which plots the elasticity
of backstop R&D across time under each scenario. Popp (2002) estimates an elasticity of energy
R&D and energy prices of 0.35. In each case, the elasticity begins above that level. More
importantly, it stays well above that level when the elasticity of substitution is high, suggesting
that such a case does not accurately reflect R&D markets.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

25

Another interesting variation under a high elasticity of substitution is that global
temperature change is moderated significantly. Figure 8 plots the global mean temperature for
each optimal scenario, as well as for the BAU run in the low price scenario. The figure also
illustrates temperature under a restrictive emissions policy. Note that, with a high elasticity of
substitution, the temperature in both the BAU and optimal policy runs is lower than the
restrictive policy. Optimistic assumptions about backstop technologies not only imply that the
costs of dealing with climate change are lower, but that climate change itself is less of a problem!

B. Progress Ratio
The other new parameter introduced in the ENTICE-BR model is the progress ratio
between new knowledge and backstop prices. In the base case, this is nearly 24%. Such a level
produces realistic behavior for R&D, but is lower than suggested by historical data, and could
result in the backstop technology having less impact than assumed in other studies. However,
changing the progress ratio does not have much impact on the model. The welfare gains from
backstop R&D are only two to six percent higher with a progress ratio of 50%. A higher
progress ratio does result in a greater share of backstop energy in the long run. However,
because of the cumulative nature of R&D, the short-run increase in backstop usage resulting
from a higher progress ratio are minimal. Because this benefit does not come until far into the
future, and because backstop energy itself is a small part of the overall economy, increasing the
progress ratio leads to little change in other variables. The nature of energy R&D markets
appears more important than the effect of new technology on backstop prices.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

26

C. The Opportunity Cost of R&D
By crowding out other types of R&D investments, policy-induced energy research may
have negative impacts elsewhere in the economy. As demonstrated in Popp (2003), assumptions
about the opportunity cost of R&D affect the magnitude of the role induced technological change
can play. Differences in this assumption help explain variation in results across models. Models
that ignore crowding out, such as Buonanno et al. (2003) are much more optimistic about the
potential for ITC than models including crowding out.
Moreover, models implementing technological change via learning-by-doing also ignore
potential crowding out effects. At the same time, most models using learning-by-doing are
bottom-up models that feature several different technologies, such as Gerlagh and van der Zwaan
(2002) and Manne and Richels (2003). These models consistently find that technological change
plays an important role. For example, Gerlagh and van der Zwaan report that welfare improves
by a factor of three when learning-by-doing is included, and Manne and Richels find that cost
fall from 42-72 percent when learning-by-doing is considered. While ignoring opportunity costs
offers one explanation for such results, the presence of an alternative technology must also help.
Thus, here I explore the effect of opportunity costs of R&D in a model with a backstop
technology.
Recall that the base model assumes 50% of energy R&D comes at the expense of other
research opportunities.

To examine the importance of this assumption, I consider a low

opportunity cost case with no crowding out, and a high opportunity cost case with complete
crowding out. In doing so, it is important to note that changing the opportunity cost of R&D
changes the level of energy R&D. However, the model is designed to be calibrated to actual
values of energy R&D. Thus, I present lower bound and upper bound values for the sensitivity
to potential crowding out effects. The upper bound scenario allows R&D to adjust as a result of

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

27

changes in the opportunity cost. This, for example, could be thought of as the maximum gains
possible from government policy that was able to alleviate potential crowding out effects.25 As a
lower bound, I run the model changing the opportunity cost of R&D, but constrain energy R&D
in each case to equal energy R&D in the corresponding base case scenario. Here, for example,
welfare gains in the low opportunity cost case should be interpreted as the gains from removing
the assumption of partial crowding out.

They are not the gains that would result if the

government intervened to remedy the problem of partial crowding out.
As in the base ENTICE model, assumptions about potential crowding out have important
effects. Table 7 shows how the gains from ITC change as assumptions about the opportunity
cost of R&D change. With partial crowding out, ITC improves welfare by 6.0% under an
optimal policy, compared to a model with exogenous technological change. When crowding out
is ignored, this increases to a range of 12.2 to 30.5%. Similarly, assuming a high opportunity
cost of R&D results in policy-induced R&D having almost no additional effect. Nearly identical
effects are found for the restrictive emissions policy. These results are similar to those found in
Popp (2003). Even with alternative technologies available as emission reduction options, the
opportunity cost of R&D remains an important limitation to the potential of ITC. Models
ignoring these potential costs, including those modeling technological change via learning-bydoing, likely provide overly optimistic estimates of the potential of innovation to lower the costs
of reducing carbon emissions.

25

In these simulations, energy R&D levels change in both the base case and in the policy scenarios. The effect of
policy that addressed opportunity costs only in conjunction with a climate policy will fall in between the upper and
lower bounds.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

28

D. R&D Subsidies
The base model constrains the social rate of return on R&D to be four times greater than
that of the return on other investment. This assumption is consistent with the empirical finding
that firms underinvest in research, as they are unable to capture the entire social returns.
However, the problem of underinvestment could be addressed by subsidies to energy R&D, if
government investments in R&D are set so that all social returns are captured. Models that do
not include market failures, such as Buonanno et al. (2003) implicitly assume that government
R&D subsidies are sufficient to correct all market failures.
Popp (2003) finds that R&D subsidies can have an important impact.

Table 8

summarizes the results found there, as well as new results using ENTICE-BR. Results are
presented for the high backstop price case only.26 In the model without a backstop, energy
efficiency R&D subsidies improve welfare by 6.7%. With a constant price backstop, energy
R&D subsidies increase welfare by 4.4%. Finally, in the model with both energy efficiency and
backstop energy R&D, backstop energy R&D subsidies have little effect, increasing welfare by
only 0.9%. Adding energy efficiency subsidies as well increases welfare by an additional 4.0%.
Similar results are found in the restrictive policy case.

While R&D subsidies remain important,

they are slightly less important than in the original ENTICE model. A backstop technology
provides an additional option for reducing carbon emissions, and thus provides more flexibility
with or without R&D subsidies.
Finally, to illustrate the importance of having a policy in place, the last row of Table 8
presents results from a simulation including optimal R&D subsidies for both energy efficiency

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

29

and backstop energy R&D, but without a carbon tax in place. Note that the welfare gains here
are trivial. As shown in section III, even in a model with induced technological change, factor
substitution still plays an important role in reducing emissions. R&D subsidies alone will not
address the climate problem, as they do not offer incentives for factor substitution.

V. Discussion

These results suggest that estimates of the costs of complying with climate policies do
fall when alternative technologies are considered. This is particularly significant for policies
placing a cap on emissions. Thus, adding a backstop technology to climate models is important.
Policy-induced innovation on this backstop technology is also important, but its potential is
limited by the effects of crowding out of other productive R&D. The welfare gains from simply
adding a backstop technology to ENTICE are nearly double the gains from then endogenizing
R&D on that technology.
One important modeling lesson that can be derived from these results is the importance of
getting the baseline right.

Although there are dramatic improvements to welfare when a

backstop is added to the model, the appropriate comparison is between business as usual and
policy in a model making the same assumptions about technology. In models with optimistic
assumptions about potential technological progress, climate change will be less of a problem
even under business as usual.
In addition, the results support the notion that the opportunity costs of R&D are
important, even when alternative energy technologies are considered. As in the base ENTICE
model, removing the assumption of partial crowding out of energy R&D dramatically increases
26

Results for other assumptions are similar, with one exception. Backstop energy R&D subsidies improve welfare
by nearly 16% in the low backstop price scenario. Since the technology is already competitive, the additional R&D

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

30

the potential of ITC. Thus, models ignoring these opportunity costs, including models in which
technology proceeds by learning-by-doing, overestimate the potential gains from technological
innovation.

Given this important limitation, more research on both the magnitude of any

crowding out that may occur, as well as policies that could help alleviate crowding out, would
both be helpful.
Finally, limitations of the ENTICE-BR model must be discussed. First, by modeling the
world as a single region, the ENTICE model simplifies policy dramatically. Expanding these
results to a regional model, based on Nordhaus’ RICE model, would be beneficial. However, to
do so would require research on how innovative effects vary by region, and how technology
diffuses across regions. In general, new innovations are developed in the industrialized world
and diffuse slowly to developing countries. For example, of the $500 billion spent on R&D in
the 28 OECD countries in 1997, 85% occurred in just 7 countries (National Science Board,
2000).
Second, the ENTICE-BR model does not include uncertainty. As markets for renewable
energy are not yet well-developed, the potential role that renewable energy may play is still
unclear. As shown in both this and other papers, the range of possibilities is large. Adding
endogenous technological change to a model allowing for uncertain climate effects, such as
Nordhaus and Popp (1997), would help provide guidance as to how policy should proceed in the
face of this uncertainty.

has a larger impact on the share of backstop energy consumed.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

31

References

Anderson, D. (1997), Renewable Energy Technology and Policy for Development, Annual
Review of Energy and the Environment, 22, 187-215.
Buonanno, P., C. Carraro, and M. Galeotti (2003), Endogenous induced technical change and the
costs of Kyoto, Resource and Energy Economics, 25, 11-34.
Burtraw, D, J. Darmstadter, K. Palmer, and J. McVeigh (1999), Renewable energy: Winner,
loser, or innocent victim? Resources, 135, 9-13.
Energy Information Administration (2003), International Energy Outlook 2003, Washington,
DC.
Gerlagh, R. and W. Lise (2003), Induced technological change under carbon taxes, FEEM
working paper #84.2003.
Gerlagh, R. and B.C.C.v.d. Zwaan (2003), Gross world product and consumption in a global
warming model with endogenous technological change, Resource and Energy Economics,
25, 35-57.
Goolsbee, A. (1998), Does government R&D policy mainly benefit scientists and engineers?
American Economic Review, 88(2), 299-302.
Goulder, L.H. and S.H. Schneider (1999), Induced technological change and the attractivenes of
CO2 emissions abatement, Resource and Energy Economics, 21, 211-253.
Griliches, Z. (1995), R&D and productivity: econometric results and measurement issues, in: P.
Stoneman (Ed.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation and Technological Change,
Blackwell Publishers, Cambridge, MA, 52-89.
Griliches, Z. (1989), Patents: recent trends and puzzles, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:
Microeconomics, 291-330.
Grübler, A. and S. Messner (1998), Technological change and the timing of mitigation measures,
Energy Economics, 20, 495-512.
Hall, B. (1995), The private and social returns to research and development,” in B. Smith, C.
Barfield (Eds.), Technology, R&D, and the Economy, Brookings Institute, Washington,
D.C., 1995, 140-183.
Ibenholt, K. (2002), Explaining learning curves for wind power, Energy Policy, 30, 1181-1189.
International Energy Agency (2002), World Energy Outlook, OECD, Paris.
Jaffe, A.B. (1986), Technological opportunity and spillover of R&D: evidence from firms’
patents, profits, and market value, American Economic Review, 76, 984-1001.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

32

Jaffe, A.B. and K. Palmer (1997), Environmental regulation and innovation: a panel data study,
Review of Economics and Statistics, 79, 610-619.
Jones, C. (1995), R&D based models of economic growth, Journal of Political Economy, 103
739-784.
Lanjouw, J.O. and A. Mody (1996), Innovation and the international diffusion of
environmentally responsive technology, Research Policy, 25, 549-571.
Manne, A.S. and R.G. Richels (2002), The impact of learning-by-doing on the timing and costs
of CO2 abatement, Working Paper 02-8, AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory
Studies, Washington, DC.
Mansfield, E. (1996) Microeconomic policy and technological change, in: J.C. Fuhrer, J.
Sneddon Little (Eds.), Technology and Growth: Conference Proceedings, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston, 183-200.
Mansfield, E. (1977) Social and private rates of return from industrial innovations, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 91, 221-240.
Messner, S. (1997), Endogenized technological learning in an energy systems model, Journal of
Evolutionary Economics, 7, 291-313.
Nakicenovic, N.A., Grübler, A., and McDonald A. (1998), Global Energy Perspectives, IIASAWEC, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
National Science Board (2000), Science and Engineering Indicators – 2000, National Science
Foundation, Arlington, VA (NSB-00-1).
Newell, R.G., A.B. Jaffe, and R.N. Stavins (1999), The induced innovation hypothesis and
energy-saving technological change, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 941-975.
Nordhaus, W.D. (2002) Modeling induced innovation in climate-change policy, in: A. Grübler,
N. Nakicenovic, W.D. Nordhaus (Eds.), Technological Change and the Environment,
Resources for the Future, Washington, DC, 182-209.
Nordhaus, W.D. (1994), Managing the Global Commons: The Economics of the Greenhouse
Effect, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Nordhaus, W.D. and J. Boyer (2000), Warming the World: Economic Models of Global
Warming, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Nordhaus, W.D. and D. Popp (1997), What is the value of scientific knowledge? An application
to global warming using the PRICE model, Energy Journal, 18, 1-45.
Nordhaus, W.D. and Z.. Yang (1996) A regional dynamic general-equilibrium model of
alternative climate change strategies, American Economic Review, 886, 741-765.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

33

Pakes, A. (1985), On patents, R&D, and the stock market rate of return, Journal of Political
Economy, 93, 390-409.
Popp, D. (2003), ENTICE: Endogenous backstop technology in the DICE model of global
warming, forthcoming in Journal of Environmental Economics and Management.
Popp, D. (2002), Induced innovation and energy prices, American Economic Review, 92 (2002)
160-180.
Popp, D. (2001), The effect of new technology on energy consumption, Resource and Energy
Economics, 23, 215-239.
Porter, M.E. and S. Stern (2000), Measuring the ‘ideas’ production function: evidence from
international patent output, Working Paper No. 7891, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Portney, P.R. and J.P. Weyant (Eds.) (1999), Discounting and Intergenerational Equity,
Resources for the Future, Washington, D.C..
Romer, P.M. (1990) Endogenous technological change, Journal of Political Economy, 98, S71S102.
van der Zwaan, B.C.C., R. Gerlagh, G. Klaassen, and L. Schrattenholzer (2002), Endogenous
technological change in climate change modeling, Energy Economics, 24, 1-19.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

34

Figure 1 – Backstop Price in BAU
2000

Price (carbon ton equivalent in 1990 US dollars)

1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

year
400

1200

2000

fossil fuel price

Figure shows changes in the price of the backstop technology over time in the BAU simulation for each of three initial price
assumptions. Also shown is the price of fossil fuels. Note that only with a low initial price does the backstop ever become cheaper
than fossil fuels.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

35

Figure 2 – Percentage Contribution of Backstop Technology
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

Percent

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

year
400: BAU

1200: BAU

2000: BAU

400: opt

1200: opt

2000: opt

Figure shows the share of energy consumption provided by the backstop technology over time in both the BAU and optimal policy
simulations for each of three initial price assumptions.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

36

Figure 3 – Backstop Technology Contribution to Welfare – Optimal Policy
3.5

3

Welfare Gain

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
low backstop price

medium backstop price
no backstop

back, no R&D

high backstop price

back & R&D

The figure shows the welfare gains from an optimal climate policy with and without a backstop technology. Note that the largest
gains come from factor substitution. Also, simply adding a backstop to the model increases welfare more than considering backstop
R&D.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

37

Figure 4 – Emissions Control Rates Under an Optimal Carbon Policy
0.2
0.18

Percentage of Emissions Reduced

0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
2005

2015

2025

2035

2045

2055

2065

2075

2085

2095

2105

Year
ENTICE

ENTICE-B

ENTICE-BR

ENTICE-BR (exog R&D)

Figure shows the carbon emission control rates for each technology assumption. Control rates are highest with exogenous backstop
R&D. When backstop R&D is endogenous, a small increase in emissions makes sense in the short run, as increased technological
progress will make fossil fuels obsolete more quickly.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

38

Figure 5 – Mean Global Temperature

Degree Celcius Increase From 1900

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

2295

Year
ENTICE: BAU

ENTICE-B: BAU

ENTICE-BR: BAU

ENTICE: opt

ENTICE-B: opt

ENTICE-BR:opt

ENTICE-BR: opt/exog R&D

restrict emissions

The figure shows the departure of mean global temperature from 1990 levels, reported in degrees Celsius. Note that neither induced
R&D nor adding a backstop technology have little effect on temperature.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

39

Figure 6 – Backstop Technology Contribution to Welfare – Restricted Emissions Policy
4

2

welfare gain

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10
low backstop price

medium backstop price
back & R&D

back, no R&D

high backstop price

no backstop

The figure shows the welfare gains from a policy restricting emissions to 1995 levels with and without a backstop technology. Note
that adding a backstop technology reduces the welfare costs of complying with such a policy, and that the welfare improvements from
the backstop technology are more substantial than under an optimal climate policy.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

40

Figure 7 – Backstop Energy R&D Elasticity Over Time – Sensitivity to the Elasticity of Substitution

9
8
7
6

Elasticity

5
4
3
2
1
0
2005

2055

2105

2155

2205

2255

-1
Year
1.6

2.2

8.7

The figure shows how the elasticity of backstop R&D to energy prices changes over time for each of the three assumptions about the
elasticity of substitution between fossil fuels and the backstop technology. In each case, diminishing returns causes the elasticity to
fall over time. Nonetheless, the elasticity is unrealistically high when assuming a high elasticity of substitution

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

41

Figure 8 – Temperature Over Time – Sensitivity to the Elasticity of Substitution

5
4.5
4

Temperature

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

2295

Year
1.6

2.2

8.2

8.2: BAU

restrict emissions

The figure shows the departure of mean global temperature from 1990 levels, reported in degrees Celsius, under the optimal policy
scenario for each elasticity of substitution between fossil fuels and the backstop technology. It also shows the temperature for the
BAU scenario with a high elasticity of substitution, as well as temperature under a policy restricting emission to 1995 levels. Note
that temperature is lowest with a high elasticity of substitution.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

42

Figure 9 – Share of Backstop Energy Over Time – Sensitivity to the Progress Ratio

1
0.9
0.8
0.7

Percent

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

year
400/50% PR

1200/50% PR

2000/50% PR

400/24% PR

1200/24% PR

2000/24% PR

The figure illustrates sensitivity to the progress ratio of the share of total energy for the backstop fuel. For each initial backstop price
assumption, a dashed line represents the share with a higher progress ratio. Because of the cumulative nature of R&D, doubling the
progress ratio has almost no effect on the share in the first 100 years. As a result, there is also little change in other variables.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

43

Table 1 – Summary of Parameter Values
backstop parameters

initial
price
400
1200
2000
400
1200
2000

effect of
technology
on
backstop
price: η
0.4
0.4
0.4
1
1
1

IPF: a
0.0155
0.0122
0.0075
0.0073
0.00505
0.0033

IPF: b
0.0525
0.1
0.105
0.032
0.073
0.075

Revised energy efficiency
IPF parameters

calculated parameters

IPF: φ
0.55
0.54
0.53
0.55
0.54
0.53

sub between
backstop/fossil
fuels
0.885
0.542
0.383
0.885
0.542
0.383

sub elas
backstop/fossil
fuels
8.672
2.185
1.621
8.672
2.185
1.621

Share of
energy in
production:

β

0.074
0.082
0.089
0.074
0.082
0.089

IPF: a
0.0286
0.0264
0.0255
0.0286
0.0264
0.0255

IPF: b
0.2
0.2
0.22
0.2
0.2
0.22

IPF: φ
0.55
0.54
0.53
0.55
0.54
0.53

The table presents parameter values for the ENTICE-BR model. The center columns are calculated based on the initial
backstop price and level.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

44

Table 2 – Welfare Gains from Optimal Climate Policy
Welfare gains
compared to BAU
case without
backstop:

low backstop price
No Backstop
Backstop w/constant price
Backstop w/R&D
Backstop w/exogenous R&D

BAU
N/A
2.605
17.645
N/A

Optimal
1.880
5.305
20.701
20.346

medium backstop price
No Backstop
Backstop w/constant price
Backstop w/R&D
Backstop w/exogenous R&D

BAU
N/A
4.871
9.356
N/A

Optimal
1.880
7.019
11.665
11.518

high backstop price
No Backstop
Backstop w/constant price
Backstop w/R&D
Backstop w/exogenous R&D

BAU
N/A
5.788
9.680
N/A

Optimal
1.880
7.947
11.955
11.825

Gain from optimal policy
% gain to
Gain from
optimal policy
from adding
optimal
policy
backstop
1.880
2.701
43.7%
3.057
62.6%
2.702
% gain to
Gain from
optimal policy
optimal
from adding
policy
backstop
1.880
2.148
14.2%
2.309
22.8%
2.162
% gain to
Gain from
optimal policy
optimal
from adding
policy
backstop
1.880
2.159
14.8%
2.275
21.0%
2.145

% gain
from
induced
R&D

13.1%
% gain
from
induced
R&D

6.8%
% gain
from
induced
R&D

6.0%

Note: all figures in trillions of 1990 US dollars.
The table shows the net economic impact, measured by the difference in the present value of
consumption between an optimal climate policy and a no policy (BAU) simulation, for each
assumption about the initial backstop price. The figures on the left show the gain from a BAU
scenario without a backstop technology. Thus, reading down for each price assumption, one
obtains the gains from adding a backstop to the model in both the BAU and optimal policy cases.
The right set of figures show the gains from an optimal policy, holding assumptions about
technology constant. This is obtained by reading across each row. While R&D on the backstop
technology is important, simply adding a backstop to the model has a larger effect.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

Table 3 – Returns to Marginal R&D

24% Progress Ratio
low backstop price
medium backstop price
high backstop price
50% Progress Ratio
low backstop price
medium backstop price
high backstop price

energy
efficiency R&D
4.96
4.93
4.74

backstop R&D
26.00
6.76
4.85

4.22
5.02
4.77

37.85
8.08
6.06

Note: all figures in billions of 1990 US dollars.

The table shows the welfare gains from an additional $1 billion of R&D for each R&D
type. Figures are in billions of 1990 U.S. dollars.

45

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

46

Table 4 – Key Variables – Optimal Policy
1995

2005

2015

2025

2055

2105

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

$10.19
$10.40
$10.42
$10.20
$10.40
-0.10%
0.19%

$14.61
$15.00
$15.03
$14.62
$14.99
-0.07%
0.27%

$19.54
$20.13
$20.19
$19.55
$20.13
-0.05%
0.30%

$36.89
$38.25
$38.41
$36.89
$38.29
0.00%
0.31%

$70.21
$73.17
$73.65
$70.19
$73.44
0.03%
0.29%

10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
N/A
N/A

13.33
13.37
13.30
13.13
13.08
0.35
0.39

17.07
17.18
17.07
16.83
16.91
0.24
0.15

20.03
20.17
20.03
19.71
19.82
0.22
0.13

27.26
27.34
27.08
26.59
26.62
0.22
0.15

39.85
39.94
39.36
38.55
38.52
0.23
0.18

Backstop Energy R&D -- billions 1990 US dollars
Endogenous R&D
1.00
Exogenous R&D
1.00
N/A
Elasticity

1.35
1.31
0.81

1.59
1.54
0.57

1.82
1.76
0.43

2.47
2.40
0.23

3.70
3.67
0.11

6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187

7.173
7.186
7.212
6.947
6.925
6.951
6.947
6.914
0.00%
0.54%

8.015
8.099
8.129
7.675
7.703
7.734
7.677
7.68
-0.03%
0.70%

8.774
8.925
8.951
8.303
8.376
8.402
8.308
8.339
-0.06%
0.76%

10.904
11.261
11.255
9.921
10.106
10.099
9.931
10.017
-0.10%
0.82%

14.156
14.829
14.734
12.01
12.337
12.229
12.026
12.14
-0.13%
0.73%

22.61
22.61
22.61
22.61
22.61
22.61
22.61
22.61

30.00
29.93
29.93
30.01
29.93
29.94
30.01
29.94
0.00%
0.00%

36.94
37.05
37.08
36.92
37.03
37.06
36.91
37.05
0.03%
0.05%

43.72
44.00
44.06
43.68
43.95
44.01
43.65
43.98
0.06%
0.08%

63.55
64.34
64.52
63.42
64.20
64.39
63.35
64.30
0.12%
0.15%

95.19
96.96
97.46
94.95
96.71
97.23
94.77
97.04
0.19%
0.19%

Carbon Tax ($/ton)
Endogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop
& Backstop R&D
Exogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop R&D
% ∆ Endog vs. Exog.: no backstop
& Backstop R&D
Energy R&D -- billions 1990 US dollars
Endogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop
& Backstop R&D
Exogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop R&D
Elasticity: no backstop
& Backstop R&D

Emissions -- billion tons
No Policy or Backstop
& Backstop
& Backstop R&D
Endogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop
& Backstop R&D
Exogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop R&D
% ∆ Endog vs. Exog.: no backstop
& Backstop R&D
Output -- trillions $1990 US dollars
No Policy or Backstop
& Backstop
& Backstop R&D
Endogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop
& Backstop R&D
Exogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop R&D
% ∆ Endog vs. Exog.: no backstop
& Backstop R&D

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

47

Table 5 – Welfare Gains from Restricted Emissions Policy

Welfare gains
compared to BAU
case without
backstop:

low backstop price
No Backstop
Backstop w/constant price
Backstop w/R&D
Backstop w/exogenous R&D

medium backstop price
No Backstop
Backstop w/constant price
Backstop w/R&D
Backstop w/exogenous R&D

high backstop price
No Backstop
Backstop w/constant price
Backstop w/R&D
Backstop w/exogenous R&D

BAU
N/A
2.605
17.645
N/A

BAU
N/A
4.871
9.356
N/A

BAU
N/A
5.788
9.680
N/A

Optimal
-8.219
3.556
20.845
20.256

Gain from climate policy
% gain to
% gain
Gain from
welfare policy
from
from adding
induced
climate
policy
backstop
R&D
-8.219
0.952
111.6%
3.200
138.9%
2.611
22.6%

Optimal
-8.219
-0.846
5.606
5.197

Gain from
climate
policy
-8.219
-5.717
-3.750
-4.159

Optimal
-8.219
-1.684
3.085
2.758

Gain from
climate
policy
-8.219
-7.473
-6.595
-6.923

% gain to
welfare policy
from adding
backstop

% gain
from
induced
R&D

30.4%
54.4%
9.8%
% gain to
welfare policy
from adding
backstop

% gain
from
induced
R&D

9.1%
19.8%

Note: all figures in trillions of 1990 US dollars.
The table shows the net economic impact, measured by the difference in the
present value of consumption between a climate policy restricting emissions to
1995 levels and a no policy (BAU) simulation, for each assumption about the
initial backstop price. The figures on the left show the gain from a BAU scenario
without a backstop technology. Thus, reading down for each price assumption,
one obtains the gains from adding a backstop to the model in both the BAU and
optimal policy cases. The right set of figures show the change in welfare from
climate policy, holding assumptions about technology constant. This is obtained
by reading across each row. Adding a backstop technology reduces the costs of
achieving these emissions reductions.

4.7%

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

48

Table 6 – Key Variables – Restricted Emissions Policy
1995

2005

2015

2025

2055

2105

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

$375.08
$324.59
$362.51
$377.69
$320.25
-0.69%
13.20%

$775.20
$697.33
$740.49
$779.35
$686.63
-0.53%
7.84%

$1,168.54
$1,062.46
$1,099.84
$1,175.33
$1,043.85
-0.58%
5.36%

$2,342.75
$2,149.59
$2,146.80
$2,360.07
$2,096.94
-0.73%
2.38%

$4,194.19
$3,873.84
$3,769.18
$4,234.74
$3,733.24
-0.96%
0.96%

10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
N/A
N/A

14.08
13.90
13.82
13.13
13.08
0.09
0.07

18.35
18.02
17.90
16.83
16.91
0.08
0.05

21.82
21.28
21.12
19.71
19.82
0.08
0.05

30.58
29.23
28.89
26.59
26.62
0.10
0.06

45.91
43.22
42.36
38.55
38.52
0.12
0.08

Backstop Energy R&D -- billions 1990 US dollars
Endogenous R&D
1.00
Exogenous R&D
1.00
N/A
Elasticity

1.47
1.31
0.15

1.71
1.54
0.09

1.96
1.76
0.09

2.82
2.40
0.11

4.58
3.67
0.15

6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187

7.173
7.186
7.212
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
0.000%
0.000%

8.015
8.099
8.129
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
0.000%
0.000%

8.774
8.925
8.951
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
0.000%
0.000%

10.904
11.261
11.255
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
0.000%
0.000%

14.156
14.829
14.734
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
6.187
0.000%
0.000%

22.61
22.61
22.61
22.61
22.61
22.61
22.61
22.61

30.00
29.93
29.93
29.98
29.92
29.92
29.98
29.92
0.00%
0.00%

36.94
37.05
37.08
36.71
36.84
36.87
36.69
36.85
0.06%
0.06%

43.72
44.00
44.06
43.26
43.55
43.62
43.21
43.58
0.11%
0.11%

63.55
64.34
64.52
62.25
63.07
63.29
62.12
63.17
0.21%
0.19%

95.19
96.96
97.46
92.66
94.52
95.16
92.35
94.90
0.34%
0.27%

Carbon Tax ($/ton)
Endogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop
& Backstop R&D
Exogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop R&D
% ∆ Endog vs. Exog.: no backstop
& Backstop R&D
Energy R&D -- billions 1990 US dollars
Endogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop
& Backstop R&D
Exogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop R&D
Elasticity: no backstop
& Backstop R&D

Emissions -- billion tons
No Policy or Backstop
& Backstop
& Backstop R&D
Endogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop
& Backstop R&D
Exogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop R&D
% ∆ Endog vs. Exog.: no backstop
& Backstop R&D
Output -- trillions $1990 US dollars
No Policy or Backstop
& Backstop
& Backstop R&D
Endogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop
& Backstop R&D
Exogenous R&D: no backstop
& Backstop R&D
% ∆ Endog vs. Exog.: no backstop
& Backstop R&D

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models
Table 7 – Effect of Crowding Out

A. Optimal Policy

Backstop w/R&D
low opportunity cost -- lower bound
low opportunity cost -- upper bound
high opportunity cost -- lower bound
high opportunity cost -- upper bound

Gain from
optimal policy
2.275
2.414
2.445
2.123
2.227

Compare to
exog R&D
2.145
2.152
1.874
2.155
2.200

Gains from ITC
6.0%
12.2%
30.5%
-1.5%
1.2%

Gain from
policy
-6.595
-6.467
-6.263
-6.868
-6.843

Compare to
exog R&D
-6.922
-6.918
-7.152
-6.910
-7.048

Gains from ITC
4.7%
6.5%
12.4%
0.6%
2.9%

B. Restrict Emissions to 1995 Levels

Backstop w/R&D
low opportunity cost -- lower bound
low opportunity cost -- upper bound
high opportunity cost -- lower bound
high opportunity cost -- upper bound

Note: all figures in trillions of 1990 US dollars.
The table shows how the welfare gains from induced technological change vary as
assumptions about the opportunity cost of R&D vary. To illustrate the gains from
ITC, the first column presents the net economic impact of policy with ITC, and
the second column presents the net economic impact of policy with exogenous
energy R&D.

49

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models
Table 8 – Effect of R&D Subsidies
A. Optimal Policy

No Backstop
with R&D subsidies
Backstop w/constant price
with R&D subsidies
Backstop w/R&D
with backstop R&D subsidies only
with R&D subsidies
R&D subsidies only -- no tax

Gain from
BAU
1.880
2.006
2.159
2.241
2.275
2.292
2.367
0.177

% gain from
optimal
policy/no
backstop
6.7%
14.8%
19.2%
21.0%
21.9%
25.9%

B. Restrict Emissions to 1995 Levels

No Backstop
with R&D subsidies
Backstop w/constant price
with R&D subsidies
Backstop w/R&D
with backstop R&D subsidies only
with R&D subsidies

Gain from
BAU
-8.219
-7.964
-7.473
-7.319
-6.595
-6.597
-6.459

% gain from
optimal
policy/no
backstop
3.1%
9.1%
11.0%
19.8%
19.7%
21.4%

Note: all figures in trillions of 1990 US dollars.
The table shows how the welfare gains change when R&D subsidies are used
along with climate policy.

50

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

A1

Appendix A – Equations of the ENTICE Model

This appendix presents the complete equations of the ENTICE model.
Exogenous variables and parameters
t = time
Lt = population at time t, also equal to labor inputs
L0 = initial population level
gL,t = growth rate of population
gL,0 = initial value of the growth rate of population
dL = rate of decline of gL,t
Rt = pure time preference discount factor
r0 = initial value of the pure rate of social time preference
gr = growth rate of the social time preference
At = total factor productivity
A0 = initial value of total factor productivity
gL,t = growth rate of total factor productivity
gL,0 = initial value of the growth rate of total factor productivity
dL = rate of decline of gA,t
γ = elasticity of output with respect to capital
β = elasticity of output with respect to energy/carbon inputs
Φt = ratio of carbon emissions per unit of carbon services
gzt = growth rate of Φt per decade
δz = rate of decline of gzt
ζ1, ζ2, ζ3 = parameters of the long-run carbon supply curve
markup= energy services price markup
CumC* = Total carbon resources available
δ = rate of depreciation of the physical capital stock
δH = rate of depreciation of energy knowledge stock
crowdout = percentage of overall R&D crowded out by energy R&D
a, b, φ = parameters of the innovation possibilities curve
η = effect of backstop energy knowledge on backstop price
αH = scaling factor for the stock of energy knowledge
αΦ = percentage of exogenous carbon intensity reduction
ρH = substitution parameter for energy and knowledge
ρB = substitution parameter between fossil fuels and backstop energy
LUt = Land-use carbon emissions
LU0 = Initial land-use carbon emissions
δLU = Rate of decline of land-use carbon emissions
φ11, φ12, φ21, φ22, φ23, φ32, φ33 = Parameters of the carbon transition matrix
Ot = Increase in radioactive forcing over preindustrial levels due to exogenous anthropogenic
causes
σ1, σ2, σ3 = Temperature dynamics parameters
θ1, θ2 = Parameters of the damage function

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

A2

4.1/λ = Climate sensitivity – equilibrium increase in temperature from a doubling of CO2
concentrations)
Endogenous Variables
Ut = utility in period t
ct = per capita consumption
Qt = output (trillions of 1990 US dollars)
Ωt = damages from climate change
µt = emissions control rate in DICE model
Kt = physical capital stock (trillions of 1990 US dollars)
Et = energy inputs
pF,t = price of fossil fuels
pB,t = price of backstop energy
Ft = fossil fuel/carbon inputs, also equal to CO2 emissions
Bt = backstop energy, in carbon ton equivalents (CTE)
qF = marginal cost of fossil fuel extraction
CumCt = cumulative carbon extractions by year t
It = investment in physical capital
Ct = total consumption
HEt = stock of energy efficiency knowledge
HBt = stock of backstop energy knowledge
REt = energy R&D
EMt = Carbon emissions
MA,t = Atmospheric CO2 concentration
MU,t = Upper oceans/biosphere CO2 concentration
ML,t = Lower oceans CO2 concentration
FORCEt = Radioactive forcing, increase over preindustrial level
Tt = Atmospheric temperature, increase over 1900 level
TLt = Lower ocean temperature, increase over 1900 level
The ENTICE model maximizes per capita utility, defined in equation (A 1) below,
subject to a set of environmental and economic constraints.

Economic constraints are

represented by equations (A 2) – (A 17). Equations (A 18) – (A 27) are the environmental
constraints.
T

(A 1)

max V = ∑ U [ct , Lt ]Rt
t =0

Economic Constraints
(A 2)

U t = Lt log(C t / Lt )

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

[

t

(A 3)

Rt = ∏ 1 + r0 e − g r t

A3

10

]

v =0

(A 4)

Qt = Ω t ( At K tγ L1t − γ − β Etβ ) − p F , t Ft − p B, t Bt

(A 5)

Kt = {It – 4*crowdout*(RE,t + RB,t)} + (1-δ)Kt-1.

(A 6)

Lt = L0exp(gL,t)

(A 7)

gL,t = (gL,0/dL)*(1-exp(-dL*t))

(A 8)

At = A0exp(gA,t)

(A 9)

gA,t = (gA,0/dA)*(1-exp(-dA*t))

(A 10)

⎡
⎛⎛ F
⎢
ρ
t
Et = ⎢α H H E ,Ht + ⎜⎜ ⎜⎜
⎜⎝ αΦΦt
⎢
⎝
⎣

⎡⎛ g z
Φ t = exp ⎢⎜⎜ tz
⎢⎣⎝ δ

⎞
⎟ 1 − exp − δ z t
⎟
⎠

(

(

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

ρB

ρ /ρ
⎞ H B⎤

ρB ⎟

+ Bt

⎟⎟
⎠

⎤

))⎥
⎥⎦

(A 12)

PF = qF + markup
q F = ζ 1 + ζ 2 [CumCt / CumC*]ζ 3

(A 13)

CumCt = CumCt-1 + 10*Ft

(A 14)

Ft < 0.1 * (CarbMax – CumCt)/10

(A 15)

Hi,t = h(Ri,t) + (1–δH)Hi,t-1,

i = E,B

(A 16)

h(Ri,t) = aRbi,tHφi,t,

i = E,B

(A 17)

Qt = Ct + It + REt + RBt

(A 11)

Environmental Constraints
(A 18)

LUt = LU0(1-δLU)t

(A 19)

EMt = Ft + LUt

(A 20)

MA,t = 10*EMt + φ33ML,t-1 + φ23MU,t-1

(A 21)

ML,t = φ11MA,t-1 + φ21MU,t-1

(A 22)

MU,t = φ12MA,t-1 + φ22MU,t-1 + φ32ML,t-1

(A 23)

FORCEt = 4.1*{log(MA,t/596.4)/log(2)} + Ot

(A 24)

Ot = -0.1965 + 0.13465t,

t < 11

⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

1

ρH

,

ρ≤1

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models
Ot = 1.15,

t ≥ 11

(A 25)

Tt = Tt-1 + σ1{FORCEt - λTt-1 - σ2(Tt-1 – TLt-1)}

(A 26)

TLt = TLt-1 + σ3(Tt-1 – TLt-1)

(A 27)

Ωt = 1/(1 + a1 + Tt + a2*Tt2)

A4

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

B1

Appendix B – Calibration of the ENTICE-BR Model

This appendix describes the steps taken to calibrate the ENTICE-BR model. I begin by
summarizing calibration of the ENTICE model without a backstop technology, followed by a
discussion of changes necessary to incorporate the backstop technology.
As a global macroeconomic model, ENTICE uses Nordhaus’ DICE model (1994,
Nordhaus and Boyer 2000) as its basic building block. Since the current version of Nordhaus’
DICE model does not include carbon emissions as an input, but rather simply models emissions
as a byproduct of output requiring control, the first step to constructing the model is to add a
fossil fuel sector that mimics the behavior of the original DICE model. I do this using the same
modeling structure as Nordhaus’ RICE model, except that I apply the equations at a global,
rather than regional, level. Key equations of the economic sector of the DICE model, along with
the modifications necessary to include carbon emissions as an input, are included in the
modeling appendix. I calibrate this basic model, with no energy R&D, so that the results are
comparable to Nordhaus’ DICE model. To begin, I take the initial value of F from the latest
version of the DICE model. I then solve for initial values of A and K that reproduce the initial
output found in the DICE model. Next, I calculate the elasticity of output to with respect to
energy, β, as the percentage of output spent on fossil fuels in the initial period, using the 1995
price of carbon based on equations (6) and (7).27 Finally, the growth rate of Φ, gz (-15.49), and
the rate of decline of this growth rate, γz (23.96), are chosen to produce an emissions path as
close as possible to the DICE model. These values represent the rate of exogenous decline in
carbon intensity without any energy R&D in the model. Figures B1 and B2 compares the
emissions and output that result from this calibration.

27

References to equation numbers refer to equations in the text of the main paper.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

B2

Having added carbon fuels as an input to production in the DICE model, the next step is
to add induced technological change to the ENTICE model. The modeling for this stage is
described the main text of the paper. Calibration requires choosing values for the following
parameters:
• the initial value of energy research, RE0.
• ρ, the substitution parameter in equation (10),
• parameters in the invention possibilities frontier (9): a, b, and φ, and
• the initial level of energy human capital, HE0,28
• αΗ , the scaling factor for the effect of this human capital, and
• αΦ , the percentage of exogenous technological change remaining.
To calibrate the energy R&D sector, three goals must be met. First, R&D levels should
be consistent with historical levels. A starting value of $10 billion is chosen for the base year of
1995. To get this value, I begin with an estimated level of total global spending on R&D of $500
billion. This figure is based largely on data from OECD countries. Energy R&D data is not
available on a global basis. However, it is available for the United States. In the U.S., two
percent of R&D spending in 1995 went to energy-related R&D. The $10 billion figure used in
this paper is simply two percent of the global level of R&D. This figure is also close to the
initial value of R&D used by Nordhaus (2002).
Second, the behavior of energy R&D should be consistent with empirical studies both
across time and across policy dimensions. Based on Popp (2002), I use an elasticity of energy
R&D with respect to energy prices of 0.35 for the base model. As the price of carbon rises over
time, the time path of energy R&D should follow the path predicted by this value as closely as

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

B3

possible.29 In addition, elasticities of energy R&D calculated on differences in the carbon price
with and without a carbon tax in the optimal policy simulation should also equal 0.35. Since the
goal of this paper is to explore the consequences of omitting endogenous technological change
from earlier climate change models, when these two goals are incompatible, the second takes
precedence.

Furthermore, since Popp (2002) also notes that energy R&D experiences

diminishing returns over time, the calibrated elasticity should fall over time. Figure B3 shows
the calibrated levels of energy R&D and what would be predicted by a constant elasticity over
time of 0.35.
Finally, Popp (2001) estimates a 4:1 ratio on the returns to energy R&D. Thus, each
dollar of energy R&D should lead to a four dollar reduction in energy savings. The model is
calibrated so that a weighted average of energy savings each period (weighted by the discount
factors used in the model) produce a 4:1 ratio of energy savings to energy R&D.
Using these goals as guidelines for choosing the parameters, I first choose the value of
HE0 to approximate baseline emissions in early years of the simulation. Next, I choose ρ to
approximate the elasticity of energy R&D between the no-policy and optimal policy simulations.
Third, the value of the scaling factor αH is chosen to yield the appropriate rate of return on
energy R&D. To calibrate the inventions possibility frontier, the value a is chosen so that the
change in energy R&D between 1995 and 2005 in the optimal policy simulation is consistent
with the elasticity of 0.35. Values of b and φ are chosen so that future elasticities fit the desired
time path – falling slowly in the near future due to diminishing returns to R&D. Once the
desired time path of R&D is calibrated, the scaling factor αΦ can be adjusted to change the level
28

Note that, since human capital enters the invention possibilities frontier multiplicatively, the initial value cannot
be zero.
29
Note that, to account for growth in the level of economic activity, all elasticities are calculated based on a ratio of
energy R&D to global output.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

B4

of baseline emissions as appropriate. A value of 0.8 is used in the base model, meaning that 80
percent of exogenous technological change remains in the ENTICE model.

As a result,

purposeful R&D efforts to improve energy efficiency are only a small portion of the changes that
take place over time to reduce energy intensity. Table 1 in Popp (2003) presents a complete list
of the parameter values chosen for both the base model and various sensitivity analysis
scenarios.
When adding a backstop, the first critical piece of information is the initial conditions.
Based on Nakicenovic et al. (1998), the backstop technology is assumed to contribute four
percent of total energy in 1995.

This yields an initial backstop level of 0.25 carbon ton

equivalents (CTE). The parameter β from the production function, which equals the share of
energy expenses taken from output, is adjusted accordingly, as the share of production costs
going to energy is now greater. To be consistent with R&D data (Anderson 1997), the initial
level of backstop energy R&D is ten percent of energy efficiency R&D, or $1 billion. The initial
stock of backstop knowledge, HB,0 is normalized to 1.
As with energy efficiency R&D, the value of ρB has a significant impact on the elasticity
of backstop energy R&D. However, its value is not set independently. Based on the first-order
conditions for energy demand, ρB is determined by initial energy consumption and the relative
prices of fossil fuels and the backstop technology. Unfortunately, a wide range of possibilities
for the starting price exists. For example, in appropriate conditions, the price of electricity from
wind is nearing competitive levels. Burtraw et al (1995) report the cost of wind energy to be
44% higher than that of energy from fossil fuels. This yields an initial price of $400 per carbon
ton equivalent (CTE) of backstop energy. Gerlagh and Lise (2003) report prices for alternative
energy sources ranging from 2 to 5 times that of fossil fuels. Using the upper range of this as an

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

B5

alternative, I consider an initial price of $1200 as a second option. Unfortunately, the resulting
elasticity of substitution yields very high elasticities of R&D in each case. Thus, I also consider
a starting price of $2000 CTE.

This provides more reasonable elasticities of backstop energy

R&D, as the resulting elasticity of substitution is similar to that for energy efficiency R&D.
Next, a value for η, which relates human capital to backstop price decreases, is chosen.
Again, no good empirical estimates exist. Results for two values, 0.5 and 1.0, are presented.
These yield progress ratios of 24 and 50 percent respectively. A 50 percent progress means that a
doubling of the knowledge stock reduces the backstop price by 50 percent. More importantly,
under realistic base case R&D scenarios, the share of energy consumption resulting time paths
for backstop energy R&D are comparable to other studies. Such rapid progress is comparable to
changes in patenting and prices during the past 20 years. The 24 percent progress ratio yields
slightly lower shares of backstop energy than comparable scenarios. However, as shown in the
results section, the marginal returns to R&D are more realistic. Thus, a 24 percent progress ratio
is used for the base case.
Finally, the parameters of the inventions possibilities frontier are chosen as before. At
the same time, the parameters a and b for energy efficiency R&D are changed slightly so that
base case R&D is comparable in simulations with and without a backstop technology. Table 1 in
the paper provides a list of the new parameters needed for the ENTICE-BR model.

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

B6

Figure B1 – Industrial Emissions in the ENTICE & RICE Models
20

Industrial Emissions (billion tons per year)

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

2295

Year
DICE -- no policy
DICE -- opt policy

ENTICE -- no R&D
ENTICE opt policy -- no R&D

ENTICE -- R&D
ENTICE opt policy -- R&D

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

B7

Figure B2 – Output in the ENTICE & RICE Models
350

Output (trillions 1990 US dollars)

300

250

200

150

100

50

0
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

2295

Year
DICE -- no policy
DICE -- opt policy

ENTICE -- no R&D
ENTICE opt policy -- no R&D

ENTICE -- R&D
ENTICE opt policy -- R&D

ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate Policy Models

B8

Figure B3 – Predicted and Actual Energy R&D
0.14

Energy R&D: Trillions 1990 US $

0.12

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

Year
elas = 0.35

Base -- no policy

Base -- opt policy

2295

