                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 CAPITAL CONTROLS:
                       MUD IN THE WHEELS OF MARKET DISCIPLINE

                                            Kristin J. Forbes

                                         Working Paper 10284
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10284


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




Paper prepared for the conference: “Market Discipline: The Evidence Across Countries and Industries.”
Sponsored by the Bank of International Settlements and Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Kristin J. Forbes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Capital Controls: Mud in the Wheels of Market Discipline
Kristin J. Forbes
NBER Working Paper No. 10284
January 2004
JEL No. F3, F15, F21, G15

                                           ABSTRACT

Widespread support for capital account liberalization in emerging markets has recently shifted to

skepticism and even support for capital controls in certain circumstances. This sea-change in

attitudes has been bolstered by the inconclusive macroeconomic evidence on the benefits of capital

account liberalization. There are several compelling reasons why it is difficult to measure the

aggregate impact of capital controls in very different countries. Instead, a new and more promising

approach is more detailed microeconomic studies of how capital controls have generated specific

distortions in individual countries. Several recent papers have used this approach and examined very

different aspects of capital controls – from their impact on crony capitalism in Malaysia and on

financing constraints in Chile, to their impact on US multinational behavior and the efficiency of

stock market pricing. Each of these diverse studies finds a consistent result: capital controls have

significant economic costs and lead to a misallocation of resources. This new microeconomic

evidence suggests that capital controls are not just “sand”, but rather “mud in the wheels” of market

discipline.

Kristin J. Forbes
MIT Sloan School
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
kjforbes@mit.edu
1. Introduction

In the early and mid-1990's, most international economists and Washington-based policymakers

supported rapid capital account liberalization for emerging markets. Liberalization was expected

to have widespread benefits. For example, it was predicted to increase capital inflows, thereby

financing investment and raising growth. It could facilitate the diversification of risk, thereby

reducing volatility in consumption and income. Liberalization could also increase market

discipline, thereby leading to a more efficient allocation of capital and higher productivity

growth. Many countries followed this advice and removed their capital account restrictions.

        The initial results were generally positive – increased capital inflows, investment booms,

and impressive growth performance. In the last decade, however, this positive view of capital

account liberalization has been widely questioned. Several countries that had recently removed

capital account restrictions, such as Mexico, Thailand, Korea, Russia, and Argentina,

experienced severe financial crises. These experiences, especially when combined with the

recent backlash against globalization, caused many people to question the benefits of unrestricted

capital flows in emerging markets. Does capital account liberalization lead to inefficient

investment and asset market bubbles? Could controls on capital flows have prevented these

crises, or at least reduced their virulence? Even the IMF, formerly the bastion of capital market

liberalization, has cautiously begun to support certain capital controls, especially taxes on capital

inflows.1

        These concerns have been bolstered by the inconclusive macroeconomic evidence on the

benefits of capital account liberalization and the costs of capital controls. Although there is an


1
  For example, Fischer (2002), the former First Deputy Managing Director of the IMF, writes: “The IMF has
cautiously supported the use of market-based capital inflow controls, Chilean style.” Eduardo Aninat, a Deputy
Managing Director of the IMF, recently stated: “…in some circumstances, these controls on capital inflows can play
a role in reducing vulnerability created by short-term flows…” (Druckerman, 2002)


                                                                                                                1
extensive literature on this subject (discussed in more detail in Section 2), the lack of agreement

across studies, methodologies, and data sources is remarkable. In a recent survey of capital

account liberalization, Eichengreen (2002) summarizes his conclusions: “Capital account

liberalization, it is fair to say, remains one of the most controversial and least understood policies

of our day...empirical analysis has failed to yield conclusive results.” In a recent review of the

empirical evidence on globalization, Prasad et al. (2003) conclude: “…if financial integration has

a positive effect on growth, there is as yet no clear and robust empirical proof that the effect is

quantitatively significant.”

       Many skeptics interpret these inconclusive macroeconomic results as evidence that the

theoretical benefits of capital account liberalization may be elusive, possibly due to a range of

market imperfections. A closer look at individual countries that have removed their capital

controls, however, suggests that capital account liberalization may actually have substantial

benefits, but these benefits are extremely difficult to measure at the macroeconomic level

(especially in a cross-country framework). Most countries that remove their capital controls

simultaneously undertake a range of additional reforms and undergo widespread structural

changes, so that it is extremely difficult to isolate the specific impact of removing the controls.

Accurately measuring one of the most important benefits of capital account liberalization—

increased competition and market discipline that leads to a more efficient allocation of capital

and higher productivity growth—is extremely complicated. Moreover, the benefits of removing

capital controls may vary substantially across countries based on factors such as: their

institutional development, the strength and depth of their financial system, and the quality of

their corporate governance.




                                                                                                      2
       Instead, a potentially more promising way to assess the effect of capital account

liberalization may be to focus on more detailed microeconomic evidence on how capital controls

have generated specific distortions in individual countries. Several recent studies have adopted

this approach, with much more conclusive results than the macroeconomic, cross-country

studies. Johnson and Mitton (2002) show that the Malaysian capital controls provided a shelter

for government cronyism and reduced market discipline. Forbes (2003) shows that the Chilean

capital controls made it more difficult for smaller firms to obtain financing for productive

investment. Desai et al. (2002) show that capital controls reduced the amount of foreign direct

investment by U.S. multinationals and created additional distortions as U.S. companies

attempted to evade the controls. Li et al. (2004) show that capital controls reduced market

discipline and lowered the efficiency of stock market prices.

       Although this literature examining the microeconomic effects of capital controls is only

its infancy, the combination of results is compelling. These papers use diverse methodologies to

examine very different aspects of capital controls in a range of countries and time periods, yet

each finds a consistent result; capital controls have significant economic costs and lead to a

misallocation of resources. Even if it is difficult to capture these effects at the macroeconomic

level during periods when countries undergo rapid structural reform, this misallocation of

resources is bound to reduce productivity and potential growth rates. Tobin (1978) argued that a

tax on currency transactions would act as “sand in the wheels” of international financial markets.

In comparison, given this new microeconomic evidence that capital controls may lead to a

misallocation of capital through a number of different channels, a more accurate rendition may

be that capital controls are not just “sand”, but rather “mud in the wheels of market discipline.”




                                                                                                     3
           The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the inconclusive

macroeconomic, empirical evidence on capital controls. Section 3 discusses, in more detail,

several recent microeconomic studies showing how capital controls can cause “mud in the

wheels of market discipline.” Section 4 weighs these costs of capital controls relative to the

potential benefit of reduced vulnerability to crises. Section 5 concludes.




2. The Inconclusive Macroeconomic Evidence on Capital Controls

The theoretical literature suggests that there are a number of potential benefits from capital

account liberalization. Prasad et al. (2003) survey this literature and describe four direct benefits:

the augmentation of domestic savings, a reduction in the cost of capital through better global

allocation of risk, the transfer of technological and managerial know-how, and the stimulation of

domestic financial sector development. It also describes three indirect benefits: the promotion of

specialization, the commitment to better economic policies, and a signaling of friendlier policies

for foreign investment in the future. Capital account liberalization, however, can also have

important costs. For example, by increasing market discipline and integration with global

financial markets, removing capital controls can increase a country’s vulnerability to banking

and currency crises. As seen in the 1990’s, these crises can be severe and have substantial

economic and social costs.

           The macroeconomic literature, however, has had limited empirical success in consistently

showing that capital account liberalization has any of these effects.2 The most common testing

approach has been to evaluate if reducing capital controls is correlated with higher economic

growth. The contrasting results of the two most cited studies in this literature capture the general
2
    For excellent surveys of this literature, see Eichengreen (2002) or Prasad et al. (2003).


                                                                                                     4
inconsistency. Rodrik (1998) finds no significant relationship between capital account openness

and growth, while Quinn (1997) uses a different measure of capital account openness and finds a

significant positive relationship. A recent evaluation of this literature by Prasad et al. (2003)

yields the same inconclusive results. Figure 1 replicates a key graph of the paper. It shows no

significant relationship between financial openness and the growth in real per capita income

across countries—even after controlling for a series of the standard variables in this literature.3 In

fact, of the 14 recent studies on this subject surveyed in Prasad et al. (2003), 3 find a positive

effect of financial integration on growth, 4 find no effect, and 7 find mixed results.



                                                        Figure 1
                        Conditional Relationship Between Financial Openness and Growth, 1982-97

                                               1
       Growth rate of per capita GDP: 1982-




                                              .5




                                               0
       97




                                              -.5

                                                    -10.5                                                 18.0
                                                            Change in capital account openness, 1982-97


                  Notes: Growth is measured by growth in real per capita GDP. Conditioning variables are: initial
                  income, initial schooling, average investment/GDP, political instability, and regional dummies

                  Source: Prasad et al. (2003)



3
  The control variables include: initial income, initial schooling, average investment/GDP, political instability, and
regional dummies.


                                                                                                                         5
       There are a number of possible explanations for these conflicting results and lack of

consensus. First, it is extremely difficult to accurately measure capital account openness. Simple

empirical statistics measuring policies and regulations can not accurately capture the complexity

and effectiveness of liberalization. De facto measures of integration (such as capital flows or

foreign asset holdings) are also problematic, since some countries with large capital inflows still

maintain relatively strict capital controls (such as China), while other countries with relatively

unrestricted capital accounts receive fairly little foreign capital (such as many African nations).

Second, different types of capital flows and capital controls may have different effects. For

example, recent work suggests that the benefits of foreign direct investment to growth may be

greater than those of portfolio flows. Controls on capital inflows may be less harmful since they

can be viewed as a form of prudential regulation, while controls on capital outflows may be

interpreted as a lack of government commitment to sound policies and/or a lack of attractive

domestic investment opportunities.

       Third, the impact of removing capital controls could depend on a range of other, hard-to-

measure factors. For example, recent work suggests that countries are more likely to benefit from

capital account liberalization if they have stronger institutions, better corporate governance, and

more effective prudential regulation. Fourth, the sequence in which different types of capital

controls are removed may determine the aggregate impact. For example, lifting restrictions on

offshore bank borrowing before freeing other sectors of the capital account may increase the

vulnerability of a country’s banking system (as seen in Korea in the mid-1990’s). Finally, there

may be “threshold effects” that are difficult to capture in linear regressions. More specifically,

countries may need to attain a certain level of financial market integration or of overall economic

development before attaining substantial benefits from lifting capital controls.




                                                                                                      6
           Despite these imposing challenges to measuring the cross-country impact of capital

account liberalization, several papers have focused on narrower aspects of this issue and

generated more conclusive and promising results. For example, recent work shows that stock

market liberalizations in emerging markets lead to increased investment and a lower cost of

capital.4 Other recent work suggests that the impact of capital account liberalization is closely

related to the quality of governance and institutions.5 Given the numerous channels by which

capital account liberalization could affect an economy, it is not surprising that focusing on

particular aspects of this relationship can yield more conclusive results. Further narrowing the

investigation to specific countries and experiences with capital controls may be even more

productive.




3. Mud in the Wheels: Microeconomic Evidence of the Distortions from Capital Controls

Given these myriad difficulties in assessing the impact of capital account liberalization,

potentially even more promising than the approaches used in these cross-country studies is to

focus on the microeconomic impact within specific countries. Although case studies inherently

have the shortcoming that it is difficult to control for other events that occur simultaneously, this

approach can avoid many of the problems (discussed above) with the macroeconomic, cross-

country literature. Moreover, this approach can facilitate a much more detailed measurement of

exactly how capital account liberalization affects the allocation of resources and creates specific

market distortions. The next four subsections discuss recent studies that have used very different

methodologies to examine specific microeconomic effects of capital controls. Despite the range


4
    For example, see Henry (2000) and Bekaert and Harvey (2000).
5
    For example, see Klein (2003) and Gelos and Wei (2002).


                                                                                                      7
of experiences and approaches, each clearly identifies a significant cost of capital controls. The

accumulation of these costs and distortions suggests that capital controls may act as “mud in the

wheels of market discipline.”



3. 1. Protection for Cronyism in Malaysia

In September of 1998, soon after the peak of the Asian crisis, Malaysia imposed controls on

capital outflows. Some predicted dire effects, such as scaring foreigners from investing and

doing business in Malaysia for years. Others predicted that the capital controls would have the

benefit of giving the Malaysian government “breathing room” to enact reforms that would

facilitate recovery and raise long-run growth. A few years later, two papers (presented at the

same conference) used macroeconomic data to assess the impact of these capital controls. Kaplan

and Rodrik (2002) argued that the capital controls had positive macroeconomic effects, while

Dornbusch (2002) argued that they had no significant effect. These contradictory views of one

specific country experience with capital controls mirrors the disagreements in the broader

macroeconomic literature.

        Johnson and Mitton (2002), however, use a very different, microeconomic approach to

analyze the impact of the Malaysian capital controls. It examines how the Asian crisis and the

announcement of the capital controls affected stock returns for individual Malaysian companies.

The analysis splits the sample of firms into those with political connections to senior government

officials (such as Prime Minister Mahatir), and those without political connections. The paper

finds that in the initial phase of the crisis, before the capital controls were enacted, politically-

connected firms experienced a greater loss in market value than firms without political

connections. When the controls were put into place, politically-connected firms experienced a




                                                                                                        8
relatively greater increase in market value. These results suggest that the Asian crisis initially

increased financial pressures on Malaysian firms, improving market discipline and reducing the

ability of governments to provide subsidies for favored firms. When the capital controls were put

into place, however, investors expected that the Malaysian government would have more

freedom to help favored firms and engage in cronyism. In other words, the capital controls

reduced market discipline and provided a shelter for government cronyism.

           Moreover, the empirical estimates in Johnson and Mitton (2002) suggest that this cost of

the Malaysian capital controls was substantial. In the initial phase of the crisis (from July 1997 to

August 1998), politically-connected firms lost about $5.7 billion in market value due to the fall

in the expected value of their connections. When the controls were enacted in September 1998

(and market values were substantially lower), politically-connected firms gained about $1.3

billion in market value due to the increased value of their connections. Another calculation

indicates that at the end of September 1998, after the capital controls had reduced market

discipline, political connections were worth about 17% of the total market value for connected

firms.



3.2. Increased Financial Constraints for Smaller, Publicly-Traded Firms in Chile

Another well-known example of capital controls is the encaje, a tax on capital inflows adopted

by Chile from 1991 through 1998. An extensive literature has examined the macroeconomic

effect of these capital controls, with a range of results.6 For example, some papers argue that the

controls reduced country vulnerability to external shocks, while others claim that they had no

effect on vulnerability. There is somewhat more agreement (albeit not unanimous) that the

controls lengthened the maturity of capital inflows, with no significant effect on their volume.
6
    Simone and Sorsa (1999) is an excellent survey of the empirical literature on the Chilean capital controls.


                                                                                                                  9
Assessing the macroeconomic impact of the capital controls is complicated by Chile’s rapid

growth, ambitious economic reforms, and sound policy environment during this period. Despite

these difficulties, however, there is fairly widespread agreement that the encaje generated some

small economic benefits for Chile, with minimal economic costs. This assessment has prompted

a number of countries to consider enacting similar controls on capital inflows.

       A closer look at the microeconomic evidence, and especially how these capital controls

impacted different types of firms, however, suggests that this assessment is overly optimistic.

Forbes (2003) examines how the encaje affected investment and financial constraints for

different types of publicly-traded firms in Chile. The results show that the capital controls

generated a number of distortions—such as an increase in companies listing abroad through

American Depository Receipts (ADRs) in order to avoid the tax. Most important, an extensive

empirical analysis indicates that the encaje significantly increased financial constraints for

smaller, publicly-traded companies, but not for larger firms. In other words, the capital controls

made it relatively more difficult and expensive for smaller companies to raise financing. Figure 2

(replicated from the paper) shows investment growth for publicly-traded Chilean firms around

the time of the capital controls, without controlling for all the variables in the more formal

empirical analysis. Investment growth was higher for smaller firms both before and after the

encaje (which is a standard result in the finance literature). During the period that the capital

controls were in place, however, investment growth plummeted for smaller companies and was

generally lower than for large companies.

       Therefore, the results in Forbes (2003) suggest that capital controls may have created a

number of microeconomic distortions in Chile, such as making it more difficult for smaller




                                                                                                    10
companies to obtain financing for productive investment.7 This inefficient allocation of capital

and resources undoubtedly reduced productivity and growth in Chile. These costs of capital

controls could be particularly important for emerging markets in which small and new firms are

often important sources of job creation and economic growth.




                                            Figure 2
                      Growth in Investment/Capital Ratios for Chilean Firms


                                        Encaje                                             Encaje
                                        enacted                                            ended
                20%

                15%

                10%

                 5%

                 0%
                       1988

                              1989

                                       1990

                                              1991

                                                     1992

                                                            1993

                                                                   1994

                                                                          1995

                                                                                 1996

                                                                                        1997

                                                                                               1998

                                                                                                      1999

                                                                                                             2000

                                                                                                                    2001
                -5%

               -10%

               -15%
                                     Smaller Firms
               -20%
                                     Large Firms
               -25%


                 Source: Forbes (2003).




7
  Recent work by Gallego and Hernández (2002) also shows that the Chilean capital controls affected a range of
firm-level variables, with differential effects on small and large companies.


                                                                                                                           11
3.3. Reduced Investment and Distortionary Behavior by U.S. Multinationals

While the previous two subsections discuss the microeconomic effects of capital controls on

domestic firms, another potentially important impact of capital controls is on foreign investment.

Theory suggests that foreign investment can bring numerous benefits to host countries, such as

increasing the capital stock and transferring technology and skills, all of which would raise

investment, productivity, and growth.

        Desai et al. (2002) attempt to measure the effect of capital account liberalization on

foreign direct investment by examining the behavior of U.S. multinational firms in countries

with and without capital controls. It shows that capital controls distort the asset allocation,

financing, transfer pricing, and divided policies of U.S. multinationals. For example, capital

controls in host countries reduce investment by multinationals by roughly 20 percent, and U.S.

firms operating in countries with capital controls tend to overinvest in physical assets and

underinvest (by as much as 40 percent) in financial assets. The paper also shows that when

countries liberalize their capital accounts, these distortions tend to be reversed. For example,

capital account liberalization is associated with large increases in multinational investment,

particularly in local financial assets.

        Moreover, Desai et al (2002) show that capital controls can cause U.S. multinational

affiliates to distort prices in order to circumvent the controls. More specifically, foreign affiliates

adjust prices by which they “trade” with their U.S. parents so that they run “trade deficits” about

4 to 6 percent larger than in countries without capital controls. The magnitude of this distortion is

comparable to that which would occur if the foreign country raised taxes by about 20 to 50

percent. Therefore, this paper suggests that not only will capital controls distort the amount and




                                                                                                     12
type of foreign direct investment available to host countries, but they can also generate additional

distortions as companies attempt to evade the controls and extract profits.



3.4. Reduced Efficiency in Stock Market Pricing

Capital controls may not only distort the behavior of multinational affiliates and locally-owned

companies, but can also affect the efficiency of domestic equity markets by reducing competitive

pressure, market discipline, and the information content of stock prices. More specifically, by

making it more difficult for foreigners to invest in domestic stock markets, capital controls could

limit this valuable source of information and liquidity. As discussed above in the context of

Malaysia, capital controls can insulate markets and reduce market discipline by providing a

shelter for cronyism and other non-competitive activities. Capital controls might also limit the

ability of potentially successful companies to raise additional financing, thereby restraining their

ability to invest and grow.

       Li et al. (2004) examine the extent to which individual stock prices move up and down

together in specific countries—i.e., “synchronicity”—to attempt to measure some of these

effects. High levels of comovement and low levels of firm-specific variation in prices suggest

that stock prices are less efficient. In other words, when stock prices are driven more by

aggregate, country-level news instead of by firm-specific variables and information, there is less

market discipline. This paper uses several different measures to show that greater openness in

capital markets (but not in goods markets) is correlated with greater firm-specific content in

stock prices, and therefore with more market discipline and pricing efficiency. This relationship

is magnified in countries with strong institutions and good governance.




                                                                                                   13
           One set of results, although not a focus of Li et al. (2004), is particularly relevant to this

assessment of the relationship between capital controls and market discipline.8 Around the time

of the Asian crisis, the firm-specific variation in stock prices increased significantly in most

Asian countries and remained high for an extended period. This pattern is graphed for Korea in

Figure 3, and is typical for most open economies in the region. In Malaysia, the firm-specific

component of stock prices also increased significantly after the Asian crisis, but then fell sharply

after its capital controls were imposed (as also shown on Figure 3). Although not a definitive

test, this indicates that the Asian crisis increased market discipline and the firm-specific content

in stock prices, while the Malaysian capital controls appear to have suppressed market discipline

and reduced the efficiency of stock market prices.



                                                   Figure 3
                                    Firm-Specific Variation in Stock Prices

               0.45%

               0.40%
                                     Korea
               0.35%
                                     Malaysia
               0.30%

               0.25%

               0.20%

               0.15%

               0.10%

               0.05%

               0.00%
                    1990    1991    1992     1993   1994    1995    1996    1997    1998    1999    2000


           Note: Higher levels of firm-specific variation in stock prices indicate greater pricing efficiency.
           Source: Based on data from Li et al (2004).

8
    These results were removed from the published version of the paper but are available in the working paper.


                                                                                                                 14
4. But….Can Capital Controls Reduce Vulnerability to Crises?

The four studies discussed above suggest that capital controls can create a number of

microeconomic distortions and therefore reduce productivity and growth. Despite these

potentially serious costs, supporters of capital controls argue that this policy can yield benefits

that outweigh these costs. The most frequently cited benefit is that capital controls reduce

country vulnerability to currency and banking crises. The series of emerging markets that

liberalized their capital accounts, and subsequently experienced a crisis in the 1990’s, is often

cited to support this argument. Capital controls, by placing “mud in the wheels of market

discipline” may render countries less vulnerable to external shocks and therefore reduce their

susceptibility to crises.

        This is not surprising since capital controls share many similarities to most standard

regulations---such as labor market regulations that make it more difficult to fire workers.

Regulations on both capital flows and labor markets can create safer, less volatile markets,

whether in the form of more stable capital flows or workers less likely to lose their jobs. Both

regulations also have a cost, however, whether in the form of lower levels of investment or lower

aggregate employment, both of which reduce efficiency and economic growth. To evaluate the

overall desirability of a specific regulation, it is necessary to weigh the costs against the benefits.

Therefore, any accurate evaluation of capital controls needs to weigh the potential costs

discussed throughout this paper against the potential benefit of reduced vulnerability to crises.

        A thorough evaluation of this tradeoff is beyond the scope of this paper, but Figure 4

provides some anecdotal evidence. The figure graphs an index of real income per capita




                                                                                                      15
(adjusted for PPP) in India, South Korea, and Thailand from 1980 through 2002.9 Income is

normalized to 100 in 1980 in order to equalize income levels at the start of the period. All

countries maintained fairly stringent capital controls in 1980, but then Korea and later Thailand

began to liberalize their capital accounts in the late 1980’s and early 1990’s. Growth increased as

capital flowed into Korea and Thailand and investment boomed. In 1997, however, both Korea

and Thailand experienced severe financial crises. Between 1997 and 1998, income per capita fell

by about 7 percent in Korea and 12 percent in Thailand. India, which maintained fairly stringent

capital controls throughout this period, actually had a small increase in income per capita and

emerged relatively unscathed from the Asian crisis.



                                               Figure 4
                               Income per Capita in Select Asian Countries
                                      (normalized to 100 in 1980)
                  700


                  600
                                      India
                                      South Korea
                  500
                                      Thailand
                  400


                  300


                  200


                  100
                        1980



                               1982



                                        1984


                                                 1986



                                                        1988



                                                               1990


                                                                      1992



                                                                             1994



                                                                                    1996


                                                                                           1998



                                                                                                  2000



                                                                                                         2002




                 Note: Income per capita is GDP per capita in international dollars, adjusted for PPP.
                 Source: Original data from World Bank, World Development Indicators online.




9
  I do not include China on this graph, since it is not a clear case of an open or closed capital account over this
period. Although China maintains some strict capital controls—such as on capital outflows—it has also substantially
liberalized restrictions on other capital movements—such as on inflows of foreign investment.


                                                                                                                16
       Despite the crisis, however, Korea and Thailand still have substantially higher income

levels than India on the graph—even after correcting for initial income levels in 1980. The figure

suggests that in Korea, the Asian crisis was only a short-term deviation from a higher long-term

growth rate. Despite the plunge in income during the crisis, the rapid recovery almost

compensated for growth lost during the crisis. As a result, Korean income per capita is now close

to where it would have been if growth had continued at trend and was not interrupted by the

crisis. Granted, Thailand has been slower to recover from the Asian crisis, and income per capita

did not recover to its pre-crisis levels until 2001. Despite this severe crisis and prolonged

recovery, however, average income levels in Thailand are still substantially higher than in

India—despite starting at the same normalized level in 1980. All in all, the graph indicates that

although crises can have severe economic costs, the short-term impact on income levels may be

small compared to the long-term benefits of higher growth rates.

       Granted, even if countries with open capital accounts tend to grow faster, on average,

than countries with capital controls, some individuals and governments may still chose to restrict

capital flows and reduce the chance of disruptive crises. This is similar to some countries’

preferences for more regulated labor markets and greater job stability, even at the cost of higher

unemployment and lower economic growth. In the case of capital account liberalization,

however, this tradeoff is less clear. Although recent experience suggests that emerging markets

with liberalized capital accounts have recently been more vulnerable to crises, the empirical

evidence is less definitive. In fact, Glick and Hutchinson (2000) find a positive—instead of

negative—correlation between capital controls and the occurrence of currency crises in both a

bivariate and multivariate analysis.




                                                                                                    17
       A closer look at the case study evidence suggests that this empirical evidence of a

positive relationship between capital controls and crises is not surprising. Countries with

macroeconomic imbalances (and which are therefore more vulnerable to crises), may choose to

impose capital controls in order to avoid difficult economic reforms, or to avoid capital outflows

that may trigger a crisis. Developed countries, or emerging markets with sound macroeconomic

environments, are not only less likely to experience crises, but also less likely to enact capital

controls and forego the benefits of free capital flows. Countries with closed capital accounts can

still experience domestic financial crises and banking crises. Therefore, although capital account

liberalization may increase country vulnerability to crises in some cases, the relationship

between capital controls and financial crises is not straightforward.




5. Conclusions

Although the theoretical literature suggests that there could be substantial benefits to emerging

markets from capital account liberalization, the empirical macroeconomic literature has had

limited success in consistently identifying these benefits. There are a series of compelling

reasons why it may be difficult to measure the aggregate impact of capital controls in a range of

very different countries that often undergo a variety of structural changes simultaneously with

liberalization. A more useful approach may be to focus on more narrow empirical analyses that

can measure the specific effects of capital account liberalization at the microeconomic level.

       The series of papers surveyed above indicates that focusing on microeconomic data, and

especially individual case studies of specific effects of capital controls, yields much stronger

evidence of the resulting economic distortions and costs. The Malaysian capital controls




                                                                                                     18
provided a shield for crony capitalism. The Chilean capital controls increased financial

constraints and limited investment in smaller, publicly-traded companies. U.S. firms tend to

reduce investment and adopt a range of distortionary practices in countries with capital controls.

Stock market pricing tends to be less efficient in countries with capital controls. Even though

none of these papers attempts to aggregate these microeconomic effects into estimates of an

economy-wide cost of capital controls, they clearly suggest that capital controls can lead to a

misallocation of resources through several different channels. The accumulation of these

different costs of capital controls indicates that they may act as “mud in the wheels of market

discipline” and significantly depress productivity and growth.

       Potentially offsetting these costs, capital controls may have the benefit of reducing

country vulnerability to currency and banking crises. Although the short-term impact of crises on

income levels can be severe, this effect is generally small when compared to the long-term

benefits of higher growth rates possible with liberalized capital accounts. Moreover, the benefits

of capital account liberalization may be smaller, while the risk of severe crises may be greater,

for countries with weak institutions and poor corporate governance.

       Mud in the wheels of a cart will slow down movement towards your destination. If mud

in the wheels weighs down the cart, minimizing the chance of the cart being overturned, some

people may chose the weighted-down, slower vehicle. Moreover, if the cart has a weak frame

and the wheels are only held together by the dried mud, it may be prudent to strengthen the

wheels and ensure that a minimum frame is in place before removing the mud and moving

rapidly. Given a certain level of structural integrity in the cart, however, most people would

probably chose to take the mud out of the wheels, even if it slightly increases the risk of a spill,

in order to more quickly arrive at their destination. Similarly, capital controls act as “mud in the




                                                                                                    19
wheels of market discipline.” They create a number of microeconomic distortions and

inefficiencies that can substantially reduce long-term growth rates. Capital account liberalization

may increase the risk of crises, especially for countries with weak institutions, but can also

substantially raise productivity growth and overall standards of living.




                                                                                                 20
                                          References

Bekaert, Geert and Campbell Harvey, 2000, “Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity
Markets,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 55, April, pp. 565-614.

Desai, Mihir, C. Fritz Foley, and James Hines, 2002, “Capital Controls, Liberalizations, and
Foreign Direct Investment,” Harvard Business School and University of Michigan, working
paper.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, 2002, “Malaysia’s Crisis: Was it Different?,” In Sebastian Edwards and
Jeffrey Frankel, eds., Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Druckerman, Pamela, 2002, “Some Warm to Use of Capital Controls,” Wall Street Journal,
October 24.

Eichengreen, Barry, 2002, “Capital Account Liberalization: What Do Cross-Country Studies
Tell Us?,” The World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 15(3), pp. 341-365.

Fischer, Stanley, 2002, “Financial Crises and Reform of the International Financial System,”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #9267.

Forbes, Kristin, 2003, “One Cost of the Chilean Capital Controls: Increased Financial
Constraints for Smaller Traded Firms,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
#9777.

Gallego, Francisco, and Leonardo Hernández, 2002, “Microeconomic Effects of Capital
Controls: The Chilean Experience During the 1990s,” Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
Central Bank of Chile, working paper.

Gelos, Gaston and Shang-Jin Wei, 2002, “Transparency and International Investor Behavior,”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #9260.

Glick, Reuven and Michael Hutchinson, 2000, “Stopping ‘Hot Money’ or Signaling Bad
Policy? Capital Controls and the Onset of Currency Crises,” Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco and University of California, Santa Cruz, working paper.

Henry, Peter, 2000, “Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?,” Journal of
Financial Economics, Vol. 58, October, pp. 301-334.

Johnson, Simon and Todd Mitton, 2002, “Cronyism and Capital Controls: Evidence From
Malaysia,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 67, February, pp. 351-382.

Kaplan, Ethan and Dani Rodrik, 2002, “Did the Malaysian Capital Controls Work?,” In
Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey Frankel, eds., Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



                                                                                               21
Klein, Michael, 2003, “Capital Account Openness and the Varieties of Growth Experience,”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #9500.

Li, Kan, Randall Morck, Fan Yang, and Bernard Yeung, 2004, “Firm-Specific Variation and
Openness in Emerging Markets,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Quinn, Dennis, 1997, “The Correlates of Changes in International Financial Regulation,”
American Political Science Review, Vol. 91, September, pp. 531-551.

Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose, 2003, “Effects of
Financial Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence,” International
Monetary Fund Occasional Paper #220.

Rodrik, Dani, 1998, “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?,” In Peter Kenen, ed., Should
the IMF Pursue Capital Account Convertibility?, Essays in International Finance no. 207,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Simone, Francisco Nadal De and Piritta Sorsa, 1999, “A Review of Capital Account
Restrictions in Chile in the 1990s,” International Monetary Fund Working Paper #99/52.

Tobin, James, 1978, “A Proposal for International Monetary Reform,” Eastern Economic
Journal, Vol. 4, July/October, pp. 153-159.




                                                                                           22
