                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           EQUILIBRIUM POLICY EXPERIMENTS
                       AND THE EVALUATION OF SOCIAL PROGRAMS

                                              Jeremy Lise
                                             Shannon Seitz
                                             Jeffrey Smith

                                         Working Paper 10283
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10283


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2004




We are grateful for helpful comments from Marina Adshade, David Andolfatto, Dan Black, Stephen Coate,
Curtis Eaton, Chris Ferrall, John Ham, Allen Head, Robert Moffitt, Derek Neal, Chris Taber, Petra Todd, Jim
Walker, and Ken Wolpin, along with participants at the 2001 Canadian Economic Association Meetings, the
2003 Canadian Public Economics Study Group, the 2003 Econometric Society Winter Meetings, the 2003
Institute for Research on Poverty Summer Workshop, the 2003 IZA/SOLE Transatlantic Meetings, the 2002
Society of Labor Economists Meeting, and the World Bank, and seminar participants at the following
universities: British Columbia, Carnegie-Mellon, Cornell, Guelph, Mannheim, McMaster, Melbourne, North
Carolina at Greensboro, Pennsylvania, Queen’s, Simon Fraser, Toronto and Tulane. We thank Andrew Leach
for excellent research assistance. Financial support from the Social Research and Demonstration Corporation
is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Jeremy Lise, Shannon Seitz, and Jeffrey Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Equilibrium Policy Experiments and the Evaluation of Social Programs
Jeremy Lise, Shannon Seitz, and Jeffrey Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 10283
January 2004
JEL No. J2, I38, J6

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper makes three primary contributions. First, we demonstrate the usefulness of general

equilibrium models as tools with which to draw policy implications for policies implemented in

practice only as small-scale social experiments. Second, we illustrate the usefulness of social

experiments as a tool to evaluate equilibrium models. In particular, we calibrate our model using

only data on an experimental control group and from general data sets, and then use it to predict (in

partial equilibrium) the outcomes experienced by an experimental treatment group. We find that it

predicts these outcomes remarkably well. Third, we apply our methodology to the evaluation of the

Canadian Self-Sufficiency Project (SSP), a policy providing generous financial incentives for

Income Assistance (IA) recipients to obtain stable employment. This policy is similar to many other

policies designed to "make work pay" currently under debate or in place in the US, the UK and

elsewhere. Our results reveal several important feedback effects associated with the SSP policy;

taken together, these feedback effects reverse the cost-benefit conclusions implied by the partial

equilibrium experimental evaluation.

Jeremy Lise                         Shannon Seitz                       Jeffrey Smith
Department of Economics             Department of Economics             Department of Economics
Queen’s University                  Queen’s University                  University of Maryland
lise@econ.queensu.edu               seitz@post.queensu.edu              3105 Tydings Hall
                                                                        College Park, MD 20742
                                                                        and NBER
                                                                        smith@econ.umd.edu
1    Introduction

Many potential policies have been evaluated using social experiments, where small subsets

of the population are randomly assigned to treatment and control groups, the treatment

group is subjected to the potential policy reform and the difference in outcomes between

the groups provides an estimate of the mean impact of the policy. The resulting treatment

effects literature provides useful estimates of the effect of treatment on those individuals

participating in the program within an experiment, where typically a small number of in-

dividuals are affected by the policy. However, such estimates may be of limited usefulness

if the policy evaluated in the experiment is implemented in general. A growing body of re-

search indicates that a policy may have very different implications when it is implemented

for the general population than when it is implemented on only a small number of partici-

pants for evaluation purposes.

    As outlined in Calmfors (1994) and elsewhere, such general equilibrium effects of pro-

grams represent a critical component of social cost-benefit analysis. Consider two examples

of such effects. First, programs may have indirect effects on both participants and non-

participants by changing the equilibrium of the labor market. These effects violate the

“stable unit treatment value assumption” (SUTVA) invoked to justify partial equilibrium

analysis. Heckman, Lochner, and Taber (1998) consider increasing subsidies to college tu-

ition and find that the resulting increase in the number of individuals who attend college

has the effect of increasing the supply of college graduates and reducing their wages. In

this case, the effect of the tuition policy depends on the number of college graduates in the

labor market.

    Second, programs may directly affect those who are not treated within the program. As

discussed by Heckman and Smith (1998), the standard treatment effects literature assumes




                                             1
that the outcomes for individuals not treated by the program within an experiment are the

same as the outcomes non-participants would experience if the program were implemented

more widely. This need not be the case. For example, consider the US Unemployment

Insurance Bonus experiments, where individuals starting a spell of unemployment were

offered a cash payment if they obtained employment within a limited time period. Davidson

and Woodbury (1993) estimate the displacement effects of the bonus program that would

result from changes in the search behavior of all workers in the labor market. In particular,

the bonus increases the gain to employment for workers eligible to receive it, resulting

in increased search effort and employment. Some of the increase in employment will be

in jobs that would otherwise have been held by workers not eligible for the bonus. This

displacement directly affects a subset of the labor force not treated within the program.

   Existing studies, such as those mentioned above, indicate that the equilibrium effects of

large-scale policies may be substantial. With regard to the college tuition subsidies studied

by Heckman, Lochner and Taber (1998), they estimate that the general equilibrium effects

on enrollment rates are 10 times smaller than those obtained from a partial equilibrium

analysis. Davidson and Woodbury (1993) estimate that the displacement of UI-ineligible

workers offsets 30-60 percent of the gross employment effect of the bonus program. This has

a strong effect on the estimated net impact of the program from society’s point of view. In

recent work, Blundell, Costa Dias, and Meghir (2003) consider the long-run effects of a large-

scale wage subsidy policy for low-skill workers. They find that the general equilibrium effects

of the policy on unemployment are opposite in sign to the predictions of a partial equilibrium

analysis. Overall, the literature shows that general equilibrium program evaluations can lead

to very different conclusions regarding the cost-benefit performance of labor market policies.

   Studying the potential general equilibrium effects that may result from implementing a

small-scale social experiment as a large-scale policy is difficult without the use of an equi-


                                              2
librium model. However, the degree of confidence that can be placed in policy experiments

generated within a model depends to a large extent on how well the model captures the

behavior of the individuals affected by the policy.

      The goal of our paper is to combine the advantages of the literature that attempts to

evaluate potential policies through social experiments with the literature that evaluates

potential policies through model experiments. We construct a dynamic, equilibrium model

that is well-suited for conducting labor market policy experiments and we use the model as

a tool for evaluating social programs. Our model is based on the search model of Davidson

and Woodbury (1993). Within the model, the amount of time required to find a job can be

reduced by increased search effort on the part of the worker. Once workers and firms meet,

they bargain over wages in an environment where wages reflect the value of the match and

the value of the outside options faced by both parties. This framework is ideally suited

for many equilibrium program evaluations, as it explicitly considers the effect of changes in

financial incentives introduced by social programs on the intensity with which individuals

search for jobs and on the process by which wages are determined in the labor market.

In addition to the matching and wage determination process, our model incorporates key

features of the Income Assistance (IA) and Unemployment Insurance (UI) programs, both of

which constitute important aspects of the economic context and are likely to have important

feedback effects on the labor market.

      We demonstrate the usefulness of social experiments as tools to evaluate equilibrium

models. In this respect, our paper serves as an analogue to work by Lalonde (1986) and

others, where experiments are used as a benchmark against which to assess the performance

of partial equilibrium non-experimental estimators.1 In particular, we test our model by

examining its ability to match the observed behavior of the experimental treatment group
  1
      See, e.g., Smith and Todd (2004) for a summary of this literature.




                                                      3
when calibrated using only the experimental control group (and external data).

       In general, calibrated models are tested by examining the extent to which they can

replicate features of the economy. Our exercise is more stringent in the sense that the

model must also be able to match the behavior observed in the data following a policy

change without exploiting the variation introduced by the policy change itself. We are able

to replicate the outcomes produced by a social experiment without using the data from

the experimental treatment group. The ability of the model to do so greatly increases

our confidence in the results from our general equilibrium program evaluation. In parallel

work, Todd and Wolpin (2003) use the data from the experimental evaluation of Mexico’s

PROGRESA program to test a partial equilibrium, structural, dynamic model of fertility

and child schooling using a similar approach. Their model does a good job of matching the

experimental impacts from PROGRESA.

       We apply our methodology to the equilibrium evaluation of the Canadian Self-Sufficiency

Project (SSP), a policy designed to provide incentives for individuals on income assistance to

leave the system for full-time employment.2 Similar, but less generous, income supplement

programs have been studied in the United States; see Auspos, Miller, and Hunter (2000) on

the Minnesota Family Investment Program and Bos, Huston, Granger, Duncan, Brock, and

McLoyd (1999) on the Wisconsin New Hope program. Bloom and Michalopoulos (2001)

provide an overview of the experimental literature and compare these programs to other

approaches. These programs, along with policies such as the Earned Income Tax Credit

(EITC) in the US and the Working Families Tax Credit (WFTC) in the UK, aim to “make

work pay” by subsidizing low-wage work.

       The SSP provides financial incentives by offering a temporary earnings supplement to
   2
    A growing literature looks at various aspects of the Self-Sufficiency Project. See, e.g., Card and Hyslop
(2002), Ferrall (2000) and Kamionka and Lacroix (2002).




                                                     4
single parents on IA.3 Individuals must remain on IA twelve months to become eligible

for the earnings supplement; once they do, they receive a supplement if they obtain full-

time employment (at least 30 hours per week) and leave IA within the following twelve

months. The supplement equals half the difference between the individual’s earnings and a

province-specific cutoff level in each month.

       Our model incorporates the main features of the SSP. In particular, the model allows

for time limits in determining eligibility for receipt of the supplement, consistent with the

one-year time limit in the experiment, allows individuals to receive the earnings supplement

for up to three years while employed, and allows the earnings supplement to depend on the

wages received by eligible recipients. The full-time work requirement is the sole omission,

due to the fact that our model does not include the hours choice. In addition, our model

incorporates the time limitations on entry and exit in the Canadian unemployment insur-

ance4 program and captures the interactions between IA, UI and the minimum wage in the

labor market.

       After constructing the model, we adopt the following strategy. First, we calibrate the

equilibrium model in the absence of the program using publicly available, non-experimental

data and data on the experimental control group. The parameters calibrated in the first

stage include the discount rate, search friction parameters, and exogenous job separation

rates: parameters that are, in theory, invariant to changes in the income assistance program.

Using the calibrated model, we simulate a model control group.

       Second, we simulate the SSP experiment within our calibrated model using the param-
   3
     In Canada, IA provides mean-tested transfers to persons of working age that do not depend on past
earnings or employment but do depend on family size and composition. Canada also has an unemployment
insurance system (similar to that in the US but more generous) that pays benefits that depend on past
earnings and employment (but not on family size or composition) to workers with sufficient past employment.
Unemployment insurance is the more generous program, so a worker eligible for both will collect that first
until his or her eligibility runs out, and then switch to IA.
   4
     The Canadian UI program is presently called Employment Insurance; we use the standard international
term here for clarity.




                                                    5
eters obtained in the first stage. A simulated treatment group is constructed by imposing

the Self-Sufficiency Project in partial equilibrium.

   Third, we compare the impacts from the simulated treatment and control groups to

those from the SSP social experiment, in order to determine how well our model replicates

the observed treatment effects. The results from this exercise lend strong support to our

parsimonious model, as the simulated treatment group outcomes match the experimental

data quite closely. In particular, the IA-to-work transition rates for the simulated treatment

group during the 36 months following random assignment are virtually the same as those

observed in the experimental data. We are also able to match the delayed exit effects of a

second randomized experiment that offered SSP to new IA recipients.

   Fourth, we re-calibrate the model using data on the low-skill population as a whole, and

simulate the equilibrium effects that result from introducing the SSP as a general policy for

all IA recipients, not just single mothers. Our model allows us to quantify the displacement,

wage and delayed exit effects of the SSP and provides a more complete picture of the

potential implications of implementing the SSP as policy than does the partial equilibrium

experimental evaluation.

   Four main results emerge from the equilibrium program evaluation. First, introducing

an earnings supplement to the income assistance program has implications for unemployed

workers, as the increase in employment for IA recipients coincides with a decrease in re-

employment rates for those individuals receiving UI benefits. As a result, the overall em-

ployment level does not change after the introduction of the policy. Second, although the

introduction of an earnings supplement increases the rate of exits to employment from IA,

it does so at lower equilibrium wages, as workers are willing to accept lower starting wages

so as to benefit from the supplement payments. Surprisingly, the wages of other workers in

the economy increase slightly, as the increased value of IA due to the introduction of the


                                               6
earnings supplement increases the fraction of the match surplus transferred to the worker.

This result is primarily due to the fact that the minimum wage limits the ability of firms

to extract the surplus generated by the supplement from the worker. Third, the simulation

results indicate the presence of entry and delayed exit effects, as the transition rate into

the IA program from UI increases and a higher fraction of individuals remain on IA long

enough to qualify for the supplement after the policy change. Fourth, taken together, the

equilibrium effects reverse the cost-benefit conclusions from the partial equilibrium analysis

and further illustrate the importance of equilibrium program evaluation.


2       The Model

In this section, we present the model of the labor market that we use to conduct equilib-

rium program evaluations. Three segments of the market are incorporated in the model:

individuals may be employed (E), unemployed and receiving UI benefits (U ) or on income

assistance (A).5 This feature of the model allows us to consider how workers, unemployed

individuals and income assistance recipients interact in the labor market. The model builds

on the equilibrium search model of Davidson and Woodbury (1993), where individuals max-

imize expected lifetime income by choosing their labor market state and the intensity with

which they search for work if not employed.6 We extend Davidson and Woodbury (1993)

to incorporate the income assistance program, minimum wages, and time limitations for

entry to and exit from the unemployment insurance program. Workers bargain with firms

over wages that depend on the tenure of the match, the minimum wage, and on the outside

options of both parties. Through this channel, the model generates predictions regarding

the way starting wages vary depending on the state from which the individual enters em-
    5
     Throughout this paper we use the term unemployed to mean collecting UI benefits. In the model, all
jobless individuals are actively seeking employment; they are distinguished by whether they are receiving
unemployment benefits or income assistance benefits.
   6
     The model of Davidson and Woodbury (1993) is based on work by Diamond (1982), Mortensen (1982)
and Pissarides (1984).



                                                   7
ployment. It is further assumed that the value of the match surplus increases with job

tenure, generating on-the-job wage growth in the model.

       Our model incorporates key features of typical unemployment insurance and income

assistance programs.7 First, individuals face time limitations regarding entry to and exit

from the unemployment insurance system. Individuals who enter employment from income

assistance or who have exhausted their unemployment benefits become eligible to receive

unemployment benefits after I months of employment. The number of months of benefit

eligibility subsequently increases by one month for each additional month of employment,

from a minimum of u months up to a maximum of ū months. Workers who enter employment

with unused benefits retain their unused benefit months and accumulate additional months

with each month worked. Second, individuals who exhaust their UI benefits and do not

secure a job are assumed to transit directly to income assistance. Finally, it is assumed that

individuals can remain on income assistance indefinitely or transit to employment if they

contact a firm with a vacancy; income assistance recipients cannot transit directly from IA

to unemployment. In the following sections, we describe the problems faced by each type

of individual and by firms in the model.

2.1      Workers

The value of employment for a worker depends on her job tenure t and unemployment

insurance benefit eligibility status i, where i ∈ {0, 1, ..., u, ..., ū}. The number of months an

individual with no benefits must work in order to qualify for UI benefits is I. For every

period an individual works beyond I, i increases by 1. The maximum number of benefit

months an individual can accumulate is denoted ū. If an individual is not working she would
   7
    The program details correspond to those in place in Canada at the time of the SSP experiment. Our
model could easily be modified to correspond to the institutions present in the US, the UK, or other developed
countries.




                                                      8
therefore be unemployed with i periods of benefits remaining.8 With probability δ, jobs are

exogenously destroyed in the subsequent month, in which case workers transit to income

assistance if they have not yet qualified for UI benefits (i = 0) and transit to unemployment

otherwise. With probability (1 − δ), workers remain employed in the next month.

       It is assumed that individuals who return to work before their UI benefits expire retain

their remaining UI benefit eligibility. Finally, workers experience on-the-job wage growth

for a maximum of T months, after which the wage remains constant, where it is assumed

that T > ū. The value function for a worker with outside option i and with job tenure t is:
           
           
            w(t, 0) + β[(1 − δ)V E (t + 1, 0) + δV A ]        if t < I and i = 0,
           
           
           
                                  E                   U
           w(t, 0) + β[(1 − δ)V (t + 1, u) + δV (u)]          if t = I and i = 0,
  E                               E                       U
V (t, i) = w(t, i) + β[(1 − δ)V (t + 1, i + 1) + δV (i + 1)] if 0 < i < ū and I ≤ t < T,
           
           
           
            w(t, ū) + β[(1 − δ)V E (t, ū) + δV U (ū)]      if i = ū and I ≤ t < T,
           
           
                                   E               U
             w(T, ū) + β[(1 − δ)V (T, ū) + δV (ū)]          if t ≥ T,
                                                                                        (1)

where w(t, i) is the wage for a person with tenure t who has i months of UI benefit eligibility

remaining, β is the discount rate, V A is the value of being on income assistance, and V U (i)

is the value of being unemployed with i periods of UI benefits remaining.

2.2      IA Recipients

IA recipients receive benefits (ba ) and pay search costs ca [p(0)z ] every month they remain

on IA, where z is the elasticity of search costs with respect to search effort, ca is a parameter

capturing the disutility of search effort, and p(i) is the optimal search effort for individuals

with i months of UI benefits remaining (and also the probability that such a worker contacts

a firm). The cost of search depends directly on the intensity with which individuals search.

In particular, for values of z > 1, the marginal cost of search increases as search effort

increases. If IA recipients match with a firm, they transit to employment. Otherwise, they
   8
    The UI system in our model embodies two simplifications relative to the system in place at the time
of the SSP experiment. First, months of employment do not cumulate across job spells in determining
benefit eligibility. Second, months of benefit eligibility last indefinitely once obtained. Both simplifications
substantially reduce the state space of the model.


                                                       9
remain on IA in the next period. The value function for an IA recipient is

                         n                    h                              io
                V A = max ba − ca [p(0)z ] + β m(0)V E (1, 0) + (1 − m(0))V A ,                           (2)
                        p(0)


where m(0) is the match rate for IA recipients, which depends in part on the search effort

p(0). The only reason IA recipients are not employed is because an employment opportunity

is not available and the only way an IA recipient can increase the likelihood of finding a job

is through increased search effort.9

2.3    Unemployed Individuals

Unemployed agents receive exogenous UI benefits (bu ) and pay search costs cu [p(i)z ]. We

make the simplifying assumption that unemployment benefits are independent of the indi-

vidual’s pre-separation earnings. With probability m(i), individuals contact a firm with a

vacancy and transit to employment in the next month. If individuals remain unemployed in

the next month, it is assumed they continue to collect UI benefits. Following the last month

of UI benefit eligibility, individuals can either transit to employment, if a job opportunity

is available, or transit to IA. The value function for unemployed individuals with i months

of benefits remaining is
                 n                    h                                          io
          
          maxp(i) bu − cu [p(i)z ] + β m(i)V E (1, i − 1) + (1 − m(i))V U (i − 1)   1 < i ≤ ū,
V U (i) =         n                    h                               io
          
          maxp(i) bu − cu [p(i)z ] + β m(1)V E (1, 0) + (1 − m(1))V A               i = 1.
                                                                                          (3)

2.4    Firms

Production takes place when there is a match between one firm and one worker; the number

of firms can alternatively be interpreted as the number of jobs in the economy. In every
   9
     It is worth noting that we assume all income assistance recipients enter employment with zero tenure.
This assumption could be relaxed by assuming workers retain their experience when they enter income
assistance and then allowing their experience to depreciate over time. One implication of this extension
would be that the hazard of leaving IA would decline as the length of the IA spell increased. The drawback
of this extension is that it involves a large increase in the size of the state space. We thank Jim Walker for
this valuable suggestion.


                                                     10
period, each firm has the option of filling a vacancy, if one exists, by hiring a worker or

keeping the vacancy open. If matched with a worker, firms earn profits that depend on the

surplus generated by the match and pay wages, determined in equilibrium, that depend on

the worker’s outside options and the minimum wage. Profits depend on the worker’s tenure

in order to allow match-specific capital to increase the productivity of the match over time.

Denote the surplus generated by a worker-firm pair of tenure t by S(t). With probability

δ the match separates and the firm is left with a vacancy in the following month. Denote

the profits of a firm matched with a worker with outside option i, i ∈ {0, 1, ..., u, ..., ū} and

match tenure t as Π(t, i).

   The expected discounted present value of profits for matches of job tenure t and workers

with outside option i are
                             
                             
                              β[δΠV   + (1 − δ)ΠE (t + 1, 0)]       if   i = 0 and t < I,
                             
                             
                             
                                  V   + (1 − δ)ΠE (t + 1, u)]
                             β[δΠ                                   if   i = 0 and t = I,
 ΠE (t, i) = S(t) − w(t, i) + β[δΠV    + (1 − δ)ΠE (t + 1, i + 1)]   if   0 < i < ū and t < T, (4)
                             
                             
                             
                              β[δΠV   + (1 − δ)ΠE (t + 1, ū)]      if   i = ū and t < T,
                             
                             
                             
                               β[δΠV   + (1 − δ)ΠE (T, ū)]          if   t ≥ T,

where match tenure beyond T no longer increases profits.

   If a firm has a vacancy, the value of the vacancy is determined by the probability of

meeting an unmatched worker, by the profits the firm expects to make from the match, and

by the costs of posting a vacancy (ξ)

                                   hX
                                    ū                    ³    ū
                                                               X      ´ i
                     ΠV = −ξ + β           q(i)ΠE (1, i) + 1 −    q(i) ΠV ,                     (5)
                                     i=0                      i=0

where q(i) is the probability a firm matches with a worker with outside option i. Firms

will post vacancies unless the expected profit from doing so is negative. We assume free

entry, so that in the steady state equilibrium the number of firms in the economy will be

determined by the condition that the expected profits from posting a vacancy equal zero.




                                                 11
2.5     Search Technology

Assume, for simplicity, that there is no on-the-job search in the economy. The probability

that a jobless individual receives a job offer depends on the probability the worker contacts

a firm and the probability a firm has a vacancy.

2.5.1    Workers


The probability a firm has a vacancy is simply the total number of vacancies divided by the

total number of firms
                                                      V
                                                        .
                                                      F

If a firm has a vacancy, it will hire a worker and pay a wage which is the outcome of Nash

bargaining between the worker and the firm, discussed in detail below. Applications for

jobs arrive according to a Poisson process, where λ is the average number of applications

filed by workers at each firm. Firms with more than one applicant randomly draw a worker

from the applicant pool.10 The probability a worker is offered a job is:

                                                 1 − e−λ
                                                         .
                                                    λ

The conditional re-employment probabilities for unemployed workers and workers on income

assistance can then be expressed as the product of the above components, multiplied by the

worker’s search effort
                                                p(i)V ³       ´
                                       m(i) =          1 − e−λ ,                                         (6)
                                                 λF

where
                                           Ã ū                       !
                                      1     X
                                   λ=               p(i)U (i) + p(0)A .                                  (7)
                                      F
                                              i=1
  10
     Alternatively, we could let the length of a period tend to zero and work in continuous time, where there
is zero probability of more than one application arriving at a given time. As we wish to take the model to
data, we work with discrete periods.




                                                      12
Workers determine the optimal level of search effort by equating the marginal benefit from

an increase in search effort with its marginal cost.11 The optimal level of search effort, for

each labor market state and program eligibility combination, is described by:



                             µ                    ¶1
                          βm(0) £ E            A
                                                 ¤ z
                 p(0) =          V (1, 0) − V        ,
                           ca z
                        µ                         ¶1
                          βm(1) £ E            A
                                                 ¤ z
                 p(1) =          V (1, 0) − V        , i = 1,                                         (8)
                           cu z
                        µ                                   ¶1
                          βm(i) £ E               U
                                                           ¤ z
                 p(i) =          V (1, i − 1) − V (i − 1)      , 1 < i ≤ ū.
                           cu z

2.5.2    Firms


From the firm’s perspective, the probabilities of matching with potential workers from

unemployment and IA equal the numbers of workers from unemployment and IA who

transit to employment, divided by the total number of vacancies, so that

                                    m(i)U (i)                         m(0)A
                           q(i) =                  and       q(0) =         ,                         (9)
                                       V                               V

respectively.

2.6     Equilibrium Wage Determination

After meeting in the labor market, a firm and a worker bargain over wages by making alter-

nating wage offers until both sides find the offer acceptable. It is assumed that the parties

have equal bargaining power, but may have different threat points. The equilibrium of this

game is the Nash cooperative bargaining solution and results in workers and firms splitting

the surplus of a match evenly. The surplus of the match from the worker’s perspective is the

difference between employment at the equilibrium wage and the worker’s outside option,

which depends on their current labor market state and program eligibility. The surplus
  11
     In determining the marginal cost and benefit of search effort λ is held constant under the assumption
that each worker believes her impact is small relative to the labor market as a whole.


                                                   13
from the perspective of the firm is the difference between the profits the firm receives at

the equilibrium wage and the value of leaving the vacancy open. It is further assumed that

the bargaining process is constrained such that the wage can not fall below the minimum

wage w. The equilibrium wage, w(t, i), equals the solution to

                     [w(t, i) − w][(V E (t, i) − V i ) − (ΠE (t, i) − ΠV )] = 0,              (10)

subject to [w(t, i) − w] ≥ 0, where V i ∈ {V A , V U (i)} is the value of outside option i.

2.7   Steady State Conditions

Let E denote the steady state number of jobs occupied by workers and V the number of

vacancies. By definition, the total number of jobs in the labor market is equal to the total

number of occupied jobs and the total number of vacancies

                                           F = E + V.                                         (11)

Denote the total number of individuals in the labor market L. The total number of individ-

uals can be decomposed into three groups. The first group consists of the employed, who

are distinguished both by their current job tenure and their current outside option
                                          T X
                                          X
                                    E=               E(t, i) + Ē,
                                          t=1   i

where Ē is the group of workers no longer experiencing on-the-job wage growth. The

second group, denoted A, consists of those on income assistance. The final group, denoted

U , consists of unemployed individuals, who can receive UI benefits for a maximum of ū

periods
                                                ū
                                                X
                                          U=             U (i),
                                                i=1

where U (i) indicates the number of unemployed persons with i periods of benefits remaining.

   The total number of individuals in the labor market is the sum of the three components

                                         L = E + A + U.                                       (12)

                                                    14
Using these definitions, we can describe the conditions governing the steady state, where

the flows in and out of every employment state must be equal over time. We now discuss

the steady state conditions for each state and eligibility combination in turn.

Employment

As above, let m(0) and m(i) denote the probabilities that IA recipients and unemployment

recipients with i periods of benefits remaining, respectively, match with a firm. The flow

into the first period of employment includes those workers from IA and unemployment who

receive job offers. They are indexed by their respective outside options as this will determine

their progression of benefit entitlements. In subsequent periods, the inflow consists of

workers who were employed in the previous period and who were not exogenously separated

from their jobs. Formally,


              E(1, 0) = m(0)A + m(1)U (1);

               E(1, i) = m(i + 1)U (i + 1),           0 < i < u;

               E(t, 0) = (1 − δ)E(t − 1, 0),          1 < t < I and i = 0;

               E(t, i) = (1 − δ)E(t − 1, i − 1),          1 < t < T and 0 < i ≤ ū;

              E(t, ū) = (1 − δ)E(t − 1, ū),         1 < t < T and i > ū;

                  δ Ē = (1 − δ)E(T, ū),        t ≥ T.


Income Assistance

The flow into IA includes those employed workers who were exogenously separated from

their jobs and ineligible for UI benefits and unemployed workers no longer eligible for UI

benefits. The flow out of IA includes IA recipients who find employment. The steady state

condition for IA is the following:

                              I
                              X
                          δ         E(t, 0) + (1 − m(1))U (1) = m(0)A.                    (13)
                              t=1



                                                 15
Unemployment

Employed workers who are separated from their jobs and who are eligible for the maximum

months of UI benefits flow into the first period of unemployment, U (ū). For U (i) where

0 < i < ū, the inflow consists of unemployed workers from the previous period who did not

find jobs, and workers separated from their jobs who qualify for less than the maximum

number of benefit months. All workers flow out of the unemployment state when benefits

run out due to the time limitations in the UI program

                                                  X
                                              δ       E(t, ū) = U (ū)
                                                  t
                   X
               δ       E(t, i − 1) + (1 − m(i + 1))U (i + 1) = U (i)            if 0 < i < ū.        (14)
                   t


3         Combining Social Experiments and Structural Models for
          Policy Evaluation

In this section, we describe a way to use social experiments in combination with structural

models to conduct equilibrium policy evaluations. The social experiment we consider is the

Canadian Self-Sufficiency Project (SSP). We start by providing some details on the SSP

experiment and then outline our approach for conducting a general equilibrium evaluation

of the policy it embodied.12

         The SSP experiment focused on long-term IA recipients.13 The universe for the experi-

ment was long-term single parent IA recipients ages 19 and older in British Columbia and

New Brunswick from November 1992 to March 1995. This universe was sampled at random.

Of those selected, 6,028 recipients volunteered to participate in the experiment and were

subsequently placed in treatment and control groups by random assignment.14 Individuals
    12
     For comprehensive details on the Self-Sufficiency Project, see Michalopoulous, et al. (2002).
    13
     In particular, individuals had to receive IA in at least 11 months during the last year including the
current month in order to be included in the experiment.
  14
     Kamionka and Lacroix (2002) examine the potential for randomization bias in the (partial equilibrium)
experimental impact estimates due to refusals to participate in the experiment. They find evidence that the
published estimates understate the true impact of the SSP treatment.



                                                      16
assigned to the treatment group were informed that they were to receive an earnings sup-

plement if they found a full-time (30 hours per week) job within one year and left income

assistance. The supplement received by members of the treatment group equaled one-half

of the distance between the earnings of the recipient and a benchmark earnings level, set at

$37,000 in British Columbia and at $30,000 in New Brunswick.15 Once eligible, individuals

could receive the supplement for up to three years. Individuals in the treatment group who

were not able to secure full-time employment within the twelve months following random

assignment become ineligible to receive the supplement. Individuals in the control group

were never eligible for the supplement.

       The data contain information on 5,686 individuals from the main study who responded

to the 18 and 36-month follow-up surveys: 2,827 control group members and 2,859 treatment

group members. We imposed the following additional sample restrictions. First, 280 males

were dropped from the sample so that our analysis can focus on a homogeneous group (single

mothers) within the study.16 Second, 13 observations with inconsistent information in the

baseline survey were removed from the sample17 and 324 cases with missing information on

hours, earnings and other relevant variables in the 18-month follow-up data were eliminated.

An additional 476 cases with missing hours and earnings information in the 36-month follow-

up survey were also removed. The remaining sample contains 4,593 respondents, of whom

2,290 are members of the control group and 2,303 are members of the treatment group.18

This final sample is the one we use for our policy evaluation.

       The policy evaluation we undertake involves the following four stages:
  15
     No other sources of income affected the calculation of the earnings supplement.
  16
     This is a relatively innocuous restriction, as 95% of the individuals in the SSP experiment are female.
  17
     In particular, 7 individuals report their age at the baseline survey to be less than 19 and 6 individuals
report having no children. To be included in the study, individuals had to be single parents and at least 19
years of age.
  18
     The control group contains 1,061 respondents from New Brunswick and 1,229 from British Columbia,
while the treatment group consists of 1,072 and 1,231 respondents from New Brunswick and British
Columbia, respectively.




                                                     17
  1. Calibrate the model to be consistent with the population targeted in the SSP social

      experiment using data on the experimental control group and external data sources.

      This represents the model control group.


  2. Introduce the Self-Sufficiency Project in the model as an experiment in much the same

      way it was implemented in reality. Simulate the behavioral effects of the program in

      partial equilibrium. This represents the model treatment group.


  3. Compare the impact predicted by the model to the mean impact observed in the

      data. This exercise provides evidence on how well the simulated experiment based on

      our model replicates the impacts observed in the actual experiment. It is important

      to emphasize that the partial equilibrium version of the model is the appropriate

      comparison to the experiment because the experiment only affected a small subset of

      the economy and as such is not expected to have general equilibrium impacts.


  4. If the model is able to capture the response of individuals to the experiment, then

      proceed to simulate the equilibrium effects of the policy in the model economy for the

      target population of all low-skill workers.


We now discuss each of these steps in detail.

3.1   Constructing the model control group

In this section, we calibrate our model to data on single mothers without completed post-

secondary education and to data on the experimental control group. The model is calibrated

separately for British Columbia and New Brunswick, the two provinces in which the SSP

experiment was implemented. For the sake of brevity, and because they tell the same

substantive story, we only report results for British Columbia. A full set of results for New




                                              18
Brunswick is contained in a supplement that is available from the authors upon request.19

As the SSP experiment affected only a small fraction of the population, we use a partial

equilibrium version of the model when generating simulated impacts from the model to

compare to the measured impacts from the actual experiment.

    The parameters for the partial equilibrium version of the model include monthly income

assistance and unemployment benefits (ba and bu , respectively), the wage profile, the size

of the labor force (L), the vacancy rate (V /F ), the job separation rate (δ), the discount

factor (β), and the search friction parameters (ca , cu , z). Table 2 reports the values used

for these parameters.

    Monthly income assistance benefits (ba ) for single mothers (by province) are based on

the average IA benefits for a single parent with one child during the 1990s, as reported in the

National Council of Welfare Reports (2002). Over this period the average monthly income

assistance benefit was $927. UI benefits (bu ) are set at 55 per cent of average earnings.

In British Columbia, the earnings sample is limited to single mothers without completed

post-secondary education, as we are attempting to isolate that segment of the labor market

most similar to individuals receiving Income Assistance.20 The earnings data are based on

the usual hourly wage for the latter sub-population in British Columbia, as reported in the

monthly Labour Force Survey (1997-2000), assuming a 37.5 hour work week.21 Earnings,

IA benefits and unemployment benefits are all converted to 1992 dollars using the all-goods

CPI.22 The resulting monthly unemployment benefit level is $952.

    The model is homogeneous of degree zero in L and F ; we can therefore normalize the

size of the labor force to 100 without loss of generality. The number of firms in the economy
   19
      We focus on British Columbia in the paper rather than New Brunswick because a second component of
the SSP, the Entry Effects experiment, was only carried out in British Columbia.
   20
      Approximately 12% of the control group in the Self-Sufficiency Project has some post-secondary educa-
tion.
   21
      The Canadian Labour Force Survey is the analogue of the U.S. Current Population Survey.
   22
      All figures are reported in 1992 Canadian dollars, where $1Cdn is presently equal to about $0.75US.



                                                    19
will be estimated in the baseline model, and is identified using the observed vacancy rate in

the economy. Equation (11) determines V endogenously as a function of F and E. In order

to estimate F we use the additional relationship between F and V given by the vacancy

rate (v)
                                                  V
                                                    = v.
                                                  F

The vacancy rate of 3.20 is taken from Galarneau et al. (2001) and is based on the average

for the retail trade and consumer services and labor-intensive tertiary manufacturing sectors,

both of which have average incomes similar to our sample. Therefore, using equation (11),

and for a given value of E,
                                                      E
                                            F =               .
                                                  (1 − 0.032)

The job separation rate in the model (δ) is constant and can be directly estimated by

the average job tenure for single mothers in British Columbia with no completed post-

secondary education in the monthly Labour Force Survey (1990-2000). Job tenure is only

reported for individuals currently employed in the data; we do not have direct information

on separations. However, average job tenure is observed and in the model is equal to
                             P∞                   P
                                t=1 tE(t)     E(1) ∞   t(1 − δ)t−1  1
                                            =     Pt=1
                                                    ∞         t−1
                                                                   = .
                                   E          E(1) t=1 (1 − δ)      δ

Average job tenure in the Labour Force Survey (LFS 1990–2000) for this group is 46.68

months; therefore the monthly separation rate equals 0.0214.23

       We use parameter estimates for our search cost function from Christensen, Lentz,

Mortensen, Neumann and Wervatz (2002), whose estimates of the elasticity of search costs

imply z = 1.8457, and we set the monthly discount factor β equal to 0.9835, corresponding

to an annual discount factor of 0.82 as in Davidson and Woodbury (1993). We assess the

sensitivity of our results to the values of these parameters in Section 6 below. The costs
  23
    This measure of job tenure does not take quits into account. As a result, we may overestimate the job
separation rate as individuals moving between jobs because of quits report holding jobs of shorter durations.


                                                     20
of search are allowed to differ depending on whether individuals are receiving UI benefits

or IA in order to capture the notion that searching may be less costly while unemployed.

For example, unemployed individuals may have access to better search technologies through

unemployment offices than do IA recipients, which would be consistent with ca > cu .

       To identify the search friction parameter ca we use the IA-to-work transition rate, m(0),

directly observed from the SSP control group. The data on the control group do not provide

information on the transition from unemployment to work necessary to identify the search

friction for this group (cu ). Instead we use the search friction implied by the equilibrium

model calibrated to the low-skill labor force outlined below in Section 4.

       Next we must specify the length of time a worker is eligible for unemployment insurance

benefits. The length of the UI benefit eligibility period in Canada depends on the unem-

ployment rate in the region of residence (British Columbia in this case) and on the worker’s

previous job tenure. We set the eligibility periods in the model according to the eligibility

rules in place during the 1990s. In British Columbia, this implies that a worker is entitled

to 5 months of benefits after working 4 months, and to 10 months of benefits after working

9 months or more (Lin 1998).

       Finally, we set the minimum wage to 5.50 to match the legislated minimum wage in BC

at the beginning of the SSP experiment (Michalopoulos, Tattrie, Miller, Robins, Morris,

Gyarmati, Redcross, Foley, and Ford, 2002) and abstract from increases in the minimum

wage during the remainder of the experiment.24

       After calibrating and simulating the model, we select those individuals who received

income assistance benefits for at least 12 months. These individuals constitute the simulated

model control group.
  24
    As discussed in Michalopoulos et al. (2002), the minimum wage in British Columbia increased several
times following random assignment, from $5.50 per hour in November 1992 to $7.15 in April 1998. We
repeated our analysis using the minimum wage in place at the end of the experiment and found the qualitative
results were the same. These results are available from the authors upon request.



                                                    21
3.2    Constructing the model treatment group

The following additions are made to the model to incorporate the Self-Sufficiency Project.25

First, individuals on IA face several time constraints. IA recipients become eligible for SSP

after they have been on income assistance a minimum of 12 months. Once eligible for

SSP, individuals have 12 months to find full-time employment in order to receive supple-

ment payments. If an individual secures a job before the eligibility period ends, she can

receive the supplement while employed for a maximum of 36 months. Consistent with the

SSP treatment implemented in the experiment, individuals have one eligibility period for

the treatment during their lifetimes. Once the eligibility period for the supplement pay-

ments expires, individuals return to the regular IA system. Second, eligible individuals who

find work receive supplement payments that are a function of their wage upon obtaining

employment.

    In order to mimic the experimental design of the SSP, we simulate the model in partial

equilibrium, using a fixed wage profile. In addition, we assume that (as in the experiment)

individuals do not anticipate the SSP treatment. We then solve for the re-employment prob-

abilities of a random sample of individuals on IA for at least 12 months. These individuals

constitute the simulated model treatment group.

3.3    Comparing the outcomes of the model experiment with the outcomes
       of the social experiment

We now compare the predicted partial equilibrium effects of SSP to those found in the SSP

experiment. This comparison represents an empirical test of our model, in the same spirit

as the comparisons of experimental and non-experimental partial equilibrium estimates in

LaLonde (1986) and other, similar papers in the treatment effects literature. It is important
  25
     Extending the model to include the SSP requires only minor changes. As such, we omit the details from
the paper, but describe them in an appendix available from the authors upon request.




                                                   22
to emphasize that we do not use any information on the SSP treatment group in the

calibration of our model; we are interested in whether the model can predict the behavior

of the treatment group as an informal out-of-sample test.

    Figure 1 compares the income assistance survival rates for the control and treatment

groups in the SSP experiment and in the model simulation.26 The basic pattern matches

the experimental data very well. Both the simulation and the experiment indicate that the

SSP increases the exit rate from income assistance to work substantially, with the impact

ending once eligibility expires. During the 12 months of program eligibility individuals

increase their search effort and as a result transit to employment at a faster rate. Once the

12-month eligibility period is over, behavior reverts back to what it was in the absence of

the program, and the transition rate to employment returns to exactly what it was in the

absence of the treatment. It is very encouraging that the model correctly predicts not only

the basic pattern, but also matches the proportion of the treatment group remaining on

income assistance 36 months after random assignment.

    As an additional test of how well the model predicts behavior we reproduce a second

experiment designed to estimate the extent of any delayed exit from income assistance that

results from the 12-month SSP qualification period. The delayed exit experiment was a

separate experiment conducted on a sample of 3,315 single parents in their first month

of IA receipt in the metropolitan area of Vancouver, British Columbia. This sample was

randomly assigned to treatment and control groups, where the treatment group was told

that they would become eligible for the SSP program if they remained on IA for 12 months.
  26
     To maintain comparability between our model and the experimental data we condition on not being
employed full-time in the month of random assignment and consider exits to full-time employment as the
end of an income assistance spell. In the model, receiving income assistance and employment are mutually
exclusive states, while in the data they are not. This is due to lags in the receipt of income assistance
payments, as well as the definition of full-time employment in the SSP data: “being employed full-time
during any portion of the month.” Conditioning on not being employed at random assignment gives us
an appropriate group for comparison with the model at the expense of dropping the 25 percent who were
employed.




                                                   23
The difference between the fraction remaining on IA in the program and treatment groups

12 months after random assignment is estimated by Ford, Gyarmati, Foley, Tattrie and

Jimenez (2003) to be 3.9 percentage points with a standard error of 1.4. We conduct the

same experiment in our model in partial equilibrium. The model predicts a delayed exit

effect of 4.3 percentage points in British Columbia, which is within one-third of the standard

error of the effect estimated by Ford et al. (2003). The model is thus able to predict the

magnitude of the experimental delayed exit effect quite well.

    Comparing the model predictions with the experimental impacts we can see that the

model correctly predicts both the degree of delayed exit associated with the expectation

of receiving the SSP supplement in the future as well as the increased transition rate into

employment that becoming eligible for the SSP program induces. This comparison indicates

that the model captures the fundamental dynamics introduced by the SSP policy, which

increases our confidence in the policy simulations that follow.


4     The Equilibrium Impacts of the SSP Policy
4.1   Calibrating the equilibrium model

In the equilibrium analysis, we focus on all IA recipients. We do this for two reasons. First,

it simplifies our analysis substantially. If the SSP were limited to single mothers (or single

parents), the model would have to be extended to allow for two types of IA recipients: those

potentially eligible for the SSP supplement and all the rest. This extension would require a

large increase in the size of the state space. Second, if the SSP policy were adopted, it would

likely apply to all IA recipients rather than just to single parents, both for political reasons

related to equal treatment and to avoid incentive effects of SSP on marital dissolution and

on out-of-wedlock childbearing.

    The calibration of the general equilibrium version of the model differs from that of the



                                              24
partial equilibrium version of the model in two ways. First, because the relevant group to

be studied within the model is no longer limited to single mothers, we recalibrate wages,

the job separation rate (δ), unemployment benefits, and IA benefits. We approximate the

low-skill population most likely to be affected by the policy by individuals with less than a

post-secondary level of education. Table 3 presents the values of the calibrated parameters;

we discuss them in more detail below. The calibrated IA benefits equal $695 in British

Columbia.27 The calibrated UI benefit level equals $1, 174.

    Second, we calibrate the parameters for firm behavior and equilibrium wage determi-

nation and impose the steady state conditions. The fractions of the relevant population in

each labor force state (A, U , and E) in British Columbia are estimated from the 1993-94

longitudinal wave of the Survey of Labour Income Dynamics (SLID).28 Unlike the LFS, the

SLID has separate data on IA and UI benefit receipt. We adopt the following definitions

in the data in order to maintain consistency with the model. We define employed workers

as individuals who are employed in the first week of the month and report no UI or IA

benefits during the month. Unemployed workers are defined as individuals who are either

unemployed or not in the labor force and report receiving UI benefits. Finally, IA recipients

are individuals who are either unemployed or not in the labor force and report receiving IA.

We exclude all individuals who do not fit these criteria, such as those who report working

full time and receiving either UI or IA benefits. Similarly, we exclude those reporting that

they are unemployed or not in the labor force, but not receiving any UI or IA benefits.29

    Third, we calibrate the match surplus for each of the first 48 months of job tenure
  27
     IA benefits by province are provided for the sub-groups of single employable persons, persons with
disabilities, single parents with one child, and couples with two children. We take a weighted average for
these groups, with the weights reflecting their size in the IA population. The population shares are based
on those reported for British Columbia in Barrett and Cragg (1998).
  28
     The SLID is the Canadian analogue of the U.S. Survey of Income and Program Participation.
  29
     71 per cent of the individuals in the data fit into one of these three mutually exclusive categories. Of
those who do not, 80 per cent report being either unemployed or not in the labor force, but do not report
receiving either UI or IA benefits.




                                                     25
(S(1)–S(48)), with one additional match surplus for all jobs of a longer duration (S(49)).

We do not directly observe the match surplus; however, we do observe the average wage

for workers with different tenure levels in the data. We can therefore use the wage and

tenure information from the LFS for the sample of individuals in British Columbia without

completed post-secondary education to infer the match values in the baseline economy. In

particular, we estimate a wage profile that is cubic in job tenure and then determine the

match values in the model that generate the equilibrium wage profile observed in the data.

It is important to emphasize that we assume the match values S(t), but not wages, are

invariant to policy changes. In particular, the policy changes we consider change the value

of the outside options of workers and firms, and thus the way the match value is divided,

but not the total value of the match itself.30

       The first period of employment in the model differs from later periods of employment, as

the model allows starting wages to differ depending on whether the worker’s outside option

is IA or unemployment. However, it is not possible to separate out the starting wages in the

data for individuals with different outside options. In the model, all matches are assumed

to have the same match surplus value, but workers may receive different wages, as they

face different outside options when bargaining with firms. Therefore, when estimating the

starting wages for workers in each of the first ū periods of employment, we restrict the

average of the wage for each month in the model to equal the average wage for a worker

with the corresponding tenure in the data. The cost of posting a vacancy (ξ) is calibrated

so that the value of a vacancy equals zero. The job separation rate (δ), the search cost

elasticity (z), the discount factor (β), the size of the labor force (L) and the vacancy rate

(v) are calibrated as in Section 3.1.

       Given ba , bu , L, E, U , A, F , z, δ, β, and data on wages, the baseline model is a system
  30
    This assumption would be invalid if the policy experiments considered involved changing the productivity
of worker-firm matches.



                                                    26
of 377 equations and unknowns. Solving the baseline model yields estimates for ca , cu , ξ,

S(1)−S(49), and starting wages w(t, i) for each unemployment insurance eligibility status.31

4.2      The equilibrium model with SSP

In this section we incorporate the SSP program as policy in the model. There are two key

differences between the partial equilibrium analysis of the last section and the following

simulations. First, all workers and firms are now aware of the SSP program and will include

this information in their decision making processes; as a result, the SSP program will now

have feedback effects, just as the unemployment insurance and income assistance program

have feedback effects. Second, the Self-Sufficiency policy now applies to all IA recipients,

rather than just to single parent IA recipients as in the experiment.

      Our discussion regarding the implementation of SSP as policy focuses on the three

questions raised in the introduction. First, does an increase in the employment rate for

IA recipients come at the expense of reduced employment for others in the labor market?

Second, what impact does offering an earnings supplement have on the distribution of wages

in the economy? Finally, does the existence of the SSP program delay exit from IA during

the pre-qualifying period? We now discuss the answer to each question in turn.

4.3      The Displacement Effect

The top half of Table 4 presents the expected durations of joblessness. As expected, the

average duration of income assistance spells is substantially reduced under the SSP program,

as SSP-eligible individuals face greater incentives to exit the IA program. The model

predicts a decrease in expected IA duration of approximately 32 days (1.1 months). In

contrast, the expected duration of unemployment spells for those eligible for the maximum

number of months increases by approximately 3 days (0.09 months). In essence, the policy
 31
      Estimates of the match surplus values and wages are available from the authors upon request.



                                                     27
change increases the likelihood that unemployed workers exhaust their UI benefits and

transit to IA, as unemployed workers are displaced in the labor market by IA recipients.

The total jobless duration increases for those who begin a spell in unemployment, while the

total jobless duration decreases for those exiting employment to IA.

   The last two rows of Table 4 indicate that employment rates and vacancies decline in

British Columbia following the introduction of SSP. Employment falls within the model due

to the relationship between wage bargaining and the minimum wage (discussed below). In

particular, because firms are constrained to pay at least the minimum wage and the value

of IA increases for workers because of the presence of SSP, workers have a higher threat

point. As a result, firms are not able to extract the surplus introduced by the SSP when

bargaining with workers.

4.4   The Wage Effect

As discussed in Section 3, starting wages differ depending on whether the worker transits

from IA or UI and depending on the length of the unemployment spell. Once the SSP

is in place, starting wages also differ depending on whether the worker is transiting from

an SSP-eligible state. Table 5 displays the average earnings, over the first six months of

employment, for workers transiting to employment from selected states. Several patterns

are worth discussion.

   First, individuals eligible to receive supplement payments in British Columbia experience

only a 5% (834 − 938/938) reduction in wages. The reason supplement-eligible workers do

not experience large reductions in wages is that firms are constrained to pay them at least

the minimum wage. The income of workers receiving supplement payments, as a result,

rises substantially: for example, before the policy change an individual in British Columbia

that transited to employment from the first period of IA would earn, on average, $938 per



                                            28
month over the first six months of employment. In contrast, the same worker would expect

to receive $1, 989 in earnings and supplement payments if he or she transits to employment

during the first month of eligibility for the SSP supplement.

   Surprisingly, other workers experience an increase in wages following the introduction

of the SSP. For example, UI recipients who are one month from exhausting benefits receive

starting wages that are 13% higher after the introduction of the SSP program. One’s

initial intuition may be that they should receive a lower wage; the reason they do not is

because supplement-eligible workers do not experience a large decline in wages because of

the minimum wage. As a result, the introduction of the supplement does not result in firms

receiving a larger share of the match surplus. At the same time, the value of entering IA

has increased due to the introduction of the supplement. As a result, the outside options

of UI recipients and IA recipients who are not eligible to receive the supplement improve.

4.5   Delayed Exit Effects

As discussed earlier, the equilibrium unemployment rate increases slightly with the intro-

duction of the SSP program, the result of a lower re-employment probability for unemployed

workers. The fall in re-employment probabilities for unemployed workers is due in large part

to the fact that unemployed workers exert less search effort after the policy change. The

difference in search effort for unemployed workers in the baseline and in the model following

the introduction of the Self-Sufficiency policy is presented in Figure 2. In general, search

effort for unemployed workers increases in the months leading up to unemployment benefit

exhaustion. However, because the value of transiting to IA has increased following the

policy change, search effort for unemployed workers in the SSP world does not rise to the

same extent as it did in the baseline economy. As a result, a larger fraction of unemployed

workers transit from unemployment to IA after the policy change.




                                             29
   The search behavior of IA recipients also changes following the policy change. Figure 3

compares the survival rates for individuals entering IA in the baseline world and the SSP

world. In the presence of the SSP, the survival rate is higher in the first 15 months than

in the base case. This finding is indicative of the presence of delayed exit effects, due to

the fact that individuals have incentives to remain on IA long enough to become eligible to

receive the supplement. Although survival rates are higher in the first 15 months of an IA

spell with the SSP, the subsequent decrease in survival rates that results from the increased

search effort of supplement-eligible IA recipients outweighs the delayed exit effects, as the

average duration of IA spells declines following the imposition of the SSP.

4.6   A Comparison of the Simulated Impacts in Partial Equilibrium and
      General Equilibrium

To gauge the importance of general equilibrium effects in the simulated economy, we com-

pare the simulated impacts of the Self-Sufficiency program in partial equilibrium to the

general equilibrium effects highlighted above. The difference in survival rates for IA recip-

ients in the partial equilibrium model as compared to the general equilibrium model are

presented in Figure 4. The impact of the policy change is slightly greater in the partial

equilibrium version of the model. This result is not surprising for two reasons. First, wages

do not fall in the partial equilibrium model after the workers become eligible for the sup-

plement. Second, re-employment probabilities do not decline in response to the increased

flow of IA recipients into employment. Both factors are consistent with greater incentives

to exit IA for employment when equilibrium effects are not taken into account. Our results

are consistent with the findings from the literature discussed in the introduction of smaller

impacts of policy changes when equilibrium effects are taken into account (Davidson and

Woodbury, 1993; Heckman, Lochner and Taber, 1998). It should be noted that, because

of the assumption of free entry for firms and constant returns to scale in production, our



                                             30
simulation likely captures a lower bound on the general equilibrium effects.


5    Reconsidering the Costs and Benefits of the Self-Sufficiency
     Project

In this section, we look at the benefits of implementing the SSP policy relative to the costs.

To highlight the importance of equilibrium effects, we conduct our cost-benefit analysis

using both the partial equilibrium and the general equilibrium results. Our analysis has

two limitations worth noting. First, SSP was found to have both positive and negative

effects on other variables of interest such as marriage and child outcomes (Michalopoulos et

al., 2002). We ignore outcome variables other than earnings, as they are beyond the scope

of this paper. Second, we do not consider any additional costs or benefits associated with

the process of moving from the baseline steady state to the SSP steady state.

    We start with the partial equilibrium cost-benefit analysis. In this case, the following

assumptions are imposed. First, the only individuals who change their behavior in response

to the policy change are those who have been on income assistance for 12 months. Second,

any jobs obtained as a result of the SSP program are ‘new jobs’, leading to an increase

in aggregate output. Finally, wages do not change from the baseline economy. In other

words, we assume that there are no displacement effects, no delayed exit effects, and no

wage effects.

    Our cost-benefit analysis, presented in Table 6, draws on SSP program cost information

presented in Michalopoulos et al. (2002). First, we calculate the direct costs of administering

the Self-Sufficiency policy. Michalopoulus et al. (2002, Table 7.7) estimate that the net

average cost per individual eligible for the SSP program is $1,367. In addition, SSP increases

the costs of administering other transfer programs and generates management information

systems costs totaling $251 per eligible person in British Columbia. In the first two columns



                                              31
of Table 6, the total program costs for each province are subsequently multiplied by 1.5, an

estimate of the marginal social cost of a tax dollar.32 The estimated cost of SSP program

services weighted by the number of individuals eligible for SSP in the partial equilibrium

version of our model is $128,276 per 1000 individuals in the low-skill population of British

Columbia (hereafter “per 1000”).

      Second, we calculate the total value of transfer payments in the baseline economy and in

the economy with the SSP. We multiply the difference in the value of the transfer payments

by the deadweight loss associated with the taxes necessary to finance the difference in

transfers, estimated at 0.5. The deadweight loss of the change in transfer payments is

therefore estimated as $493,144 per 1000.

      Third, we calculate total output in the baseline economy and in the economy with the

SSP. In the partial equilibrium version of the model, the value of monthly output increases

after the Self-Sufficiency policy is introduced. In particular, we predict output to increase,

per 1000, by $2,383,891 in British Columbia after the imposition of the policy change.

Finally, we add the direct costs of the program to the social cost of the net increase in taxes

resulting from the increase in transfers and then subtract the total from the increase in the

value of output. Under these assumptions the SSP program more than pays for itself; there

is a net gain from the program of $1,762,470 per 1000.

      The equilibrium effects of the policy change the cost-benefit conclusion drawn from

the partial equilibrium analysis substantially. Performing the same calculations using the

general equilibrium values for output, UI benefit receipt, and IA receipt yields dramatically

different cost-benefit estimates. After taking the equilibrium effects into account, the SSP

policy yields a net cost of $1,982,444 per 1000. These findings highlight the importance of

conducting general equilibrium evaluations of programs, rather than relying solely on the
 32
      See, e.g., Diewert (1988) and Dalhby (1994) for Canada and Browning (1987) for the U.S.




                                                    32
findings from partial equilibrium social experiments, to guide policy.

    The third and fourth columns of Table 6 present the cost-benefit analysis in the case

where the marginal social cost of a tax dollar equals zero. This comparison provides a lower

bound on the indirect costs of implementing the Self-Sufficiency Project as a wide-scale

program. Even neglecting the marginal social cost of taxes, our model indicates that in

general equilibrium the benefits of the SSP do not cover its costs.


6    Sensitivity Analysis

Table 7 presents evidence on the extent to which our results are sensitive to the choice of

the discount factor (β) and the elasticity of search costs with respect to search effort (z). It

is worth emphasizing that the search friction parameters ca and cu are re-calibrated in the

baseline model for each combination of β and z. Lower values for β reduce the incentives

of individuals on UI or IA to search as the value of employment falls. Lower values of ca

and cu are required to match the observed transitions into employment from unemployment

and income assistance. A similar argument holds for z. If search costs become more elastic

(a higher value for z), then lower search costs are necessary to match the transition into

employment. The re-calibrated values for ca and cu are presented in the top four rows of

Table 7.

    First, we consider the sensitivity of our partial equilibrium measure of the estimated

impact of SSP on income assistance survival rates. For comparison purposes, we also

present the experimental impact constructed from the data. Lowering the discount factor

increases the simulated impact of the policy in partial equilibrium. This occurs because

lower values of ca and cu associated with the decrease in the discount factor result in a

higher exit rate from IA. As search costs become less elastic with respect to search effort,

the shape of the cost function changes such that the simulated IA survival rate is greater


                                              33
than its experimental counterpart during the 12 months of supplement eligibility. The

consistency of Davidson and Woodbury’s (1993) estimate of the discount factor and of the

search elasticity parameter estimated by Christensen et al. (2002) with the behavior of

participants in the Canadian SSP is quite striking.

    Next, we consider the sensitivity of the general equilibrium program evaluation to

changes in the parameters outlined above. In general, the predicted labor force compo-

sition is relatively insensitive to the changes in parameter estimates, as are the number of

firms and vacancies. It is also important to note that the cost-benefit conclusions do not

change in any of the specifications: the partial equilibrium analysis consistently results in

a net gain from the SSP program and the general equilibrium analysis consistently reports

a net loss.


7    Alternative Versions of the Self-Sufficiency Policy

One of the main advantages to the approach taken in this paper is that we are able to

explore the implications of changing the parameters of the SSP policy within our framework.

To this end, we consider three alternative versions of the policy and simulate the predicted

outcomes of each version in general equilibrium. First, we consider changes in the generosity

of the earnings supplement for eligible income assistance recipients. In particular, we reduce

the earnings ceiling by 25%. Second, we reduce the supplement payment period from 36

months to 12 months. Finally, we require new IA recipients to remain on IA for 24 months,

as opposed to 12, in order to qualify for SSP. Results of each policy experiment are presented

in Table 8.

    We find that all of the changes we examine improve the cost-benefit performance of

the SSP in general equilibrium without reductions in employment. This finding results

from reductions in the delayed exit effect: individuals are less willing to exhaust their


                                             34
unemployment benefits or to remain on IA for longer periods as SSP becomes less generous.


8         Conclusion

This paper makes three main contributions to the literature. First, we add to the small

but growing literature that uses structural equilibrium models to study the general equi-

librium effects of labor market interventions. Except in unusual cases, as when a policy is

implemented differently in separate jurisdictions of sufficient number to allow econometric

analysis, estimating general equilibrium effects requires a structural model.

         The second contribution is methodological: we show how evidence from social exper-

iments can be used in combination with structural models to perform convincing policy

analysis. In so doing, we extend the literature starting with LaLonde (1986) that uses ex-

perimental data to benchmark non-experimental evaluation estimators. In particular, we

consider the ability of a model, fit to an experimental control group, to match the experi-

mental treatment group as an informal test of the model. Our model passes both versions

of this test. The caveat is that the SSP experiment considered here only allows for direct

testing of the partial equilibrium aspects of the model. Because the Self-Sufficiency Project

has not been implemented on a wide scale, it is not possible to conduct out-of-sample tests

regarding the general equilibrium effects of the program.33 Nonetheless, our research, to-

gether with the recent paper by Todd and Wolpin (2003), indicates that the combination of

social experiments and structural models of labor market interventions represent a powerful

tool for program evaluation.

         The final contribution consists of our empirical findings on the general equilibrium effects

of the SSP. This program represents a special case of a broad class of interventions designed

to“make work pay” for individuals collecting government benefits. Such interventions have
    33
    Alternative experimental designs might capture some general equilibrium effects; we thank Ken Wolpin
for making this point.



                                                   35
received a great deal of academic and policy attention in recent years. We find that equi-

librium wages fall for those treated by the program after the introduction of the earnings

supplement, as workers are willing to accept lower starting wages so as to benefit from the

supplement payments. However, wages of other workers in the economy increase slightly

as the existence of the SSP, along with the minimum wage, increases the threat point of

workers. Furthermore, the simulation results indicate the presence of delayed exit effects,

as a higher fraction of individuals remain on IA to become eligible for the supplement after

the policy change. All these effects have important implications for the cost-benefit per-

formance of the SSP policy; we find that taking account of the general equilibrium effects

reverses the cost-benefit calculation from the partial equilibrium experiment.




                                            36
                                Table 1: Summary of Notation

A            Steady state number of workers on social assistance
ba           Social assistance benefits
bu           Unemployment insurance benefits
ca           Parameter capturing the disutility of search effort in the
             cost of search function for social assistance
cu           Parameter capturing the disutility of search effort in the
             cost of search function for unemployed
E            Steady state number of employed workers
E(t, i)      Steady state number of employed
             workers eligible for i unemployment insurance benefit months in jobs of tenure t
Ē           Steady state number of workers no longer experiencing wage growth
F            Number of firms (jobs)
L            Total labor force
m(0)         Conditional probability a social assistance recipient
             finds a job and transits to employment next period
m(i)         Conditional probability of re-employment with i
             months of unemployment benefits remaining
p(0)         Search effort for those on social assistance
p(i)         Search effort for the unemployed with i benefit months remaining
q(i)         Firm’s probability of meeting a potential worker
             with i months of unemployment benefits remaining
S(t)         Match surplus for a worker firm match of tenure t
T            Match tenure beyond which match surplus no longer increase
I            Number of months required to
             qualify for minimum unemployment insurance benefits
u            Minimum number of unemployment benefit months
ū           Maximum number of unemployment benefit months
U            Steady state number of workers receiving
             unemployment insurance benefits
V            Steady state number of vacancies
VA           The value function for a worker on social assistance
V E (t, i)   The value function for an employed worker in the
             tth period of employment with unemployment benefit eligibility i
V U (i)      The value function for an unemployed worker with
             i months unemployment insurance benefits remaining
w(t, i)      The wage for a worker in the tth month of employment
             with unemployment eligibility i
w            Minimum wage
z            The elasticity of search cost with respect to search effort
β            Discount factor
δ            Exogenous job separation rate
λ            The average number of applications filed by workers
             at each firm
ξ            The per period cost to a firm of posting a vacancy
ΠE (t, i)    Firms’ expected future profit from a match of tenure t,
             with a worker with unemployment eligibility i
ΠV           Firms’ value of a current vacancy




                                              37
                 Table 2: Moments and Parameters for Single Mothers without
                 Completed Postsecondary Education

              Income assistance benefits, monthly (ba )1                               927
              Unemployment benefits, monthly (bu )2                                    952

              UI qualifying months3
                  Minimum                                                                4
                  Maximum                                                                9
              UI benefit months
                  Minimum (u)                                                            5
                  Maximum (ū)                                                          10

              Average job tenure, months (1/δ)4                                      46.68

              Average hourly wage4                                                  10.65
              Average wage, tenure > 48 months                                      11.12
              Wage growth equation w(t) =                                  7.89 + 0.0891t
                                                                             −0.000378t2
                                                                            +6.10e − 7t3
              Minimum wage (w)5                                                      5.50

              Vacancy rate (V /F )6                                                  3.20
              Exogenous job separation rate (δ)7                                   0.0214
              Monthly discount rate (β)8                                           0.9835
              Elasticity of search costs w.r.t effort (z)9                         1.8457


Notes: All values are in 1992 Canadian dollars. 1. National Council of Welfare (2002). 2. Unemployment
benefits are based on 55 per cent of average monthly earnings from Labour Force Survey (1997–2000).
3. Information on EI eligibility rules is from Lin (1998). 4. Labour Force Survey (1997–2000). 5. Minimum
wage at the beginning of the the SSP experiment (Michalopoulos 2002). 6. Galarneau et al. (2001), based
on the average for retail trade and consumer services and labor-intensive tertiary manufacturing sectors.
7. Inverse of average job tenure in the Labour Force Survey (1997–2000). 8. This corresponds to an annual
discount rate of 0.82, the rate used for all figures and tables in Davidson and Woodbury (1993). 9. From
Christensen, Lentz, Mortensen, Neumann, and Wervatz (2002).




                                                   38
                 Table 3: Moments and Parameters for the Baseline General Equi-
                 librium Model

              Income assistance benefits, monthly (ba )                       695
              Unemployment benefits, monthly (bu )                           1174

              Search costs, income assistance (ca )                         0.3281
              Search costs, unemployment (cu )                              0.0526
              Average job tenure, months (1/δ)                               72.91
              Employment rate (E)                                            90.15
              Unemployment rate (U )                                          5.80
              Income assistance rate (A)                                      4.05

              Average hourly wage                                            13.14
              Average wage, tenure > 48 months                               16.14

              Exogenous job separation rate (δ)                             0.0137
              Monthly discount rate (β)                                     0.9835
              Elasticity of search costs w.r.t effort (z)                   1.8457
              Cost of posting a vacancy (ξ)                                  9, 445

              Number of firms (F )                                           92.99
              Vacancy rate (V /F )                                            3.20


Notes: See Table 2 for sources.




                                                   39
                  Table 4: Labor Force Composition — Baseline and SSP Models

                                                              Baseline              SSP
          Expected UI duration, months                                   5.07            5.16
          Expected IA duration, months                                  31.03           29.96
          Expected jobless duration, months                              8.33            8.73

          Employment rate                                               90.15           89.72
          Unemployment rate                                              5.80            5.92
          Income assistance rate                                         4.05            4.36

          Number of firms                                               93.13           92.67
          Number of vacancies                                            2.98            2.95



Notes: The sources for the the baseline values of the labor force status proportions, number of firms and
vacancy rate are given in Table 3. All other values are generated by the model.




                     Table 5: Average Monthly Earnings — First Six Months

            Entering employment from:                      Baseline               SSP
            Maximum months of UI remaining (U (ū))                   2,070          2,085
            Last month of UI (U (1))                                    972          1,097
            First month on IA (A(1))                                                   967
            12th month on IA (A(12))                                                   987
            First month eligible for SSP (SSP (1))                                     894
                 with SSP top-up                                                     1,989
            Last month eligible for SSP (SSP (12))                                     894
                 with SSP top-up                                                     1,989
            IA, no longer eligible for SSP (A(0))                      938             967

            Mean wage                                                 1,563          1,593
            SD wage                                                     407            672
            Mean income                                               1,563          1,634
            SD income                                                   407            390


Notes: Authors’ calculations based on model simulations.




                                                   40
                     Table 6: Cost-Benefit Analysis–SSP Applied to All Income Assis-
                     tance Recipients

                                          Partial            General               Partial          General
                                        Equilibrium         Equilibrium          Equilibrium       Equilibrium


                                         Marginal Social Cost of 0.5               Marginal Social Cost of 0.0
 Direct Costs
 SSP program service costs1                      1,367             1,367                1,367            1,367
 Net SSP admin costs                               251               251                  251              251
 Number eligible for SSP                            53                63                   53               63
 Total Direct Costs                             85,517           102,698               85,517          102,698
 Adjusted for MSC2                             128,276           154,047               85,517          102,698

 Indirect Costs
 Change in UI Payments                               0            95,414                    0           95,414
 Change in IA Payments                        –212,553           144,375             –212,553          144,375
 Change in SSP Payments                      1,198,843         1,648,983            1,198,843        1,648,983
 Total Change in transfers                     986,289         1,888,772              986,289        1,888,772
 Adjusted for MSC3                             493,144           944,386                    0                0

 Change in output                            2,383,891          –884,011            2,383,891         –884,011
 Net gain from program                       1,762,470        –1,982,444            2,298,374         –986,709


Notes: Costs are calculated over five years for a labor force normalized to 1000. 1. The direct costs are taken
from Michalopoulos et al. (2002, Table 7.7). 2. The direct costs are multiplied by the marginal social cost
(MSC) of a tax dollar, estimated to be 1.5 (Diewert 1988; Dalhby 1994; Browning 1987). 3. The marginal
social cost of the increase in transfers is just the dead weight loss associated with a tax and transfer system:
0.5.




                                                      41
                            Table 7: Sensitivity to the Choice of β and z

 Parameters                        Base (PE) Base (GE)                  Alternative Parameters
 Annual discount rate (β)                             0.82       0.77        0.87         0.82      0.82
 Elasticity of search costs (z)                       1.85       1.85        1.85         1.75      2.00
 Search costs, income assistance (ca )                0.33       0.26        0.40         0.37      0.28
 Search costs, unemployment (cu )                     0.05       0.04        0.06         0.07      0.03

 12 Month impact1                     −0.178       −0.173     −0.186      −0.159      −0.201      −0.140
 35 Month impact                      −0.123       −0.118     −0.127      −0.108      −0.137      −0.096

 Labor force composition
 Employment                             90.15        89.72      89.63       89.75       89.76      89.76
 Unemployment                            5.80         5.92       5.96        5.91        5.92       5.90
 Income assistance                       4.05         4.36       4.41        4.35        4.32       4.34

 Firms                                  93.13        92.67      92.56       92.70       92.72      92.71
 Vacancies                               2.98         2.95       2.94        2.95        2.96       2.95

 Cost–benefit analysis: Net gain from program
 Partial equilibrium                          1, 762          1, 919      1, 686      1, 407      1, 645
 General equilibrium                        −1, 982          −2, 294     −1, 905     −1, 914     −1, 864


Notes: Authors’ calculations based on model simulations. The search friction parameters, ca and cu are
re-calibrated in the baseline model for each combination of β and z. Costs are per capita costs over five
years. 1. For the 12 and 35 month impacts the values in the Base (PE) column refer to the impacts estimated
using the experimental data. All other values in the table come from model simulations.




                                                    42
                          Table 8: Alternative SSP Policy Simulations

                                                       Reduced        12 month      24 months
                                Base                  supplement      payment        waiting
                                Case       SSP          by 75 %        period         period
                                                     Labor force composition
 Employment                      90.15       89.72           89.99          89.89        89.87
 Unemployment                     5.80        5.92            5.85           5.87         5.86
 Income assistance                4.05        4.36            4.16           4.23         4.27

 Firms                           93.13       92.67          92.96           92.85        92.84
 Vacancies                        2.98        2.95           2.97            2.96         2.97

                                           Cost-benefit: Net gain from program
 Partial equilibrium                       1, 762       2, 067          1, 505          1, 147
 General equilibrium                      −1, 982        −923          −1, 465          −969


Notes: Authors’ calculations based on model simulations.




                                               43
                  1.0
                                                          Control Group              Program Group
                                                          Impact                     Simulated Control Group
                                                          Simulated Program Group    Simulated Impact
                  0.8        0.6
       Jobless survival rate
    0.2         0.4
                  0.0




                                   0   5   10        15            20           25       30            35
                                                Months from random assignment


Figure 1: Simulated Partial Equilibrium Impact of SSP. The dotted bands are point wise
95 per cent confidence intervals for the data.
                  11




                                                                                          Baseline      SSP
                  10
                  9
                  8
     Search intensity
    5     6      74
                  3
                  2




                                   0   5   10        15            20           25       30            35
                                                    Months since job loss


  Figure 2: Search Intensity for Those Starting with Maximum Unemployment Benefits


                                                            44
                 1.0
                                                                                                                  Baseline          SSP
                 0.9

                                                                                                                  Difference
                 0.8          0.7
Income assistance survival rate
  0.3   0.4    0.5
                 0.2
                 0.1
                 0.0  0.6




                                    0         5        10        15           20            25               30                35
                                                              Months on income assistance


                                        Figure 3: Survival Probability, Starting from Income Assistance
                 1.0




                                                                                            Baseline                  Equilibrium SSP
                                                                                            Partial SSP               Equilibrium Impact
                                                                                            Partial Impact
              0.60.8
Survival rate
 0.4             0.2
                 0.0




                                    0         5        10        15           20            25               30                35
                                                                        Months


                                        Figure 4: Survival Probability, Partial and Equilibrium Impacts



                                                                         45
References
 [1] Auspos, Patricia; Miller, Cynthia and Hunter, Jo Anna. Final Report on the Implemen-
     tation and Impacts of the Minnesota Family Investment Program in Ramsey County.
     New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, 2000.

 [2] Barrett, Garry and Cragg, Michael. “An untold story: the characteristics of welfare
     use in British Columbia.” Canadian Journal of Economics, 31, 1998: 165-88.

 [3] Bloom, Dan and Michalopoulos, Charles. How Welfare and Work Policies Affect Em-
     ployment and Income: A Synthesis of Research. New York: Manpower Demonstration
     Research Corporation, 2001.

 [4] Blundell, Richard, Costa Dias, Monica, and Costas Meghir. “The Impact of Wage
     Subsidies: A General Equilibrium Approach.” Unpublished manuscript, Institute for
     Fiscal Studies, 2003.

 [5] Bos, Hans; Huston, Aletha; Granger, Robert; Duncan, Greg; Brock, Tom and McLoyd,
     Vonnie; with Crosby, Danielle; Gibson, Christina; Fellerath, Veronica; Magnuson,
     Katherine; Mistry, Rashmita; Poglinco, Susan; Romich, Jennifer and Ventura, Ana.
     New Hope for People with Low Incomes: Two Year Results of a Program to Reduce
     Poverty and Reform Welfare. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corpo-
     ration, 1999.

 [6] Browning, Edgar. “On the Marginal Welfare Cost of Taxation.” American Economic
     Review, 77(1), 1987: 11-23.

 [7] Calmfors, Lars. “Active Labor Market Policy and Unemployment - A Framework for
     the Analysis of Crucial Design Features.” OECD Economic Studies. 22(1), 1994: 7-47.

 [8] Card, David and Hyslop, Dean. “Estimating the Dynamic Effects of an Earnings Sub-
     sidy for Welfare-Leavers.” Unpublished manuscript, University of California at Berke-
     ley, 2002.

 [9] Christensen, Bent Jesper, Lentz, Rasmus, Motensen, Dale T, Neumann, George R.,
     and Wervatz, Axel. “On the Job Search and the Wage Distribution.” Unpublished
     manuscript, Northwestern University, 2002.

[10] Dalhby, Bev. “The Distortionary Effect of Rising Taxes.” In Robson, William and
     Scarth, William, eds., Deficit Reduction: What Pain, What Gain? Toronto: C.D.
     Howe Institute, 1994.

[11] Davidson, Carl and Woodbury, Stephen A. “The Displacement Effect of Reemployment
     Bonus Programs.” Journal of Labor Economics, 11, 1993: 575-605.

[12] Diamond, Peter A. “Wage Determination and Efficiency in Search Equilibrium,” Re-
     view of Economic Studies, 49, 1982: 217-228.

[13] Diewert, Irwin. “On Tax Reform.” Canadian Journal of Economics. 21(2), 1988: 1-40.

[14] Ferrall, Christopher. “The Dynamics of Income Assistance: Evidence from the Self-
     Sufficiency Project,” research report, Social Research Demonstration Corporation,
     2000.

                                           46
[15] Ford, Reuben; Gyarmati, David; Foley, Kelly; Tattrie, Doug and Jimenez, Liza. “Can
     Work Incentives Pay for Themselves? Final Report on the Self-Sufficiency Project for
     Welfare Applicants.” Social Research and Demonstration Corporation, October 2003.

[16] Galarneau, Diane; Krebs, Howard; Morissette, René and Zhang, Xuelin. “The Quest
     for Workers: A New Portrait of Job Vacancies in Canada.” The Evolving Workplace
     Series. Statistics Canada and Human Resources Development Canada, 2001.

[17] Heckman, James J., Lochner, Lance and Taber, Christopher. “General Equilibrium
     Treatment Effects: A Study of Tuition Policy.” American Economic Review, 88(2),
     1998: 381-386.

[18] Heckman, James J. and Smith, Jeffrey. “Evaluating the Welfare State” in Steiner Strom
     (ed.), Econometrics and Economic Theory in the 20th Century: The Ragner Frisch
     Centennial. Cambridge University Press for Econometric Society Monograph Series,
     1998: 241-318.

[19] Kamionka, Thierry and Lacroix, Guy. “Assessing the Extent of Randomization Bias in
     the Canadian Self-Sufficiency Experiment.” Unpublished manuscript, Université Laval,
     2002.

[20] Lalonde, Robert. “Evaluating the Econometric Evaluation of Training Programs with
     Experimental Data.” American Economic Review, 76(4), 1986: 604-620.

[21] Lin, Zhengxi. “Employment Insurance in Canada: Recent Trends and Policy Changes.”
     Statistics Canada: Analytical Studies Branch–Research Paper Series No. 125, 1998.

[22] Michalopoulos, Charles; Tattrie, Doug; Miller, Cynthia; Robins, Philip; Morris,
     Pamela; Gyarmati, David; Redcross, Cindy; Foley, Kelly and Ford, Reuben. Mak-
     ing Work Pay: Final Report on the Self-Sufficiency Project for Long-Term Welfare
     Recipients. Ottawa: Social Research and Demonstration Corporation, 2002.

[23] Mortensen, Dale. “Property Rights and Efficiency in Mating, Racing and Related
     Games.” American Economic Review, 72, 1982: 968-79.

[24] National Council of Welfare. Welfare Incomes, 2000 and 2001, Spring 2002.

[25] Pissarides, Christopher. “Efficient Job Rejection.” Economic Journal 94 (suppl.), 1984:
     97-108.

[26] Smith, Jeffrey and Todd, Petra. “Does Matching Overcome LaLonde’s Critique of
     Nonexperimental Methods?” Journal of Econometrics, 2004: forthcoming.

[27] Todd, Petra and Wolpin, Kenneth. “Using Experimental Data to Validate a Dynamic
     Behavioral Model of Child Schooling and Fertility: Assessing the Impact of a School
     Subsidy Program in Mexico.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Pennsylvania,
     2003.




                                            47
