NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOCIAL SECURITY AND UNSECURED DEBT
Erik Hurst
Paul Willen
Working Paper 10282
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10282
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004

We thank Charlie Brown, Jeff Liebman, Steve Zeldes and seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute
Social Security Working Group for helpful comments and suggestions and Francisco Torralba for excellent
research assistance and helpful comments and suggestions. Both authors gratefully acknowledge research
support from the Graduate School of Business at the University of Chicago. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Erik Hurst and Paul Willen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Social Security and Unsecured Debt
Erik Hurst and Pual Willen
NBER Working Paper No. 10282
January 2004
JEL No. E2, E6, H3, H5
ABSTRACT
Most young households simultaneously hold both unsecured debt on which they pay an average of
10 percent interest and social security wealth on which they earn less than 2 percent. We document
this fact using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. We then consider a life-cycle model
with optimizing and “rule-of-thumb” households and explore ways to reduce this inefficiency. We
show that both allowing households to use social security wealth to pay off debt and exempting
young households from social security contributions (but in both cases requiring higher
contributions later later in life) leads to increases in welfare for both types of households and
significant increases in consumption and saving, and reductions in debt, for optimizing households.
Erik Hurst
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
213A Walker Museum
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
erik.hurst@gsb.uchicago.edu
PaulWillen
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
205 Stuart Hall
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
paul.willen@gsb.uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

The starting point for our analysis is the observation that currently households have
about $700 billion in unsecured debt on which they pay roughly 10 percent interest
and $11 trillion of social security wealth on which they earn less than 2 percent
interest.1 As a nation, we are apparently borrowing on credit cards and saving in
a passbook savings account, something that Gross and Souleles (2002) describe as,
“puzzling, apparently inconsistent with no-arbitrage and thus inconsistent with any
conventional model.”
We focus on the old-age portion of social security and explore this topic in three
steps. First, in Section 2, we examine the composition of individuals who own both
non-collateralized debt and social security wealth. In an economy with heterogenous
agents, it is possible that the households that have the debt and the households that
have the wealth are different. We use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
to show that this is generally not the case. In our sample of households under the
age of 40, 62 percent of households have unsecured debt. We show that if households
could access their social security wealth to pay off debt, only 17 percent would still
have debt. And for that 17 percent, total debt would be dramatically reduced; for the
90th percentile household in the debt distribution, unsecured debt would fall from 84
percent to 33 percent of that household’s average income.
In Section 3, we construct a dynamic life-cycle portfolio choice model. We follow
Campbell and Mankiw (1989) and others by assuming that the world is populated by
two types of households: optimizing households that use financial assets to maximize
utility and “rule-of-thumb” households that simply set consumption equal to income.
Evidence from the consumption literature suggests that households roughly break
1

Our measure of unsecured debt is “consumer revolving credit” from the Federal Reserve Board
– which was $725.0 billion in May 2003. Davis, Kubler and Willen (2003) argue that the interest
rate on unsecured debt, taking default into account, is roughly 10 percent in real terms. The value
of social security wealth, defined as “the present actuarial value of the Social Security benefits to
which the current population will be entitled at age 65 (or are already entitled to if they are older
than 65) minus the present actuarial value of the social security taxes that they will pay before
reaching that age,” comes from Feldstein and Ranguelova (2001). Leimer (1994) calculates that the
internal rate of return on social security contributions is 1.7 percent.

1

into these two categories, especially with respect to retirement.2 For the optimizing
households, we adapt a model developed by Davis, Kubler and Willen (2003). In that
model, households can invest in stocks and bonds and can also take out unsecured
loans. We specify that the interest rate on unsecured debt (i.e., the borrowing rate)
exceeds the interest rate on bonds (i.e., the lending rate). Such an assumption is
consistent with the pattern of observed interest rates.3 We show that our parameterization of this model can roughly match the life-cycle borrowing behavior documented
in Section 2.
In Section 4, we analyze the effects of two policy experiments aimed at alleviating
the inefficiency of simultaneous debt and social security holdings. In our first experiment, we allow households currently in the social security system to access their social
security wealth to pay off debt. In our second experiment, we build on an idea due to
Hubbard and Judd (1987) and exempt young households from social security contributions. Under both proposals, households would contribute more to social security
(via higher taxes) later in life to compensate for their reduced contributions while
young. Such an assumption ensures unchanged social security benefits upon retirement. Both of the above proposals lead to increases in saving, reductions in debt and
substantial increases in lifetime certain equivalent consumption. Table 1 summarizes
some key results in the paper. For example, moving from our existing system to one
where households under 30 are exempt from contributing to social security (but are
forced to make up the taxes later in life) raises certain equivalent consumption by 3.4
percent for optimizing households and 3.3 percent for rule-of-thumb households.
It is easy to see that exempting young households from social security taxes will
tilt household social security contributions so that they are more in line with desired
life-cycle saving. Given realistic income profiles, most households under the age of 30
want to borrow not save. But what is surprising is that the exemption also reduces
the distortions that result from the fact that social security requires investment of
all contributions in an asset that pays 2 percent interest and does not allow any
2

See the discussion in Section 1.1 below.

3

See Davis et al., 2003.

2

investment in equity which has historically returned 8 percent. We illustrate this
surprising fact in Section 4.
Finally, we draw attention to one other possibility offered by our experiments. By
either giving an exemption or allowing a withdrawal but requiring higher contributions
later, the government effectively loans money to households. We call the interest rate
on such loans the internal borrowing rate (IBR). The conditions we impose imply
that the IBR equals the internal rate of return on social security investment. But the
welfare gains from these “loans” are so big that the government could charge a higher
IBR and still make households better off. Table 1 shows that a combination of the
age 40 exemption and an increase in the IBR from 2 percent to 5 percent still leads
to a significant increase in welfare for both types of households. We also show that
raising the IBR would significantly improve social security finances. In other words,
we show that the government could borrow at 2 percent, lend at 5 percent and still
make households better off!
Before continuing with the paper, we draw the reader’s attention to five important
aspects of our analysis.
First, social security has a purpose in our setup. That purpose comes from the
existence of rule-of-thumb households. Table 1 shows that eliminating social security
altogether makes optimizing households better off than any of our proposed policy
changes. This is a consequence of the fact that households can at least replicate
social security privately in our setup. But for rule-of-thumb households, eliminating
social security would be catastrophic as it is their only resource to fund consumption
in retirement. In this sense, our analysis follows Feldstein (1985), who writes, “The
principle rationale for such mandatory programs is that some individuals lack the
foresight to save for their retirement years.” Our goal is to build a social security
system that is “paternalistic” in the sense of Diamond (1977), but we also take into
account the needs of optimizing households, for whom mandated social security may
be welfare reducing.
Second, we do not make any assumption about how social security is funded. Nor
do we take any stand on changing the financing of the social security system. Our
3

main vantage point is that of the individual household, which contributes money to
social security while working and receives benefits in retirement with certainty. We
use the internal rate of return estimated by Leimer (1994) to link contributions with
benefits, but we do not assume that the social security system invests the contributions in an individual account or in a pension fund. However, we measure the effects
of various social security schemes on the difference between annual contributions by
workers and annual retiree benefits at various points in time – in other words how
our proposals would affect the solvency of a pay-as-you-go system. But, it should be
stressed again that our policy experiments are designed to leave the benefit portion
of social security unchanged.
Third, we assume that households do not face any longevity risk. This is an important omission as some researchers argue that by providing an indexed life annuity,
social security allows households to manage longevity risk.4 Further, they argue that
markets fail to provide such annuities. This benefit of social security is missing from
our model. However, none of our proposed schemes – except our “straw man” of
eliminating social security altogether – have any effect on the retirement portion of
social security. Thus the benefits shown in Table 1 and elsewhere in the paper are
incremental to the social benefits of a mandated, indexed life annuity.
Fourth, in all of our policy experiments, we require that households contribute at
least as much in present value terms and receive exactly the same benefits as they
do in the current system. For example, we consider allowing households to remove
their wealth from social security to pay off debt. But we do not allow them to “opt
out” of social security at all – in fact their subsequent contributions go up. So our
experiment is completely different from, for example, Smetters and Walliser (2002),
who allow household to leave social security entirely. In addition, our model preserves
the “commitment” aspect of social security. Some researchers (Akerlof, 1998, for
example) have argued that households do not trust themselves to save and vote for a
government program that makes it illegal for them not to. The options we consider
change only the life-cycle structure of social security not the level of contributions:
4

See Abel (1986) and Eckstein, Eichenbaum and Peled (1985), among others.

4

social security will still require that households save enough to guarantee an income
equal to 43 percent of their average working income in retirement.
Finally, the main point of the paper – that the ideal life-cycle profile of contributions is not flat – applies equally well to any tax. Given the choice, households
with a hump-shaped income profile would rather pay less income tax when young
and more income tax when middle-aged. We focus on social security for two reasons.
First, unlike income taxes, the explicit purpose of social security is to smooth lifecycle consumption. So it is particularly ironic that the contribution structure does
precisely the opposite at certain points in the life-cycle. Second, a progressive income
tax approximates the ideal life-cycle structure by lowering tax rates when income
is low. Since social security taxation is, in fact, regressive, not progressive, it is a
natural target for our analysis.
Before proceeding with the main body of the paper, we conduct a brief literature
review. In our concluding section, we discuss some additional limitations of our
analysis.

1.1

Literature review

This paper builds on earlier work in four fields: social security, consumer credit,
life-cycle portfolio choice and consumption.
Many researchers have explored the effects of social security on the economy. For
a survey, see Feldstein and Liebman (2002). We draw the reader’s attention to three
particularly relevant papers. Feldstein and Ranguelova (2001) propose that we replace the current pay-as-you-go social security system with individual accounts in
which households can invest in equity and calculate the effects on retirement income.
They find that people typically do better with individual accounts although there
is a small probability that they will do worse. Hubbard and Judd (1987) look at a
dynamic general equilibrium model of social security in which households face borrowing constraints.5 They show, as we do, that an exemption from social security
5

Imrohoroglu, Imrohoroglu and Joines (2003) make a similar point.

5

contributions early in the life-cycle yields substantial welfare benefits. Our set-up is
much richer in that we include risky assets and borrowing in the household portfolio
choice set and consider rule-of-thumb as well as optimizing households. On the other
hand, our model is set in partial equilibrium. In the conclusion, we briefly discuss
general equilibrium aspects of the problem and other relevant literature. Imrohoroglu,
Imrohoroglu and Joines (2003), like Hubbard and Judd, consider a dynamic general
equilibrium model. However, they allow households to have time-inconsistent preferences, building on the idea of Akerlof (1998), among others, that social security
exists precisely because time-inconsistent household demand a commitment device.
In their model, social security “may raise or lower welfare depending on the strength
of time inconsistency.” Their results for time-inconsistent households contrast with
our results for “rule-of-thumb” households for whom social security is unambiguously
welfare improving.
Gross and Souleles (2002), Durkin (2000) and Kennickell, Starr-McCluer and
Surette (2000), among others, have documented the increasing importance of unsecured debt – and in particular credit card debt – in household portfolios.
Researchers have recently started to focus attention on the effects of borrowing
limitations on life-cycle portfolio choice.6 We build on this literature by extending
a model due to Davis, Kubler and Willen (2003). Davis, Kubler and Willen limit
borrowing not through a cap on the amount but by introducing a wedge between the
cost of borrowing and the risk-free interest rate. They argue that a wedge is both
empirically evident and that a model that incorporates a wedge leads to a more realistic profile of life-cycle portfolio holdings. Campbell, Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout
(2001) explore the effects on portfolio choice and utility of allowing households to
invest some of their social security wealth in equities in a life-cycle model with no
borrowing. They find that a combination of smaller contributions and investment in
equities leads to substantial welfare increases.
6

Some examples include Constantinides, Donaldson and Mehra (2002) who explore the effects
of borrowing limitations on asset pricing. Gomes and Michaelides (2003) explore the effects of
participation costs in conjunction with borrowing limitations.

6

Altig and Davis (1992) consider the effects of a wedge between borrowing and
lending rates in an overlapping generations model. They find that the wedge dramatically affects the timing of bequests. Our findings, that a wedge affects the optimal
timing of contributions, are similar in spirit.
Finally, recent work in the consumption literature motivates our decision to categorize consumers as optimizing or rule-of-thumb. Researchers have shown that consumers roughly matching the two definitions coexist in the data, particularly with
respect to retirement. Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg (2001) argue that drops in
household consumption at retirement “are consistent with ‘rule of thumb’... theories
of wealth accumulation.” Both Hurst (2003) and Scholz, Seshadri and Khitatrakun
(2003) argue that an optimizing model describes consumption behavior at retirement
for roughly 80 percent of the population and while a rule-of-thumb model describes
the remaining 20 percent.

2

Empirical facts about borrowing and social security

2.1

Data

The PSID is a large, nationally representative survey, started in 1966 that tracks
social and economic variables of a given household over time. Each year, the survey
gathers demographic information such as age, race, family composition and education
levels of all members in each household. Among other information, individuals report
their labor market participation and earned labor income.
On occasion, the PSID supplements the main data set with special modules. In
1984, 1989, 1994 and 1999, the PSID asked households extensive questions about
their wealth. Specifically, households report holdings of cash, stocks, bonds, mutual funds, saving accounts, checking accounts, government savings bonds, Treasury
bills, Individual Retirement Accounts, bond funds, cash value of life insurance policies, valuable collections for investment purposes, and rights in a trust or estate.
7

Additionally, respondents report the value of their main home, the value of their outstanding mortgage debt, and their net positions in other real estate, businesses and
vehicle ownership. Of particular interest to this study is the respondents’ report of
their holdings of unsecured debt (including store and credit card debt, student loans
and other personal loans).
The time-series aspect of the PSID makes it ideal for measuring social security
wealth. While the PSID does not have actual social security records for each respondent, social security wealth can be computed using the household’s detailed earnings
history coupled with the social security tax tables.7
Given that the PSID measures wealth (and indebtedness) at five year intervals
starting in 1984, we focus our analysis on the 1999 wealth supplement. There are
two reasons for this approach. First, in order to compute social security wealth, we
need a long history of earnings for each individual in the survey. Using the 1999 data
thus allows us as many as 31 annual observations of individual earnings. Second,
innovation in financial markets resulted in an explosion in credit card use between
the late 1980s and the late 1990s. Focusing on more recent time periods, therefore,
may provide a more representative picture of a household’s steady state holdings of
unsecured debt. However, for completeness, we redid our analysis for a sample of
1989 households and our main conclusions were unchanged.
Our main sample included all household heads in the 1999 PSID between the ages
of 22 and 40. We focused on younger households since most unsecured borrowing occurs among younger households. Unfortunately, we do not have full earnings histories
for all households heads in the sample. To see why, note two things. First, the PSID
only tracks core PSID members over time. A core PSID member is either an original
respondent from 1968 (when the survey started) or a descendent of an original sample
member. Second, given PSID definitions, the male is classified as the household head
for all married and cohabiting couples. As a result, for some male PSID heads, earnings histories only extend back to the date that they married into the survey. Rather
than imputing the missing income history for these household heads, we restrict our
7

See http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/HOP/hopi.htm.

8

sample to include 1) all single headed households (both male and female) and 2) all
married households where the head has complete earnings histories. Given that all
the households in the 1999 PSID under the age of 40 are descendants who are equally
likely to be men or women, our restriction does not bias our analysis in any way.
In summary, our 1999 PSID sample includes all unmarried households with heads
between the age of 22 and 40 and married households with heads between the age of
22 and 40 where the head also has a complete earnings history. The resulting sample
size was 2,077 households. For robustness, we also examine only single households
where the head is between 22 and 40. This latter sample included 850 households.

2.2

Discussion of data

Our analysis of the data reveals three key facts. First, young households have large
amounts of unsecured debt. Table 2 shows some descriptive statistics about our
sample. 62 percent of households under the age of 40 have positive amounts of
unsecured debt. The median and mean amount of debt held for households in our
sample was, respectively, $1,200 and $6,400. For those that hold positive amounts
of debt, the median debt held was $5,600 while the mean amount of debt held was
$10,500.8 The results are equally striking when comparing total household debt in
1999 to the household head’s current 1999 income. The median debt to income ratio
is 5 percent; the mean is 36 percent.9 Households who have positive unsecured debt
tend to be slightly younger, more likely to be married and less likely to be black.
Income of the household head is not a strong predictor, however, of the household’s
8

All dollar amounts in this paper are in 1996 constant dollars.

9

Unlike the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), the PSID does not distinguish between total
debt and revolving debt. Some households may have a positive amount of debt at anytime during
the month for transaction reasons. These households may intend to payoff the debt before they
accrue any interest charges. We would like to focus on households that hold revolving debt (i.e.,
who carry balances forward from month to month). Of those households who report positive credit
card balances in the PSID, most hold more debt than can be justified by a transaction motive. In
our sample, we find that 46 percent of all households (or 75 percent of households with debt), have
accumulated debt greater than one month’s worth of income. This finding is consistent with data
from the 1995 SCF which finds that 56 percent of all households pay interest on their credit card
balance on a monthly basis (Gross and Souleles, 2002).

9

propensity to have debt. This result is not surprising given that both low income and
high income households hold little, if any, unsecured debt. Low income households are
unable to obtain debt, despite their desire to borrow, while high income households
have less need to borrow. Among households that have some debt – i.e. 62 percent
of our sample – the median debt to income ratio is 22 percent and the mean is 58
percent.
If individuals are constrained by social security contributions, we would expect
that those households with debt would have a negative net asset position. To explore
this question, we define three measures of household wealth. First, we examine household “total net worth,” which includes vehicle holdings, real estate equity (including
main home equity), business equity, stocks, corporate bonds, cash, checking accounts,
saving accounts and Treasuries less unsecured debt.10 Second, we create a measure of
liquid assets by subtracting illiquid assets from our measure of net worth. We define
illiquid assets as business equity, housing equity and vehicle equity. We refer to this
measure as “net liquid assets.” Finally, we realize that cash, saving accounts, and
checking accounts may be used to make monthly purchases. As a result, they are not
measures of the stock of a household’s wealth. To account for this, we remove these
resources from our measure of net illiquid assets. Essentially, our measure of “net
financial wealth” is the sum of stock wealth plus bond wealth less non-collateralized
debt.
Most of the households in the sample have positive net worth in spite of their
unsecured debt. Table 3 shows that only 16 percent of the total sample and 26 percent
of those with positive debt have negative net worth. However, most of total net worth
is accounted for by home equity and assets, which provide limited liquidity (net
vehicle equity, for example). If we look at “net financial assets,” we get a completely
different picture. Table 3 shows that 50 percent of the households in the sample have
negative net financial assets and 82 percent of the households with unsecured debt
10

The is the full PSID wealth definition. See Hurst, Luoh and Stafford (1998) for a thorough
discussion. Up through the top 2 percentiles, the PSID wealth data compares very well to the SCF
wealth data (Juster and Stafford, 1999).

10

have negative net financial assets. Our sample does indicate that some households do
have positive holdings of stocks and bonds at the same time that they have unsecured
debt. To see this, look at Table 2, which shows that the median household with
positive debt has net financial assets equal to -16 percent of income but debt equal
to 22 percent of income. In other words, if they used their financial assets to pay
off debt, they would could reduce their debt load from 22 percent of income to 16
percent. However, the PSID data tells us neither the interest rate on the debt nor
the return on the assets. If the return on stocks is sufficiently high or the interest on
the debt is sufficiently low, such debt reduction would not be sensible. By contrast,
the interest rate on unsecured debt always exceeds the interest rate on social security
contributions.
The life cycle profile of debt is as expected. Young households have steep income
profiles, on average. As a result, the PIH would predict that young households should
be indebted. As they age, and their income profiles flatten out, the propensity to be
in debt should diminish. These predictions are borne out in the data. Table 4 shows
that the median debt to income ratio rises slightly from 13 percent between age 22 and
24 to 14 percent between ages 25 and 27 before falling sharply to 3 percent between
age 37 and 39. Variations for the 75th percentile household are more dramatic. Table
4 shows that the debt-to-income ratio for the 75th percentile household rises from 45
percent for households aged between 22 and 24 to 54 percent households aged 25 to
27 before falling to 20 percent for households aged 37 to 39.
Indebtedness is highly skewed. In the whole sample, the median household debt
to income ratio is just 5 percent. Table 5 shows that a quarter of households have
debt to income ratios of more than 29 percent and 10 percent have debt to income
ratios of more than 84 percent. Just focusing on those households with some debt,
we see that the debt distribution is still quite skewed. 25 percent of households have
debt to income ratios of less than 8 percent. However, 25 percent also have debt to
income ratios of more than 53 percent. And 10 percent have debt to income ratios
that exceed 120 percent.
Social security wealth is considerable for young households. Table 2 shows that
11

total social security contributions for both the with-debt and the without-debt samples are broadly similar. For the median household in our sample with debt, the
social security wealth to income ratio is 64 percent and for the mean household is 85
percent. As expected, given social security rules and life-cycle income profiles, social
security wealth rises rapidly over the life cycle. Table 4 shows that social security
wealth to income ratio grows from 22 percent of income for households aged between
22 and 24 to 120 percent of income between for households aged 37 to 39.
Most interestingly, the data bears out our basic claim that households could wipe
out much of their unsecured debt if they had access to their social security wealth.
To measure the effects of social security wealth on debt, we construct “social security augmented debt” by subtracting social security wealth from household debt. If
social security wealth exceeds debt for a particular household, then social security
augmented debt equals zero. Table 5 shows what happens to the distribution of debt
when we allow access to social security wealth. In the whole sample, the incidence of
unsecured debt falls from 62 percent of households to 17 percent. Of those households
that have debt, 72 percent can eliminate it when they have access to social security
wealth. For those that cannot eliminate their debt, the level of indebtedness falls
dramatically. The 90th percentile household has debt equal to 84 percent of income;
after gaining access to social security wealth the 90th percentile household has debt
equal to 33 percent of income. Among those households with some debt, the debt to
income ratio of the 75th percentile household falls from more than half to just 4 percent. It should be noted that these numbers should be seen as upper bounds. Given
the structure of the PSID, we can only measure the actual social security wealth for
one member of the household. Debt, however, is for all household members.11
In terms of aggregates, the decline in total debt and total interest paid for the
U.S. economy resulting from allowing households under 40 to use the social security
wealth to pay off non-collateralized debt is large. Table 6 shows some aggregate
11

We experimented with imputing the spouse’s social security wealth given the spouse’s current
age and work status. Under plausible assumptions, the percent of households with positive debt
after also allowing access to the spouse’s social security wealth falls to 14 percent.

12

calculations. Using PSID sample weights and census data, we calculate that allowing
households to pay off non-collateralized debt with social security wealth would reduce
total household debt by more than $100 billion and reduce total annual household
interest payments by $11.5 billion per year – or about $500 for every household that
has non-collateralized debt.

3

A life-cycle model

We now construct a model of life-cycle consumption with social security. Our household enters the labor force at age 21, retires and no longer receives labor income
after age 65 and dies at age 80 with certainty. We assume that labor is supplied
inelastically and that household income evolves deterministically over the life-cycle.
The assumption of inelastic labor supply is a strong one, and we revisit the issue in
the last section. Our solution for optimizing households allow for stochastic variation
in labor income but we go with a deterministic specification for two reasons. First,
our focus is on the life-cycle aspects of borrowing and saving, not the high-frequency
variation. Second, Davis, Kubler and Willen (2003) show that the predictions of our
model for wealth accumulation for relatively impatient households with labor income
risk are similar to those of our model with more patient households with no labor
income risk. To account for this, we estimate the model with different time discount
rates.
Households can trade three financial assets: They can buy equity with stochastic
net return r̃E , bonds at a net risk-free rate rL , and borrow at the rate rB ≥ rL .
Households can buy unlimited positive quantities of stocks and bonds and can borrow
unlimited positive amounts but they cannot take short positions in equity or bonds,
nor can they borrow negative amounts. We impose the condition that a household
must pay off all debts before it dies, which implies that the household cannot borrow
more than the present value of all its future labor income discounted at the borrowing
rate rB .
We consider two types of households: An optimizing household chooses a plan for
13

consumption, borrowing and asset holdings at date t to maximize:
Et

T
X

β a−t

a=t

c̃1−γ
a
1−γ

where ca is consumption at age a, Et is the expectations operator conditional on
time-t information, β is a time discount factor. A rule-of-thumb household does not
take advantage of financial markets at all and sets consumption equal to income less
mandated contributions to social security while working and equal to social security
benefits when retired.
We solve the model for optimizing households computationally using methods
developed in Judd, Kubler and Schmedders (2002). For details on our numerical
solution, see the appendix to Davis, Kubler and Willen. Table 7 lists key features of
our parameterization of the model. We draw the reader’s attention to three aspects
of our parameterization.
First, our choice of asset returns follows Campbell (1999). We set the annual
risk-free investment return to 2 percent, the expected return on equity to 8 percent
and the standard deviation of equity returns to 15 percent. All returns are in real
terms.
Second, Davis, Kubler and Willen (2003) present evidence that the borrowing rate
exceeds the riskless lending rate by 10 percentage points. Of those ten percentage
points, charge-offs for uncollected loans (i.e., defaults) account for 1.3 percent of the
loan value. Conservatively, we assume that the marginal and average borrower are the
same and thus we specify a wedge equal to 8 percent, which yields borrowing rate of 10
percent. Our model is partial equilibrium, so we don’t attempt to explains the origins
of the wedge between borrowing and lending rates. However, Dubey, Geanakoplos
and Shubik (2003) and Bisin and Gottardi (1999) present general equilibrium models
in which the prices paid by buyers and the prices received by sellers of financial assets
diverge because of asymmetric information.
Third, for the life-cycle income processes, we adopt parameter values estimated
by Gourinchas and Parker (2002) from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) and
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), adjusted as described in Davis, Kubler
14

and Willen. The Gourinchas and Parker (GP) labor income series is after-tax and
we make the simplifying assumption that income taxation would be invariant to our
proposed schemes.12
To carry out the welfare comparisons, we use certainty-equivalent consumption
levels. To obtain certainty-equivalent consumption, we first calculate lifetime expected utility, U, for a given consumption profile. We then find the constant level of
consumption, c, that yields the same level of lifetime expected utility. That is, we
solve

T
X
a=t

3.1

β a−t

c1−γ
=U
1−γ

 1 − γ γ−1
for c = PT
U
.
t
β
t=0

(1)

Social security system

Our social security system works in the following way. Households pay a proportional
tax while working. Upon retirement, optimizing households receive a lump-sum payment equal to the value of an annuity paying a fixed fraction of the average of the
highest 35 years of income. Rule-of-thumb households receive the annuity.
Our system differs from the real social security system in three fundamental ways:
First, both contributions and benefits are strictly proportional to income whereas
in the real social security system, contributions and benefits vary non-linearly with
income. Let’s focus on the contributions first. In the real world, social security
contributions are a fixed portion of income up to a cap. Thus household contributions
to social security are a declining fraction of income. In our model, there is no cap but
this omission actually strengthens our results. We argue below that the one problem
with social security is that it forces households to save when their income is relatively
low. The real system makes the problem worse by raising the tax rate as income goes
down.
12

Gokhale, Kotlikoff and Neumann (2001) show that by redistributing income over the life-cycle,
pension plans can have adverse tax consequences. In some of our policy experiments, we potentially
change the life-cycle profile of pre-tax income significantly (by increasing the employer contribution
to social security) which could affect many aspects of household decision-making. We do not attempt
to model these effects. However, we remind the reader that in our policy experiment of exempting
households from social security prior to age 30, these effects will be small.

15

How do benefits differ between our social security system and the real one? In our
model and in the real world, social security benefits depend on income in the highest
35 years of income. However, in the real world, the proportion of one’s income that
one receives in retirement depends on the level of one’s income. Specifically, the
marginal increase in retirement income for a dollar of labor income falls with income.
Thus, the real social security system reduces relative income for those who have
done relatively well and increases relative income for those who have done relatively
poorly. In essence, the social security system provides a sort of income insurance for
households. Since income is non-stochastic in our model, such a feature would not
play a significant role, but it does mean that our model ignores a potential benefit
of a social security system. However, in all our policy experiments (aside from the
straw man of eliminating social security altogether), the benefits portion of the social
security system remains unchanged.
Second, we give a lump-sum to optimizing households rather than an annuity in
retirement. We do this because in our model an annuity reduces household welfare. To
see why, note that in our model households can replicate an annuity with a lump sum
if they want and can often do better, for example, if they want their consumption
to slope down. Thus, if we eliminate social security, welfare improves even in the
absence of any other distortion. We view this as a problem for the model in light
of arguments, discussed in the introduction, that private annuity markets generally
cannot replicate the annuity provided by social security. By eliminating the annuity
feature from social security, we ensure that the method of provision of benefits is
not a liability for social security. As noted above, our policy experiments typically
have no effect on the retirement portion of social security – they guarantee exactly
the same payment stream as the existing system. So whatever welfare benefits an
annuity confers are preserved in our policy experiments. We do, however, report the
annuity value of the lump sum as a percentage of income for comparison purposes.
Third, we build on an idea due to Hubbard and Judd (1987), who propose that
the social security system exempt young households from contributing. For example,
we consider a social security system in which only households over the age of 30
16

contribute. To maintain the relationship between contributions and benefits, we
adjust the level of contributions later in life so that the total discounted contributions
under all plans are identical. Below, we discuss this adjustment in depth.
Table 7 shows the basic parameters of our social security system. We draw the
reader’s attention to two possibly unfamiliar terms: “internal lending rate” and “internal borrowing rate.” The internal lending rate (ILR) is the implied rate of return
on social security contributions in our system and is usually referred to as the “internal rate of return” in the literature. For example, in our model, the ILR equals
the rate of return on investment of contributions that yields the retirement lump-sum
benefit we select. We actually work backwards: we choose a level of contributions
and an internal lending rate to get our lump-sum benefit. Leimer (1994), in a widely
cited article, calculates that the internal lending rate on social security contributions
of those currently entering the social security system is 1.7 percent We round up and
assume that the internal lending rate is 2.0 percent. In our baseline scenario, this
implies that the replacement rate in retirement equals around 43 percent.13
The notion of an internal borrowing rate (IBR) relates to our analysis of alternative social security arrangements. In our simulations, we will consider two policy
experiments. First, we will allow households to withdraw money from the social security system to pay off debts. Second, as mentioned above, we allow households to
push back the point in the life cycle at which they start to contribute to social security.
To maintain balance between contributions and benefits, we increase the level of contributions later in the life-cycle. We view the reduction in contributions (from either
the exemption or the withdrawal) as a loan: we allow households to increase their
after tax income today in exchange for a reduction in income in the future. Reducing
contributions today at a cost of increased contributions later in life is tantamount to
giving a household a loan from current social security contributions to be paid back
in installments at some point in the future. We call the interest rate on this loan the
internal borrowing rate. In our baseline scenarios, we set the internal borrowing rate
13

The Social Security Administration in 2003 states that their target replacement rate is 42 percent
(See http://www.ssa.gov/kc/fact sheet 14 exp.htm).

17

equal to the internal lending rate. We also consider scenarios in which the internal
borrowing rate exceeds the internal lending rate. The existing social security system
does allow some of this sort of “borrowing”: the earlier a household retires, the lower
the level of benefits the household receives. In effect, when a household retires early,
it borrows against future benefits. Simple calculations show that the implied internal
borrowing rate roughly equals the internal lending rate when a household opts for
early social security benefits.14

3.2

Basic results of the optimizing model

In this section, we outline the basic implications for life-cycle consumption and portfolio choice of our model for optimizing households. For a thorough discussion of the
results of the model, see Davis, Kubler and Willen (2003). In the discussion that
follows we will use the term “private saving” to measure total wealth of the household not including social security wealth. Note that our “lump-sum” assumption
means that for optimizing households all wealth in retirement is “private saving.”
Four aspects of the solution are relevant to our discussion of social security.
First, the relationship between equity holdings and the borrowing rate is nonmonotonic. Consider a small modification to the baseline scenario in which the expected return on equity is 8 percent and the borrowing rate is 8 percent. With this
specification, no one would ever borrow money to buy equity since such an investment
would have zero expected return and would increase household exposure to risk.
Suppose we lower the borrowing rate: Equity holdings go up. Even a small reduction in the interest rate would turn borrowing to buy equity into a winning proposition. Thus, reductions in the borrowing rate increase equity demand. Conversely,
suppose we raise the borrowing rate: Equity holdings will also go up. Households
borrow for consumption purposes early in life and as they age, they pay off the debt.
Until they pay off the debt, however, purchasing equity makes no sense; the expected
return on borrowing to buy equity is now negative. Thus, if we raise the borrowing
14

Authors’ calculation using benefit and life expectancy information from the Social Security
Administration web site.

18

rate, households borrow less for consumption purposes, which means they need to
spend less time paying off their debts, which means that they can start saving (and,
as a result, buying equity) sooner. So equity demand reaches a minimum when the
borrowing rate equals the expected return on equity. Since we choose a borrowing
rate of 10 percent, which exceeds, but not by much, the expected return on equity, we
can say two things about our model. First, household demand for equity will be relatively low in all our simulations. And second, no household will ever simultaneously
hold debt and equity.
As one would expect in a life-cycle model, borrowing (saving) and equity holding
are highly sensitive to the shape of the age-income profile. Panels 1-5 of Table 8
show consumption, stock and bond holdings, debt, and social security wealth for
households age 22 to 39. Panel 1 shows our baseline specification in which the lifecycle profile is the “pooled” estimate from Gourinchas and Parker. Two features of the
borrowing profile stand out. First, the level of borrowing is considerable – peaking
at 45 percent of income between the ages of 28 and 30. Second, for the baseline
household, borrowing has a hump-shaped profile. The household accumulates debt
from age 21 until roughly age 30 and then starts paying it off. Figure 1 shows the age
income profiles for different educational attainments as estimated by Gourinchas and
Parker. Panels 2 to 4 show the estimates of our model with these alternative ageincome profiles. High school educated households (Panel 2) borrow significantly less
than the baseline; college educated households (Panel 3) borrow significantly more.
Notice from Figure 1 that the age-income profile is less steep for high school educated
households, particularly before age 30, compared to the baseline. In contrast, Figure 1
also shows that the age income profile for college educated households is much steeper
than the baseline until age 30. One interesting thing to note is that college educated
households only accumulate debt from age 22-24 – after that they decumulate. With a
flat income profile (Panel 4), households never borrow and by the age 37 to 39 period,
accumulate assets worth more than three times annual income; households in the
baseline specification accumulate none by the age of 39. Panel 5 shows that increasing
the subjective discount factor reduces debt and increases asset accumulation, as one
19

would expect.
With reasonable parameters, the model can generate life-cycle borrowing patterns
similar to those we observe in the data. Our baseline household has a life-cycle debt
accumulation pattern roughly matches that of the 25th percentile household in Table
4. The household in the model starts a little lower, accumulates more and its debt
level peaks a little later. Both the high school educated household and the baseline
household with a high discount factor generate borrowing patterns similar to the
median household. The focus of this paper is on debtors, which motivates our choice
of a household that is roughly the median debtor as our baseline.
Lastly, the gains from equity ownership are quite small in this model. How much
is the right to trade equity worth to households? The column labeled “equity benefit”
in Table 8 shows the percentage increase in certain equivalent lifetime consumption
of a household which can trade equity compared to one that cannot. For our specifications with realistic age-income profiles, the ability to invest in equity increases
lifetime consumption by 2 to 3 percent. To put this number in perspective, the gains
are on the order of 40 percent in the standard Merton-Samuelson version of this
model. Why does equity ownership have so little effect on lifetime consumption in
our model? The reason is simple. In the Merton-Samuelson model, households can
borrow at the return on riskless bond (i.e., 2 percent in this model). Households can
realize arbitrarily large returns with no investment by borrowing at 2 percent and
investing in equity with an expected return of 8 percent. Crucially, they can also
use low interest unsecured borrowing to borrow against these future excess returns
and increase their current consumption accordingly. In our model, equity does afford
substantial increases in consumption; however, those increases occur late in life and
thus have a comparatively small impact on lifetime utility. This is due to the fact
that household income is low while young and it is expensive for households to borrow. Such a model with a wedge between borrowing and lending rates predict equity
holdings that are more in line with household data.

20

3.3

Effect of social security over the life-cycle for optimizing
households

Our simulations show that for optimizing households the existing social security system leads to significantly higher levels of debt, lower private savings, lower consumption and lower utility. We first discuss life-cycle aspects of social security and then
consider overall measures. The deleterious effect of social security for optimizing
households follows directly from our assumptions about borrowing. A household that
can borrow at the riskless rate can undo social security completely. For example,
as Geanakoplos, Mitchell and Zeldes (1999) point out, only a borrowing constrained
household stands to gain from investing social security in equities, since an unconstrained household would have invested the optimal amount in equity anyway.
Figure 2 shows results of our simulations with our baseline social security system.
What are the differences between the choices optimizing households with and without
social security?
First, the upper left panel of Figure 2 shows that the household with social security
accumulates significantly more debt. Initially, the differences are quite small; at age
26, social security leads to a small increase in debt. But at age 30, the household
without social security stops accumulating additional debt whereas the household
facing social security continues. The contrast is most stark at age 34: the household
with social security has more than $10,000 dollars of debt and the same household
without has none.
Why don’t households stop borrowing completely when we eliminate social security? Eliminating social security has two effects. On one hand, it increases current
income relative to retirement income, which increases saving. At the same time,
households are liberated from the internal rate of return for a large portion of their
investments. The upper left panel of Figure 3 illustrates this point. The line marked
“existing” shows the percentage of household saving (including social security wealth)
allocated to equities in the existing system – which is zero until age 40 and never exceeds 50 percent. The line marked “optimal” shows the percentage for a household

21

that faces no social security system – which equals 100 percent except for a couple of
years shortly before retirement. The change in portfolio returns tilts total household
income and induces borrowing early in life.
Second, social security depresses stock and bond holding throughout the life-cycle
but increases total saving early in the life cycle. The reduction in stock and bond
holding under a system with social security follows from the increased borrowing
documented above. Households are forced to save when they do not want to. As a
result, they borrow to increase consumption. In our model, households that borrow
never invest in bonds or stocks because the cost of borrowing always exceeds the
returns on stocks and bonds. Thus, the wealth accumulation phase of the life-cycle
only starts when the debt phase ends – and social security pushes that age back from
36 to 41 (see the upper right panel of Figure 2.) But if we include social security
wealth, the picture is quite different. Forced social security saving exceeds debt from
the beginning which means that total wealth for households with social security is
always positive (see the lower left panel of Figure 2) . By contrast, households without
social security have negative total wealth until they emerge from debt at age 35.
Third, social security depresses consumption throughout the life-cycle. As the
lower right panel of Figure 2 shows, the social security-induced consumption gap is
roughly constant at a little more than $1000 dollars until shortly before retirement.
Throughout working life, social security drives down after-tax income. Households
can (and do) borrow to make up for the forced social security, saving. But, initially,
households without social security borrow comparable amounts and don’t pay social
security yielding higher overall consumption. When households without social security start to accumulate wealth at age 35, the gap actually narrows slightly and
then widens shortly before retirement as the effects of higher investment in equities,
described above, kick in.
Overall, social security depresses consumption, increases debt, decreases saving
and decreases utility for optimizing households. Table 9 shows that on a population
weighted basis, households with social security (Panel 1) consume $2,000 less per
year on average, have $1,600 more debt and save about $40,000 less than otherwise
22

identical households that face no social security (Panel 11). Eliminating social security
raises lifetime certain equivalent consumption by 7.5 percent.

3.4

Effect of social security over the life-cycle for “rule-ofthumb” households

The top panel of Figure 4 shows that for a rule-of-thumb household, social security
provides a reasonable approximation to the optimizing portfolio rule. The dashed
line marked “income” shows pre-social security income. If there were no social security, a rule-of-thumb household would consume nothing in retirement. With our
preference specification, such a household would have infinitely negative utility – certain equivalent consumption would be zero. Social security reduces income during
a household’s working life and increases it in retirement, as show by the line market “post-SS income.” The line marked “optimal” shows the optimal consumption
of a baseline forward-looking household which does not participate in social security.
For clarity, we assume that this optimizing household does not trade equity either.
Clearly, social security generates a much better consumption stream for the rule-ofthumb household. But it still has problems. Early in life, consumption is too low; in
middle age, it is too high; and in retirement, it is too low again.

4

Alternate social security policy proposals

We consider two policy experiments. First, we take households that are already in
the social security system and have accumulated both social security wealth and
unsecured debt and we look at the benefits of using social security wealth to pay off
debt. We call this the payoff proposal. Second, we consider the whole life-cycle and
try to design a social security system that doesn’t force households to both borrow
and save at the same time. Specifically, we evaluate a proposal to exempt young
households from contributing to social security. We call this the exemption proposal.
We evaluate policy proposals using four criteria. First, does the policy proposal

23

prevent optimizing households from simultaneously borrowing and holding social security wealth – the problem with which we motivated this paper? More generally,
what happens to household consumption, saving and debt? Second, what are the welfare consequences for optimizing and rule-of-thumb households? Third, we compare
our proposals with much-discussed alternatives that seek to raise the internal rate of
return, or in our parlance, the internal lending rate. And finally, for the exemption
proposals, we ask how the proposal affects the average household net contribution to
social security.
For all our experiments, we require that the replacement rate in retirement equal
or exceed the replacement rate in the existing social security system.

4.1

The payoff proposal

According to Table 2, our average debtor household is around age 30 and has average
debt around 60 percent of income. Suppose we take such a household and assume that
they have social security wealth equal to their debt (in reality, their social security
wealth is higher). Consider the following policy proposal. Allow that 30-year-old
household to withdraw cash from social security. To make sure this is an admissible
plan, we require that the household increase its subsequent contributions from 10.6
percent of labor income to 12.8 percent of labor income which assures us that the
retirement replacement rate equals the 43 percent guaranteed by the existing system.15
This proposal is not relevant for rule-of-thumb households since in our model such
households do not accumulate debt.
How well does this payoff proposal do? First, does the payoff proposal eliminate the problem of simultaneous unsecured borrowing and social security investment
among optimizing households? The answer is not completely. The upper left panel
of Figure 5 shows debt and social security wealth with our proposal (“reduced debt”)
and without (“existing”). Household use most but not all of their social security
wealth to pay down debt. A small portion is used to finance increased consumption.
15

12.8 percent would be the tax rate necessary to pay for the withdrawal of 60 percent of income
from accumulated social security wealth to pay off existing debt.

24

To maintain the higher level of consumption, the household continues to borrow small
amounts until age 33 at which point it starts to pay off the debt. Since households
must continue to make social security contributions, our proposal does not eliminate
the problem of simultaneous debt and borrowing although it reduces it dramatically.
As discussed above, eliminating the debt allows households to save in equities earlier (and reduce debt payments) resulting in a wealth effect, which in turn causes
households to want higher consumption.
Second, the payoff proposal greatly increases utility the optimizing households.
Table 10 shows that our proposal (Panel 2) raises certain equivalent consumption
by 2.1 percent for optimizing households versus the existing social security system
(Panel 1). To put this in perspective, Panel 5 of the table shows that eliminating
social security altogether would raise certain equivalent consumption for optimizing
households by almost 10 percent.
Third, the payoff proposal compares well with alternative proposals for social
security. Panels 3 and 4 of Table 10 show the effects on utility of increasing the
internal lending rate but otherwise keeping the social security system as is. Allowing
households to use social security to pay off debt yields a welfare payoff equivalent to an
increase in the internal lending rate (ILR) of between 3 and 4 percent for an optimizing
household. For a rule-of-thumb household, an increase in the ILR generates a much
bigger increase in utility than our proposal. The difference in effects for different
types of households results from the unwillingness of rule-of-thumb households to
trade equity on their own. Optimizing households already buy some equity on their
own, so their effective “lending rate” is much higher than the return on social security.
But for rule-of-thumb households, increasing the ILR is akin to forcing them to invest
in equity with consequently large welfare improvements. We will return to this theme
in the next section when we consider our proposal for exemptions to social security
contributions.
To help illustrate the payoff proposal, we suggest an alternative interpretation.
What we are doing here is allowing household to spend money now (to pay off debt)
on condition that they pay money later in the form of increased social security con25

tributions. In other words, our household is borrowing money. Specifically, our
household borrows 60 percent of income and pays it back in 35 annual installments
each one equal to 1.7 percent of annual income – the difference between the standard
social security contribution and the one necessary to pay off the debt. It is easy to see
that the interest rate on the loan equals the ILR. But who is the household borrowing
from? One way to view it is that the household is borrowing from itself. Later on, we
will argue that the sensible interpretation is as a loan from the government but when
the internal borrowing and lending rates are the same, either interpretation is valid.
So what the household is really doing is investing social security wealth in a loan to
itself. The calculations show that reallocating a social security portfolio into loans to
oneself is equivalent to reallocating your social security portfolio into an asset that
pays a little more than 3 percent return for sure.

4.2

The exemption proposal

In this section, we propose changes in the age structure of social security contributions.
Specifically, we build on Hubbard and Judd’s idea (1987) to ameliorate the life-cycle
effects of social security by providing young households with an “exemption” from
social security contributions. Recall that we require the households increase their
contribution after the exemption expires to assure that their retirement replacement
rate equals the replacement rate in the existing system. We consider three age-based
exemptions: no contributions before age 30; no contributions before age 40; and no
contributions before age 50. As we discuss in the conclusion, the latter two policies
will require large changes in the household’s marginal tax rate after exemption expires.
Such changes in the tax structure could induce changes in household behavior which
we abstract from at this time. However, the before age 30 exemption requires very
small changes in the marginal tax rate after the age of 30. As a result, the labor
supply effects of changing tax rates after the age 30 exemption expires would be
negligible.
Again we return to the four questions posed in the beginning of this section.
First, do these policy proposals prevent households from simultaneously borrowing
26

and holding social security wealth? Yes; Figure 6 shows that all three exemption
programs ensure that households have no debt by the time they start contributing
to social security. For the age 40 and 50 exemptions, this result is not surprising.
The upper left panel of Figure 2 shows that with the current social security system,
households pay off most of their debt by age 40 anyway. But even with the age 30
exemption, households are out of debt by the time social security taxes take effect.
Optimizing households anticipate the 12.9 percent permanent drop in income that
will occur at age 30 and start saving in advance.
More broadly, the payoff proposal improves the general household balance sheet.
Table 9 shows per capita levels of of consumption, debt and savings for optimizing
households under the different exemption plans (panels 2, 3, and 4, respectively).
Panel 1 of Table 9 shows the baseline model with the existing social security system.
Panel 11 of Table 9 shows the results of the model with no social security system.
The age 30 exemption leads to an almost complete elimination of unsecured debt.
Households increase consumption and save slightly more. Why do both consumption
and saving go up? As we explained in Section 3.1, an exemption as we define it can
be interpreted as a loan: it raises income today in return for a reduction in future
income. There is, however, a key difference between an exemption and unsecured
debt in our model: instead of paying a credit card company 10 percent, an exempted
household pays the government 2 percent. Delaying contributions to social security
until later in the life cycle leads to continued increases in saving and consumption
but also to increases in debt. Why do both debt and saving go up? The longer
the exemption, the steeper the income profile when young (see the bottom panel of
Figure 4). At the same time, the longer the exemption, the bigger the discontinuous
drop in income when the exemption ends. The sharp future decline in income causes
a household to increase saving today.
Second, what happens to utility? The exemption generate substantial increases
in utility for both optimizing and rule-of-thumb households. The age 30 exemption
increases certainty equivalent consumption by roughly comparable amounts for optimizing and rule-of-thumb households – 3.4 and 3.3 percent respectively. An age 40
27

exemption helps both types of households – but the gains are bigger for the optimizing households – 5.5 percent versus 4.8 percent. And age 50 exemption generates a
large welfare gain for optimizing households – 6.7 percent of annual consumption. In
contrast, the age 50 exemption results in a small reduction in welfare for the ruleof-thumb household vis-a-vis the age 40 exemption. For the optimizing household,
the age 50 exemption reduces the burden of social security by about 90 percent (6.7
change in utility/7.5 change in utility). In the next section, we explain why the
exemptions work so well.
Third, how do the utility gains from the payoff proposal compare to gains to simply
raising the internal lending rate? For both optimizing and rule-of-thumb households,
the answer depends on whether we change contribution rates when we increase the
internal lending rate. Suppose we assume that contribution rates remain the same
as it is currently. Then for optimizing household, exemptions clearly dominate (see
panels 5, 6, and 7 of Table 9). Even an increase in the internal lending rate to 5
percent increases certain equivalent consumption by an amount less than that for the
age 30 exemption. By contrast, for rule-of-thumb households, raising the internal
lending rate is a winning proposition. Raising the ILR to 3 percent generates gains
comparable to those of the exemptions but higher ILRs lead to much larger welfare
gains (compare panel 4 of Table 9 to panel 7 of Table 9). This welfare gain for ruleof-thumb households should not be surprising. If we leave contribution rates constant
and increase ILR, replacement rates in retirement must increase dramatically. For
example, a 5 percent ILR leads to a replacement rate of 88 percent of pre-retirement
income, holding contributions constant. In that case, the decline in cash flow at the
time of retirement for rule-of-thumb households is small. Stabilizing income during
retirement has large welfare benefits for rule-of-thumb households.
Now suppose we we simultaneously lower withholding rates when we increase the
ILR so that the replacement rate in retirement remains constant at 43 percent. Now
the results are reversed. The gains to rule-of-thumb households are relatively small.
An increase of the ILR to 5 percent generates a welfare increase in between the age 30
and the age 40 exemptions. For optimizing households, however, the gains are much
28

larger: an increase in the ILR to 5 percent yields welfare increases comparable to the
age 40 exemption. Why are the effects so different? For rule-of-thumb households,
the opportunity to invest at 5 percent is extremely valuable – since they don’t invest
in equity (or in anything). But for optimizing households, even a 5 percent ILR is
still less than they get investing in equity at 8 percent.
Finally, how do our proposals affect the net household contributions to social
security. As we said in the introduction, we make no assumption here about how
social security is funded. As far as households are concerned, social security withholds
contributions and pays out benefits. But social security is basically a pay-as-you-go
system and its long run solvency depends on taking in as much in contributions
as it pays out in benefits. In other words, the solvency depends on having nonnegative net contributions. So we ask how the payoff proposal (and raising the ILR)
would affect the level of net contributions. To answer this question, we assume that
aggregate wage growth equals the baseline ILR of 2 percent. This means that if there
were no population growth, social security would always take in exactly as much in
contributions as it pays out in benefits. In addition, our exemptions should have no
effect on net contributions. In fact, given the year 2000 population distribution, our
exemptions do affect net contributions. The age 40 to age 50 group is relatively large
and so the age 30 and age 40 exemptions shift contributions to that group, which raises
net contributions. The age 50 exemption shifts contributions away from the age 40 to
50 group and reduces net contributions. In contrast, raising the ILR always leads to
a deterioration in the level of net contributions. However, proposals to raise the ILR
are always paired with proposals to generate additional income through investment in
stock. But our results on net contributions illustrate that we can generate significant
welfare improvements without investing in stock or reducing the solvency of the social
security system. In Section 4.4, we show by changing the internal borrowing rate we
improve the solvency of social security while preserving some of the welfare benefits.

29

4.3

Approximating optimal policy rules

Let’s first consider the rule-of-thumb households. First, we consider existing social
security. The top panel of Figure 4 shows that the existing social security system
lowers consumption to below the optimal level early in life and allows it to exceed the
optimal level in middle age and to fall short of the optimal level in retirement. The
bottom panel Figure 4 shows after-social security income for the three exemptions
compared to optimal consumption for a household that can’t trade equity. All three
exemptions increase consumption early in life and lower it in middle age. In each
case, the cost of the exemption is a discontinuous fall in consumption at the start of
the exemption. The cost of the discontinuity illustrates why rule-of-thumb households
prefer the age 40 to the 50 exemption in spite of the fact that from age 50 to retirement
the age 50 exemption almost exactly matches the optimal profile.
For the optimizing households, the explanation for the success of the exemptions
is more complex because social security not only interferes with savings decisions but
also with portfolio allocation decisions. We first consider the saving decision and
then the portfolio allocation decision. The top right panel of Figure 3 shows total
saving (including social security wealth) in excess of the no-social security optimum
for a baseline household under four scenarios: the existing social security system;
and social security with the three age-based exemption rules. As the picture shows,
deviations from the optimum get progressively smaller as we extend the exemption.
We note two odd features of the excess saving. First, households in all the social
security systems oversave relative to the no social security benchmark until roughly
age 60. For households in the existing social security system, this is not too puzzling
– the system forces them to save when they would actually like to borrow. But in
the age 40 and age 50 exemptions, forced saving starts after the household would
have started saving anyway. So why do they oversave even before the exemption
starts? The reason is that the exemption leads to a discontinuous but predictable
drop in income (17.9 percent for the age 40 exemption and 30.4 percent for the age
50 exemption, see Table 9). Households engage in private saving in anticipation of

30

this – which you can see in the lower panel of Figure 3, which shows what we call
excess private or non-social security saving.
The second odd feature of the life-cycle excess saving profile is that households in
all the social security systems undersave relative to the no social security benchmark
after roughly age 60. Why does this happen? The lower panel of Figure 3 shows that
private saving falls relative to the non-social security benchmark when the exemption
ends – the forced saving crowds out private saving. Since the return on private saving
is much higher than the return on forced saving, wealth accumulates much more
quickly for households that don’t have social security.
We now discuss how social security affects portfolio allocation and show that
exemptions reduce the distortions generated by social security. The upper left panel
of Figure 3 compares portfolio allocations to equities over the life cycle for the four
social security schemes and the no social security optimum. In the absence of social
security, households invest all their money in equities until quite late in the life cycle
– which we see in the line marked “optimal” in the figure. Households invest almost
all their money in equity in virtually all portfolio choice models with labor income
which follows from the fact that financial wealth is a small fraction of total wealth –
which includes human capital – until late in the life cycle. Thus households can invest
almost all their financial wealth in equity but still have relatively low exposure to it.
Under the existing social security system, equity’s share never exceeds 50 percent and
is zero for much of the life cycle. Before the age of 40, households facing the existing
social security system engage in no private saving – all their saving is forced and all
forced saving is invested at the internal lending rate – 2 percent in our case.
The top right panel of Figure 3 shows that exemptions close the gap. For the age
40 and 50 exemptions, households never invest less than 50 percent in equities and
invest 100 for much of the life cycle. Why? The basic reason is that with exemptions,
households engage in considerably more private saving. Consider first a household
with the age 30 exemption. They start saving before they reach 30 in anticipation
of a decline in income when the exemption ends. At age 30, they start dissaving to
maintain consumption, but by the age of 35, they are accumulating again and all
31

their accumulation goes into equity. Now consider a household facing an age 40 or
age 50 exemption. In both cases, they save entirely in equities in anticipation of the
exemption. Then when the exemption ends, they start to draw down their private
saving and replace it with forced saving, which they cannot invest in equities.
To quantify the effect of exemptions on optimal saving and on optimal portfolio
allocation, we conduct the following exercise. Table 11 shows the effects of exemptions
in the Hubbard-Judd scenario in which there are no risky assets. We note three
things. First, the increase in certain equivalent consumption from eliminating social
security altogether is much smaller – roughly $1,000 compared with the $1,700 in
the risky asset scenario. Second, an age 30 exemption wipes out about 70 percent of
the portfolio loss and an age 40 exemption wipes out 97 percent. By contrast, when
there are risky assets, an age 30 exemption only eliminates 45 percent of the portfolio
loss and an age 40 exemption eliminates about 70 percent. As the top right panel
of Figure 3 shows, going from the age 40 exemption to the age 50 exemption brings
portfolio allocation much closer to the optimal level.

4.4

Raising the internal borrowing rate

In Section 4.1, we characterized exemptions as loans from the government to the
household to pay the social security contribution that year. The exemptions, as
discussed in the previous two sections, implicitly assume an internal borrowing rate
(the interest rate on the loans) equal to the internal lending rate which roughly equals
the riskless lending rate. What if the government charged a higher borrowing rate?
Since households already pay 10 percent for unsecured debt as it is, why should we
require the government to charge only 2 percent?
In Table 12, we show the effects of higher borrowing rates on households when
we introduce an age 40 exemption and charge different internal borrowing rates.
According to our results, social security could charge as much as 7 percent interest and
still make both types of households better off. The main upside for social security is an
obvious increase in net contributions to social security. Using a 5 percent borrowing
rate, for example, would more than double net contributions using 2000 population
32

weights. Using 2020 population weights, a 5 percent internal borrowing rate would
turn a per capita deficit for social security into a per capita surplus.

5

Conclusion and directions for future research

In this paper, we show that the current social security system leads many households
to save at low interest rates and borrow at high interest rates. We show empirically
that simply allowing households to use the money they have paid in to the social
security system to pay off debt would allow many households to get out of debt
completely and others to dramatically reduce their exposure to high interest unsecured
debt. We then considered two policy experiments aimed at resolving this problem in
the context of a life-cycle model with both optimizing and rule-of-thumb households.
First, we considered allowing households to use the money in social security to get out
of debt. And then we considered options to change the age structure of social security
to prevent households from borrowing while they also contribute to social security.
We found that both proposals, but in particular the latter, solved the problem in
question and led to significant increases in household welfare, consumption and saving
and reductions in high-interest unsecured debt.
We showed that our options generated comparable and often higher welfare increases than popular proposals to increase the return on investment in social security.
And they do so without any major administrative change to the social security system. There are no individual accounts. There is no uncertainty about returns. And
it preserves the basic functions of social security: it does not subject rule-of-thumb
households to politically unacceptable risks.
There are, however, two limitations of our analysis with respect to optimizing
households. First, we assume exogenous labor supply. Some of our policy experiments
introduce major changes in both the level of social security taxes and the life-cycle
profile of them. For example, compared to the existing system, the age 50 exemption
leads to a significant reduction in taxes before age 50 and a huge increase in taxes
after age 50. Such a change in the tax code could lead to major changes in life cycle
33

labor supply. However, our preferred model of exempting households up to the age
of 30 (as opposed to the age 40 or age 50 exemptions) results in large welfare gains
and only requires an increase in the marginal tax rates after the age of 30 from 10.6
percent to 12.9 percent. Relative to changes in the social security tax rate observed
over the last quarter century, this change is very small and would have minimal effects
on household labor supply.
Second, we have constructed a partial equilibrium model. Obviously, if a policy
change has significant partial equilibrium effects, one would imagine that it would
have significant general equilibrium effects. Researchers have found, for example,
that investing some of the social security trust fund in equities – which we modeled
as an increase in the internal lending rate – would have significant macroeconomic
effects (see Bohn, 1999, and Diamond and Geanakoplos, 2002, for examples).
A model that incorporates both endogenous labor supply and general equilibrium
would strengthen our results significantly. However, as noted above, for one policy
proposal – the age 30 exemption – neither extension should have a sizeable effect
on our conclusions. First, the increase in withholding on labor income is very small
– from 10.6 to 12.9 percent of income, comparable in magnitude to the increase in
social security withholding that took place between 1980 and 1994. Second, Table 9
shows that an age 30 exemption has a small impact on consumption demand (a little
more than a 1 percent increase) and a small impact on saving (a little more than a 4
percent increase). The main change is a dramatic reduction in consumer unsecured
debt. Such a change could affect the wedge between borrowing and lending rates.
Analyzing the general equilibrium affects of such a policy change on consumer credit
markets would be a fruitful area for future research.

34

References
[1] Abel, Andrew B. 1986. Capital accumulation and uncertain lifetimes with adverse
selection. Econometrica 54: 1079-97.
[2] Akerlof, George. 1998. Comment. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 185189.
[3] Altig, David and Steven J. Davis. 1992. The timing of intergenerational transfers,
tax policy and aggregate saving. American Economic Review, 82:1199-1220.
[4] Bernheim, B. Douglas, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Weinberg. 2001. What accounts for the variation in retirement wealth among U.S. households? American
Economic Review, 91:832-857.
[5] Bisin, Alberto and Piero Gottardi. 1991. Competitive equilibria with asymmetric
information. Journal of Economic Theory 87:1-48.
[6] Bohn, Henning. 1999. Should the social security trust fund invest in equities?
An intergenerational welfare analysis. Review of Economic Dynamics 2:666-697.
[7] Campbell, John Y. 1999 Asset prices, consumption and the business cycle. In
Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1C. edited by John B. Taylor and Michael
Woodford. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
[8] Campbell, John Y. and Luis Viceira, 2002, Strategic Asset Allocation. New York:
Oxford University Press.
[9] Campbell, John Y., Joao Cocco, Francico Gomes and Pascal J. Maenhout. 2001.
Investing retirement wealth: a lifecycle model. In Risk Aspects of InvestmentBased Social Security Reform, edited by John Campbell and Martin Feldstein.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
[10] Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw. 1989. Consumption, income, and
interest rates: Reinterpreting the time series evidence. In NBER Macroeconomics
Annual edited by O.J. Blanchard and S. Fischer. Cambridge: MIT Press.
35

[11] Constantinides, George M., John B. Donaldson and Rajnish Mehra. 2002. Junior
can’t borrow: A new perspective on the equity premium puzzle, Quarerly Journal
of Economics, 117:269-296.
[12] Davis, Steven J., Felix Kubler and Paul S. Willen. 2003. Borrowing costs and
the demand for equity over the life-cycle. Revised version of NBER working paper 9331 available at http://gsbwww.uchicago.edu/fac/paul.willen/
research/.
[13] Diamond, Peter A. 1977. A framework for social security analysis. Journal of
Public Economics 8:275-98.
[14] Diamond, Peter A. and John Geanakoplos. 2003. Social security investment in
equities. American Economic Review 93:1047-1074.
[15] Dubey, Pradeep, John Geanakoplos and Martin Shubik. 2003 Default and punishment in general equilibrium. Yale University. Working paper.
[16] Durkin, Thomas A. 2000. Credit cards: Use and consumer attitudes. Federal
Reserve Bulletin (September):623-634.
[17] Eckstein, Zvi, Martin Eichenbaum and Dan Peled. 1985. Uncertain lifetimes and
the welfare enhancing properties of annuity markets and social security. Journal
of Public Economics 26:303-26.
[18] Feldstein, Martin. 1985. The optimal level of social security benefits. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 100:303-320.
[19] Feldstein, Martin and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2002. Social security. In Handbook
of Public Economics, vol. 4, edited by A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein. NorthHolland.
[20] Feldstein, Martin and Elena Ranguelova. 2001. Individual risk in an investmentbased social security system. American Economic Review 91:1116-1125.

36

[21] Geanakoplos, John, Olivia Mitchell and Steven Zeldes. 1999. Social security
money’s worth. In Prospects for Social Security Reform, edited by Olivia S.
Mitchell, Robert J. Myers and Howard Young. University of Pennsylvania Press.
[22] Gokhale, Jagadeesh, Laurence J. Kotlikoff and Todd Neumann. 2001. Does participating in a 401(k) raise your lifetime taxes? NBER Working paper 8341.
[23] Gomes, Francisco and Alex Michaelides. 2002. Life cycle asset allocation: A
model with borrowing constraints, uninsurable labor income risk and stockmarket participation costs. London Business School. Working Paper.
[24] Gourinchas Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan A. Parker. 2002. Consumption over the
life cycle. Econometrica 70:47-89.
[25] Gross, David and Nicholas Souleles. 2002. Do liquidity constraints and interest
rates matter for consumer behavior? Evidence from credit card data. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 117:149-85.
[26] Hubbard, R. Glenn and Kenneth L. Judd. 1987. Social security and individual welfare: Precautionary saving, borrowing constraints and the payroll tax.
American Economic Review 77:630-646.
[27] Hurst, Erik. 2003. Grasshoppers, ants and pre-retirement wealth: A test of permanent income consumers. University of Chicago working paper.
[28] Imrohoroglu, Ayse, Selahattin Imrohoroglu and Douglas Joines. 1995. A life-cycle
analysis of social security. Economic Theory VI:83-114.
[29] Imrohoroglu, Ayse, Selahattin Imrohoroglu and Douglas Joines. 2003. Time
inconsistent preferences and social security. Quarterly Journal of Economics
118:745-784.
[30] Judd, Kenneth, Felix Kubler and Karl Schmedders. 2002. Computational methods for dynamic equilibria with heterogeneous agents. In M. Dewatripont, L.

37

P. Hansen and S. J. Turnovsky, editors, Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Eighth World Congress. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
[31] Kennickell, Arthur B., Martha Starr-McCluer and Brian J. Surette. 2000. Recent
changes in U.S. family finances: Results from the 1998 Survey of Consumer
Finances Federal Reserve Bulletin 86(1): 1-29.
[32] Leimer, Dean. Cohort Specific Measures of Lifetime Net Social Security Transfers. ORS Working Paper No 59, Office of Research and Statistics, Social Security
Administration, February 1994.
[33] Scholz, John Karl, Ananth Seshadri and Surachai Khtiatrakun. 2003. Are Americans saving optimally for retirement? University of Wisconsin - Madison working
paper.
[34] Smetters, Kent and Jan Walliser. 2002. Opting out of Social Security. University
of Pennsylvania working paper.
[35] Tauchen, George and Robert Hussey. 1991. Quadrature-based methods for obtaining approximate solutions to nonlinear asset pricing models, Econometrica,
59:371-96.

38

Table 1: Summary of results. Number in box is certain equivalent lifetime consumption
measured in thousands of 1987 dollars. Percentage difference from existing is in parentheses.

Existing

No social security

Optimizing
households
Suboptimal portfolio
choice
22.2 (-0.0%)
Optimal portfolio
choice
23.9 (7.5%)

“Rule-of-thumb”
households
Reasonable pension
20.5 (0.0%)
Starvation
0.0 (-100.0%)

Age 30 exemption

23.0 (3.4%)

21.1 (3.3%)

Age 40 exemption

23.4 (5.5%)

21.4 (4.8%)

Age 50 exemption

23.7 (6.7%)

21.4 (4.6%)

Raise IRR to 4%

22.5 (1.4%)

21.9 (7.0%)

Age 40 exemption +
Raise IBR to 5%

23.0 (3.4%)

21.1 (3.0%)

Notes:
1. See Section 3 for a complete description of the model.
2. See equation (1) for the calculation of certainty-equivalent (CE) consumption. Consumption is
measured in 1987 dollars.
3. With no social security, rule-of-thumb households earn no income in retirement and thus consume
nothing. Since utility is CRRA with RRA=3, certain equivalent consumption is zero.

39

Table 2: Descriptive statistics for 1999 PSID sample, by debt holding. Notes – Sample
includes 1) all unmarried households with heads between the age of 22 and 39 and 2)
married households with heads between the age of 22 and 39 where the head also has a
complete earnings history. Head’s total social security contributions are computed by the
authors using the household heads earnings history and social security tax formulas. The
contributions are accumulated from the head’s first year in the labor force through 1998.
Household net liquid assets are defined as the sum of cash, checking and saving balances,
stocks, corporate bonds, and Treasuries less unsecured debt. Household net financial asses
are defined as the some of stocks and corporate bonds less unsecured debt. Sample is
split by households with no unsecured debt (column II) and households with some positive
amount of unsecured debt (column III). All dollar amounts are reported in 1996 dollars.

I

II
III
Sample by household
unsecured debt level
No
Positive
All
debt
debt
31.6
32.3
31.1

Variable
Age of the household head
Percent of households with...
Sex of head = Male
Race of head = Black
Married
Unsecured debt
Mean
Median
Numbers below all divided by income
Mean
Head’s total SS contributions
Median
Mean
Household unsecured debt
Median
Mean
Household total net-worth
Median
Mean
Household net liquid assets
Median
Mean
Household net financial assets
Median
Sample Size
Head’s 1998 labor income

40

IV

p-value of
difference
<0.01

0.83
0.12
0.55
0.62
33,600
27,400

0.84
0.16
0.50
–
35,400
27,400

0.83
0.09
0.58
–
32,500
27,800

0.58
<0.01
<0.01
–
<0.05
0.40

0.85
0.64
0.36
0.05
2.02
0.66
0.24
0
0.04
0
2,077

0.91
0.68
–
–
3.07
1.00
0.78
0.08
0.50
0
844

0.81
0.62
0.58
0.22
1.80
0.48
-0.08
-0.08
-0.24
-0.16
1,233

<0.01
0.02
–
–
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01

Table 3: Portfolio composition of PSID households under 40, by debt holding. “Cash”
includes cash, checking and saving accounts. For other queries, see notes to Table 2.

Variable
Owning a home
Having positive cash
Owning any stocks
Owning any bonds
Owning stocks or bonds
Owning cash, stocks or bonds
Owning a business
Having negative net worth
Having negative net liquid assets
Having negative net financial assets
Sample Size

I
II
III
IV
Sample by household
debt level
No
Positive p-value of
All
debt
debt
difference
0.44
0.44
0.44
0.81
0.83
0.74
0.89
<0.01
0.22
0.22
0.22
0.99
0.17
0.15
0.18
0.06
0.32
0.30
0.33
0.26
0.85
0.77
0.90
<0.01
0.09
0.10
0.09
0.91
0.16
0.01
0.26
<0.01
0.39
0
0.63
<0.01
0.50
0
0.82
<0.01
2,077
844
1,233

Table 4: Median ratio of net financial assets to income, by age range. See notes to Table
2.

Age range
22
25
28
31
34
37

–
–
–
–
–
–

24
27
30
33
36
39

Debt/Income by %ile
50
0.13
0.14
0.12
0.03
0.02
0.03

75
0.45
0.54
0.37
0.27
0.20
0.20

41

90
1.54
1.11
0.90
0.70
0.54
0.56

SS Wealth
/Income
0.22
0.33
0.60
0.70
1.07
1.20

Table 5: Distribution of unsecured debt to income before and after adjusting for social
security wealth. Notes – Data is from the 1999 PSID. Sample in columns I and II includes
1) all unmarried households with heads between the age of 22 and 39 and 2) married
households with heads between the age of 22 and 39 where the head also has a complete
earnings history (2,077 households). Sample in column II includes all unmarried households
with heads between the age of 22 and 39 (513 households). Social security augmented debt
is defined as unsecured debt less total accumulated social security contributions of the head.
Social security augmented debt is constructed to be non-negative. In other words, if social
security contributions exceed the household’s unsecured debt, social security augmented
debt is set equal to zero.

I

II
All
households
with debt

All
households

III
Single
households
with debt

Panel A
Percent with positive unsecured debt
0.62
1.00
1.00
Distribution of debt to income ratio
25th Percentile
0.00
0.08
0.09
th
50 Percentile
0.05
0.22
0.25
th
75 Percentile
0.29
0.53
0.60
th
90 Percentile
0.84
1.20
1.72
Mean
0.36
0.58
0.79
Panel B
Percent with positive social security augmented debt
0.17
0.28
0.31
Distribution of social security augmented debt to income ratio
25th Percentile
0
0
0
th
50 Percentile
0
0
0
75th Percentile
0
0.04
0.14
th
90 Percentile
0.33
0.74
0.97
Mean
0.19
0.32
0.50

42

Table 6: Aggregate effects of allowing households to use social security wealth to pay
off non-collateralized debt. All dollar amounts are in 1996 dollars. Data comes from the
1999 Panel Study of Income Dynamics. Debt reduction is calculated by using accumulated
social security wealth to pay off existing non-collateralized debt. Non-collateralized debt
assumes an interest rate of 10% while social security wealth assumes an interest rate of 2%.
To compute total debt reduction for the U.S. population, we use 104 million households
(Census Bureau), 36.6% of which have heads between the ages of 22 and 40 (PSID weighted
data), and 60.8% of which have non-collateralized debt (PSID weighted data).

Average debt reduction for households
with debt between the ages of 22 and 40
(1999)
Average annual interest saving resulting
from debt reduction for households with
debt between the ages of 22 and 40 (1999)
Total debt reduction for households aged
22 to 40 (1999)
Total annual interest saved by households
aged 22 to 40 (1999)

43

$6,225

$498

$144.1 billion
$11.5 billion

Table 7: Parameter Settings

Parameter
Relative risk aversion
Annual discount factor
Age of labor force entry
Age of retirement
Age of death
rL
rB
E(r̃E )
std (r̃E )
Social security parameters
Start year
Contribution rate
Internal lending rate
Internal borrowing rate

Baseline
3
0.97
21
65
80
2%
10%
8%
15%

Alternative values

21
10%
2%
2%

30,40,50
see tables
see tables
3%,4%,5%

44

0.98

Table 8: Consumption and portfolio choice for optimizing households over the life cycle as predicted by the model under various
assumptions.

#

β

Profile

22-24 25-27 28-30 31-33 34-36 37-39 22-39

Equity
benefit

0.97

Baseline

2.39

2

0.97

High
school

2.55

3

0.97

College

3.03

4

0.97

Flat

8.55

5

0.98

Baseline

3.62

45

1

Consumption
Stocks+bonds/Y
Debt/Y
SS wealth/Y
Consumption
Stocks+bonds/Y
Debt/Y
SS wealth/Y
Consumption
Stocks+bonds/Y
Debt/Y
SS wealth/Y
Consumption
Stocks+bonds/Y
Debt/Y
SS wealth/Y
Consumption
Stocks+bonds/Y
Debt/Y
SS wealth/Y

16.8
0.00
0.27
0.30
16.4
0.00
0.04
0.30
19.9
0.00
0.50
0.28
22.8
0.46
0.00
0.31
16.4
0.00
0.17
0.30

18.0
0.00
0.40
0.58
17.5
0.00
0.09
0.60
21.2
0.00
0.48
0.53
23.8
0.94
0.00
0.64
17.7
0.00
0.23
0.58

19.2
0.00
0.45
0.85
18.7
0.00
0.13
0.90
22.6
0.00
0.33
0.81
24.7
1.41
0.00
0.99
19.0
0.00
0.21
0.85

20.5
0.00
0.42
1.12
20.0
0.00
0.14
1.18
24.1
0.00
0.15
1.12
25.7
1.90
0.00
1.36
20.5
0.00
0.12
1.12

21.8
0.00
0.32
1.40
21.3
0.00
0.10
1.45
25.7
0.02
0.01
1.45
26.8
2.42
0.00
1.75
22.1
0.03
0.01
1.40

Notes:
1. All parameters are baseline (Table 7) unless otherwise indicated.
2. Consumption is measured in 1987 dollars.
3. Equity benefit measures the percentage increase in certain equivalent consumption yielded by investment in equity.

23.3
0.00
0.16
1.67
22.7
0.02
0.01
1.72
27.0
0.17
0.00
1.77
27.9
2.96
0.00
2.16
23.4
0.23
0.00
1.67

19.9
0.00
0.33
1.06
19.4
0.00
0.08
1.09
23.4
0.04
0.22
1.06
25.3
1.68
0.00
1.20
19.8
0.05
0.11
1.06

Table 9: Effects of exemptions. All amounts in thousands of 1987 dollars unless otherwise noted. See Table 10 for definitions.

#

Parameters of SS system
Start WithRepl.
ILR
age holding
rate

46

1

21

10.6

2

43

2

30

12.9

2

43

3

40

17.9

2

43

4

50

30.4

2

43

5

21

10.6

3

54

6

21

10.6

4

68

7

21

10.6

5

88

8

21

8.6

3

43

9

21

6.9

4

43

10

21

5.4

5

42

11

21

0.0

2

0

Utility
Optimizing C = Y
(∆)
(∆)
22.2
20.5
(-0.0)
(0.0)
23.0
(3.4)
23.4
(5.5)
23.7
(6.7)

21.1
(3.3)
21.4
(4.8)
21.4
(4.6)

22.3
(0.6)
22.5
(1.4)
22.7
(2.3)

21.3
(4.0)
21.9
(7.0)
22.3
(9.1)

22.7
(2.2)
23.1
(4.0)
23.4
(5.6)

20.8
(1.8)
21.1
(3.2)
21.3
(3.9)

23.9
(7.5)

0.0
(-100.0)

Population weighted per capita
Optimizing
C=Y
Net SS
Cons. Debt Saving
Cons.
contrib.
26.1

3.4

58.3

25.5

1.1

26.4

0.2

60.8

25.2

1.3

26.8

0.8

72.4

25.2

1.4

27.3

1.3

84.9

25.6

1.0

26.4

4.0

52.3

25.8

0.7

26.7

4.7

45.9

26.2

0.2

27.2

6.0

38.9

26.8

-0.5

26.7

3.4

60.2

26.0

0.6

27.2

3.4

61.9

26.5

0.1

27.5

3.5

63.5

26.9

-0.3

28.1

1.8

99.0

26.9

0.0

Table 10: The effects of allowing households to use social security wealth to pay off debt.

Age 30 wealth
#

Parameters of SS system
WithRepl.
ILR
holding
rate

Non-SS

SS

1

-0.6

0.6

10.6

2

42

2

0.0

0.0

12.8

2

43

3

-0.6

0.6

10.6

3

51

4

-0.6

0.6

10.6

4

64

5

0.0

0.0

0.0

2

0

Utility
Optimizing C = Y
(∆)
(∆)
25.3
21.9
(0.0)
(0.0)
25.9
(2.1)

22.6
(2.9)

25.6
(1.1)
25.9
(2.4)

23.4
(6.9)
24.7
(12.5)

27.7
(9.5)

0.0
(-100.0)

Notes:
1. ILR is the internal lending rate (See Section 3.1 for an explanation.)
2. Private saving equals stocks plus bonds minus debt.
3. Scenario is baseline (see Table 7).
4. Replacement rate is the annuity value of the lump-sum payment from social security as a fraction
of the top 35 years of income.
5. Utility is certain equivalent consumption (see equation (1)).
6. ∆ is difference from existing. case).

47

Table 11: Effects of exemptions. Scenario is baseline (see Table 7) except that households cannot trade equity. See Table 10 for
definitions.

#

Parameters of SS system
Start WithRepl.
ILR
age holding
rate

48

1

21

10.6

2

43

2

30

12.9

2

43

3

40

17.9

2

43

4

21

0.0

2

0

Utility
Optimizing C = Y
(∆)
(∆)
21.7
20.5
(0.0)
(0.0)
22.3
(3.1)
22.6
(4.4)

21.1
(3.3)
21.4
(4.8)

22.7
(4.5)

0.0
(-100.0)

Population weighted per capita
Optimizing
C=Y
Net SS
Cons. Debt Saving
Cons.
contrib.
24.1

5.6

66.3

25.5

1.1

24.4

0.9

65.5

25.2

1.3

24.2

2.8

61.9

25.2

1.4

24.2

3.2

77.4

26.9

0.0

Table 12: Effects of changes in the Internal Borrowing Rate (IBR) (See Section 3.1 for an explanation) for an age 40 exemption. Scenario
is baseline (see Table 7) except where noted. See Table 10 for definitions.

#

Parameters of SS system
Start WithRepl.
IBR
age holding
rate

49

1

21

10.6

2

43

2

40

17.9

2

43

3

40

21.6

4

43

4

40

24.0

5

43

5

40

26.9

6

43

6

40

30.3

7

43

7

40

34.4

8

43

8

21

0.0

2

0

Utility
Optimizing C = Y
(∆)
(∆)
22.2
20.5
(-0.0)
(0.0)
23.4
(5.5)
23.1
(4.2)
23.0
(3.4)
22.7
(2.4)
22.5
(1.2)
21.3
(-3.9)

21.4
(4.8)
21.2
(3.7)
21.1
(3.0)
20.9
(2.0)
20.6
(0.7)
20.3
(-1.0)

23.9
(7.5)

0.0
(-100.0)

Population weighted per capita
Optimizing
Net SS contrib.
C=Y
Cons. Debt Saving
2000
2020
Cons.
26.1

3.4

58.3

25.5

1.1

-0.1

26.8

0.8

72.4

25.2

1.4

0.0

26.4

0.6

74.5

24.6

2.0

0.6

26.1

0.4

76.0

24.2

2.4

1.0

25.8

0.3

78.2

23.7

2.9

1.4

25.5

0.2

81.0

23.1

3.5

2.0

25.0

0.2

84.0

22.4

4.2

2.6

28.1

1.8

99.0

26.9

0.0

0.0

Figure 1: Expected labor income profiles.

Income (thousands of 1987 $)

45
40

Grad
↓
school

35
30

College ↓

Pooled ↓

← High School

25
20

← Less than HS

15
10
20

30

40

50
Age

50

60

70

80

Figure 2: Effect of social security on various household indicators over the life cycle. Baseline specification.

Debt

[ss a 15]

18

350

← SS wealth - with SS

300

9

,000s of 1987$

12
,000s of 1987$

[ss a 17]

400

15

ւ With SS

6
3

No SS ր

250
200
150
No SS ց

100
50

տ With SS

0

51

0
20

25

30

35

40 45
Age

50

Total wealth (inc. SS)

450

55

60

65

-50

[ss a 16]

20

25

60

400

30

35

40 45 50 55
Age
Consumption [ss a 14]

60

65

50

350
300

No SS ց

40

250
200

,000s of 1987$

,000s of 1987$

Stocks and bonds

450

տ No SS

150
100

With SS ց

50

30
տ With SS
20
10

0
-50

20

30

40

50
Age

60

70

80

0

20

30

40

50
Age

60

70

80

Figure 3: Excess saving over the life cycle for various different social security schemes. Excess saving equals the difference between total
saving (including social security) under the listed scheme and total saving under the optimal scenario for the household in which there
is no social security. Age 30 refers to an exemption ending at age 30 and so on. Existing is the existing system.

Allocation to equity

120

[ss a 2]

Excess saving

50
↓ Optimal

100

30
Excess saving

20

Equity share

↓ Existing

40

← Age=40 ← Age=50

80
60

↑ Age=40

Age=30 −→

10

← Age=30

40

↑ Age=50

0

-20
-30

0
20

25

30

35

40

45
Age

50

55

60

65

-40
20

Excess private saving

50

25

30

35

40 45
Age

[ss a 3]

↓ Age=40

Age=30 ↓

← Age=50

0
Existing ↑
-50
Excess saving

52

-10

← Existing

20

[ss a 1]

-100
-150
-200
-250
20

25

30

35

40 45
Age

50

55

60

65

50

55

60

65

Figure 4: The effects of exemptions for rule-of-thumb households.

Existing social security [ss a 8]
↓ Income

40
35
30

↓ Optimal
,000s of 1987$

25
20
15

↑ Post SS income

10
5
0

20

30

40

50
Age

Exemptions

40

60

70

80

[ss a 9]

ւ Age=50

35

,000s of 1987$

30
↓ Optimal

25

տ Age=40

20

տ Age=30

15
10

20

30

40

50
Age

53

60

70

80

Figure 5: Effects of allowing households to use social security wealth to pay off debt for a household with debt equal to 60 percent of
annual income.

Debt

40

Consumption

[ss a 18]

40

[ss a 21]

30

←− SS wealth - existing

25

← SS wealth - reduced debt
,000s of 1987$

35

20
15
10

ւ Debt - existing

5

54

0
30

35

40

30
տ Existing
25
տ Reduced debt

Debt - reduced debt

20

45
50
Age

55

60

65

30

40

Rule of Thumb Consumption

40

50
[ss a 19]

35
30
,000s of 1987$

,000s of 1987$

35

տ Reduced debt
25
20

տ Existing

15
10

30

40

50

Age

60

70

80

Age

60

70

80

Figure 6: The effect of exemptions on debt and social security wealth.

Existing

50
40

[ss a 10]

[ss a 11]

40

տ SS wealth

30
,000s of 1987$

30
,000s of 1987$

Age 30

50

20
10

ւ Debt

0

տ SS wealth

20
10

↓ Debt

0

55
-10

20

25

30

35

55

60

65

-10

40

40

30

30
տ SS wealth

20
10

ւ Debt

0
-10

20

25

30

35

50

,000s of 1987$

,000s of 1987$

50

40 45 50
Age
Age 40 [ss a 12]

40 45 50
Age
Age 50 [ss a 13]

20

55

60

65

տ SS wealth

10

ւ Debt

0
20

25

30

35

40 45
Age

50

55

60

65

-10

20

25

30

35

40 45
Age

50

55

60

65

