                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             LEGAL REGIME AND BUSINESS’S ORGANIZATIONAL CHOICE:
                A COMPARISON OF FRANCE AND THE UNITED STATES
                     DURING THE MID-NINETEENTH CENTURY

                                         Naomi R. Lamoreaux
                                        Jean-Laurent Rosenthal

                                         Working Paper 10288
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10288


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2004




The authors gratefully acknowledge the research assistance of Clothilde Canavate, Mark Dincecco, and
Jennifer Wang, and the financial support of the Collins Fund, the UCLA Academic Senate, and the
Guggenheim Foundation. We have also benefited from the advice of Hongbin Cai, Tony Freyer, Robert
Gordon, Ron Harris, Timur Kuran, Gregory Mark, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, as well as the comments of
participants at seminars at the École des Hautes Études, Oxford University, Reed College, UC Berkeley,
UCLA, UC Riverside, University of Southern California, and at the annual meeting of the American
Association of Law Schools, the annual meeting of the American Society for Legal History, the Business
History Conference, and at the CEPER conference on “Understanding Financial Architecture: Corporate
Governance.” The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Legal Regime and Business’s Organizational Choice: A Comparison of France and the United
States during the Mid-Nineteenth Century
Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal
NBER Working Paper No. 10288
February 2004
JEL No. K2, N4

                                           ABSTRACT

In a recent series of articles, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and

Robert W. Vishny have argued that countries whose legal systems are based on civil law (especially

of French origin) have systematically weaker environments for business than those whose legal

systems are based on Anglo-American common law. This paper addresses that argument by

exploring the responsiveness of French and U.S. law to the needs of business enterprises during the

nineteenth century, when both countries were undergoing industrialization. We find that contracting

environment in the U.S. was in fact neither freer nor more flexible than that in France during this

critical period. Not only did U.S. law offer enterprises a more limited menu of organizational

choices, but business people in the U.S. had much less ability to adapt the basic forms to meet their

needs than their French counterparts. Nor is there any evidence that American law evolved more

readily in response to economic change than French law. In both nations, major changes in the rules

governing organizational forms required the passage of new statutes, and governmental institutions

do not seem to have worked any more expeditiously in the U.S. than in France to improve the menu

of choices. To the contrary, it was not until the late twentieth century that U.S. business obtained

much the same degree of contractual freedom that their French counterparts had long taken for

granted.

Naomi R. Lamoreaux                                    Jean-Laurent Rosenthal
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
UCLA                                                  UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue                                    405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                            Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER                                              rosenthal@econ.ucla.edu
lamoreaux@econ.ucla.edu
                                                                                                     2




  Legal Regime and Business’s Organizational Choice: A Comparison of France and the

                      United States during the Mid-Nineteenth Century



       Although there has long been widespread agreement that the effectiveness with which

property rights are specified and enforced matters a great deal for economic growth, this idea has

recently been pushed in a provocative direction by Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes,

Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny (hereafter LLSV). According to these scholars, two

alternative legal regimes—a common-law system based on judicial precedent and a civil-law

system based on formal codes—emerged in Europe during the early modern period and were

transplanted to the rest of the world through European expansionism. Reporting cross-country

regressions for the mid-1990s, LLSV argue that the type of legal regime a country adopted at

that time continues to affect its economic performance in dramatic ways. They find that

countries whose legal systems are based on civil law (especially of French origin) have

systematically weaker environments for business than those whose legal systems are based on

Anglo-American common law: Common-law countries offer external suppliers of finance,

whether shareholders or creditors, better protection than countries with legal systems based on

French civil law. Moreover, firms’ ability to finance their activities, whether measured by the

ratio of stock market capitalization or debt to GNP, appears to be superior in common-law

countries than in French civil-law countries, even controlling for the existence of protections to

debt and equity holders and the quality of law enforcement in each country (LLSV 1997, 1998,

and 1999).
                                                                                                                       3

         LLSV’s findings touched off a heated debate that was waged primarily through

alternative specifications for the cross-country regressions (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson

2001; Levine, Loayza, and Beck 2000; Mahoney 2001; Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine 2002

and 2003; Berkowitz, Pistor and Richard 2003; LLSV 2000; Botero, et al. 2002; Djankov, et al.

2003). They also gave rise to an effort to understand the apparent superiority of Anglo-

American law.1 Two main hypotheses have been offered to explain why code-based systems

might have such inimical effects on economic growth. The first emphasizes the relatively static

character of this type of legal regime. Under the Anglo-American system of common law, legal

rules can evolve in accordance with businesses’ needs. Codes, however, are revised relatively

infrequently and, as a result, their provisions are likely to become increasingly outmoded as the

economy develops (Posner 1973; Priest 1977; Rubin 1977; Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine

2002).2 The second hypothesis is that the codes were creations of highly interventionist

governments intent on consolidating their power over society. Whereas the French and German

codes were imposed by Napoleon and Bismarck respectively, English common law was shaped

by Parliament’s struggle to limit the power of the King and so was more concerned with

restraining government and protecting individual rights. LLSV favor this alternative and consider

the existence of a civil code to be a proxy for bad government in the form of “an intent to build




1
  For an excellent survey of this literature, see Beck and Levine (2003).
2
  This idea of the superior flexibility of the common law has deep roots in the literature on comparative legal
systems (see for example, Pound 1921; Stone 1936). It should be recognized, however, that some scholars have
argued for the superiority of code-based regimes (Weber 1925/1954; Horn, Kötz, and Leser 1982), others have
insisted that the differences between the two types of systems have been exaggerated or that they have diminished
over time through a process of transplantation (Watson 1974), and still others claim that law in the French colonies
was very different from that in France itself (Merryman 1996). For more comprehensive treatments of Anglo-
American versus French law, see Zweigert and Kötz 1998, and Glendon, Gordon, and Carozza 1999.
                                                                                                                  4

institutions to further the power of the State” (LLSV 1999, 231-2; Glaeser and Shleifer 2002;

Botero, et al. 2002).3

        Both these explanations emphasize the different processes by which law is created and

altered under the French and Anglo-American systems. These are topics that cross-sectional

analysis is poorly suited to investigate, so we pursue a more historical approach in this article. In

particular, we focus on France and the United States during the nineteenth century, when both

countries were undergoing industrialization, and compare the extent to which their legal systems

actually constrained businesses’ organizational choices. We also compare the facility with which

French and American legal rules evolved as the economy grew and developed.

        France is an obvious case to study as it was the main producer of the codes singled out by

LLSV for their detrimental effect on business. We study the United States, rather than Britain,

because like France it was a “follower” nation in the timing of its industrialization. Moreover,

the U.S. is a particularly appropriate case for our purposes because of its weak state, and because

its decentralized structure of government, if anything, should have increased the flexibility of the

common-law system relative to the civil-law codes that governed highly centralized France. An

additional motive for focusing on the U.S. is that the most industrial of the American states were

leaders in making corporate charters available to business enterprises, and it has generally been

assumed that this leadership role extended to other organizational forms as well.

        If legal regimes, as opposed to specific governmental policies, really mattered for

economic growth, then their effects should be observable over long periods of time. It therefore

follows that, if the Anglo-American system of common-law is intrinsically superior to French

civil law, then U.S. businesses should have faced a freer, more flexible contracting environment


3
 This hypothesis too has a history that can be traced back at least to Friedrich A. Hayek (Hayek 1960 and 1973;
North and Weingast 1989; Mahoney 2001).
                                                                                                      5

than French businesses in the nineteenth century as well as at the present time. Our research

demonstrates, however, that the U.S. contracting environment was in fact neither freer nor more

flexible than its French counterpart during this critical period of industrialization. Not only did

U.S. law offer business people a more limited menu of organizational forms but the possibilities

for adapting the basic forms to specialized needs were much greater in France than in the United

States. Nor is there any evidence that American law evolved more readily in response to

economic change than French law. On the one hand, our research suggests that the static nature

of the French legal system has been overstated in the literature. On the other, we find the

common-law to be more inherently conservative than many scholars have acknowledged. In

both nations, major changes in the menu of available organizational forms, as well as in the rules

governing these contracts, required the passage of new statutes. Although understanding the

comparative political economy of legislation is beyond the scope of this article, we show that

there is no evidence that governmental institutions in the United States worked more

expeditiously than those in France to improve the contracting environment in which businesses

operated. To the contrary, it was not until the late twentieth century that U.S. business obtained

much the same degree of contractual freedom that their French counterparts had long taken for

granted.



The Corporation and Alternative Organizational Forms

       On the surface, it might appear that mid-nineteenth-century U.S. firms had a more

favorable menu of organizational choices than French firms because they could readily adopt the

corporate form. In France, businesses could not organize as corporations without the (difficult-

to-obtain) approval of the government until 1867, and in fact only 642 corporations were
                                                                                                        6

chartered between 1807 and 1867 (Freedeman 1979 and 1993, 1-9). Although initially U.S. firms

also needed special permission (in the form of a legislative act) to organize as corporations, by

the second quarter of the century a number of states had made it easier for firms to obtain

charters, and by mid-century most of the leading industrial states had passed general

incorporation laws that routinized the entire process (Evans 1948; Hurst 1970; Maier 1993; Blair

1993). Not surprisingly, the number of corporations formed in the United States during the first

two-thirds of the nineteenth century was much greater than in France. In New England, for

example, more than 3,200 were organized between 1800 and 1843, and in excess of 3,500

between 1844 and 1862 (Kessler 1948, 46)—that is, in this region alone more than ten times as

many corporations were organized as in the whole of France over approximately the same

period.

          It has generally been thought that the limited liability associated with the corporate form

was crucial for access to broad capital markets and that the lack of a general incorporation law in

France until 1867 was an important barrier to industrialization. As a matter of fact, however,

relatively few of the manufacturing corporations chartered in the U.S. during the nineteenth

century raised funds by selling shares on the market. Although more than three thousand

industrial corporations had been chartered in New England by 1875, the Boston market quoted

stock prices for only about fifty. According to a contemporary survey of trading on the Boston

exchange, manufacturing stocks generally were held by people who did not intend to sell them.

As a result, “it was exceedingly difficult to obtain reliable quotations,” even for the region’s

largest enterprises, because the securities rarely appeared on the market “except in stray shares or

in the case of executors’ sales.” (Martin 1898, 126-32). Even fewer manufacturing stocks were

traded in New York, the nation’s primary financial market (Navin and Sears 1955; Baskin and
                                                                                                      7

Miranti 1997). As late as 1890, the Commercial and Financial Chronicle reported financial

information for only about fifteen industrial enterprises and quoted stock prices for less than half

of those.

       The difficulties that French firms faced in forming corporations were not as significant as

they are often made out to be, moreover, because the Code de Commerce offered business

people an important alternative: the société en commandite, or limited partnership. (In both

France and the United States, of course, businesses could also organize as ordinary partnerships).

A descendent of the medieval Italian commenda, the limited-partnership form was sanctioned by

Colbert’s Ordinance of 1673 and explicitly defined and regulated by Napoleon’s Code of 1807.

Sociétés en commandite (simples) consisted of one or more general partners, who managed the

firm and were unlimitedly liable for its debts, and one or more special partners, whose liabilities

were limited to their investments and who played no role in management (see Table 1). An

important advantage of the form was that it enabled the general partners to raise funds from

wealthy individuals who were not interested in participating actively in the business (Rivière,

1882, 80-81; Lyon-Cahen and Renault 1924, 112-14; Howard 1932; Houpin and Bosvieux 1935,

Vol. 1, 368; Ripert 1967, 456-58).

       These limited partnerships could take a variety of forms, and, by the third decade of the

nineteenth century, some had even begun to issue transferable shares. In 1830, a group of

disgruntled shareholders challenged the legality this practice on the grounds that it was not

explicitly permitted by the Code de Commerce. Loosely constructing the Code’s provisions,

both the Commercial Tribunal of Paris and, on appeal, the Royal Court upheld the practice. Over

the next couple of decades the number of commandites par action, as these enterprises were

called, grew rapidly until the passage of legislation in 1856 that more strictly regulated the
                                                                                                     8

issuance of shares and strengthened stockholders’ rights with respect to the managing partners

(Freedeman 1979). New legislation in 1863 permitted firms with a maximum capital of 20

million francs to organize as corporations without receiving special permission from the state.

When the 1867 general incorporation law removed the limit on capitalization, the number of

corporations (sociétés anonyme) grew rapidly. Initially, corporations seem to have reduced the

popularity of commandites simples, as well as commandites par action, but the former soon

regained its earlier position. Between 1880 and 1913, however, the growth in the number of

corporations (which now accounted for about 20 percent of new multiowner firms) came at the

expense of partnerships (see Figure 1).

       As in the case of the United States, relatively few of the new corporations chartered under

the general law (indeed, only 19 of the nearly 800 formed between 1867 and 1875) were listed

on the official exchange. Nonetheless, French firms seem to have had readier access to national

capital markets than their American counterparts. Because government approval was needed to

list a security on the Paris Bourse, the shares of many enterprises traded instead on the coulisse

(curb market). By 1875, there were frequent quotations for more than 300 enterprises (not

including banks, insurance companies, and railroads). At a time when quotations were available

for no more than a handful of industrial firms in New York and for only about 50 in Boston, at

least 208 of the firms whose securities were actively traded in Paris can be identified as

manufacturing enterprises. Many, moreover, were commandites par actions rather than

corporations (Plache 1999; Hautcoeur 1994, ch. 2).

       Although there were attempts to introduce the commandite form into the United States

during the early nineteenth century, the idea never took off. New York passed an enabling

statute in 1822, and most other states followed its example over the next decade or so. The
                                                                                                                  9

statutes, however, were much more restrictive than the provisions of the French Code. For

example, all members of a limited partnership had to sign a certificate (to be filed with a

government authority) declaring among other things the amount of their individual investment,

so there was no possibility of issuing tradable shares. Moreover, because the innovation did not

fit well with the body of common-law precedent, the courts interpreted the statutes

conservatively in ways that potentially exposed limited partners to unlimited liability. For

example, they tended to view any deviation from the declarations contained in the partnership

certificate as sufficient cause to hold all of the partners unlimitedly liable for the firm’s debts,

even partners who were innocent of error and even if the substance of the deviation was

inconsequential (Howard 1934; Lewis 1917; Warren 1929, ch. 6).4 Not surprisingly, the form

was comparatively rarely used. A sample of over 160 partnerships for which the R. G. Dun

Company collected credit information in Boston during the 1840s and early 1850s included only

two with limited partners.5 Similarly, a search by Stanley Howard of the records of five New

Jersey counties (representing about a third of the population of the state) from the 1830s until the

1930s yielded only about 140 limited partnerships (Howard 1934).

        Comprehensive data on business forms are not available for the U.S. for the nineteenth

century, but Jeremy Atack and Fred Bateman used the names of firms enumerated in the Census

of Manufactures to estimate that partnerships of all kinds accounted for nearly 90 percent of

multi-owner firms during the period 1850-1870 (Atack and Bateman 1995). In 1900, the first

year the Census recorded information on organizational form, 67 percent of all manufacturing

establishments owned by more than one person were partnerships (including limited

4
  By the end of the century, a few states (mainly in the western parts of the country) had passed legislation
protecting special partners who were not involved in the misstatement. See Gilmore 1911, 618-19.
5
  The sample consisted of every firm on the right hand page of Massachusetts, Vol. 67, that had an entry that began
before 1853. The records of the R. G. Dun Co. are located at Baker Library, Harvard University Graduate School of
Business Administration.
                                                                                                 10

partnerships) and 29 percent were corporations, with the remaining 4 percent consisting mainly

of cooperatives (U.S. Census Office 1902, 503). Economy-wide counts are not available until

after 1916, when the Internal Revenue Service began to collect the income tax. In 1920, there

were approximately 314,000 corporations in the United States compared to about 241,000

partnerships, again including limited ones. These figures likely understate the use of

partnerships because all corporations were required to file tax returns whereas partnerships only

had to file if their income exceeded the threshold for the tax (U.S. Internal Revenue Service

1922, 8-10). The number of limited partnerships, however, was clearly very small—so small that

the IRS did not bother to count them separately until 1976, at which point they constituted only

7.0 percent of all partnerships and 2.7 percent of partnerships in the manufacturing sector ((U.S.

Internal Revenue Service 1979, 408). The bottom line is that multi-owner firms in the United

States, unlike those in France, effectively had only two organizational choices during the era of

industrialization: ordinary partnerships or corporations.



Flexibility within Organizational Forms in France

       Not only did French firms have a broader range of organizational choices, they also had

considerable freedom to modify the basic forms to suit their needs. As a result, for them liability

was essentially a continuous variable rather a dichotomous choice. The French legal system

even allowed members of ordinary partnerships (sociétés en nom collectif) to limit the extent of

the risks they assumed. Business people who organized partnerships under the terms of the Code

were required to draft formal written agreements, the main details of which had to be registered

with the government and published in a newspaper of record. Because the provisions of these

agreements were public knowledge, partners had a great deal of freedom to specify the terms of
                                                                                                                   11

their relationships. Although many firms organized under the Code gave all partners equal rights

and responsibilities, others added to their agreements clauses that limited the capacity of one or

more of their members to act on behalf of the firm. So long as these clauses were published in

the requisite journal, they were enforced by the courts. If a partner who was not authorized to do

so borrowed money on behalf of the firm, the firm was not obligated to repay the debt (Lyon-

Cahen and Renault 1924; Houpin and Bosvieux 1935, Vol. 1; Merle 1998).6

         There is abundant evidence that business people took advantage of this flexibility to

control their liabilities. During the years 1832-1843, for example, 27.0 percent of the new

partnerships that published notices of their formation in the Paris newspaper of record, the

Gazette des tribunaux, delegated managerial authority to a subset of their members (see Table 2).

About the same proportion (25.0 percent) required that debt instruments be signed by more than

one member of the firm, and 7.7 percent prohibited partners from incurring any debts

whatsoever. As Table 2 indicates, moreover, the value of this flexibility appears to have

increased with the number of partners. Whereas over half of the firms (51.1 percent) with only

two partners did not in any way restrict the ownership rights of members, only 7.6 percent of the

firms with more than four partners had similarly permissive governance rules.

         The other organizational forms to which French business people had access were equally

flexible. The managing partners of a commandite, for example, could and did organize

themselves with as much diversity as if they had been members of a simple partnership (see

Table 3). For example, of the 412 commandites simples in our dataset that had multiple

managing partners, 42.7 percent imposed some kind of restriction on management, and 10.1

percent completely prevented the managing partners from borrowing, in effect requiring the


6
 Contract clauses that required partners to fulfill obligations to the firm (for example, make promised infusions of
capital) were enforceable even if they were not published.
                                                                                                                     12

approval of the silent partners for the firm to take on debt. Commandite contracts could also

require the managing partners to render accounts to the silent partners on a regular basis, and

they could require that the managing partners pay out a minimum dividend each year (generally

between 4 and 6 percent) to guarantee the silent partners at least a fixed return on their

investment. As in the case of ordinary partnerships, moreover, the value of this flexibility

appears to have increased with the size of the firm.

         There were, of course, limits to what organizers of commandites simples could do: at

least one partner had to be fully liable; shares were not tradable; and the only way to replace a

managing partner was to dissolve the firm and form a new one. The last two of these limitations

could be overcome (without giving up any of the flexibility of the societé en nom collectif or

commandite simple) by organizing the firm as a commandite par actions (see Table 4). Not only

were the shares of these ventures tradable, but shareholders could appoint a conseil de

surveillance, or supervisory committee. In some cases the conseil was simply a communication

device between managers and shareholders, but in others it acted as a board of directors whose

approval was required for important decisions, such as whether to encumber the firm. (The latter

role became more common over time, especially after an 1856 law made the creation of a conseil

mandatory).7 Shareholders of commandites par actions might also hold regular annual or

biannual meetings at which they could fire the manager or change other aspects of the

organization. Between 1832 and 1843 there were 227 shareholder meetings that resulted in

modifications to the firm. 108 of these resulted in the appointment of new managers. Organizers

could also specify which types of shareholders could attend these assemblies and what voting

7
 Unfortunately, the Code did not require firms to publish the articles of their contracts relating to internal policing.
Nonetheless, information about conseils de surveillance can be gleaned from notices of amendments to contracts for
existing commandites par action. The conseils could range in size from three to seven members; their meetings
could occur quarterly or be as frequent as once a week; their powers could be limited to auditing the books, or their
approval could be required to sell assets and/or incur debts.
                                                                                                     13

rules would be employed—that is, whether there would be one vote per share, one vote per

shareholder, or some intermediate scheme. In addition, they could require that managers pay

shareholders a minimum dividend rate before profits could be used for any other purpose.

        Abuses during the boom of the 1850s moved legislators to attempt to regulate the use of

share commandites. In so doing, they sought to balance two contradictory goals. On the one

hand, they aimed to keep limited partners out of the day-to-day affairs of the firm. On the other,

they did not wish to give insiders (the managing partners and members of the conseil)

unrestricted power to do as they pleased. The 1856 law tried to resolve this dilemma by

imposing personal liability on members of the (now mandatory) conseils if they did not perform

their duties properly (Rivière 1882, 90). This solution proved unsatisfactory, however, because

shareholders were not willing to serve on such boards if they bore personal liability (Lefebvre-

Teillard 1985). As a consequence, the general incorporation law of 1867 took a different tack. It

required shareholders to elect audit committees and allowed them to assume a more active role in

the affairs of the enterprise. At the same time, it absolved those who served on these committees

of personal liability for the firm’s obligations (Hautcoeur, 1994, 247-8).

        Under the 1867 act, firms still had considerable freedom to determine their governance

structures and how they would meet the requirements of the law. Indeed, incorporators still had

all of the choices that had been available to organizers of commandites par action, including the

ability to distinguish different types of shares, set voting rules for stockholders, determine the

timing of regular shareholders’ meetings (as well as the circumstances under which extraordinary

meetings could be called), and fix a minimum level for dividends. French business people thus

could obtain the advantages of incorporation without any significant loss of contractual

flexibility.
                                                                                                                     14


Lack of Flexibility in the United States

         Business people in the United States had much less ability than their French counterparts

to modify the basic organizational forms to meet their needs. Under Anglo-American common

law, for instance, partnerships were defined by the relationship of the parties to each other rather

than by the existence of a contract. If two or more business people agreed to share the profits

from a venture, then they were partners. There was no requirement that they enter into a formal

contract and no requirement that they notify the public of their relationship. This simple

principle had two profound consequences. First, it meant that business people could be held by a

court to be partners even if they had not entered into a partnership agreement and did not

consider themselves to have formed a firm.8 Second, because partnerships were not legal entities

under Anglo-American common law, the firm had no existence or identity that was independent

of the people who made it up. Each partner exercised full ownership rights and could enter into

debt contracts that were binding on the firm without consulting the other members. Although

business people could draw up copartnership agreements that restricted the ability of individual

partners to contract debts on behalf of the firm, these agreements were private arrangements and

not matters of public record. As a consequence, they were not legally binding with respect to

third parties who had not been given formal notice of their terms. Partners often did negotiate

such agreements, but if a member obligated the firm in violation of the partnership contract, the

other partners were likely nonetheless to be held liable for the debt (Story 1859; Warren 1929,

ch. 1). As John Marshall, Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, explained in Winship v. The

Bank of the United States (30 U.S. 529 [1831]), “The articles of copartnership are . . . rarely if


8
 This ambiguity in the law generated large amounts of litigation during the early nineteenth century, especially
during downturns, as creditors desperately sought to collect on the obligations of failed businessmen. Over time,
new legal tests evolved that reduced the risk of being held liable as a partner for contracts that were not intended to
be partnerships but involved some sharing of profits (Lamoreaux 1995).
                                                                                                                  15

ever seen, except by the partners themselves. . . . The trading world, with whom the company is

in perpetual intercourse, cannot individually examine these articles, but must trust to the general

powers contained in all partnerships.”9

         Although, in theory, a partner might seek an injunction in equity against a member of the

firm who violated a partnership agreement, such a remedy could do little more than force the

dissolution of the partnership and a settlement of accounts (Story 1859, 352). This is not to say

that such contracts were useless. At the very least, they provided written evidence of the rules to

which partners expected each other to adhere. Perhaps more important, the threat of dissolution

gave partners some ability to discipline each other’s behavior—particularly if the threat was

made by the wealthiest member or if there was a chance that dissolution would require the

liquidation of assets whose value outside the firm was much lower than within.10 Clearly,

however, this method of discipline was inferior to the ability to enforce the terms of the contracts

themselves that French businesses obtained under the Code.

         Business people in the United States could, of course, turn to the corporate form as a

remedy for the deficiencies of partnerships. Because all members of a corporation had limited

liability, stockholders did not have to negotiate special side contracts in order to protect assets

held outside the firm.11 In addition, because the corporate form concentrated managerial


9
  The courts did sanction one means of concentrating management (and the right to encumber the firm) in a
partnership: the joint stock company. Members of joint stock companies, however, were still fully liable for the
enterprises’ debts in the absence of explicit contracts with creditors to the contrary, and there was considerable
uncertainty about whether the courts would enforce all aspects of the contract (Warren 1929, 327-404; Blair 2003).
10
   The threat of dissolution, of course, could also be used by one member of a firm to hold up the others (Blair
2003), but the possibility that the threat would result in liquidation acted as a constraint because the recalcitrant
member would have to bear his or her full share of the costs of liquidating firm-specific assets (Lamoreaux 2003).
11
   The earliest corporate charters in the United States were often silent on the issue of stockholders’ liability,
creating considerable uncertainty that, by the second decade of the nineteenth century, was resolved by the courts in
favor of the presumption of limited liability. Where early charters were not silent, they sometimes explicitly denied
stockholders this privilege. Over time, however, limited liability came to be treated as a standard aspect of the
corporate form, though charters for railroads and banks might still make shareholders liable up to double the par
value of their stock (Livermore 1935; Handlin and Handlin 1945 pp. 8-17; Dodd 1954, pp. 365-437; Horwitz 1992,
p. 94; Perkins 1994, pp. 373-76). Of course, even with limited liability stockholders of small corporations often
                                                                                                                     16

authority in an elected board of directors, only those persons explicitly authorized by the board

could encumber or otherwise act on behalf of the firm. Contracts negotiated by any other

stockholder were unenforceable (Freund 1896; Blair 2004).

         At the same time as incorporation solved some of the agency problems associated with

partnerships, however, it also created new problems—problems that were potentially exacerbated

by the increasingly standardized nature of the form in the United States. During the early period

when corporate charters could be granted only by special legislative act, their terms varied

significantly from one enterprise to the next. For example, some charters allowed stockholders

one vote for each share owned, but others specified one vote per share up to some ceiling, and

some even gave each stockholder the same vote regardless of his or her holdings. As the number

of corporate charters increased, legislatures developed standard templates that made the

provisions much more uniform. The passage of general incorporation laws further reduced the

extent of variation, so that by mid century most charters specified one-vote-per-share, majority-

rule governance (Dunlavy 2004).

         This standard governance rule was a potential source of agency problems because it

weakened the position of minority shareholders and potentially subjected them to exploitation by

shareholders controlling a majority of the stock. If the majority followed policies that members

of the minority thought were wrongheaded or detrimental to their interests, in the absence of

outright fraud there was little the latter could do but grin and bear it. Minority shareholders could

not force a dissolution. Nor could they easily exit by selling their shares. Indeed, in the case of



found that they had to assume personal responsibility for their enterprises’ debts in order to secure loans at
affordable rates (Woodward 1985; Forbes 1986) Nonetheless, this attribute of incorporation did resolve to an
important degree the principal-agent problems that partners faced vis-à-vis each other by removing the possibility
that one member of a firm could unilaterally encumber the enterprise with debts which the others might have to
repay out of their own assets. In a firm with limited liability, members were responsible personally only for
obligations that they deliberately chose to assume.
                                                                                                                      17

closely held corporations, often the only buyers for their shares were the same majority

shareholders with whom they were in conflict—a situation conducive more to extortion than to

an equitable resolution of the problem (Hetherington and Dooley 1977; Hillman 1982; Dickinson

1984; Mitchell 1990; Moll 2000; Lamoreaux 2004).

         Of course, voting rules that limited the power of the majority could also cause problems

by giving minority shareholders the ability to hold up the majority (Rock and Wachter 2000;

Blair 2004), but it is not obvious that one-vote-per-share, majority-rule governance schemes are

always superior. Presumably the desirability of alternative rules would vary from one firm to the

next depending, for example, on the role played by minority shareholders in the ongoing success

of the enterprise. Where members of the minority contributed critical human capital, it might be

important to give them a voice disproportionate to their shareholdings. The competitive position

of the Edison Electric Light Company was undermined, for example, by Thomas Edison’s

dissatisfaction with the business strategy embraced by J. P. Morgan and other major

stockholders. At one point, Edison waged a costly proxy battle to wrest control of company from

Morgan, only to lose it again. Ultimately, the company’s successor, Edison General Electric,

merged with the more profitable Thomson-Houston Company to form General Electric

(McGuire, Granovetter, and Schwartz 1993; Carlson 1995).12

         Minority shareholders in corporations sometimes attempted to protect themselves by

means of side contracts. As in the case of partnerships, however, these contracts were often

unenforceable. For example, there was a high probability that agreements that required

shareholders’ unanimity (or even a super-majority vote) for corporate decisions would be

12
  Another similar episode involved the Edison United Phonograph Company. Edison had assigned his
phonographic patents to the firm in exchange for half of its stock. Later, he found himself in disagreement with the
policies pursued by the majority of the firm’s directors and was unable to persuade them to change course.
Frustrated, he sued in equity to try to force the dissolution of the firm, but the court refused to intervene (Edison v.
Edison United Phonograph Co., 52 N.J. Eq. 620 [1894]).
                                                                                                                 18

overturned (Hornstein 1950 and 1953; Cary 1953; O’Neil 1953, 1958, and 1965; Gower 1956).13

Even worse, shareholders who ignored or altered the standard governance rules in such ways

risked being held partners and thus unlimitedly liable for their firms’ debts. As New Jersey’s

Chancellor warned in 1852, if firms operating for all practical purposes as partnerships were

allowed to exercise corporate privileges like limited liability, the result would be to perpetrate “a

fraud upon the community.” In the case at issue, two shareholders held all of the stock of the

New England Manufacturing Company, excepting four shares, “which were put in the names of

four other persons, merely for the purpose of having a sufficient number of stockholders to

organize the company in the manner directed by the act of incorporation.” After incorporation,

the two major owners continued to run their business “as before . . . , by and between themselves

as individuals, the company not acting by its board.” In the Chancellor’s view, the business was

“in reality but an ordinary partnership.” Therefore, either the members of the firm “must be held

to conduct their business as a corporation, and be governed by the law of corporations,” or they

“should be liable to debts to the whole amount of their property” (Vandyke v. Brown, 8 N.J. Eq.

657 [1852]).

        Although the courts would not permit stockholders to opt out of the standard corporate

governance rules, they did usually allow stockholders to contract among themselves to exercise

their votes in particular ways.14 For example, the courts were willing to enforce agreements

among stockholders to vote for particular persons as directors or to place their stock in voting

trusts whose officers in turn would choose the directors of the firm. Thus a federal court declared


13
   The reader will note that these sources all date from the post-World War II period. Even that late there was
substantial uncertainty associated with agreements that modified the standard governance rules. See below.
14
   There were, however, some contrary decisions. See, for example, Seitz v. Michel,148 Minn. 80 (1921): “There is
much authority tending to sustain plaintiff’s contention that the owners of a majority of the stock of a corporation
may combine, either through the agency of a voting trust or by private agreement, to secure and retain control and
ensure permanency in the management of corporate affairs. There is nearly as much authority condemning all such
combinations and private arrangements as contrary to public policy.
                                                                                                    19

in 1867 that it was “unable to perceive anything . . . contrary to public policy, or anywise open to

objection” in an agreement by a group of stockholders to place their shares in an irrevocable

voting trust for a specified period of time (Brown v. Pacific Mail Steamship Co., 5 Blatchf. 525

[1867]). Similarly, an Illinois court saw nothing wrong in an agreement among a majority of the

shareholders of the Chicago Carbon and Coal Company to “determine among themselves as to

the officers and management of the company, and that if they could not agree, they would ballot

among themselves for the directors and officers, and that the majority should rule, and their vote

be cast as a unit, so as to control the election” (Faulds v. Yates, 57 Ill. 416 [1870]). As this last

example suggests, such agreements could actually worsen the situation of minority shareholders

by making it easier for a controlling group to solidify its power. Moreover, even when such

contracts were employed by the minority to protect their interests, there were limits to their

reach. Most importantly, they could not be used to bind the directors to pursue a particular set of

policies or elect specific people as officers. The courts regarded such provisions as “contrary to

public policy” and would refuse to enforce them if the directors violated their terms (Guernsey v.

Cook, 120 Mass. 501 [1876]; Cone v. Russell, N.J. Eq. 208[ 1891]; Manson v. Curtis, 223 N.Y.

313 [1918]).

       In sum, business people in the United States not only had fewer organizational choices

than their French counterparts, they also had less freedom to modify the basic forms to suit their

needs. Although they sometimes attempted to compensate for this rigidity by writing side

contracts, the case law indicates that many such agreements were often either unenforceable or

of uncertain effect. Because these kinds of contracts were private matters, we have no way of

estimating their incidence, but there is little question that there were generally an inferior means

of obtaining the flexibility that French business people obtained under the Code.
                                                                                                                20


Change over Time in Response to Industrialization

        Because French businesses had a broad range of organizational choices and could readily

modify the basic forms to suit their needs, one would not expect industrialization to have

generated much pressure for additional flexibility. Changing economic conditions and periodic

bouts of speculative excess did, however, result in repeated calls for new legislation, particularly

reforms that would protect small investors in sociétés anonymes. Some of these calls ultimately

led to the passage of statutes. For example, a reform effort that began in the mid-1880s finally

yielded an 1893 law specifying (among other provisions) that the original subscribers of a

corporation were liable for calls on capital for two years, even if they sold off their stock, and

that shares had to be fully paid in before they could be designated bearer shares. But subsequent

proposals in 1903, 1906, and 1911 failed even to get to the floor of the Chamber of Deputies for

a vote (Freedeman 1993; Lyon-Cahen and Renault 1924, 11; Houpin and Bosvieux 1935, Vol. 1,

767-68).15

        French corporations were required by law to deposit financial statements with their local

commercial tribunals. In principle, shareholders could research these statements, but the lack of

accounting standards meant that the information they contained could obscure as much as it

revealed about a company’s actual condition. Although the state increased penalties during the

1930s for firms that did not file financial statements, it made no effort to standardize accounting

practice or force firms to publicize their balance sheets. Nor did the governing authority of the

Bourse make any effort to increase transparency (Ripert 1967, Vol. 1). Not until the wholesale

15
  Sometimes, when problems developed that were not quickly resolved by new legislation, the French courts
articulated their own rules, much like common-law courts in the United States. For example, in the late nineteenth
century they determined that acts of corporations that involved fundamental departures from the terms of their
original charters required the unanimous approval of stockholders rather than the simple majorities sufficient for
minor alterations. The courts also decided what kinds of changes should be construed as fundamental, applying a
broad definition that included most mergers until new legislation in 1913 provided a narrower standard (Freedeman
1993).
                                                                                                                 21

redrafting of business law in 1966 were there substantial changes in the provision of information

to investors in sociétés anonymes. These reforms ushered in a period of convergence towards

U.S. standards of corporate governance. Indeed, the laws that created the Commission des

Operations de Bourse and required that publicly traded corporations publish financial statements

drew inspiration from the legislation that had set up the Securities and Exchange Commission

(SEC) in the mid-1930s (Merle 1998, 553).

        Business people involved in small privately held enterprises, however, received a boost in

1925, when the French government added a major new alternative to the menu of organizational

forms—the limited liability company or société à responsabilité limitée (SARL). Based on the

model of the German Gesellschaften mit beschränkter Haftung (GmbH), this option mixed

attributes of corporations and partnerships. For example, all members of an SARL had limited

liability, but the capital was not divided into tradable shares. The new form apparently served an

important economic need because businesses rapidly adopted it (see Figure 2). Despite the ready

availability of the corporate form, as late as 1920 to 1925 two-thirds of all the new multi-owner

firms formed in France were ordinary partnerships, and three-fourths had at least one liable

partner. Within a few years of the passage of the new statute, the numbers had completely

reversed. By 1927 to 1932, fully 87 percent of all new multi-owner firms were either

corporations or SARLs—that is, forms that granted all members limited liability. Moreover, of

these limited-liability firms, three quarters were organized as SARLs rather than sociétés

anonymes.16



16
  These figures come from annual issues of the Compte général de l’administration de la Justice Civile et
Commerciale and include all new multi-owner firms registered in France. The results for Paris alone are similar:
Ordinary partnerships accounted for 69 percent of new multi-owner firms in 1920-25; addition of commandites
would increase the figure to 83 percent. For 1927-32, 87 percent of firms in Paris were either corporations or SARLs
and of those 65 percent were SARLs.
                                                                                                  22

       Intriguingly, although the limited liability company was already in widespread use in

Great Britain, as well as in Germany, the 1925 law was not a response to pressure from the

French business community for access to this advantageous form. Nor was it an attempt by

progressive policy makers to copy models that had achieved desirable results elsewhere. Rather,

the statute was a consequence of France’s recovery of Alsace and Loraine after the First World

War. These departments had been part of Germany and hence governed by German law since

the Franco-Prussian War. Many businesses had organized during this period as GmbHs and did

not want to give the form up when the area returned to French control. Instead, they campaigned

for legislation that would make an equivalent form available throughout France. Despite the

measure’s subsequent popularity, the bill faced staunch opposition which delayed its passage

until 1925 (Copper-Royer, 1925, Vol. 3, 173-74; Houpin and Bosvieux 1935, Vol. 2, 752, 753 fn

1; Ripert 1968, 476-77).

       In the case of the United States, one might have expected businesses’ relative lack

contractual freedom to have generated pressures for more organizational choice, but the pace of

change was glacial until the last third of the twentieth century. Not only did the common law fail

to evolve in ways that increased the flexibility of the legal rules governing business

organizations, but at times it even functioned as a barrier to statutory reform. For example, not

only was there no change in the rule that contracts that limited the ability of one member of a

partnership to encumber the firm were not enforceable if creditors failed to receive advance

notice of the restrictions, but the weight of common-law precedent derailed an effort to draft

legislation that would have made the partnership form more flexible. During the first decade of

the twentieth century, as part of the movement to standardize legal practice across states, the

Conference on Uniform State Laws directed its Committee on Commercial Law to prepare a
                                                                                                   23

Uniform Partnership Act. The Committee commissioned two drafts: one based on common-law

precedent; and the other on the idea, central to the French Code, that partnerships were legal

entities. Because the latter statute would have required partnerships to publish notice of their

formation, it had the potential to grant American business people the same ability that their

French colleagues enjoyed to write contracts controlling the extent of their liability. At the start

of the drafting process, there was overwhelming sentiment for the French approach, but in the

end the draft based on common-law precedent prevailed. One of the primary reasons was the

growing realization that such a statute would “abolish much of our existing partnership law and

substitute in its place radically different legal principles . . .” (Lewis 1915, 172) Although

eventually a Revised Uniform Partnership Act would declare partnerships to be legal entities,

this change would not occur until 1992, and even then most states would balk at accepting it

(Hurst 1996).

       In the case of corporations, there was similarly little evolution in the courts’ attitude

toward stockholders’ agreements that altered the standard governance rules. Thus the New

Jersey Appeals Court decided a key case in 1910 on much the same grounds that the state’s

Chancellor had articulated over a half century earlier in Vandyke v. Brown. At issue was a

corporation organized by Walter M. Jackson and Horace E. Hooper to publish and distribute the

Encyclopedia Britannica. As in the earlier case, the two men had agreed between themselves to

run the business as a partnership in which all decisions were to be made by mutual assent. When

they had a falling out, Jackson sued in equity to enforce the agreement. The court turned him

down, adamantly declaring that partnerships and corporations were different legal forms and that

business people could not “Proteus-like” become “at will a co-partnership or a corporation, as

the exigencies or purposes of their joint enterprise may from time to time require.”
                                                                                                                 24

        If the parties have the rights of partners, they have the duties and liabilities

        imposed by law, and are responsible in solido to all their creditors. If they adopt

        the corporate form, with the corporate shield extended over them to protect them

        against personal liability, they cease to be partners, and have only the rights,

        duties, and obligations of stockholders (Jackson v. Hooper, 76 N.J. Eq. 592

        [1910]).

This rigid view of the rules of corporate governance persisted at least until the mid-twentieth

century. As late as 1945, for example, the New York State Court of Appeals struck down a

corporate by-law requiring stockholders’ unanimous consent for the election of directors on the

grounds that “the State, granting to individuals the privilege of limiting their individual liabilities

for business debts by forming themselves into an entity separate and distinct from the persons

who own it, demands in turn that the entity take a prescribed form and conduct itself,

procedurally, according to fixed rules” (Benintendi v. Kenton Hotel, 294 N.Y. 112 [1945]).17

        Although state legislatures passed a number of revisions to their general incorporation

laws during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the collective effect of these

changes at least through the first half of the twentieth century was to increase the power of

majority shareholders over the minority. For example, a wave of statutes enacted in the wake of

New Jersey’s permissive 1888 law typically included provisions that reduced the ability of

individual stockholders to block managerial decisions that fundamentally altered the business of

the enterprise.18 As one writer put it, the result was increasingly to place the individual


17
   Although some decisions (see, for example, Ripin v. U.S. Woven Label Co., 205 N.Y. 442 [1912]) pointed toward
a more flexible view of the statutory requirement, Clark v. Dodge, 269 N.Y. 410 (1935) was the first case to
articulate the view that a contract among stockholders that deviated from statutory norms might be upheld so long as
it “damaged nobody—not even, in any perceptible degree, the public.” See Dickinson (1984).
18
   As in France, the courts tended to hold that important changes to a corporation’s charter required stockholders’
unanimous consent. By the late nineteenth century, however, the courts increasingly were permitting firms to
liquidate and reorganize in order to bypass recalcitrant shareholders (Carney 1980).
                                                                                                 25

stockholder “in the position of holding a ‘pig-in-a-poke’”—to make him or her “more dependent

with each new statute upon the desires of the management and the majority which often is only

another name for the management” (Rutledge 1937, 312, 337; Berle and Means 1933; Dodd

1936; Dickinson 1984).

       Stockholders also found it increasingly difficult to monitor their investments. Although

some early general incorporation laws (most notably New York’s widely copied 1848 statute)

had required corporations to issue annual financial statements, reporting requirements tended to

become laxer over time. Indeed, by the turn of the century, except in the case of special types of

corporations like banks, the statutes rarely included mandates to provide information on

performance to stockholders, let alone publish balance sheets or profit and loss statements.

Stockholders generally retained a common-law right to examine their enterprise’s books, but this

right was difficult and expensive to exercise. Moreover, it did not extend to those trying to

decide whether or not to buy a firm’s stock. Not until the creation of the Securities and

Exchange Commission in the 1930s was there much in the way of government protection for

external investors, but even then the only shareholders who benefited were those putting their

money into corporations whose securities were traded publicly (Kuhn 1912; Dodd 1936; Cadman

1949; Gower 1956; Hawkins 1986; Baskin and Miranti 1997).

       The plight of minority investors in small- or medium-sized firms received scant attention

until the New York legislature responded in the late 1940s to the Benintendi decision by passing

a law allowing stockholders in close corporations to set high voting and quorum requirements for

corporate decisions (O’Neal 1978, 874). Other states, however, were much slower to take action.

North Carolina imbedded several provisions in its 1955 Business Corporation Act that were

aimed specifically at small, closely held firms, including one declaring that agreements among
                                                                                                                     26

all the shareholders of such corporations shall not, regardless of their form or purpose, “be

invalidated on the ground that [their] effect is to make the parties partners among themselves”

(O’Neil 1965). A few other states passed similar statutes over the next decade or so, after which

the trickle finally became a torrent. Around the same time states also began to pass new laws

that defined and established legal remedies for “corporate oppression” and other similar torts

(Hillman 1982; Dickinson 1984; Mitchell 1990).

         During the late 1980s, moreover, states took steps to increase the menu of organizational

choices. A first wave of statutes made possible the formation of Limited Liability Companies

(LLCs) along the lines of the French SARLs;19 a second added the option of Limited Liability

Partnerships (LLPs), making it possible for every member of an ordinary partnership to limit

their liability for the firm’s future debts simply by filing appropriate notice (Bishop 1995;

Ribstein 1996; Stover and Hamill 1999; Banoff 2002). Although these changes owed more than

anything else to attempts by firms to reduce their increasingly burdensome income tax liabilities,

the result was to expand in a sudden and dramatic way the contractual freedom of business

people in the U.S. By the start of the twenty-first century, firms could both secure limited

liability for all their members and choose among a broad range of governance structures—much

as their French counterparts had been able to do since the mid nineteenth century.




19
  A few states had earlier passed legislation to enable business people to form limited liability associations. In 1874,
for example, Pennsylvania passed a law providing for the creation of a new form of enterprise called the limited
partnership association. Michigan followed suit in 1877, New Jersey in 1880, and Ohio in 1881, but the device did
not spread beyond these four, heavily industrial states. Moreover, even in these states the form was rarely adopted,
most likely because the governance structure dictated by the legislation was highly restrictive. The statutes vested
the power to incur debts in a board that had to consist of at least three managers elected by the members of the firm.
Debts in excess of $500 required the signature of at least two managers, and there were situations in which the prior
approval of a majority of the members was required before the managers could take action. Approval of a majority
was also necessary for the transfer of shares to new members (even from decedents to heirs) and for the acquisition
of additional shares by an existing member (Schwartz 1965; Gazur and Giff 1991).
                                                                                                  27


Does Legal Regime Matter?

       Except for its reluctance to charter corporations before 1867, there is no evidence that the

centralized French state operated as more of a constraint on businesses’ organizational choices

than the decentralized American state. To the contrary, until recently French business people

had a broader menu of organizational forms from which to choose than their U.S. counterparts.

They also had much more ability to modify the basic forms to suit their needs. Although the

trend in the U.S. was toward greater contractual freedom over time, the common law played little

role in this evolution. Rather, in both countries, change came primarily through the passage of

new statutes. In some periods and for some purposes, U.S. statutes were more advantageous

than the French, but in other periods and for other purposes, French statutes had the edge.

Moreover, the trend over time was for U.S. law to converge toward the French model of

organizational choice rather than the reverse.

       Before we succumb to the temptation to trumpet the advantages of the French legal

regime over the Anglo-American system, it is instructive briefly to add the case of Great Britain

to the comparison. In some ways the situation facing British businesses in the nineteenth century

was similar to that of firms in the U.S. For example, in both countries the partnership form was

governed by the common law. Moreover, if anything, the law of partnership in Britain was more

unchanging and inflexible. Not only was there little evolution in the basic legal rules governing

partnerships, but the weight of precedent blocked the introduction of the limited partnership form

in Britain even more effectively than it did in the U.S. (Gower 1953 and 1956; Harris 2000).

       After Parliament passed a series of progressively more liberal general incorporation acts

in 1844, 1855, and 1856, firms in Britain could organize freely as corporations, just as they could

in the United States. However, corporate law in Britain, like that in France, granted companies a
                                                                                                     28

great deal of freedom to structure their governance rules to meet the needs of their members.

British company law included a model set of governance rules that was similar to the American

standard of one-vote-per-share majority rule. But the law permitted businesses to deviate from

this model by writing alternative provisions into their articles of association. Further, in 1907

(even earlier than in France), Parliament passed a statute permitting firms to organize as limited

liability companies similar to the German GmbH (Gower 1953 and 1956).

        This brief comparison adds support to the argument we have developed in this article:

that the common-law did not evolve flexibly in accordance with businesses’ needs, and that such

changes as occurred over time in the menu of organizational forms and in the degree of

contractual freedom available to businesses owed mainly to the passage of new statutes. It also

suggests that the pace and form of these statutory changes did not correspond in any readily

apparent fashion with the type of legal regime in effect in the country. Britain, like the U.S., was

a common-law country, yet where organizational choices were governed by statute, British

practice looked more like that of France than the U.S.

        How then can we understand the recent spate of cross-country regressions that associate

the French legal regime with poor economic performance? There are several possibilities. One

is that the significance of the variable for legal regime is a statistical artifact that might disappear

(or even reverse sign) when the model is properly specified and omitted variables are included

(Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2001; Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine 2003). A second is

that the French legal system may have functioned very differently in core countries like France

than in nations on the economic periphery (Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine 2002; Berkowitz,

Pistor, and Richard 2003). Yet a third possibility is that the greater contractual freedom that

businesses exercised under the French code was somehow a bad thing for economic
                                                                                                 29

development, perhaps because it increased the uncertainty that investors or creditors faced about

the nature of the businesses seeking their funds. To hold this view, however, one would have to

believe that government policies that severely restricted the freedom of private parties to contract

were prerequisites for economic success—a position that would seem to be directly counter to

spirit that inspired this literature in the first place.
                                                                                              30


                                           References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. “The Colonial Origins of

       Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review,

       91 (Dec. 2001), pp. 1369-1401.

Atack, Jeremy, and Fred Bateman. “Preliminary Data on the Spread of Organizational Forms

       Among American Manufacturing Firms in the Nineteenth Century.” Unpublished paper,

       1995.

Banoff, Barbara Ann. “Company Governance Under Florida’s Limited Liability Company Act.”

       Florida State University Law Review, 30 (Fall 2002), pp. 53-80.

Baskin, Jonathon Barron, and Paul J. Miranti, Jr. A History of Corporate Finance. New York:

       Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Beck, Thorsten, and Ross Levine. “Legal Institutions and Financial Development.” NBER

       Working Paper 10126 (2003).

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. “Law and Finance: Why Does Legal

       Origin Matter?” Unpublished paper, 2002.

_____. “Law, Endowments, and Finance.” Journal of Financial Economics, 69 (2003),

       forthcoming.

Berkowitz, Daniel, Katharina Pistor, and Jean-Francois Richard. “Economic Development,

       Legality and the Transplant Effect.” European Economic Review, 47 (Feb. 2003), pp.

       165-95.

Berle, Adolf A., Jr., and Gardiner C. Means. The Modern Corporation and Private Property.

       New York: Macmillan, 1933.
                                                                                            31

Bishop, Carter G. “Unincorporated Limited Liability Business Organizations: Limited Liability

       Companies and Partnerships.” Suffolk University Law Review, 29 (Winter 1995), pp.

       985-1058.

Blair, Margaret M. “Locking in Capital: What Corporate Law Achieved for Business Organizers

       in the 19th Century.” UCLA Law Review, 52 (2004), forthcoming.

Botero, Juan, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei

       Shleifer. “The Regulation of Labor.” Unpublished paper, 2002.

Cadman, John W., Jr. The Corporation in New Jersey: Business and Politics, 1791-1875.

       Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1949.

Carlson, W. Bernard. “The Coordination of Business Organization and Technological Innovation

       within the Firm: A Case Study of the Thomson-Houston Electric Company in the

       1880s.” In Coordination and Information: Historical Perspectives on the Organization

       of Enterprise, ed. Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Daniel M. G. Raff. Chicago: University of

       Chicago Press, 1995. Pp. 55-94.

Cary, William L. “How Illinois Corporations May Enjoy Partnership Advantages: Planning for

       the Closely Held Firm.” Northwestern University Law Review, 48 (1953), pp. 427-41.

Carney, William J. “Fundamental Corporate Changes, Minority Shareholders, and Business

       Purposes.” American Bar Foundation Research Journal, 1980 (Winter 1980), pp. 69-132.

Commercial and Financial Chronicle (1890).

Compte général de l’administration de la Justice Civile et Commerciale. Paris: imprimerie

       nationale, 1840-1913.
                                                                                              32

Copper-Royer, Édouard. Traité théorique et pratique des sociétés anonymes: suivi de formules

       annotées concernant les actes de la vie sociale. 3 vols. 3rd edn.; Paris: Marchal et

       Godde, 1925.

Dickinson, Kelvin H. “Partners in a Corporate Cloak: The Emergence and Legitimacy of the

       Incorporated Partnership.” American University Law Review, 33 (Spring 1984), pp. 559-

       600.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. “Courts.”

       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (May 2003), pp. 453-517.

Dodd, Edwin Merrick. American Business Corporations until 1860: With Special Reference to

       Massachusetts. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1954.

Dodd, E. Merrick, Jr. “Statutory Developments in Business Corporation Law, 1886-1936.”

       Harvard Law Review, 50 (Nov 1936), pp. 27-59.

Dunlavy, Colleen A. “From Citizens to Plutocrats: Nineteenth-Century Shareholder Voting

       Rights and Theories of the Corporation.” In Crossing Corporate Boundaries: History,

       Politics, and Culture, ed. Kenneth Lipartito and David B. Sicilia. New York: Oxford

       University Press, forthcoming 2004.

Evans, George Heberton, Jr. Business Incorporations in the United States, 1800-1943. New

       York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1948.

Forbes, Kevin F. “Limited Liability and the Development of the Business Corporation.”

       Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 2 (Spring 1986), pp. 163-77.

Freedeman, Charles E. Joint-Stock Enterprise in France, 1807-1867: From Privileged

       Company to Modern Corporation. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,

       1979.
                                                                                               33

_____. The Triumph of Corporate Capitalism in France, 1867-1914. Rochester, NY:

       University of Rochester Press, 1993.

Freund, Ernst. “The Legal Nature of Corporation.” Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University,

       1896.

Gazette des tribunaux: Journal de Jurisprudence et des débats judiciares. Paris: 1832-1843.

Gazur, Wayne M., and Neil M. Goff. “Assessing the Limited Liability Company.” Case Western

       Reserve Law Review, 41 (1991), pp. 387-501.

Gilmore, Eugene Allen. Handbook on the Law of Partnerships. St. Paul, Minn.: West

       Publishing, 1911.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Andrei Shleifer. “Legal Origins.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117

       (Nov. 2002), pp. 1193-229.

Glendon, Mary Ann, Michael W. Gordon, and Paolo G. Carozza. Comparative Legal Traditions

       in a Nutshell. 2nd edn.; St. Paul, Minn.: West Publishing, 1999.

Gower, L. C. B. “The English Private Company.” Law and Contemporary Problems, 18

       (Autumn 1953), pp. 534-45.

Gower, L. C. B. “Some Contrasts Between British and American Corporation Law.” Harvard

       Law Review, 69 (June 1956), pp. 1369-1402.

Handlin, Oscar, and Mary Flug Handlin. “Origins of the American Business Corporation.”

       Journal of Economic History, 5 (May 1945), pp. 1-23.

Harris, Ron. Industrializing English Law: Entrepreneurship and Business Organization, 1720-

       1844. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Hautcoeur, Pierre-Cyrille. “Le marché boursier et le financement des entreprises françaises,

       1890-1939.” Thèse de doctorat, Paris Sorbonne, 1994.
                                                                                             34

Hawkins, David F. “The Development of Modern Financial Reporting Practices among

       American Manufacturing Corporations.” In Managing Big Business: Essays from the

       Business History Review, ed. Richard S. Tedlow and Richard R. John, Jr. Boston:

       Harvard Business School Press, 1986. Pp. 166-169.

Hayek, Friedrich A. The Constitution of Liberty. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960.

Hetherington, J.A.C., and Michael P. Dooley. “Illiquidity and Exploitation: A Proposed

       Statutory Solution to the Remaining Close Corporation Problem.” Virginia Law Review,

       63 (Feb. 1977), pp. 1-62.

Hillman, Robert W. “The Dissatisfied Participant in the Solvent Business Venture: A

       Consideration of the Relative Permanence of Partnerships and Close Corporations.”

       Minnesota Law Review, 67 (Oct. 1982), pp. 1-88.

Horn, Norbert, Hein Kötz, and Hans G. Leser. German Private and Commercial Law: An

       Introduction, trans. Tony Weir. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1982.

Hornstein, George D. “Stockholders’ Agreements in the Closely Held Corporation.” Yale Law

       Journal, 59 (May 1950), pp. 1040-56.

_____. “Judicial Tolerance of the Incorporated Partnership.” Law and Contemporary Problems,

       18 (Autumn 1953), pp. 435-50.

Horwitz, Morton J. The Transformation of American Law, 1870-1960: The Crisis of Legal

       Orthodoxy. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.

Houpin, C., and H. Bosvieux. Traité général, théorique et pratique des sociétés civiles et

       commerciales et des associations, avec formules. 2 vols. Paris: Administration du Journal

       des notaires et des avocats, 1935.
                                                                                              35

Howard, Stanley E. “Business Partnerships in France Before 1807.” Accounting Review, 7 (Dec.

       1932), pp. 242-57.

_____. “The Limited Partnership in New Jersey.” Journal of Business of the University of

       Chicago, 7 (Oct. 1934), pp. 296-317.

Hurst, James Willard. The Legitimacy of the Business Corporation in the Law of the United

       States, 1780-1970. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1970.

Hurst, Thomas R. “Will the Revised Uniform Partnership Act (1994) Ever Be Uniformly

       Adopted?” Florida Law Review, 46 (Sept. 1996), pp. 575-89.

Kessler, William C. “Incorporation in New England: A Statistical Study, 1800-1875.” Journal

       of Economic History, 8 (May 1948), pp. 43-62.

Kuhn, Arthur K. A Comparative Study of the Law of Corporations with Particular Reference to

       the Protection of Creditors and Shareholders. New York, 1912.

Lamoreaux, Naomi R. “Constructing Firms: Partnerships and Alternative Contractual

       Arrangements in Early-Nineteenth-Century American Business.” Business and Economic

       History, 24 (Winter 1995), pp. 43-71.

_____. “Partnerships, Corporations, and the Limits on Contractual Freedom in U.S. History: An

       Essay in Economics, Law, and Culture.” In Crossing Corporate Boundaries: History,

       Politics, and Culture, ed. Kenneth Lipartito and David B. Sicilia. New York: Oxford

       University Press, forthcoming 2004.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. “Legal

       Determinants of External Finance.” Journal of Finance, 52 (July 1997), pp. 1131-50.

_____. “Law and Finance.” Journal of Political Economy, 106 (Dec. 1998), pp. 1113-55.
                                                                                               36

_____. “The Quality of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15

       (March 1999), pp. 222-79.

_____. “Investor Protection and Corporate Governance.” Journal of Financial Economics, 58

       (2000), pp. 3-27.

Lefebvre-Teillard, Anne. La société anonyme au XIXe siècle: du Code de commerce à la loi de

       1867, histoire d'un instrument juridique du développement capitaliste. Paris: Presses

       universitaires de France, 1985.

Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza, and Thorsten Beck. “Financial Intermediation and Growth:

       Causality and Causes.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46 (Aug. 2000), pp. 31-77.

Lewis, William Draper. “The Uniform Partnership Act—A Reply to Mr. Crane’s Criticism.”

       Harvard Law Review, 29 (Dec. 1915), pp. 158-92.

_____. “The Uniform Limited Partnership Act.” University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 65

       (June 1917), pp. 715-31.

Livermore, Shaw. “Unlimited Liability in Early American Corporations.” Journal of Political

       Economy, 43 (Oct. 1935), pp. 674-87.

Lyon-Cahen, Ch., and L. Renault. Manuel de droit commercial. Paris: Librairie Générale de

       Droit et Jurisprudence, 1924.

Mahoney, Paul G. “The Common Law and Economic Growth: Hayek Might be Right.”

       Journal of Legal Studies, 30 (June 2001), pp. 503-25.

Maier, Pauline. “The Revolutionary Origins of the American Corporation.” William and Mary

       Quarterly, 50 (Jan. 1993), pp. 51-84.

Martin, Joseph G. A Century of Finance: Martin's History of the Boston Stock and Money

       Markets. Boston, 1898 [privately printed].
                                                                                             37

McGuire, Patrick, Mark Granovetter, and Michael Schwartz. “Thomas Edison and the Social

       Construction of the Early Electricity Industry in America.” In Explorations in Economic

       Sociology, ed. Richard Swedberg. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1993. Pp. 213-

       46.

Merle, Philippe. Droit Commercial: Societés Commerciales. 6th edn., Paris: Dalloz, 1998.

Merryman, John Henry. “The French Deviation.” American Journal of Comparative Law, 44

       (Winter 1996), pp. 109-19.

Mitchell, Lawrence E. “The Death of Fiduciary Duty in Close Corporations” University of

       Pennsylvania Law Review, 138 (June 1990), pp. 1675-31.

Moll, Douglas K. “Shareholder Oppression in Close Corporations: The Unanswered Question

       of Perspective.” Vanderbilt Law Review, 53 (April 2000), pp. 749-827.

Navin, Thomas R., and Marian V. Sears. “The Rise of a Market for Industrial Stocks, 1887-

       1902.” Business History Review, 29 (June 1955), pp. 105-38.

North, Douglass C., and Barry R. Weingast. “Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of

       Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England.” Journal of

       Economic History, 49 (Dec. 1989), pp. 803-32.

O’Neal, F. Hodge. “Giving Shareholders Power to Veto Corporate Decisions: Use of Special

       Charter and By-Law Provisions.” Law and Contemporary Problems, 18 (Autumn 1953),

       pp. 451-72.

O’Neal, F. Hodge. Close Corporations: Law and Practice. Chicago: Callaghan & Co., 1958.

       2 vols.

_____. “Developments in the Regulation of the Close Corporation.” Cornell Law Quarterly, 50

       (Summer 1965), pp. 641-62.
                                                                                                 38

O’Neal, F. Hodge. “Close Corporations: Existing Legislation and Recommended Reform.” The

       Business Lawyer, 33 (Jan. 1978), pp. 873-88.

Perkins, Edwin J. American Public Finance and Financial Services, 1700-1815. Columbus:

       Ohio State University Press, 1994.

Plache, Lacey. “Financial Institutions, Government Policy and Industrialization: The

       Development of the French Stock Market, 1852-1875.” Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,

       University of California, Los Angeles, 1999.

Posner, Richard A. Economic Analysis of the Law. Boston, Mass.: Little-Brown, 1973.

Pound, Roscoe. The Spirit of the Common Law. Boston, Mass.: Marshall Jones, 1921.

Priest, George L. “The Common Law Process and the Selection of Efficient Rules.” Journal of

       Legal Studies, 6 (Jan. 1977), pp. 65-82.

Ribstein, Larry E. “Possible Futures for Unincorporated Firms.” University of Cincinnati Law

       Review, 64 (Winter 1996), pp. 319-68.

Ripert, Georges Traité élémentaire de droit commercial. Paris : Librairie Générale de Droit et

       Jurisprudence, 1968.

Rivière, H. F. Répétitions écrites sur le code de Commerce. 8th edn.; Paris: A. Maresq, 1882.

Rock, Edward B., and Michael L. Wachter. “Waiting for the Omelet to Set: Match-Specific

       Assets and Minority Oppression in Close Corporations.” In Concentrated Corporate

       Ownership, ed. Randall K. Morck. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000. Pp. 201-

       42.

Rubin, Paul H. “Why is the Common Law Efficient?” Journal of Legal Studies, 6 (Jan. 1977),

       pp. 51-63.
                                                                                              39

Rutledge, Wiley B., Jr. “Significant Trends in Modern Incorporation Statutes.” Washington

       University Law Review, 22 (April 1937), pp. 305-43.

Schwartz, Edward R. “The Limited Partnership Association—An Alternative to the Corporation

       for the Small Business with ‘Control’ Problems?” Rutgers Law Review, 20 (1965), pp.

       29-88.

Stone, Harlan F. “The Common Law in the United States.” Harvard Law Review, 50 (Nov.

       1936), pp. 4-26.

Story, Joseph. Commentaries on the Law of Partnership, as a Branch of Commercial and

       Maritime Jurisprudence with Occasional Illustrations from the Civil and Foreign Law.

       5th edn.; Boston: Little, Brown, 1859.

Stover, Fallany O., and Susan Pace Hamill. “The LLC Versus LLP Conundrum: Advice for

       Businesses Contemplating the Choice.” Alabama Law Review, 50 (Spring 1999), pp.

       813-47.

U.S., Census Office. Twelfth Census: Manufacturers. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Office,

       1902, Vol. 7.

U.S., Internal Revenue Service. Statistics of Income—1920. Washington, DC: Government

       Printing Office, 1922.

U.S., Internal Revenue Service, Statistics of Income—1976: Business Income Tax Return.

       Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1979.

Warren, Edward H. Corporate Advantages without Incorporation. New York: Baker, Voorhis

       & Co., 1929.

Watson, Alan., Legal Transplants: An Approach to Comparative Law. Edinburgh, Scottish

       Academic Press,1974.
                                                                                           40

Weber, Max. On Law in Economy and Society, ed. Max Rheinstein and trans. Edward Shils and

       Rheinstein. Trans. of 1925 edn; Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1954.

Woodward, Susan E. “Limited Liability in the Theory of the Firm.” Journal of Institutional and

       Theoretical Economics, 141 (Dec. 1985), pp. 601-11.

Zwiegart, Konrad, and Hein Kötz. Introduction to Comparative Law, trans. Tony Weir. 3rd edn.,

       rev.; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
                                                                                                41



                                           Table 1

                       Availability of the Basic Forms of Organization
                               in the United States and France


                                                                            Available in
Type of form                 Definition of form                        U.S.?         France?

Ordinary partnership         Two or more partners, all                 Yes            Yes
(société en nom              unlimitedly liable
collectif)


Limited partnership          One or more general partners with         Yes, but       Yes
(commandite simple)          unlimited liability and one or more       provisions
                             special partners who cannot               less
                             participate in management but who         attractive
                             have limited liability


Limited partnership with     Same as above, except special             No             Yes
shares (commandite par       partners’ shares can be bought and
action)                      sold


Limited liability            All members have limited liability,       Not until the After
company (société à           but their shares are not tradable         late 1980s    1925
responsabilité limitée)


Corporation (société         All members have unlimited                Yes after      Yes
anonyme)                     liability and their shares are tradable   c1850,         after
                                                                       increasingly   1867,
                                                                       before then    limited
                                                                                      before
                                                                                      then
                                                                                               42



                                              Table 2

               Restrictions on the Activities of Members of Ordinary Partnerships


                                      Joint
                                    Signature
                       Firm        Required to                     Partnerships
    Number of         Cannot       Encumber         Delegated        Without
     Partners         Borrow        the Firm       Management      Restrictions      Total

                                                 Number of Firms

           2            238            905              755          1847           3617

           3             61            180              305             228          685

           4             31             31              104              42          168

        >4               18             20               65               6           73

       Total            277            982              971          1872           3879

                                              Percentage of Row Total

           2            6.6            25.0             20.9            51.1

           3            8.9            26.3             44.5            33.3

           4           18.5            18.5             61.9            25.0

        >4             22.8            25.3             82.3            7.6

   Total                7.7            25.0             27.0            46.7


Source: Notices of new firms published in the Gazette des tribunaux from 1 January 1832
through 31 December 1843.

Note: “Cannot borrow” refers to partnership contracts that required all business to be on a cash
basis. “Joint signature” contracts required more than one partner (though not necessarily all) to
sign any debt instrument. “Delegated management” contracts gave a subset of partners the right
to manage the firm on a day-to-day basis and could occur with either (or none) of the previous
clauses. “Without restrictions” means that each partner had full ownership rights.
                                                                                            43



                                               Table 3

             Restrictions on the Activities of General Partners in Commandites Simples


                                       Joint
                                     Signature
    Number of           Firm        Required to                     Partnerships
     General           Cannot       Encumber        Delegated         Without
     Partners          Borrow        the Firm      Management       Restrictions    Total

                                                  Number of Firms

         1               113              --               --          642          755

         2                37             38               72           213          347

         3                  5             9               16            25           50

        >3                  3             2               10              3          15

       Total             158             49               98           806         1081

                                      Percentage of Row Total—All Firms

                         13.0           4.7               8.4          76.0

                     Percentage of Row Total—Firms With More Than One General Partner

                         10.1          11.8              23.7          58.3


Sources and Notes: See Table 2.
                                                                                          44



                                            Table 4

         Restrictions on the Activities of General Partners in Commandites par Action


                                     Joint
                                   Signature
    Number of        Firm         Required to                     Partnerships
     General        Cannot        Encumber        Delegated         Without
     Partners       Borrow         the Firm      Management       Restrictions    Total

                                                Number of Firms

         1             262             9                --           869         1142

         2              87            48               117           204          429

        >2              42            41               85             48          170

       Total           391            98              203           1121         1740

                                    Percentage of Row Total—All Firms

                      22.5            5.6             11.6           64.4

                   Percentage of Row Total—Firms With More Than One General Partner

                      21.5          14.9              33.7           42.1


Sources and Notes: See Table 2.
                                                                                                                                                                                    45




                       Figure 1: Distributions of New Multi-Owner Firms in France
                                                1840-1913
  8000

                          Cooperatives and others
  7000                    Corporations
                          Share Commandites
  6000                    Commandites Simples
                          Partnerships

  5000



  4000



  3000



  2000



  1000



     0
         1840
                1843
                       1846
                              1849
                                     1852
                                            1855
                                                   1858
                                                          1861
                                                                 1864
                                                                        1867
                                                                               1870
                                                                                      1873
                                                                                             1876
                                                                                                    1879
                                                                                                           1882
                                                                                                                  1885
                                                                                                                         1888
                                                                                                                                1891
                                                                                                                                       1894
                                                                                                                                              1897
                                                                                                                                                     1900
                                                                                                                                                            1903
                                                                                                                                                                   1906
                                                                                                                                                                          1909
                                                                                                                                                                                 1912

Source: Annual issues of the Compte général de l’administration de la justice civile et
   commerciale.
                                                                                                                                                               46




            Figure 2: Distribution of New Multiowner Firms in France 1919-1980
     100%


                                                              SARL
      80%
                                                              Cooperatives and others
                                                              Corporations
      60%                                                     Commandites Simples
                                                              Partnerships

      40%




      20%



       0%
            1919
                   1922
                          1925
                                 1928
                                        1931
                                               1934
                                                      1937
                                                             1940
                                                                    1943
                                                                           1946
                                                                                  1949
                                                                                         1952
                                                                                                1955
                                                                                                       1958
                                                                                                              1961
                                                                                                                     1964
                                                                                                                            1967
                                                                                                                                   1970
                                                                                                                                          1973
                                                                                                                                                 1976
                                                                                                                                                        1979
Source: Annual issues of the Compte général de l’administration de la justice civile et
   commerciale.
