NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AGGREGATE SUPPLY AND POTENTIAL OUTPUT
Assaf Razin
Working Paper 10294
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10294
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2004

The paper was written while Assaf Razin was a visiting scholar in the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary
Research. The Institute’s hospitaly is acknowledged. I am grateful for Lars Svensson for insightful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Assaf Razin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Aggregate Supply and Potential Output
Assaf Razin
NBER Working Paper No. 10294
February 2004
JEL No. E1, E12, E60
ABSTRACT
The New-Keynesian aggregate supply derives from micro-foundations an inflation-dynamics model
very much like the tradition in the monetary literature. Inflation is primarily affected by: (i)
economic slack; (ii) expectations; (iii) supply shocks; and (iv) inflation persistence. This paper
extends the New Keynesian aggregate supply relationship to include also fluctuations in potential
output, as an additional determinant of the relationship. Implications for monetary rules and to the
estimation of the Phillips curve are pointed out.
Assaf Razin
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and NBER
razin@post.tau.ac.il

1.

Introduction
The New Keynsian aggregate supply relationship typically links inflation surprises

with fluctuations in the output gap, but there is no independent role for the fluctuations in
potential output. Based on such construct, micro-based monetary rules do not have the
potential output as target; the monetary rules’ targets are exclusively inflation rates and
output gaps.
Another branch in the inflation literature is concerned with the long-term level of
potential output. The literature points out to the long run costs of inflation, based on some
cross-country evidence. Findings point to some threshold effects in the relationship between
inflation and growth. Consequently, above certain country-specific inflation thresholds,
growth is negatively affected by mean inflation. [e.g., see Barro (1995) and Khan and
Senhadji (2001)]. However, this long run channel through which monetary policy affect
potential output is not considered in this paper. Rather, the paper demonstrates how to bring
the potential output into the aggregate supply relationship, by incorporating the effects of
investment in capacity on aggregate supply.
The analysis is conducted in an optimization-based “New Keynesian” framework,
a la Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987), employing the analytical tools in the lucid exposition of
Woodford (2003). Specifically, the model features imperfect competition in the product
market, in which the producers mark up output prices over marginal costs, and also mark
down wages below the marginal productivity of labor. We thus derive a version of the Markups of prices over wages in our model which turn out to be counter-cyclical – a very
pronounced phenomenon in the European markets, as noted by Cohen and Farhi (2001).
They note that “European firms in bad times manage to keep the prices high, while their US
counterparts are pressed into cuts and discounts of various forms.” This is why the product
market version of the Phillips curve (i.e., the relation between inflation and the output gap),
in Europe, seems to be relatively more stable empirically than the labor market version (i.e.,
the relation between wage growth and unemployment).

2

Evidently, the equilibrium relation between inflation and excess capacity is
significantly influenced by the degree of competition in the product market. A key feature of
such an equilibrium is the degree of strategic interactions between firms that set their prices
ex ante and other domestic and foreign firms that set their prices so as to clear the markets ex
post. This market-organization feature determines in turn the degree of price stickiness.
Understanding why nominal changes have real consequences (why a short run
aggregate supply relationship exists) has long been a central concern of macroeconomic
research. Lucas (1973) proposes a model in which the effect arises because agents in the
economy are unable to distinguish perfectly between aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks. He
tests this model at the aggregate level by showing that the Phillips curve is steeper in
countries with more variable aggregate maximal demand. Following Lucas, Ball, Mankiw,
and Romer (1988) show that sticky-price Keynesian models predict that the Phillips curve
should be steeper in countries with higher average rates of inflation and that this prediction
too receives empirical support. Loungani, Razin, and Yuen (2001), and Razin and Yuen
(2001) show that both Lucas’s and Ball-Mankiw-Romer’s estimates of the Phillips curve
slope depend on the degree of capital account restrictions.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 lays out the NewKeynesian analytical framework.

Section 3 derives the aggregate supply relationship.

Section 4 concludes with implications of the aggregate supply relationship to optimising
monetary rules, and to the empirical literature.

2

The Analytical Framework

Consider a closed economy with a representative household that is endowed with a
continuum of goods-specific skills – uniformly distributed on the unit interval [0, 1] – to be
supplied to a differentiated product industry. As a consumer, the representative household
has access to consumption of both domestic goods (distributed on [0, 1]). The household
seeks to maximize a discounted sum of expected utilities:

3

[

∞

]

E t ∑ β s −t u (C s ; ξ s ) − ∫ 10 (v(hs ( j ); ξ s )dj + φ ( M s / P ) ,
s =t

where β is the subjective discount factor, C is the Dixit-Stiglitz (1977) index of household
consumption, P the Dixit-Stiglitz price index, M/P the demand for real balances, ξ a
preference shock, and h(j) the supply of type-j labor to the production of good of variety j.
As usual, we define the consumption index and its corresponding price index respectively as
θ
θ −1  θ −1
,
θ dj 


C t =  ∫ ct ( j )
0
1



and

1

1
1−θ

Pt = ∫ pt ( j )1−θ dj 

0

(1)

,

where c(j) represents domestic consumption of the jth good, and p(j) the domestic-currency
price of c(j). The elasticity of substitution among the different goods is θ>1 and the number
of goods that are produced is equal to 1.
For our purpose, the relevant utility-maximizing conditions include an intra-temporal
condition for the choice of labor supply of type j:

vh (ht ( j );ξ t ) wt ( j )
=
uc (Ct ;ξ t )
Pt

(2)

and an inter-temporal condition for the consumption-saving choice:

u c (Ct ;ξ t )
= β (1 + rt ),
u c (Ct +1 ;ξ t +1 )

(3)

4

whre rt is the real rate of interest in period. As in the Dixit-Stiglitz (1977) model, demand for
good j satisfies
 p ( j)
y ( j ) = Yt  t 
 Pt 

−θ

(4)

The production function assumes the form
y t ( j ) = k t ( j ) f [ At ht ( j ) / k t ( j )],

where At is a random labor-augmenting productivity shock. We follow Woodford (2003,
chapter 5) and assume (for tractability) that there is a separate capital stock, kt(j), for each
good, rather than a single rental market for capital services that each producer has access to.
Investment spending is in the amount

I t ( j ) = I [k t +1 ( j ) / k t ( j )]k t ( j ),
where the function I[⋅] is a convex function, as in the standard investment cost-of-adjustment
textbooks.
It(j) represents purchases by producer j of a Dixit-Stiglitz composite good:
θ

θ −1  θ −1
1
I t ( j ) =  ∫ I ti ( j ) θ di  ,θ > 1
0


For simplicity, the elasticity of substitution, θ is the same as in the case of consumption
purchases. The variable cost of supplying yt(j) is wt f −1[ yt ( j ) / kt ( j )] ,
which implies a (real) marginal cost of

st ( j ) =

Pt At f

1

[f

wt ( j )
−1

( yt ( j ) / k t ( j ))]

.

5

By using equation (2), we can replace the real wage above by the marginal rate of
substitution. Imposing symmetry across firms (so that we can drop the index j), the above
equation can be rewritten as


k
v h  f −1 ( y t / k t ) t ; ζ 
At 

s(k , y, C ; ξ , A) =
1
−1
u c (C t ; ξ ) At f f ( y t / k t )

[

2.1

]

(5)

Price Setting

Firms are monopolistically competitive in the goods markets, and each one of them behaves
like a monopson in the labor market (with producer j as the sole demander for labor of typej). A fraction γ of the monopolistically competitive firms sets their prices flexibly at p1t,
supplying y1t; whereas the remaining fraction 1 - γ sets their prices one period in advance (in
period t – 1) at p2t, supplying y2t. In the former case, the price is marked up above the

 θ

marginal cost by a factor of µ = 
> 1 , so that
θ −1 

p1t
− µs (k t , y1t , Y − I t ; ξ t , At ) = 0.
Pt

(6a)

In the latter case, p2t will be chosen to maximize expected discounted profit

 1 

( p 2t y 2t − wt ht ) = E t −1  1 [Yt Ptθ p12−t θ − wt f −1 (Yt Ptθ p θ2t / k t )],
Et 



 1 + it −1 
 1 + it −1 

where we have used the inverse demand function from equation (4) for y2t and the inverse
production function for ht. One can show that p2t satisfies
 1  θ −1 p2t

Yt Pt  − µs(kt , y2t , Yt − It , ξt , At ) = 0
Et −1
 Pt

1+ it −1 

6

(6b)

This condition has an intuitive interpretation. In the special case of perfect certainty, this is
nothing but a standard equation describing price as a mark-up over marginal cost like
equation (6a). With uncertainty, it can be interpreted as a weighted average of price markups over marginal cost. This expected value is equal to zero. With price-pre-setting, the firm
is committed to supply according to the realized demand. Hence, the realization of shocks
will affect actual output, with negative shocks leading to excess capacity and positive shocks
to over-capacity.1

Our model predicts that the mark-ups of the producers who pre-set their prices will be
counter-cyclical. Negative demand shocks will induce the flex-price firms to adjust their
prices downward, attracting demand away from, and thus lowering the marginal costs and
jacking up the price mark-ups, of fix-price firms.
Given p1t and p2t, the aggregate price index in equation (1) can be rewritten as:

[

p11t−θ

Pt = γ

2.2

+ (1 − γ )

]

1
1−θ 1−θ
p 2t

.

(1’)

The Labor Market

The market for each type of goods-specific skill of labor service is characterized by workers
as wage-takers and producers as wage-makers, as in the monopsony case. Figure 1 describes
equilibrium in one such market. The downward-sloping, marginal-productivity curve, is the
demand for labor. Supply of labor, Sh, is implicitly determined by the utility-maximizing
condition for h, i.e., see equation (2). The upward-sloping marginal factor cost curve is the
marginal cost change from the producer point of view. It lies above the supply curve because,
1

Woodford (2003) assumes the Calvo price-setting framework. He derives a aggregate supply block,
consisting with multiple dynamic equations. Our assumed price setting framework yields a singleequation aggregate supply relationship. This simple form focuses attention on the coefficient of the
potential output variable in the aggregate supply relationship.

7

in order to elicit more hours of work, the producer has to offer a higher wage not only to that
(marginal) hour but also to all the (inra-marginal) existing hours. Equilibrium employment
occurs at a point where the marginal factor costs is equal to the marginal productivity.
Equilibrium wage is given by B, with the worker'’ real wage marked down below her
marginal product by a distance AB.2
Full employment obtains because workers are offered a wage according to their supply
schedule. This is why our Phillips curve will be stated in terms of excess capacity (product
market version) rather than unemployment (labor market version).
In fact, the model can also accommodate unemployment by introducing a labor union, which
has monopoly power to bargain on behalf of the workers with the monopsonistic firms over
the equilibrium wage. In such case, the equilibrium wage will lie somewhere between Sh and
M Ph, and unemployment can arise – so that the labor market version of the Phillips curve

can be derived as well. To simplify the analysis, we assume in this paper that the workers are
wage-takers.

2

In the limiting case where the producers behave perfectly competitive in the labor market, the real wage
becomes equal to the marginal productivity of labor and the marginal cost of labor curve is not sensitive to
output changes. Thus, with a constant mark-up
exists between inflation and excess capacity.

8

θ
, the Phillips curve becomes flat, i.e., no relation
θ −1

W/P

Figure 1: Labor Market
Equilibrium
Marginal Factor Cost

Labor Supply

Mark
Down
Marginal Productivity
h

2.3

Investment

Profit maximization by producer j yields a first-order condition for investment
,
1 Pt +1
I ' [k t +1 ( j ) / k t ( j )] = E t (
)
{q t +1 ( j ) + (k t + 2 ( j ) / k t +1 ( j )) I ' [k t + 2 ( j ) / k t +1 ( j )] − I [k t + 2 ( j ) / k t +1 ( j )]}
1 + it Pt
where, q is the shadow value (because there is not any rental market) of an additional unit of
capital.3 It is written in a Bellman-like equation as follows.
 f ( At ht ( j ) / kt ( j ) − ( At ht ( j ) / (kt ( j ) )) − ( At ht ( j ) / kt ( j ) )) 

qt ( j ) = wt ( j )
At f ′( At ht ( j ) / kt ( j ) )



(7)

Note that if a rental market were to exist, qt(j) in equation (7) will be equal to the marginal
productivity of capital, as expected.

3

See Woodford (2003, chapter 5).

9

2.4

Potential Output

Potential output is defined as the price-flexible level of output. In the case where all prices
are fully flexible (i.e., γ =1), output will attain its natural level, Yt n , implicitly defined by

(

)

1 = µs K t , Yt n , Yt n − I t ; ξ t , At .

Note that, Yt n depends on the capital stock, Kt, and on current investment, It.

3.

Aggregate Supply and Investment
This section derives the aggregate supply relationship. It has its roots in the

expectations-augmented Phillips curve of the kind hypothesized by Friedman (1968) and
Phelps (1970) for both closed and open economies. [see also Ball, Mankiw, and Romer
(1988) and Roberts (1995).]

In order to obtain a tractable solution, we log-linearize the equilibrium conditions
around the steady state. In the steady state ξt = 0 and At = Ā. We assume that β(1+r) = 1 and
i = r (i.e., inflation is set equal to zero in the shock-free steady state). Define x̂t = log
 xt

x

 ~ xt − x
as the proportional deviation of any variable xt from its deterministic steady
−
x


state value x . We can then log-linearize the model equations around the deterministic steady
state equilibrium.
∧ ∧n
st − st

(

=ω

yˆt − yˆtn

)+σ (
−1

yˆt − yˆtn

)

−σ −1Iˆt

where,

10

 ∧ ∧n 
−ω p k t − k t 





(8)

ω = ωw + ω p ,
v hh
f ′′
,ω p = − 2
vh
f′

ωw =
and

σ =−

cu cc
uc

Log-linearizing the two price-setting equations

[(6a ), (6b )] ,

the investment rule, [equation

(7)], and using equation (8), yields:

)(

(

(

)

log(P1t ) = log(Pt ) + ω + σ −1 yˆ1t − Yˆt n − σ −1 Iˆt − ω p kˆ1t − kˆtn

[

)(

(

(

)

)

log(P2t ) = Et −1 log(Pt ) + ω + σ −1 yˆ 2t − Yˆt n − σ −1 Iˆt − ω p kˆ2t − kˆtn
Define,

as

standard,

the

inflation

rate

by,

(6a’)

)]

π t = ln(Pt / Pt −1 )

(6b’)
so

that

π t − Et −1 (π t ) = log(Pt ) − Et −1 log(Pt ) .
Equations (6a’) and (6b’) can be combined to obtain the link between inflation surprise, and
fluctuations in output gap, investment, and the stock of capital, as follows.

πt − Et−1(πt ) =

γ ω +σ−1  ˆ ˆn σ−1 ˆ ωp ˆ 
Y −Y −
I−
K

(1−γ )  1+θω  t t 1+θω t 1+θω t 

(

)

(9)

Real marginal costs increase with a rise in the current level of economic activity; thus, they
are

affected by fluctuations in the aggregate capital stock and investment demand.

Consequently, the fluctuations in investment and the capital stock are negatively correlated
with surprise inflation, holding constant the output gap.

4.

Aggregate Supply and Potential Output

11

Potential output is defined as the hypothetical output level that would result if prices and
wages are completely flexible but other distortions, like taxes and imperfect competition, are
left in place. That is potential output is normally lower than the efficient output level (the
Pareto-optimal output level).
The level of potential output, Ynn , is solved implicitly from:

(

1 = µs k tn , ytn , Yt n − I t ; ξ t , At

)

Log-linearizing the equation and rearranging yields:
Yˆt n+1 =

[

1
ω p Kˆ tn+1 + σ −1 I tn+1t + u t
−1
ω +σ

]

(10)

where,
ut =

ζς
ζ
dξ t + A dAt
ξ
ς

is a shock term.

ω p Kˆ tn+1 + σ −1I tn+1 = (ω + σ −1 )Yˆt n+1 − ut

Rearranging terms in equation (10), and substituting the resulting relationship into equation
(9) yields the aggregate supply relationship we are seeking, as follows.

π t − E t −1 (π t ) =


 ω + σ −1 
ω + σ −1 ˆ n
 Yˆt − Yˆt n −
Y
u
−


t
t
(1 − γ )  1 + θω 
1 + θω


γ

(

)

(11)

Equation (11) demonstrates that the fluctuations in potential output are negatively correlated
with inflation surprises for a given realization of the shock, and a given level of the output

12

gap. This means that the inflation-output tradeoff is three-dimensional: among inflation
output gaps and potential output.
In the absence of investment, however, the aggregate supply relationship reduces to the
conventional relationship between surprise inflation and the output gap:

π t − E t −1 (π t ) =

 ω + σ −1 

 Yˆt − Yˆt n 


(1 − γ )  1 + θω 


γ

(

)

(12)

Therefore the inflation-output trade-off becomes two-dimensional: between inflation rates
and output gaps.

4.

Conclusion

The New-Keynesian aggregate supply derives from micro-foundations an inflation-dynamics
model very much like the tradition in the monetary literature. Inflation is primarily affected
by: (i) economic slack; (ii) expectations; (iii) supply shocks; and (iv) inflation persistence.
This paper extends the New Keynesian aggregate supply relationship to include also
fluctuations in potential output, as an additional determinant of the relationship.
Should potential output become a target variable for central banks? Should
central banks respond to potential output?
First, one has to be clear what "target variable" and "responding" means.
The most useful definition of "targeting" a variable is that the variable is a
"target variable" in the sense that it is an argument in the loss function
to be minimized (and the loss function is increasing in the distance between
the target variable and the "target level" for the variable). There is another use
of "targeting a variable" as meaning "responding to a variable," where the latter means that
the variable in question is an argument in the reaction function that represents the equilibrium
instrument setting as a function of the state of the economy. The problem is that the

13

relation between the loss function and the corresponding optimal reaction
function (the reaction function that minimizes the loss function) is complex
and typically not one-to-one. What enter in the loss function are the target
variables. What enter into the reaction function are the determinants of
(the forecasts of) the target variables, that is, the predetermined
variables that describe the state of the economy. Typically, a target
variable enters the reaction function only if the variable is also a
predetermined state variable (which it is in some models). Also, the
coefficients in the reaction function are complex and not monotonic
functions of the parameters of the loss function and the rest of the model.
Thus, should potential output be a target variable, in the sense of
independently entering into the loss function? In the presence of capital goods in the model,
the answer could be that potential output could enter as a separate argument, and also to the
extent that it enters into the output gap.
That is, the output gap should be one of the target variables (with a zero
target level, meaning that the target for output is potential output).
In practice, though, monetary policy probably have a rather complex
effect on potential output even in the short run. Thus, any attempt to start
systematically affect potential output, for instance, attempting to increase
it towards the Pareto optimal level of output , could lead down the inflation-bias
lane of Kydland-Prescott and Barro-Gordon. Other policies than monetary
policy, like fiscal policies, structural policies that reduce regulatory barriers and improve
competition, or subsidies to research, training and education, seem to be better
designed to affect potential output.

The framework of analysis that could give an answer to these questions could usefully be the
one pursued by Woodford (2003), who skilfully reduces a dynamic optimization problem of
14

the choice of the desired monetary rule, based on the representative consumer’s welfare, into
a linear-quadratic optimization problem. Extending this framework to an analysis of the
interactions between monetary and fiscal policies, Benigno and Woodford (2003)), the
constrained-efficient allocation is achieved when output is equal to the would be price-flex
no-wedge distortions level, with a zero price dispersion (or other costs of inflation), and real
value of the initial government nominal debt equal to the deterministic steady state real debt.
In the broader-scoped framework that is specified in this paper, A conjectured quadraticlinear optimal problem, is to minimize a carefully derived loss function, subject to three
constraints: (1) Aggregate- supply relationship; (2) Government debt dynamics, and 3) the
dynamic low governing the potential accumulation of the stock of capital. The conjectured
loss function is the discounted value of a weighted sum of squared deviations of inflation
from a zero level (so as to minimize distorting price dispersion among firms of identical
technologies and demand schedules), the squared deviations in output from target output, and
the level of the output target. The target output level is likely to be different from potential
output under monopolistic competition because of the existence of a wedge between the
marginal productivity of labor and the leisure/consumption marginal rate of substitution.
My intuition is that since this paper demonstrates that potential output improves the inflationoutput gap trade-off, the task of the monetary authority, which trades off inflation and output
gaps is facilitated if they target potential output, as well as the inflation fluctuations and the
output gaps. Therefore, a Taylor-like interest rule which targets not only the fluctuations in
inflation rates and output gaps, but also the fluctuations in potential output is bound to raise
the measure of consumer.
The broader-scope aggregate supply that is derived in this paper has also implications for the
empirical literature. The New Keynesian Phillips curve has attracted renewed interest also in
much of the empirical research. Gali and Gertler (1999) and Gali, Gertler and LopezSalida(2001) present evidence that US and Europe inflation dynamics are consistent with a
variant of the New Keynesian Phillips Curve. Potential output plays a role in the analysis
only to the extent that it is needed to measure the output gap. Thus, the revised version of the
aggregate supply relationship, which includes potential output as one of the inflation-output
trade-off’s determinants has an obvious implication for the empirical literature, as well. A
new estimation strategy to come to grip with the broader scope of inflation-output trade off is
warranted.
15

16

References

(1)

Ball, Laurence, (1993), “What Determines the Sacrifice Ratio?” in N. Gregory
Mankiw (ed.), Monetary Policy (University of Chicago Press, 1994).

(2)

Ball, Laurence, N.Greg Mankiw, and David Romer, 1988, “The new Keynesian
economics and the output-inflation trade-off,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 19, 1-65.

(3)

Benigno, Pierpaolo, and Michael Woodford, (2003), “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal
Policy: A Linear-Quadratic Approach,” NBER Working Paper 9905.

(4)

Blanchard, Olivier, and Nobu Kiyotaki, 1987, “Monopolistic competition and the
effects of aggregate demand,” American economic Review 77, 647-66.

(5)

Cohen, Daniel, and Emmanuel Farhi, 2001, “The Phillips curve across the Atlantic: It
is the price curves that differ,” CEPR discussion paper 3100, December.

(6)

Dixit, Avinash, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, “Monopolistic competition and optimum
product diversity,” American Economic Review 67, 297-308.

(7)

Friedman, Milton, “The role of monetary policy,” American Economic Review 58, 117.

(8)

Gali, Jordi, and Mark Gertler, (1999), “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric
Approach,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 44 (2), October, 195-222.

(9)

Gali, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and David Lopez-Salido,(2001),“European Inflation
Dynamics,” European Economic Review, 45 (7), June, 1237-1270

(10)

Gordon, Robert J., 1982. “Why Stopping Inflation may be Costly: Evidence from
Fourteen Historical episodes,” in Robert E. Hall (ed.), Inflation: Causes and Cures,
University of Chicago Press, 9-40.

(11)

Khan, Mohsin S. and Senhadji, Abdelhak S., (2001), “ Threshold Effects in the
Relationship Between Inflation and Growth,” IMF Staff Papers,

(12)

Lane, Philip R., 2001, “The new open economy macroeconomics: a survey,” Journal
of International Economics 54, 235-266.

(13)

Loungani, Prakash, Assaf Razin, and Chi-Wa Yuen, (2001), “Capital mobility and the
output-inflation tradeoff,” Journal of Development Economics 64, 255-274.

(14)

Lucas, Robert E., (1973), “Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,” American Economic Review 63 (June), 326-34.

17

(15)

Khan, Mohsin and Senhadji, (2001), “Threshold Effects in the Relationship Between
Inflation and Growth,” IMF Staff Papers.

(16)

Obstfeld, Maurice., and Kenneth Rogoff, (1996), Foundations of international
macroeconomics, Chapter 10 (MIT Press, Cambridge).

(17)

Okun, Arthur, (1978), “Efficient Disinflationary Policies,” American Economic
Review, 348-52.

(18)

Phelps, Ned .S., (1970), Microeconomic foundations of employment theory (Norton,
New York).

(19)

Razin, Assaf, and Chi-Wa Yuen, (2002), “The New Keynesian Phillips Curve: Closed
Economy vs. Open Economy,” Economics Letters 75, 1-9.

(20)

Woodford, Michael, (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of
Monetary Policy, Princeton University Press.

(21)

Zhang, Lawrence Huiyan, (2002), “Sacrifice Ratios with Long-Lived Effects,” Johns
Hopkins University Working Paper.

18

