NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BEST OF TIMES, THE WORST OF TIMES:
HEALTH AND NUTRITION IN PRE-COLUMBIAN AMERICA
Richard H. Steckel
Working Paper 10299
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10299
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Richard H. Steckel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Best of Times, the Worst of Times: Health and Nutrition in Pre-Columbian America
Richard H. Steckel
NBER Working Paper No. 10299
February 2004
JEL No. N0
ABSTRACT
Lack of evidence has been the major obstacle to understanding trends and differences in human
welfare over the millennia. This paper explains and applies methods that are obscure to most
academics and essentially unknown to the general public. A millennial perspective is best obtained
from skeletal remains, which depict not only childhood health conditions but also processes of
degeneration that accompany aging and strenuous physical effort. Compiled into an index of health,
data from 23 localities as part of a large collaborative project on the Western Hemisphere reveal
diverse health conditions for the pre-Columbian population. For reasons not yet understood, native
populations moved over time into less healthy ecological environments. The analysis has
implications for understanding environmental determinants of health, the pattern of European
conquest, pre-contact population size, investigating human adaptation to climate change, and
discovering prime movers of very long-term economic growth.
Richard H. Steckel
Economics and Anthropology Departments
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
steckel.1@osu.edu

In his presidential address to the American Historical Association, John
Coatsworth argued that study of change over time in physical or spiritual well-being is
the central unifying concern of history.1 While one may quibble with the generalization,
any reasonable time and motion study would find that historians devote most of their
research efforts to gathering, organizing, interpreting and disseminating information on
human welfare or the quality of life broadly defined.
Human welfare is conceptually complex and difficult to measure, even in the
present. Accurate measurement of inflation is a case in point. If the consumer price
index overstates the increase in the true cost of living by as little as one percentage point
per year (as many economists have argued), then the cumulative addition to the national
debt from overindexing the federal budget is more than $1 trillion in just 12 years.2 The
error also substantially affects the measurement of poverty and of real median income in
the quarter century after 1973. If this issue about a modest slice of physical well being
cannot be resolved without argument, it is little wonder that debates are intense about the
distant past, when written evidence is thin and surveys collected by government and
private efforts are simply unavailable.
Under these conditions the less venturesome may throw up their hands and avoid
research areas lacking familiar types of written information, but this approach is
unsatisfactory as a general rule. Sometimes we should face the risks and make the effort
to cross traditional disciplinary boundaries in search of new evidence, especially if it
enlightens opinion on intriguing topics that are meager in customary sources.
This paper makes such a journey, bringing substantial new evidence to bear on a
literature characterized by an unusually high ratio of debate to factual information:
physical well being in pre-Columbian America. The new data measure health as seen
1

John H. Coatsworth, "Welfare," American Historical Review 101, no. 1 (1996): 1-12.
Michael J. Boskin et al., "Consumer Prices, the Consumer Price Index, and the Cost of Living,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives 12, no. 1 (1998): 3-26.
2

1

from the skeletal remains of over 4,000 individuals who lived in North, Central or South
America in the millennia before 1492. Because skeletons are an unfamiliar source to
most social scientists, a methodology section allows the paper to be moderately self
sufficient. A novel procedure for condensing diverse skeletal data into a single measure
of health is also described. The results have implications for understanding of the
environmental determinants of health, the pre-Columbian disease environment, plausible
ranges of pre-contact population size, and the pattern of European conquest.

Background
Economists have contributed, but archaeologists, physical anthropologists and
historians have published the bulk of the academic research on pre-Columbian America.
Archaeological information such as material artifacts or the number and character of
Native American settlements is often cited by historians, but bioarchaeological evidence
(skeletons that indicate kinds and degrees of biological stress) are essentially unknown in
the historical literature.3
A thorough explanation for this pattern is beyond the scope of this essay, but
some observations are relevant. Paleopathology, or the study of human health and
disease from skeletal remains is a relatively new field, emerging among specialists only
in the 1950s and 1960s, and has yet to spread more widely in the social sciences. The
technical nature and specific focus of the subject are obstacles to diffusion; as graduate
students, physical anthropologists usually take anatomy and other medical courses, which
are typically beyond the interests or reach of other social scientists. Moreover, physical
anthropologists often think like medical professionals, wanting to discover purely
biological processes that create pathological lesions or to diagnosis ailments of
3
See, for example, the recent, heavily-referenced book on pre-Columbian America by David P.
Henige, Numbers from nowhere : the American Indian contact population debate (Norman: University
of Oklahoma Press, 1998).

2

individuals long dead. They usually lack the training that offers the broad perspective of
social scientists interested in larger environmental processes that shape community
health, much less long-term historical forces that affect the rise or fall of civilizations and
so forth.
Typically physical anthropologists are poorly equipped or otherwise constrained
to convince historians of the importance and relevance of their evidence. Their research
projects are very labor intensive, involving travel, difficult lodging (sometimes in tents);
many hours of excavation to recover a single burial; plus cleaning, coding and analysis of
skeletons and other artifacts such that study of one, or at most a few, small geographic
sites often occupy an entire career. In short, they not only have little training but also
little time and data with which to think in broad comparative perspective.
The field is also burdened by its distant past.4 If social scientists are mildly
acquainted with physical anthropology, they often connect it with racism, phrenology or
other forms of discredited pseudo-scientific research. This mental association is decaying
over time as new generations are trained, but memories linger and most social scientists
must be persuaded that the subject is useful. In this regard, there are some parallels with
the challenges faced by anthropometric history in the 1970s, which prospered only after
this new field explained its methodology in intelligible terms and successfully addressed
several historical questions in which there was already an established interest.5
This essay vastly extends the reach of anthropometric history by expanding the
information base to skeletons, which depict important aspects of well being over the
millennia and embrace human activities from hunter gathers onward to settled
agriculture, the rise of cities, global exploration and colonization, and eventual
4

Jonathan Marks, Human biodiversity : genes, race, and history, Foundations of human behavior (New
York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1995).
5
Richard H. Steckel, "Strategic Ideas in the Rise of the New Anthropometric History and Their
Implications for Interdisciplinary Research," Journal of Economic History 58, no. 3 (1998): 803-21.

3

industrialization. Skeletons are widely available for study in many parts of the globe, and
unlike heights, they depict health over the life cycle. As a package the skeletal measures
provide age and source-specific detail on biological stress from early childhood through
old age. The remains also exist for women and for children, two groups often excluded
from more familiar historical sources such as tax documents, muster rolls, and wage
records. Skeletons provide a more extensive and complete picture of community health
than available from historical records on stature and is most useful when combined with
data from archaeology, historical documents, climate history, Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) and other sources.
The results discussed here extend a large collaborative project involving
economists, historians and physical anthropologists, who assembled numerous measures
of skeletal health for individuals who once lived in the Western Hemisphere.6 Sampling
issues inevitably arise in the comparative study of skeletons and there are ambiguities in
interpreting this biological evidence. Confidence in the approach is bolstered, however,
by comparing results with patterns of health that are well established from other sources.

Measures of Biological Stress
It is useful to begin with a general discussion of skeletal manifestations of stress.7
Unlike dental enamel, bones are living tissues that receive blood and adapt to mechanical
and physiological stress. Habitual physical activity that requires exertion leads to a
readily visible expansion of the related muscle attachments on the skeleton. If the action
is repetitive in a particular direction, the bones adapt to the load by thickening in the
6

Richard H. Steckel and Jerome C. Rose, eds., The backbone of history : health and nutrition in the
Western Hemisphere (Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002a).
7
For discussion and references to the literature, see Tim D. White and Pieter A. Folkens, Human
osteology, 2nd ed. (San Diego: Academic Press, 2000). and Alan S. Goodman and Debra L. Martin,
"Reconstructing health profiles from skeletal remains," in The backbone of history: health and nutrition
in the Western Hemisphere, ed. Richard H. Steckel and Jerome C. Rose (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2002), 11-60.

4

direction of the plane of motion . Hunter-gatherers who walked long distances, for
example, had oval-shaped femurs but these bones were nearly circular among settled
agriculturalists who typically had diverse activity patterns. Similarly, professional
athletes such as tennis players and baseball pitchers develop extensive muscles, tendons
and bones in the shoulders and arms on the side they habitually use.
Net nutrition has been an effective concept for understanding the environmental
factors that influence human growth. The body is a biological machine that requires fuel
for basal metabolism, to perform work and to combat infection, all of which claim dietary
intake.8 If net nutrition is insufficient, growth slows or ceases, and linear growth of the
skeleton is stunted if the deprivation is chronic and severe. More generally the skeleton
is an incomplete but very useful repository of an individual’s history of biological stress,
as explained in more detail below.
In principle, anthropologists could use any bone to estimate stature but the femur
is often well preserved and easily measured, and therefore is widely used. Among the
skeletal elements the femur also has the greatest correlation with stature, in part because
it comprises about one quarter of standing height. The classic study estimated the
relationship between the two variables using femur lengths of the deceased whose living
height was known from muster rolls or other sources.9 The equations vary somewhat by
sex (females are a few centimeters shorter than males for a given femur length), and
accurate height estimates require anthropologists to draw upon sexually dimorphic
characteristics of the pelvis and the skull that appear in adolescence. Growth plates
obfuscate the bone lengths of juveniles, and height estimates are correspondingly
problematic until the bony components of the femur fuse late in the teenage years.
8

See J. M. Tanner, Foetus into man : physical growth from conception to maturity (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1978). and Richard H. Steckel, "Stature and the Standard of Living," Journal
of Economic Literature. December 33, no. 4 (1995): 1903-40.
9
Mildred Trotter and Goldine C. Gleser, "Estimation of stature from long bones of American whites
and Negroes," American Journal of Physical Anthropology. December 10, no. 4 (1952): 463-514.

5

As a group, physical anthropologists collect hundreds of skeletal measures, many
of which are very specialized in nature and some of which reflect rare or unusual forms
of physiological stress.10 In designing a study of community health with a large number
of collaborators, it is important to select general health indicators that are understood and
reported by virtually all physical anthropologists, regardless of specialty. In a large
collaborative study that investigated skeletal health over the past several thousand years,
these included three indictors of health during childhood (stature, linear enamel defects,
and skeletal signs of anemia), two measures of decline among adults (dental decay and
degenerative joint disease), and two that could affect any age group, but which are more
prevalent among older children and adults (skeletal infections and trauma). Stature has
already been discussed as a child health indicator, and the others are briefly explained
below.11
Enamel hypoplasias (linear enamel defects). Hypoplasias are lines or pits of
enamel deficiency commonly found in the teeth (especially incisors and canines) of
people whose early childhood was biologically stressful. They are caused by disruption
to the cells (ameloblasts) that form the enamel. The disruption is usually environmental,
commonly due to either poor nutrition or infectious disease or a combination of both.
Although nonspecific, hypoplasias are informative about physiological stress in
childhood in archaeological settings.
Indicators of iron deficiency anemia (porotic hyperostosis and cribra orbitalia).
Iron is essential for many body functions, such as oxygen transport to the body’s tissues.
In circumstances where iron is deficient—owing to nutritional deprivation, low body

10

For a discussion see Jane E. Buikstra and Douglas H. Ubelaker, Standards for data collection from
human skeletal remains, Arkansas Archeological Survey research series ; no. 44. (Fayetteville, Ark.:
Arkansas Archeological Survey, 1994).
11
For additional information see text and references in Clark Spencer Larsen, Bioarchaeology :
interpereting behavior from the human skeleton, Cambridge studies in biological anthropology (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1997). and White and Folkens, Human osteology.

6

weight, chronic diarrhea, parasite infection, and other factors—the body attempts to
compensate by increasing red blood cell production. The manifestations are most readily
visible in the skeletons of young children in areas where red blood cell production occurs,
such as in the flat bones of the cranium. The associated pathological conditions are
sieve-like lesions called porotic hyperostosis and cribra orbitalia for the cranial vault and
eye orbits, respectively. The lesions can also be caused by other factors, but iron
deficiency is among the most common causes. In infancy and childhood, iron deficiency
anemia is associated with impaired growth and delays in behavioral and cognitive
development. In adulthood, the condition is associated with limited work capacity.
Dental health. Dental health is an important indicator both of oral and general
health, which is assessed in archaeological skeletons from dental caries, antemortem
tooth loss, and abscesses. Dental caries is a disease process characterized by the focal
demineralization of dental hard tissues by organic acids produced by bacterial
fermentation of dietary carbohydrates, especially sugars. In the modern era, the
introduction and general availability of refined sugar caused a huge increase in dental
decay. In the more distant past, the adoption of agriculture led to a general increase in
tooth decay, especially from the introduction of maize. The agricultural shift and the
later use of increasingly refined foods have resulted in an increase in periodontal disease,
caries, tooth loss, and abscesses.
Degenerative joint disease. Degenerative joint disease (DJD) is commonly
caused by the mechanical wear and tear on the joints of the skeleton due to physical
activity. Generally speaking, populations engaged in habitual activities that are
physically demanding have more DJD (especially buildup of bone along joint margins
and deterioration of bone on articular joint surfaces) than populations that are relatively

7

sedentary. Studies of DJD have been valuable in documenting levels and patterns of
activity in past populations.
Skeletal infections (osteoperiostitis). Skeletal lesions of infectious origin, which
commonly appear on the major long bones (especially the tibia), have been documented
worldwide. Most of these lesions are found as plaque-like deposits from periosteal
inflammation, swollen shafts, and irregular elevations on bone surfaces. Most lesions are
nonspecific but they often originate with Staphylococcus or Streptococcus organisms.
These lesions have proven very informative about patterns and levels of community
health in the human past.
Trauma. Fractures, weapon wounds, and other skeletal injuries provide a record
of accidents or violence. Accidental injuries, such as ankle and wrist fractures, reflect
difficulty of terrain and the hazards of specific occupations. Injuries caused by violence,
such as weapon wounds or parry fractures of the forearm, provide a barometer of
domestic strife, social unrest, and warfare.

Two Dimensions of Health
Demographers and medical professionals agree that length of life and morbidity
are central elements of health. The methodology for measuring life expectancy at birth
was refined during the nineteenth century, but much less agreement exists on principles
for the second. While death is usually well defined, morbidity is much less precise. The
incidence of various chronic diseases, days lost from school or work, and assessments of
physical capacity are used, but all have conceptual limitations. Moreover, gathering
reasonably comprehensive morbidity information that is accurate is often timeconsuming and expensive. Significant progress on the problem may be made eventually
by using devices that transmit information from receptors implanted in or on the body.

8

How well do skeletons capture the elements of health? At most localities or
burial sites, a useful but incomplete picture is available for morbidity. New techniques of
aging will improve estimates of life expectancy, but remains hazardous without good
contextual information from archaeology and other sources. Lack of information on life
expectancy is less damaging than it might appear for the study of health, however. To the
extent that morbidity and mortality are positively correlated, health can still be indexed or
ranked across sites by using morbidity indicators from skeletons.12
Skeletons are good at summarizing several types of chronic morbidity, with the
exception of various soft-tissue conditions such as hernias or torn ligaments.
Degenerative joint disease and dental decay often develop over many years, and both
have adverse functional consequences. DJD is painful and limits mobility, whereas
dental decay limits the ability to chew and digest a coarse diet, which impairs net
nutrition, weakens the immune system, and increases vulnerability to illness. Skeletal
signs of anemia (cribra orbitalia and porotic hyperostosis) usually appear early in
childhood and the adverse environmental conditions that created these bony
malformations tend to persist thereafter. Skeletal infections are often painful and signal a
weakened immune system that can lead to illness and functional loss. Broken bones and
weapon wounds are painful and require time to heal, and the loss of mobility or dexterity
associated with them can be permanent if they heal in a misaligned fashion.
Stunting and linear enamel hypoplasias (LEH) are not direct measures of
morbidity, but they signal a loss of functional capacity. Hunger is painful and limits
physical activity in the fashion of anemia, and hypoplasias are usually the direct result of
severe bouts of disease or malnutrition in early childhood. These skeletal lesions
therefore index various types of morbidity.
12

This conclusion is bolstered by morbidity and mortality data analyzed in Suchit Arora, "The Relation
of sickness to deaths: evidence from the U.S. Army, 1905-39," (Columbus, OH: 2002).

9

Sampling Issues
Physical anthropologists may have little control over the location and extent of
excavations that result from a development project that clears a small plot of ground.
With the exception of the removal of entire cemeteries containing reasonably closed
populations, one can seldom argue that skeletons represent an entire society. Many
collections in Europe, for example, are disproportionately from cities and towns, where
much construction has occurred relative to rural areas.
These constraints are a hindrance but far from disabling. In formulating a large
comparative project involving numerous sites, one may stratify for representation from
rural and urban areas. Post-weighting samples is a second option. As discussed below,
one may sidestep age bias by converting information to age specific rates if the age
distribution of deaths has been skewed by fertility, migration, or excavation.

Community Health
Numerous simplifying assumptions and approximations are required to distill
diverse skeletal data into a single number for comparative ranking and study of
populations.13 Ideally both life expectancy and morbidity would be available, so that one
might roughly approximate a measure such as quality-adjusted life years. For various
reasons, such as incomplete excavation of burials, migration, or unmeasured differences
in fertility rates, however, many sites in the collaborative project lack reliable estimates
of life expectancy. Therefore the health index discussed here incorporates only morbidity
as expressed in the frequency and severity of skeletal lesions, but the index could easily
13

A short paper necessarily conveys only a flavor of the methodology; for additional details and
justification see Richard H. Steckel, Paul W. Sciulli, and Jerome C. Rose, "A health index from skeletal
remains," in The backbone of history: health and nutrition in the Western Hemisphere, ed. Richard H.
Steckel and Jerome C. Rose (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002), 61-93. Presumably
future research will improve the health index using more appropriate assumptions.

10

be adapted to incorporate length of life. A positive correlation between morbidity and
mortality is likely, however, which mitigates the lack of data on life expectancy in
ranking health. This formulation of the index underestimates the true variation in health
(as measured by quality adjusted life years) across sites.
The index was estimated using the following sequence of steps:
(1) For each individual, the seven skeletal measures of morbidity discussed above
were graded on a scale of 0 (most severe expression) to 100 (no lesion or deficiency).
Thus, a higher score indicates better health.
(2) Age-specific rates of morbidity pertaining to the health indicators during
childhood (stature, LEH and anemia) were assumed to have persisted from birth to death,
which is justified by knowledge that childhood deprivation negatively affects adult
health.14 The duration of morbidity prior to death is in fact unknown for the remaining
four components (infections, trauma, DJD, and dental decay) but it is clear these skeletal
lesions reflect chronic conditions that typically persisted for several years. While the
durations are the subject of ongoing research, on a provisional basis they were assumed
to have existed for 10 years prior to death.
(3) The age-specific rates for each of the seven attributes of the index were
calculated as ratios in which the numerator equals the average grade or score at a
particular age and the denominator equals the number of person years of morbidity
observed at that age. Results were grouped into age categories of 0-4, 5-9, 10-14, 15-24,
25-34, 35-44 and 45+.
(4) The age-specific rates for each attribute were weighted by the relative number
of person-years lived in a reference population (Model West level 4) that is believed to
14

The effect of fetal and early childhood health on adult health is sometimes called the Barker
hypothesis, which is discussed in D. J. P. Barker, Mothers, babies, and health in later life, 2nd ed.
(Edinburgh ; New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1998).. For a additional discussion see Robert W.
Fogel and Dora L. Costa, "A theory of technophysio evolution, with some implications for forecasting
population, health care costs, and pension costs," Demography 34, no. 1 (1997): 49-66.

11

roughly agree with pre-Columbian mortality conditions in the Western Hemisphere. The
results were multiplied by life expectancy in this reference population and expressed as a
percent of the maximum attainable, which corresponds to a complete lack of skeletal
defects or lesions.15 This procedure effectively denudes the health index of differences or
variations in mortality rates because all populations are assumed to have had the same life
expectancy.16
(5) The seven components of the index were then weighted equally to obtain the
overall index.
Numerous assumptions underlying the index can be challenged, modified and
refined, which cannot be pursued in a brief paper. It would be appropriate to weight the
elements of the index, such as dental decay and trauma, by their functional consequences
but this is complicated by the nature of the social safety net, medical technology and
other factors that vary in unknown ways across societies. Thus, equal weighting is
questionable but it is also difficult to justify an alternative scheme given the present state
of knowledge. In addition, the index is an additive measure that ignores interactions, but
having both a skeletal infection and trauma, for example, could have been worse than the
sum of their independent effects on health. The present state of knowledge does not
permit the imposition of justifiable interaction effects.17

15

The Model West level 4 population has a life expectancy at birth of 26.4 years. For a discussion of
model life tables see Ansley J. Coale and Paul George Demeny, Regional model life tables and stable
populations (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1966).
16
Known differences in life expectancy could be incorporated easily into a modified index. Changing
the life expectancy modifies the weights but not the age-specific rates.
17
For a discussion of interaction effects in a modern context see George W. Torrance and David Feeny,
"Utilities and quality-adjusted life years," International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health
Care 5, no. 4 (1989): 559-75.

12

A Test of the Index Methodology
Comparing results with patterns well established in historical studies is a useful
technique for assessing the health index as a work in progress.18 Settlement size is a
suitable category because a great deal is known about it from historical records. Prior to
effective public health measures near the end of the nineteenth century, urban areas were
notoriously unhealthy. Large, permanent concentrations of people led to the
accumulation of waste that harbored parasites detrimental to health. Close contact, often
in crowded places of living or work, readily spread many diseases. In addition, cities
usually had substantially unequal distributions of wealth and power—and therefore large
differences in access to resources and in work effort, which were important for health.
These same processes affecting health likely existed in the pre-Columbian world. Other
things being equal, one would expect the more mobile, less densely settled populations to
have been healthier than those living in paramount towns or urban areas.
Because European expansion distorted Native American mortality patterns in
ways that could have obscured the effects of settlement size, comparisons are limited to
pre-Columbian sites, which include skeletons of 4,078 individuals who lived at 23
localities in North, Central and South America.19 Steckel and Rose used archaeological
evidence to arrange the settlements into three types: mobile (essentially hunter
gatherers); village or settled but dispersed populations; and town or paramount urban
center.20 The estimated regression of the health index on settlement type is:

18

Various types of sensitivity analysis and formulation of standard errors are also planned, following
public reaction to the methodology of the health index.
19
Details about the sites are available from Steckel, Sciulli, and Rose, "A health index from skeletal
remains."
20
Richard H. Steckel and Jerome C. Rose, "Patterns of health in the Western Hemisphere," in The
backbone of history: health and nutrition in the Western Hemisphere, ed. Richard H. Steckel and
Jerome C. Rose (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002b), 563-79.

13

HI = 78.98 -8.71 Village -14.91 Urban, N = 23, R2 = 0.42
(3.04) (3.47)

(1)

(3.92)

where standard errors are given in parentheses, and the mean and standard deviation of
the dependent variable are 70.5 and 8.0, respectively. The coefficients are both
statistically and practically significant: the health index was nearly two standard
deviations lower in the largest population setting as opposed to mobile groups.
That the health index systematically declined with increasing settlement size is
welcome news for the methodology. The index has passed an important preliminary test,
suggesting it is credible even in its crude form. Presumably refinements in the
methodology will sharpen the quantification of important aspects of health.

Long-Term Trend
An interesting pattern emerges from arranging the evidence by average age of the
sites. Figure 1 shows a scatter diagram of the health index at 23 pre-Columbian (pre1492) sites where all seven attributes were reported by the different research teams. The
downward trajectory is statistically significant in a simple linear regression:

HI = 65.41 + 0.0025 YBP, N = 23, R2 = 0.28
(2.26)

(2)

(0.00087)

Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Regrettably, few sites were located in the early
pre-Columbian period.21 There are only three data points before approximately 1000 BC,
which complicates the interpretation of the time trend. This particular scattering of sites
21

As averages of the estimated beginning and ending dates of burials at particular sites, the variable
YBP is artificially precise.

14

imparts a high standard deviation to the independent variable (time), which one could
argue, artificially shrinks the standard error of the coefficient, i.e., a few chronological
outliers may heavily affect the estimated relationship. This chronological concentration
makes it important to consider factors that may have contributed to variability in the
index, regardless of time period. The goal is to determine whether measurable
environmental effects can explain the downward trajectory in the health index.
Additional measurable variables collected for each site include food sources,
vegetation, topography, elevation, and settlement pattern. While it is impossible to
specify in detail the pathway of causation for each of these variables, we have a general
sense of their possible mechanisms of operation. Food sources were obvious variables to
consider because diet affects human growth and other aspects of health such as resistance
to infections. What may appear to be a simple relation between diet and the health index,
however, is made complex by interactions with other ecological variables such as
topography, climate, settlement size, and trade. While settled agriculture provided a
greater supply of foods such as maize, beans, and squash, systematic food production also
involved repetitive patterns of work compared with the varied physical efforts of huntergatherers, which may have had implications for the onset and severity of degenerative
joint disease. It is also thought that dietary diversity and quality may have suffered in the
transition to settled agriculture.22 In addition, there is evidence that maize consumption
led to dental decay. Thus, it is difficult to specify in advance the general magnitude and
even the direction of effect that subsistence patterns may have had on the health index.
In any event, all pre-Columbian sites lacked the dietary diversity that was later provided
by the addition of European plants and animals. Based on earlier studies, however, one
might expect that health was lower after the transition to settled agriculture .
22

Mark Nathan Cohen and George J. Armelagos, Paleopathology at the origins of agriculture (New
York: Academic Press, 1984).

15

Vegetation surrounding the site may have affected health via the type and
availability of resources for food and shelter. Forests provided materials for the diet, fuel
and housing and also sheltered animals that could have been used for food. Semi-deserts
posed challenges for the food supply relative to more lush forests or grasslands, but the
dry climate might have inhibited the transmission of some diseases.
Flood plain or coastal living provided easy access to aquatic sources of food;
enabled trade compared with more remote, interior areas; and facilitated the disposal of
waste. Trade, however, may have promoted the spread of disease. Uneven terrain found
in hilly or mountainous areas may have provided advantages for defense, but could have
led to more accidents and fractures.
Elevation affects or is correlated with temperature, insect vectors, and vegetation,
and often is associated with terrain, opportunities for trade, and settlement patterns. Low
elevations, particularly coastal or flood plain areas, probably provided food and
opportunities for trade, which were beneficial for health. A most low elevations in the
sample, the climate was tropical or subtropical, which could have increased exposure to
disease. It is therefore difficult to predict the effect that elevation may have had on
health.
The connection between ecological variables and the health index was studied
using a sequence of simple regressions, one for each ecological variable, which are given
in Table 1. Although the resulting coefficients may suffer from omitted variable bias,
which is discussed below, the procedure is nevertheless useful for assessing determinants
of health. As expected, settlement size had a substantial and systematic negative impact,
with the health index of the largest settlements falling nearly two standard deviations
below that of mobile groups (hunter gathers). The index was also substantially and

16

systematically affected by use of domestic plants, living at higher elevations, in open
forest or grassland, or away from coastal areas.
The last regression in the table sheds light on the issue of multicollinearity. The
R2 is much higher (0.68) in the multivariate case but only one of the independent
variables (elevation) was statistically significant, whereas each variable was significant in
the simple regressions. The most effective solution is to obtain more diverse data, i.e.
sites where environmental change did not occur as a package. Thus, despite having the
largest data set of its kind ever assembled, the desired effects are not measurable with
precision. Even though the individual coefficients are imprecisely estimated, however, it
is safe to conclude that some combination of changing environmental conditions led to
deteriorating health within the sample.23 In the multiple regression, the coefficient on the
time trend (age BP) is much smaller (0.0013 versus 0.0025) than in the simple regression
and it is statistically insignificant when controlling for ecological factors.
Additional work is required to learn more about which environmental changes
may have been important in explaining the pre-Columbian decline in health. For this
purpose the sample was divided into two roughly equal parts: early (pre 1500 BP) and
late (post 1500 BP). Table 2 gives the sample means of the health index and of the
important ecological variables in these two time periods. Between the early and the late
period, the health index declined from 74.20 to 66.46, a difference of 7.74 points.
Importantly, all ecological variables changed in a direction adverse to health: People
moved to higher elevations, out of mobile groups, into open forest-grassland habitats,

23

One would like to know the average values of the ecological variables in the Western Hemisphere
over time, but even rough estimates of these numbers might be unattainable. Nevertheless summaries
of the archaeological evidence makes clear that the general direction of change mirrored that in the
sample. Cities and socially-stratified societies, for example, were tiny in numerical importance at late
as 2000 years ago, and large urban centers appeared only in the millennium before Columbus. See
Richard E. W. Adams, Ancient civilizations of the New World, Essays in world history (Boulder,
Colo.: Westview Press, 1997). and Stuart J. Fiedel, Prehistory of the Americas, 2nd ed. (Cambridge
[England] ; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992).

17

used more domestic plants, and left coastal areas. Column 4 of Table 2 shows that the
largest move (a shift of 0.485) was into open forest-grassland areas, and by multiplying
this shift by the coefficient in the simple regression (-8.39), we obtain a measure of the
impact of this change on the health index (-4.07 points). Column 6 of Table 2 presents
similar calculations for other ecological variables. The calculations show that the rise of
towns and urban areas (-2.25), the change in vegetation patterns (-4.07), and the use of
domestic plants (-2.89) were also important factors in the decline of the health index in
the pre-Columbian era, if each variable is taken in isolation.
The sum of all the ecological changes is –12.25, which is 4.51 points more (in
absolute terms) than the decline in the health index (-7.74). Therefore the simple
accounting procedure over-explains the deterioration in health. This is not surprising
because many of the important environmental changes occurred together, e.g. domestic
plants were more commonly used in urban areas and urban areas were more typically
located in open forest-grassland habitats, etc. To the extent that change occurred as a
package, the individual regression coefficients overstate the pure effect of an ecological
category.
If the transition to settled agriculture and urban, upland living led to a decline in
health, why did it occur? There are several possible explanations, but unfortunately we
cannot adequately test them with the data at hand. First, the shift could have been a
second choice forced on hunter-gathers by resource depletion. They might have farmed
in response to exhaustion of natural sources of subsistence. If correct, one would expect
to observe a decline in health prior to the rise of settled agriculture. Our data are
insufficiently rich and abundant to explore adequately this possibility.
Second, large-scale collective efforts may have given rise to redistribution that
benefited some (dominant) groups at the expense of others. Leaders may have urged

18

settled agriculture and urban living upon their followers as a way to gain political power
and control over more resources. This objective might have been intertwined with
strategies for military protection, whereby fortifications, warriors, and stores of weapons
were important for survival. Unlike hunter-gatherer subsistence, where few stores of
food existed, settled agriculture created inventories of food that could be taxed and
distributed by the politically powerful. Similarly, the powerful expended less energy on
work and were able to compel work, such as building monuments, which adversely
affected health. Thus, some people gained while many lost in the transition. If
redistribution was the primary motive, one might observe greater inequality in health in
more complex relative to less complex societies. Consistent with this line of thought,
inequality in wealth or income has been greater in urban versus rural areas in the historic
period.
Third, the transition might have been largely voluntary if settled agriculture, trade,
and urban living created material goods and ways of life that were preferable to those
available in hunter-gatherer societies. This hypothesis recognizes that improved health
may not have been the only important goal within early societies. Hunter-gatherers may
have been tempted to switch by availability of articles such as shells, cloth, tools, metals
and other accoutrements of large, organized societies. In other words, settled
agriculturalists may have been willing to trade consumer goods and the excitement of
urban living for poorer health. By the eighteenth century urban living had a wellestablished reputation for poor health, yet populations of these areas continued to grow
by in-migration. Many newcomers were apparently willing to risk their health for job
and amenities of the city, and it is plausible to think that these priorities may have existed
in earlier millennia.

19

Whatever the explanation for the transition to settled agriculture, the health
consequences of the change are largely unrecognized, in contrast to costs well known for
the transition from agriculture to urban-industrial society. Urban death rates fell close to
those in rural areas in the early twentieth century, only after people made significant
investments in waste removal, clean water supplies and other aspects of public health and
personal hygiene. Scholars must now recognize that significant health penalties have
accompanied civilization and densely settled populations for the past several thousand
years.

Components of the Health Index
The health index is an additive measure, which makes it easy to decompose and
analyze its components, an effort facilitated by knowledge that many of its components
are age or cause-specific. Hypoplasisas of the permanent incisor and canine teeth (the
ones most commonly affected) are formed in early childhood (typically from ages 1.5 to
4.5), for example, and their presence indicates a poor diet and/or substantial exposure to
disease . To the extent that young children did not work, these lesions are insulated from
its effects on systemic physiological stress. Signs of anemia (porotic hyperostosis and
cribra orbitalia) also reflect nutritional stress in early childhood (birth to age 5), but the
causes are usually quite specific: lack of iron in the diet or the presence of parasites that
absorb iron . These environmental causes often persist into adulthood. The third
childhood indicator (stature) is sensitive to dietary and disease conditions in early
childhood but also incorporates the negative consequences of work (other things being
equal) throughout the growing years.
Several factors may affect the prevalence of dental disease, consisting of caries,
tooth loss and abscesses. Although archaeological research has implicated tooth shapes

20

and minerals in the local water (presence or absence of fluoride), as well as coarse foods
and grit that erode teeth, the phenomenon has been consistently linked to diet across
diverse environmental settings.24 Specifically, diets high in starch (and especially maize
in the pre-Columbian Western Hemisphere) have led to dental decay. 25 Even among
hunter-gatherers, however, the disease prevalence is sometimes greater among women
compared with men because the former often consume more plant foods relative to meat.
Researchers have identified numerous factors associated with degenerative joint
disease, including trauma, sex, bone density and nutrition, but the primary contributor is
mechanical stress.26 Industrial laborers, for example, display patterns of joint
deterioration in relation to habitual physical activity at work, which eventually leads to
bony growth on joint margins. With progression, pitting occurs where the cartilaginous
tissue covering the joint has failed, and erosion of bone on joint surfaces accompanies
advanced stages of the disease.
Skeletal infections (periostitis) are inflammatory responses to bacterial invasion
that produce loosely organized woven bone in its unhealed form and smooth but
undulating or inflated bone tissue after healing.27 These inflections are seldom fatal when
confined to small patches of bone but can lead to death if the infection progresses to vital
organs. The infections are painful and usually limit mobility, dexterity, and strength.
Because the Staphylococcus and Streptococcus bacteria commonly involved are nearly
ubiquitous and easily invade small wounds, the infections suggest a compromised
immune system that results from poor net nutrition. Hence they are a good index of
morbidity more generally. Unlike stature, which reflects net nutrition during the growing

24

Larsen, Bioarchaeology : interpereting behavior from the human skeleton.
Sugar also causes caries but this product was introduced to the Western Hemisphere in the postColumbian period.
26
Larsen, Bioarchaeology : interpereting behavior from the human skeleton.
27
Ibid.
25

21

years, skeletal infections occur at virtually all ages and therefore provide a more complete
picture of morbidity over the life cycle.
Age related bone loss underlies much skeletal injury in modern industrial
societies. In archaeological settings bone loss is also a risk factor for older individuals
(above age 45) but fractures or shattered bones are usually concentrated among older
children and young adults who travel over hazardous terrain, work in dangerous
occupations, or engage in warfare or otherwise become victims of interpersonal violence.
A review of numerous case studies shows enormous diversity in patterns of trauma .
Injuries in hazardous terrain are usually expressed in trauma on the lower limbs, as for
example when a fracture of the wrist or lower radius follows from an attempt to break a
forward fall. Parry fractures of the middle radius or ulna often result from efforts to ward
off a blow to the head, and their frequency is correlated with cranial injuries under
patterns of intentional as opposed to accidental trauma.
Table 3 shows the regression coefficients of index components on ecological
variables taken in categories. These coefficients are similar to those in the middle
columns of Table 2 except that the dependent variables are components rather than the
health index. The column under stature shows, for example, the coefficients estimated in
6 different simple regressions, one for each category of independent variable.28 The
coefficients and their statistical significance are guides to influences on health, but results
should be interpreted with caution because omitted variables could bias the coefficients.
In my view, it is preferable to consider specifications involving somewhat biased but
precisely estimated coefficients than unbiased coefficients with large standard errors.
With this approach it can be hazardous to attribute specific environmental mechanisms of

28

Sample sizes vary because the some investigators did not record all components of the index.
Although settlement pattern is represented by two variables, it is treated as one category.

22

causation to the variables, but the scope for interpretation is narrowed by knowledge of
biological processes that affect health.
The summary statistics at the bottom of Table 3 show that with the exception of
trauma, the attributes of the health index displayed considerable variability across sites or
localities. The range was particularly large for the childhood indicators of hypoplasias
and stature. Low variability for trauma was not an artifact of the scale of measurement;
in the entire sample (65 localities) this mean score ranged from 10.8 to 100.0 and had a
standard deviation of 16.1. Therefore trauma was relatively infrequent in the preColumbian period.
Unlike the other components of the health index, measured environmental
variables had little effect on trauma, a result that holds in the larger sample of 65
localities or sites. Therefore its determinants should be studied as a process separate
from other aspects of health. As suggested above, trauma did rise substantially after the
arrival of Europeans, especially cranial injuries among men.29 At this point it is unknown
whether the post-Columbian growth of trauma involved direct conflict between
Europeans and natives or resulted from tribal warfare precipitated by European presence.
Coastal living was advantageous for several aspects of health, particularly
infections, dental health and DJD. With the possible exception of hypoplasias, however,
coastal living did not protect the children, which indicates that adults were the primary
beneficiaries. Diverse patterns of work and subsistence, combined with lower intensity
of physical effort, were likely to have eased degenerative joint disease in coastal areas.
All childhood indicators as well as infections and possibly DJD suffered at high
elevations, but this environment had no systematic consequence for dental decay. As a
tendency, subsistence was more challenging at higher elevations, but it is unknown why
29
Phillip L. Walker and Richard H. Steckel, "A Western Hemisphere perspective on the history of
violence" (paper presented at the 14th European Meeting of the Paleopathology Association, Coimbra,
Portugal, August 31, 2002 2002).

23

this was not expressed in dental decay. It is worth investigating whether the water at
these sites contained minerals that protected teeth.

Urbanization and Health
The large and systematic negative impact of urban living merits additional
discussion. The urban populations occupied 6 of the 10 lowest slots in the health index
rankings across the 23 pre-Columbian sites, averaging 64.1 compared with an overall
mean of 70.5, and a mean of 80.2 among the sites having the 6 highest scores. What kind
of story can be told about the pathways by which urban living adversely affected health
in this era? Unfortunately opportunities for statistical analysis are severely constrained
by lack of surviving evidence. In general one cannot reliably calculate population
densities, for example, because excavations are incomplete, making it difficult to
determine total population size from counts of the number and distribution of dwellings.
Moreover, the number of residents may have fluctuated over time in ways that are hard to
estimate from archaeological remains. Connecting any possible fluctuations in
population size with precise burial dates is also a considerable challenge.
None of the urban centers prospered early in the pre-Columbian era, but they span
a reasonably wide range of time, from approximately 100 to 1160 AD. All were located
in Mesoamerica, 3 in the basin of Mexico and 3 along or near the coast of the Yucatan
peninsula or Honduras, the condition of latter group contradicting any simple connection
between coastal living and good health. As noted, estimation of population size is
hazardous, but it is thought that these cities ranged from just under 10,000 to roughly
100,000 to 150,000 residents. By way of comparison, northern Europe had few urban
areas, with Paris and Mainz no larger than 25,000 people in 1000 AD . As late as the end
of the 13th century, significant urbanization was confined mainly to southern Europe, in

24

northern Italian towns such as Milan, Florence, Venice and Genoa, each of which
probably exceeded 100,000 in population (for a discussion of urban growth see . At this
time, Paris was the only city in northern Europe that may have fallen into this category.
The southern Low Countries were moderately urbanized by the late Middle Ages (the
14th century), but the largest city, Ghent, probably had no more than 50,000 inhabitants,
while London and Cologne held fewer than 40,000 people at this time.
Living in a paramount town or urban area was devastating for infections, and hard
on the childhood indicators (hypoplasias, stature, and anemia) and on DJD, where the
regression coefficients of Table 3 were statistically significant and large relative to the
standard deviations of the independent variables. Although it is difficult to allocate the
effect of urban living between the pure effects of population size versus its association
with other measured variables, large statistically significant effects are unlikely to have
been primarily the result of specification bias. Use of domesticates was bad for
degenerative joint disease, dental health, hypoplasias and infections, but unlike urban
living, had no systematic consequences for stature, which suggests that older children
living in cities and towns had avenues of nutritional protection that were unavailable to
young children.
Three features of urban areas have been associated with poor health in studies of
the historical period prior to the late nineteenth century: heavy exposure to
communicable diseases created by congested living and poor sanitation; inequality of
wealth, power and work effort; and relatively high cost of food. How do these
explanations fare in the pre-Columbian world? Because the skeletal infections usually
stem from Staphylococcus or Streptococcus bacteria, which were also abundant in rural
areas, the high infection rates in cities cannot be blamed on elevated exposure to
pathogens. Instead, the infections signify a weak immune system connected with poor

25

net nutrition. The latter might follow from food prices that were high relative to rural
areas, but this argument is deflated by the fact that 3 out of 6 cities were on or near the
coast, with easy access to marine sources of food and to low-cost transportation of food
imports.
Instead, high rates of degenerative joint disease in the cities points to work effort,
which drains net nutrition, as a significant culprit. The pre-Columbian cities of Mexico
and the Yucatan region were noted for their monumental architecture. These and the
rituals associated with their use were emblems of a highly stratified society. The
monuments were built with simple tools, without draft animals and therefore with much
human physical effort undertaken by masses of people. Inequality in access to food and
housing likely compounded the biological stress created by their hard work.
The available package of evidence does not eliminate high food prices and heavy
exposure to some pathogens as factors adverse to health in pre-Columbian cities. The
state of research is far removed from possibilities for assigning plausible numeric weights
to causal elements. Nevertheless, one can say that inequality and draining physical effort
are the leading contenders.

Implications
Some historians have noted the absence of many prominent European diseases
such as smallpox, measles and typhoid in arguing that native populations were generally
healthy, perhaps living in an epidemiological Garden of Eden.30 Some have speculated
that these conditions allowed an enormous population to flourish. Instead, the skeletons
reveal enormous diversity, with pre-Columbian Native Americans occupying the highest
and the lowest slots in the rankings of the health index at 65 localities, which also include
30
For a general discussion of health in pre-Columbian America see Kenneth F. Kiple and Stephen V.
Beck, Biological consequences of the European expansion, 1450-1800, An Expanding world ; v. 26
(Aldershot, Hampshire, Great Britain ; Brookfield, Vt., USA: Ashgate/Variorum, 1997).

26

post-Columbians natives plus 14 groups of European-Americans and African
Americans.31 The absence of several major European diseases does not prove there was a
benign disease environment or good health. Numerous native populations, particularly
ones that lived late in the pre-Columbian period, were riddled with pathological lesions.
The natives encountered by Columbus either brought or evolved with pathogens, which
interacted with their subsistence patterns and other life ways, to cause substantial
morbidity and shorten life.
The spread of European diseases has been noted as a major factor in the rapid
Spanish conquest of Central and South America. This essay and other work in
anthropometric history suggest that poor nutrition of many native populations, including
those rapidly conquered, has been overlooked. One cannot deny the relevance of
European diseases or the advantages conveyed by surprise, guns and steel, but the sharp
contrast with the Plains tribes of the nineteenth century is undeniable. With similar
technology (guns and horses) and good nutrition (measured by tall stature and by a
diverse, high protein diet) and despite the heavy burden of European diseases such as
smallpox and measles, the natives were more than a match in many wars or conflicts.32
Indeed, destruction of their major food source--bison--was a key ingredient in their
eventual demise.
There are plausible mechanisms by which good nutrition conveys benefits in
times of conflict. The first is physical energy to organize and resist. Even without stores
of food at hand, well nourished people have large reservoirs of tissue (fat and muscle)
that can be metabolized over a period of days or weeks. It is also likely that wellnourished populations have food stores, which could provide additional energy to prolong
the duration of conflict and impose higher costs on the invaders whose supply lines were
31

Steckel, Sciulli, and Rose, "A health index from skeletal remains."
Joseph M. Prince and Richard H. Steckel, "Nutritional Success on the Great Plains: NineteenthCentury Equestrian Nomads.," The Journal of Interdisciplinary History 33, no. 3 (2003): 353-84.
32

27

stretched by expeditions to the interior. Second, poor nutrition weakens the immune
system, and when combined with the physical demands of mobilization and the burden of
disease, would have sapped vigor. Although the topic is under study, it is also reasonable
to think that poor nutrition for the masses was associated with inequality in material
resources and access to power. Perhaps the relatively disadvantaged were not only less
able by reason of poor diets, but also less enthusiastic in their resistance.
Many scholars have argued explicitly or implicitly that the European advance
would have been far different without the disease weapon; perhaps the invasion would
have failed or conquest greatly delayed, substantially altering world history. It is
constructive to speculate on a different counterfactual: other things unchanged, good
nutrition alone would have tipped the balance, enabling natives to repel the invaders.
What might have happened, for example, if a high protein food source (e.g., cattle or
bison) had been readily available in cities of central Mexico and in other poorly
nourished areas? While it is premature to claim validity, the idea is hardly farfetched
because military history repeatedly demonstrates the value of food.
Geographic determinism was vastly over-sold in the early twentieth century, but
scholars have recently resurrected useful elements of the idea. Economists have
investigated the consequences of the physical environment on persistent differences in
economic performance.33 Based on cross-country comparisons they have measured the
disadvantages of tropical location, for example, on GDP per capita. The most interesting
questions now on this agenda involve the likely pathways or mechanisms underlying the
relationship. The skeletons suggest that the physical environment has long been relevant
for human success or failure. While the matter deserves far more study, the long

33

Jeffrey D. Sachs, "Tropical Underdevelopment," (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research working paper No. 8119, 2001).

28

association suggests that the connection observed in recent times may not be simply the
bi-product of modern forces such as colonialism, institutions or government policy.
Demographic data available for the past couple of centuries repeatedly show that
cities had relatively high death rates prior to the twentieth century, and thus a decline in
health often accompanied industrialization, particularly in its urban locations. The
skeletal evidence suggests that health costs of human aggregation long pre-dated
industrialization, however, quite possibly extending back to the earliest urban centers.
Numerous social scientists have celebrated the early rise of civilization as an enormous
human achievement that gave rise to government, laws, urbanization, interregional trade,
new architecture, and so forth. While it was undeniably an accomplishment, scholars
have considered mainly the asset side of the ledger, implicitly viewing the transition as an
ancient free lunch. We now know that significant health penalties also accompanied
early, large-scale human organization, and these costs should be recognized and
incorporated into historical research.

Agenda
Although incomplete as a measure of health, skeletons are valuable as a gauge of
social performance over the millennia. Far more informative than stature alone, skeletal
measures are not only available across vast stretches of time and space, they are
comparable over this expanse in ways that dwarf anything available for traditional
measures of human welfare.
Skeletal health will be useful in debates over the prime movers of very long-term
economic growth, harnessed to test explanations flowing from efforts to model
technological progress as arising from endogenous choices of profit-maximizing
innovators. According to the Hansen-Prescott and the Galor-Weil theories, per capita

29

consumption should have been essentially constant before the era of modern growth,
whereas the Jones explanation allows for periods during which human welfare improved
measurably because of bursts in innovative activity or unusually favorable institutional
changes.34 Jones’ model can therefore be regarded as proposing the alternative to the null
hypothesis proposed by the Hansen/Prescott and Galor/Weil models.
Skeletons have promising applications in studying human adaptation to climate
change, a topic inspired by growing concerns over global warming. From tree rings, ice
cores and other sources, climate historians have made considerable progress in measuring
important aspects of climate over many thousands of years.35 Climate historians such as
deMenocal have used the new evidence to link climate change to the fall of the Maya.36
While the fall of civilizations is interesting, it is a crude measure of social performance.
By linking skeletal health with new climate data, it will be possible to measure the
connection between climate and human welfare with greater precision.
The National Science Founded recently funded a project that will gather and study
substantial amounts of skeletal data from European populations that lived from the
Paleolithic era to the late nineteenth century.37 This research laboratory is enriched by
enormous diversity in conditions that were likely important for social performance over
the millennia, including technology, climate, social organization, political structure,
degree of urbanization and opportunities for trade. When combined with evidence from
archaeology, historical documents, climate history, GIS and other sources, the skeletal
data can be used to investigate a wide range of topics such as the health of women and
34

Gary D. Hansen and Edward C. Prescott, "Malthus to Solow," American Economic Review.
September 92, no. 4 (2002): 1205-17.; Oded Galor and David N. Weil, "Population, Technology, and
Growth: From Malthusian Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond," American
Economic Review. September 90, no. 4 (2000): 806-28.
35
Brian M. Fagan, The Little Ice Age : how climate made history, 1300-1850 (New York, NY: Basic
Books, 2000).
36
Peter B. deMenocal, "Cultural responses to climate change during the late Holocene," Science 292,
no. 5517 (2001): 667-73.
37
Additional information can be found on the project’s web page: http://global.sbs.ohio-state.edu.

30

children; long-term trends in patterns of trauma and violence; biological inequality; aging
and health; geographic patterns of health; migration patterns informed by ancient DNA;
and the co-evolution of humans and disease using the DNA of ancient pathogens.

31

Time Trend in Pre-Columbian Health
100
90
80

Health Index

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-6000

-4000

-2000

BC

0

2000
AD

Date

Figure 1. Time Trend in Pre-Columbian Health
Note: Deterioration in health is indicated by the downward trend of the linear
regression line associated with these points (R2=0.28; p≤0.05). The health index
declined by an average of 2.5 points per millennium.
Source: See text.

32

Table 1: Regressions of the Health Index on Ecological Variables
Regression 1
Variables

Coeff. Sig. at

Regression 2

Regression 3

Regression 4

Coeff. Sig. at Coeff. Sig. at

Coeff. Sig. at

Regression 5

Regression 6

Coeff. Sig. at Coeff. Sig. at

Elevation
300 + meters

-9.73

0.001

-7.17

0.027

Settlement pattern
Dispersed or village

-8.71

0.021

-1.91

0.625

Town or urban

-14.91

0.001

-4.39

0.388

-3.64

0.219

0.35

0.943

-1.66

0.622

0.0013

0.200

74.79

0.000

Vegetation
Open forest—grassland

-8.39

0.006

Subsistence plants
Domesticates

-10.27

0.005

Topography
Coastal

6.53

0.038

Age BP (years before 1950)
Constant
R2
Sample size

74.39

0.000

78.98

0.000

73.81

0.000

78.20

0.000

67.32

0.000

0.42

0.42

0.31

0.32

0.19

0.68

23

23

23

23

23

23

Omitted classes: Elevation, 0 – 300 meters; settlement pattern, mobile; vegetation, forest or semi-desert; subsistence plants, no
domesticates; topography, non-coastal. The mean and standard deviation of the dependent variable are 70.5 and 8.0, respectively.
Source: Calculated from Western Hemisphere database.

33

Table 2: Average Values of Ecological Variables in the Early and Late in the Pre-Columbian Periods, and Their Implications for Health Change
1

2

3

4

5

6

Early: before

Late: after 1500

Col. 3 – Col. 2

Regression Coeff.

Col. 4 x Col. 5

1500 BP

BP

300 + meters

0.364

0.500

0.136

-9.73

-1.32

Dispersed or village

0.545

0.583

0.038

-8.71

-0.33

Town or urban

0.182

0.333

0.151

-14.91

-2.25

Open forest—grassland

0.182

0.667

0.485

-8.39

-4.07

Domesticates

0.636

0.917

0.281

-10.27

-2.89

Coastal

0.545

0.333

-0.212

6.53

-1.38

Health Index

74.20

66.46

-7.74

Sample size

11

12

Variable

Source: Calculated from Western Hemisphere database.

34

Sum: -12.25

Table 3: Simple Regression Coefficients of Ecological Variables on Components of the Health Index, pre-Columbian sites
Variable

Stature

Hypoplasias

Anemia

Dental

Infections

DJD

Trauma

300 + meters

-11.18**

-28.02***

-8.78**

0.019

-15.06***

-7.15*

1.58

Dispersed or village

-13.96**

-13.43

-3.54

-6.17

-9.10

-11.54***

3.13

Town or urban

-16.01**

-32.18**

-17.77***

-3.95

-33.66***

-12.64**

4.88*

Open forest—grassland

-2.44

-21.46**

-10.18***

-5.21

-14.70**

-0.91

0.59

Domesticates

-6.13

-20.41**

-6.97*

-7.33*

-17.35***

-12.41***

2.79

Coastal

-0.54

16.69*

6.14

7.13**

13.71**

7.99**

1.60

Mean

15.09

73.60

88.98

83.77

75.20

78.82

90.74

Standard Deviation

14.91

22.97

11.19

10.45

16.99

11.11

5.29

Minimum

0.4

18.7

55.0

55.3

45.2

51.4

80.2

Maximum

59.8

99.7

100.0

100.0

98.7

100.0

100.0

Sample size

33

28

35

36

34

36

34

Source: Calculated from the Western Hemisphere database.
Notes: Using two-tailed tests, * = Significant at 0.10; ** = significant at 0.05; *** = significant at 0.01.

35

References

Adams, Richard E. W. Ancient civilizations of the New World, Essays in world
history. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1997.
Arora, Suchit. "The Relation of sickness to deaths: evidence from the U.S. Army,
1905-39." Columbus, OH, 2002.
Barker, D. J. P. Mothers, babies, and health in later life. 2nd ed. Edinburgh ; New
York: Churchill Livingstone, 1998.
Boskin, Michael J., Ellen R. Dulberger, Robert J. Gordon, Zvi Griliches, and Dale W.
Jorgenson. "Consumer Prices, the Consumer Price Index, and the Cost of
Living." Journal of Economic Perspectives 12, no. 1 (1998): 3-26.
Buikstra, Jane E., and Douglas H. Ubelaker. Standards for data collection from
human skeletal remains, Arkansas Archeological Survey research series ; no.
44. Fayetteville, Ark.: Arkansas Archeological Survey, 1994.
Chandler, Tertius. Four thousand years of urban growth: an historical census.
Lewiston: St. David's University Press, 1987.
Coale, Ansley J., and Paul George Demeny. Regional model life tables and stable
populations. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1966.
Coatsworth, John H. "Welfare." American Historical Review 101, no. 1 (1996): 1-12.
Cohen, Mark Nathan, and George J. Armelagos. Paleopathology at the origins of
agriculture. New York: Academic Press, 1984.
deMenocal, Peter B. "Cultural responses to climate change during the late Holocene."
Science 292, no. 5517 (2001): 667-73.
Fagan, Brian M. The Little Ice Age : how climate made history, 1300-1850. New
York, NY: Basic Books, 2000.
Fiedel, Stuart J. Prehistory of the Americas. 2nd ed. Cambridge [England] ; New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Fogel, Robert W., and Dora L. Costa. "A theory of technophysio evolution, with some
implications for forecasting population, health care costs, and pension costs."
Demography 34, no. 1 (1997): 49-66.
Galor, Oded, and David N. Weil. "Population, Technology, and Growth: From
Malthusian Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond." American
Economic Review. September 90, no. 4 (2000): 806-28.

36

Goodman, Alan S., and Debra L. Martin. "Reconstructing health profiles from
skeletal remains." In The backbone of history: health and nutrition in the
Western Hemisphere, edited by Richard H. Steckel and Jerome C. Rose, 1160. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Hansen, Gary D., and Edward C. Prescott. "Malthus to Solow." American Economic
Review. September 92, no. 4 (2002): 1205-17.
Henige, David P. Numbers from nowhere : the American Indian contact population
debate. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1998.
Hohenberg, Paul W., and Lynn Hollen Lees. The making of urban Europe, 10001950. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1985.
Jones, Charles I. "Was an Industrial Revolution Inevitable? Economic Growth over
the Very Long Run." Advances in Macroeconomics 1, no. 2 (2001).
Kiple, Kenneth F., and Stephen V. Beck. Biological consequences of the European
expansion, 1450-1800, An Expanding world ; v. 26. Aldershot, Hampshire,
Great Britain ; Brookfield, Vt., USA: Ashgate/Variorum, 1997.
Larsen, Clark Spencer. Bioarchaeology : interpereting behavior from the human
skeleton, Cambridge studies in biological anthropology. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Marks, Jonathan. Human biodiversity : genes, race, and history, Foundations of
human behavior. New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1995.
Prince, Joseph M., and Richard H. Steckel. "Nutritional Success on the Great Plains:
Nineteenth-Century Equestrian Nomads." The Journal of Interdisciplinary
History 33, no. 3 (2003): 353-84.
Sachs, Jeffrey D. "Tropical Underdevelopment." Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research working paper No. 8119, 2001.
Steckel, Richard H. "Stature and the Standard of Living." Journal of Economic
Literature. December 33, no. 4 (1995): 1903-40.
———. "Strategic Ideas in the Rise of the New Anthropometric History and Their
Implications for Interdisciplinary Research." Journal of Economic History 58,
no. 3 (1998): 803-21.
Steckel, Richard H., and Jerome C. Rose. "Patterns of health in the Western
Hemisphere." In The backbone of history: health and nutrition in the Western
Hemisphere, edited by Richard H. Steckel and Jerome C. Rose, 563-79. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2002b.
37

———, eds. The backbone of history : health and nutrition in the Western
Hemisphere. Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002a.
———, eds. The backbone of history : health and nutrition in the Western
Hemisphere. Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Steckel, Richard H., Paul W. Sciulli, and Jerome C. Rose. "A health index from
skeletal remains." In The backbone of history: health and nutrition in the
Western Hemisphere, edited by Richard H. Steckel and Jerome C. Rose, 6193. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Tanner, J. M. Foetus into man : physical growth from conception to maturity.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1978.
Torrance, George W., and David Feeny. "Utilities and quality-adjusted life years."
International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care 5, no. 4
(1989): 559-75.
Trotter, Mildred, and Goldine C. Gleser. "Estimation of stature from long bones of
American whites and Negroes." American Journal of Physical Anthropology.
December 10, no. 4 (1952): 463-514.
Walker, Phillip L., and Richard H. Steckel. "A Western Hemisphere perspective on
the history of violence." Paper presented at the 14th European Meeting of the
Paleopathology Association, Coimbra, Portugal, August 31, 2002 2002.
White, Tim D., and Pieter A. Folkens. Human osteology. 2nd ed. San Diego:
Academic Press, 2000.

38

