                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             HOW DO BANKS SET INTEREST RATES?

                                           Leonardo Gambacorta

                                           Working Paper 10295
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w10295


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       February 2004




This research was done during a period as a visiting scholar at the NBER. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and not necessarily those of the Banca d’Italia or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Leonardo Gambacorta. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do Banks Set Interest Rates?
Leonardo Gambacorta
NBER Working Paper No. 10295
February 2004
JEL No. E44, E51, E52

                                             ABSTRACT

The aim of this paper is to study cross-sectional differences in banks interest rates. It adds to the

existing literature in two ways. First, it analyzes in a systematic way both micro and macroeconomic

factors that influence the price setting behavior of banks. Second, by using banks’ prices (rather than

quantities) it provides an alternative way to disentangle loan supply from loan demand shift in the

“bank lending channel” literature. The results, derived from a sample of Italian banks, suggest that

heterogeneity in the banking rates pass-through exists only in the short run. Consistently with the

literature for Italy, interest rates on short-term lending of liquid and well-capitalized banks react less

to a monetary policy shock. Also banks with a high proportion of long-term lending tend to change

their prices less. Heterogeneity in the pass-through on the interest rate on current accounts depends

mainly on banks’ liability structure. Bank’s size is never relevant.

Leonardo Gambacorta
Banca d’Italia
Research Department
Via Nazionale, 91
00184 Rome, Italy
gambacorta.leonardo@insedia.interbusiness.it
1. Introduction1

       This paper studies cross-sectional differences in the price setting behavior of Italian
banks in the last decade. The main motivations of the study are two. First, heterogeneity in
the response of bank interest rates to market rates helps in understanding how monetary
policy decisions are transmitted through the economy independently of the consequences on
bank lending. The analysis of heterogeneous behavior in banks interest setting has been
largely neglected by the existing literature. The vast majority of the studies on the “bank
lending channel” analyze the response of credit aggregates to a monetary policy impulse,
while no attention is paid on the effects on prices. This seems odd because, in practice, when
banks interest rates change, real effects on consumption and investment could be produced
also if there are no changes in total lending. The scarce evidence on the effects of monetary
shocks on banks prices, mainly due to the lack of available long series of micro data on
interest rates, contrasts also with some recent works that highlight a different adjustment of
retail rates in the euro area (see, amongst others, de Bondt, Mojon and Valla, 2003).

       Second, this paper wants to add to the “bank lending channel” literature by identifying
loan supply shocks via banks’ prices (rather than quantities). So far to solve the
“identification problem” it has been claimed that certain bank-specific characteristics (i.e.
size, liquidity, capitalization) influence only loan supply movements while banks’ loan
demand is independent of them. After a monetary tightening, the drop in the supply of credit
should be more important for small banks, which are financed almost exclusively with
deposits and equity (Kashyap and Stein, 1995), less liquid banks, that cannot protect their
loan portfolio against monetary tightening simply by drawing down cash and securities
(Stein, 1998; Kashyap and Stein, 2000) and poorly capitalized banks, that have less access to
markets for uninsured funding (Peek and Rosengren, 1995; Kishan and Opiela, 2000; van
den Heuvel, 2001a; 2001b).2 The intuition of an identification via prices of loan supply shift
is very simple: if loan demand is not perfectly elastic, also the effect of a monetary

   1
     This study was developed while the author was a visiting scholar at the NBER. The opinions expressed in
this paper are those of the author only and in no way involve the responsibility of the Bank of Italy and the
NBER.
   2
      All these studies on cross-sectional differences in the effectiveness of the “bank lending channel” refer to
the US. The literature on European countries is instead far from conclusive (see Altunbas et al., 2002; Ehrmann
et al., 2003). For the Italian case see Gambacorta (2003) and Gambacorta and Mistrulli (2003).
                                               3


tightening on banks’ interest rate should be more pronounced for small, low-liquid and low-
capitalized banks .

      Apart from these standard indicators other bank-specific characteristics could influence
banks’ price-setting behavior (Weth, 2002). Berlin and Mester (1999) claim that banks
which heavily depend upon non-insured funding (i.e. bonds) will adjust their deposit rates
more (and more quickly) than banks whose liabilities are less affected by market
movements. Berger and Udell (1992) sustain that banks that maintain a close tie with their
customers will change their lending rates comparatively less and slowly.

      In this paper the search for heterogeneity in banks’ behavior is carried out by using a
balanced panel of 73 Italian banks that represent more than 70 per cent of the banking
system. Heterogeneity is investigated with respect to the interest rate on short-term lending
and that on current accounts. The use of microeconomic data is particularly appropriate in
this context because aggregation may significantly bias the estimation of dynamic economic
relations (Harvey, 1981). Moreover, information at the level of individual banks provides a
more precise understanding of their behavioral patterns and should be less prone to structural
changes like the formation of EMU.

      The main conclusions of this paper are two. First, heterogeneity in the banking rates
pass-through exists, but it is detected only in the short run: no differences exist in the long-
run elasticities of banking rates to money market rates. Second, consistently with the existing
literature for Italy, interest rates on short-term lending of liquid and well-capitalized banks
react less to a monetary policy shock. Also banks with a high proportion of long-term
lending tend to change less their prices. Heterogeneity in the pass-through on the interest rate
on current accounts depends mainly on banks’ liability structure. Bank’s size is never
relevant.

      The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes some institutional
characteristics that help to explain the behavior of banking rates in Italy in the last two
decades. Section 3 reviews the main channels that influence banks’ interest rate settings
trying to disentangle macro from microeconomic factors. After a description of the
econometric model and the data in Section 4, Section 5 shows the empirical results.
Robustness checks are presented in Section 6. The last section summarizes the main
conclusions.
                                                        4


2. Some facts on bank interest rates in Italy

         Before discussing the main channels that influence banks’ price setting, it is important
to analyze the institutional characteristics that have influenced Italian bank interest rates in
the last two decades. The scope of this section is therefore to highlight some facts that could
help in understanding differences, if any, with the results drawn by the existing literature for
the eighties and mid-nineties.

         For example, there is evidence that in the eighties Italian banks were comparatively
slow in adjusting their rates (Verga, 1984; Banca d’Italia, 1986, 1988; Cottarelli and
Kourelis, 1994) but important measures of liberalization of the markets and deregulation
over the last two decades should have influenced the speed at which changes in the money
market conditions are transmitted to lending and deposit rates (Cottarelli et al. 1995;
Passacantando, 1996; Ciocca, 2000; Angelini and Cetorelli, 2002).

         In fact, between the mid-1980s and the early 1990s all restrictions that characterized
the Italian banking system in the eighties were gradually removed. In particular: 1) the
lending ceiling was definitely abolished in 1985; 2) foreign exchange controls were lifted
between 1987 and 1990; 3) branching was liberalized in 1990; 4) the 1993 Banking Law
allowed banks and special credit institutions to perform all banking activities.

         In particular, the 1993 Banking Law (Testo Unico Bancario, hereafter TUB) completed
the enactment of the institutional, operational and maturity despecialization of the Italian
banking system and ensured the consistency of supervisory controls and intermediaries’
range of operations within the single market framework. The business restriction imposed by
the 1936 Banking Law, which distinguished between banks that could raise short-term funds
(“aziende di credito”) and those that could not (“Istituti di credito speciale”), was
eliminated.3 To avoid criticism of structural breaks, the econometric analysis of this study
will be based on the period 1993:03-2001:03, where all the main reforms of the Italian
banking system had already taken place.




   3
       For more details see Banca d’Italia, Annual Report for 1993.
                                                         5


       The behavior of bank interest rates in Italy reveals some stylized facts (see Figures 1
and 2). First, a remarkable fall in the average rates since the end of 1992. Second a strong
and persistent dispersion of rates among banks. These stylized facts suggest that both the
time series and the cross sections dimensions are important elements in understanding the
behavior of bank interest setting. This justifies the use of panel data techniques.

       The main reason behind the fall in banking interest rates is probably the successful
monetary policy aiming at reducing the inflation rate in the country to reach the Maastricht
criteria and the third stage of EMU. As a result, the interbank rate decreased by more than 10
percentage points in the period 1993-1999. Excluding the 1995 episode of the EMS crisis, it
is only since the third quarter of 1999 that it started to move upwards until the end of 2000
when it continued a declining trend. From a statistical point of view, this behavior calls for
the investigation of a possible structural break in the nineties.4

       The second stylized fact is cross-sectional dispersion among interest rates. Figure 2
shows the coefficient of variation for loan and deposit rates both over time and across banks
in the period 1987-2001.5 The temporal variation (dotted line) of the two rates show a
different behavior from the mid of the nineties when the deposit rate is more variable,
probably for a catching-up process of the rate toward a new equilibrium caused by the
convergence process. Also the cross-sectional dispersion of the deposit rate is greater than
that of the loan rate, especially after the introduction of euro.6


   4
    In the period 1995-98, that coincides with the convergence process towards stage three of EMU, it will be
necessary to allow for a change in the statistical properties of interest rates (see Appendix 2).
   5
     The coefficient of variation is given by the ratio of the standard errors to the mean. The series that refer to
the variability “over time” shows the coefficient of variation in each year of monthly figures. In contrast, the
series that capture the variability “across banks” shows the coefficient of variation of annual averages of bank-
specific interest rates.
   6
      In the period before the 1993 Banking Law deposit interest rates were quite sticky to monetary policy
changes. Deposit interest rate rigidity in this period has been extensively analyzed also for the US. Among the
market factors that have been found to affect the responsiveness of bank deposit rates are the direction of the
change in market rates (Ausubel, 1992; Hannan and Berger, 1991), if the bank interest rate is above or below a
target rate (Hutchison, 1995; Moore, Porter and Small, 1990; Neumark and Sharpe, 1992) and market
concentration in the bank’s deposit market (Hannan and Berger, 1991). Rosen (2001) develops a model of price
settings in presence of heterogeneous customers explaining why bank deposits interest rates respond sluggishly
to some extended movements in monetary market rates but not to others. Hutchinson (1995) presents a model
of bank deposit rates that includes a demand function for customers and predicts a linear (but less than one for
one) relationship between market interest rate changes and bank interest rate changes. Green (1998) claims that
the rigidity is due to the fact that bank interest rate management is based on a two-tier pricing system; banks
offer accounts at market related interest rates and at posted rates that are changed at discrete intervals.
                                                      6


3. What does influence banks’ interest rate setting?

       The literature that studies banks’ interest rate setting behavior generally assumes that
banks operate under oligopolistic market conditions.7 This means that a bank does not act as
a price-taker but sets its loan rates taking into account the demand for loans and deposits.
This section reviews the main channels that influence banks interest rates (see Figure 3).
A simple analytical framework is developed in Appendix 1.


Loan and deposit demand

       The interest rate on loans depends positively on real GDP and inflation (y and p).
Better economic conditions improve the number of projects becoming profitable in terms of
expected net present value and, therefore, increase credit demand (Kashyap, Stein and
Wilcox, 1993). As stressed by Melitz and Pardue (1973) only increases in permanent income
(yP) have a positive influence on loan demand, while the effect due to the transitory part (yT)
could also be associated with a self-financing effect that reduces the proportion of bank debt
(Friedman and Kuttner, 1993).8 An increase in the money market rate (iM) raises the
opportunity cost of other forms of financing (i.e. bonds), making lending more attractive.
This mechanism also boosts loan demand and increases the interest rate on loans.

       The interest rate on deposits is negatively influenced by real GDP and inflation. A
higher level of income increases the demand for deposits9 and reduces therefore the
incentive for banks to set higher deposit rates. In this case the shift of deposit demand should
be higher if the transitory component of GDP is affected (unexpected income is generally
first deposited on current accounts). On the contrary, an increase in the money market rate,
ceteris paribus, makes more attractive to invest in risk-free securities that represent an
alternative to detain deposits; the subsequent reduction in deposits demand determines an
upward pressure on the interest rate on deposits.


   7
    For a survey on modeling the banking firm see Santomero (1984). Among more recent works see Green
(1998) and Lim (2000).
   8
    Taking this into account, in Section 4 I tried to disentangle the two effects using a Beveridge and Nelson
(1981) decomposition.
   9
     The aim of this paper is not to answer to the question if deposits are input or output for the bank (see
Freixas and Rochet, 1997 on this debate). For simplicity here deposits are considered a service supplied by the
bank to depositors and are therefore considered an output (Hancock, 1991).
                                                7


Operating cost, credit risk and interest rate volatility

      The costs of intermediation (screening, monitoring, branching costs, etc.) have a
positive effect on the interest rate on loans and a negative effect on that of deposits
(efficiency is represented by e). The interest rate on lending also depends on the riskiness of
the credit portfolio; banks that invest in riskier project will have a higher rate of return in
order to compensate the higher percentage of bad loans that have to be written off (j).

      Banking interest rates are also influenced by interest rate volatility. A high volatility in
the money market rate (σ) should increase lending and deposit rates. Following the
dealership model by Ho and Saunders (1981) and its extension by Angbazo (1997) the
interest rate on loans should be more affected by interbank interest rate volatility with
respect to that on deposits (diL/dσ>diD/dσ). This should reveal a positive correlation between
interest rate volatility and the spread.


Interest rate channel

      Banking interest rates are also influenced by monetary policy changes. A monetary
tightening (easing) determines a reduction (increase) of reservable deposits and an increase
(reduction) of market interest rates. This has a “direct” and positive effect on bank interest
rates through the traditional “interest rate channel”. Nevertheless, the increase in the cost of
financing could have a different impact on banks depending on their specific characteristics.
There are two channels through which heterogeneity among banks may cause a different
impact on lending and deposit rates: the “bank lending channel” and the “bank capital
channel”. Both mechanisms are based on adverse selection problems that affect banks fund-
raising but from different perspectives.


Bank lending channel

      According to the “bank lending channel” thesis, a monetary tightening has effect on
bank loans because the drop in reservable deposits cannot be completely offset by issuing
other forms of funding (i.e. uninsured CDs or bonds; for an opposite view see Romer and
Romer, 1990) or liquidating some assets. Kashyap and Stein (1995, 2000), Stein (1998) and
Kishan and Opiela (2000) claim that the market for bank debt is imperfect. Since non-
reservable liabilities are not insured and there is an asymmetric information problem about
                                                        8


the value of banks’ assets, a “lemon’s premium” is paid to investors. According to these
authors, small, low-liquid and low-capitalized banks pay a higher premium because the
market perceives them more risky. Since these banks are more exposed to asymmetric
information problems they have less capacity to shield their credit relationships in case of a
monetary tightening and they should cut their supplied loans and raise their interest rate by
more. Moreover, these banks have less capacity to issue bonds and CDs and therefore they
could try to contain the drain of deposits by raising their rate by more. In Figure 3 three
effects are highlighted: the “average” effect due to the increase of the money market rate
(which is difficult to disentangle from the “interest rate channel”), the “direct”
heterogeneous effect due to bank-specific characteristics (Xt-1) and the “interaction effect”
between monetary policy and the bank-specific characteristic (iM Xt-1). These last two effects
can genuinely be attributed to the “bank lending channel” because bank-specific
characteristics influence only loan supply movements. Two aspects deserve to be stressed.
First, to avoid endogeneity problems bank-specific characteristics should refer to the period
before banks set their interest rates. Second, heterogeneous effects, if any, should be detected
only in the short run while there is no a priori that these effects should influence the long run
relationship between interest rates.

        Apart from the standard indicators of size (logarithm of total assets), liquidity (cash
and securities over total assets) and capitalization (excess capital over total assets),10 two
other bank-specific characteristics deserve to be investigated: a) the ratio between deposits
and bonds plus deposits; b) the ratio between long-term loans and total loans.

        The first indicator is in line with Berlin and Mester (1999): banks that heavily depend
upon non-deposit funding (i.e. bonds) will adjust their deposits rates by more (and more
quickly) than banks whose liabilities are less affected by market movements. The intuition of
this result is that, other things being equal, it is more likely that a bank will adjust her terms

   10
       It is important to note that the effect of bank capital on the “bank lending channel” cannot be easily
captured by the capital-to-asset ratio. This measure, generally used by the existing literature to analyze the
distributional effects of bank capitalization on lending, does not take into account the riskiness of a bank
portfolio. A relevant measure is instead the excess capital that is the amount of capital that banks hold in excess
of the minimum required to meet prudential regulation standards. Since minimum capital requirements are
determined by the quality of bank’s balance sheet activities, the excess capital represents a risk-adjusted
measure of bank capitalization that gives more indications on the probability of a bank default. Moreover, the
excess capital is a relevant measure of the availability of the bank to expand credit because it directly controls
for prudential regulation constraints. For more details see Gambacorta and Mistrulli (2004).
                                                             9


for passive deposits if the conditions of her own alternative form of refinancing change.
Therefore an important indicator to analyze the pass-through between market and banking
rates is the ratio between deposits and bonds plus deposits. Banks which use relatively more
bonds than deposits for financing purpose fell more under pressure because their cost
increase contemporaneously and to similar extent as market rates.

         The Berger and Udell (1992) indicator represents a proxy for long-term business; those
credit institutions that maintain close ties with their non-bank customers will adjust their
lending rates comparatively less and slowly. Banks may offer implicit interest rate insurance
to risk-averse borrowers in the form of below-market rates during periods of high market
rates, for which the banks are later compensated when market rates are low. Having this in
mind, banks that have a higher proportion of long-term loans should be more inclined to split
the risk of monetary policy change with their customers and preserve credit relationships.
For example, Weth (2002) finds that in Germany those banks with large volumes of long-
term business with households and firms change their prices less frequently than the others.


Bank capital channel

         The “bank capital channel” is based on three hypotheses. First, there is an imperfect
market for bank equity: banks cannot easily issue new equity for the presence of agency
costs and tax disadvantages (Myers and Majluf, 1984; Cornett and Tehranian, 1994;
Calomiris and Hubbard, 1995; Stein, 1998). Second, banks are subject to interest rate risk
because their assets have typically a higher maturity with respect to liabilities (maturity
transformation). Third, regulatory capital requirements limit the supply of credit (Thakor,
1996; Bolton and Freixas, 2001; Van den Heuvel, 2001a; 2001b).

         The mechanism is the following. After an increase of market interest rates, a lower
fraction of loans can be renegotiated with respect to deposits (loans are mainly long term,
while deposits are typically short term): banks suffer therefore a cost due to the maturity
mismatch that reduces profits and then capital accumulation.11 If equity is sufficiently low
and it is too costly to issue new shares, banks reduce lending (otherwise they fail to meet

   11
        In Figure 3, the cost per unit of asset due to the maturity transformation at time t-1 ( ρit −1 ) is multiplied by
the actual change in the money market rate ( ∆iM ). For more details see Appendix 1.
                                                      10


regulatory capital requirements) and amplify their interest rate spread. This determines
therefore an increase in the interest rates on loans and a decrease in that on deposits:12 in the
oligopolistic version of the Monti-Klein model, the maturity transformation cost has the
same effect of an increase in operating costs.


Industry structure

         The literature underlines two possible impacts of concentration on pricing behavior
of banks (Berger and Hannan, 1989). A first class of models claims that more concentrated
banking industry will behave oligopolistically (structure-performance hypothesis), while
another class of models stresses that concentration is due to more efficient banks taking over
less efficient counterparts (efficient-structure hypothesis). This means that in the first case
lower competition should result in higher spreads, while in the second case a decrease in
managerial costs due to increased efficiency should have a negative impact on the spread. In
the empirical part great care will be given therefore to the treatment of bank mergers (see
Appendix 2). Nevertheless, the scope of this paper is not to extract policy implications about
this issue, for which a different analysis is needed. The introduction of bank-specific dummy
variables (µi) tries to control for this and other missing aspects.13


4. Empirical specification and data

        The equations described in Figure 3 and derived analytically in Appendix 1 are
expressed in levels. Nevertheless, since interest rates are likely to be non-stationary
variables, an error correction model has been used to capture bank’s interest rate setting.14
Economic theory on oligopolistic (and perfect) competition suggests that, in the long run,
both banking rates (on lending and deposits) should be related to the level of the monetary

   12
      The “bank capital channel” can also be at work even if capital requirement is not currently binding. Van
den Heuvel (2001a) shows that low-capitalized banks may optimally forgo lending opportunities now in order
to lower the risk of capital inadequacy in the future. This is interesting because in reality, most banks are not
constrained at any given time.
   13
        In Section 6 this hypothesis will be tested introducing a specific measure of the degree of competition
that each banks faces. For a more detailed explanation on the effect of concentration on the pricing behavior of
Italian banks see Focarelli and Panetta (2003).
   14
      This is indeed the standard approach used for interest rate equations (Cottarelli et al. 1995; Lim, 2000;
Weth 2002). From a statistical point of view, the error correction representation is adopted because the lending
rate and the deposit rate result to be cointegrated with the money market rate.
                                                                               11


rate, that reflects the marginal yield of a risk-free investment (Klein, 1971). We have:
                         2                        1
      ∆i L k ,t = µ k + å κ j ∆i L k ,t − j + å ( β j + β *j X           k ,t −1   ) ∆i M t − j + ϕ p t + δ 1 ∆ ln y tP + δ 2 ∆ ln y tT + λX          k ,t −1     +
(1)                      j =1                    j =0

      φ∆ ( ρ k ,t −1 ∆i M t ) + (α + α * X   k ,t −1   )i L k ,t −1 + (γ + γ * X      k ,t −1   )i M t −1 + θ j k ,t + ξ e k ,t + ψσ t + Φ k ,t + ε k ,t

                          2                        1
      ∆i D k ,t = µ k + å κ j ∆i D k ,t − j + å ( β j + β *j X            k ,t −1   )∆i M t − j + ϕ p t + δ 1 ∆ ln y tP + δ 2 ∆ ln y tT + λX           k , t −1   +
(2)                      j =1                     j =0

      φ∆ ( ρ k ,t −1 ∆i M t ) + (α + α * X   k ,t −1   )i D k ,t −1 + (γ + γ * X      k ,t −1   )i M t −1 + ξ e k ,t + ψσ t + Φ k ,t + ε k ,t


with k=1,…, N (k=number of banks) and t=1, …,T (t= periods). Data are quarterly (1993:03-
2001:03) and not seasonally adjusted. The panel is balanced with N=73 banks. Lags have
been selected in order to obtain white noise residuals. The description of the variables is
reported in Table 1.15

          The model allows for fixed effects across banks, as indicated by the bank-specific
intercept µi. The long-run elasticity between each banking rate and the money market rate is

given by: (γ + γ * X k ,t −1 ) /(α + α * X k ,t −1 ) . Therefore to test if the pass-through between the

money market rate and the banking rate is complete it is necessary to verify that this
elasticity is equal to one. If this is the case there is a one-to-one long-run relationship
between the lending (deposit) rate and the money market rate, while the individual effect µi
influences the bank-specific mark-up (mark-down). The loading coefficient (α + α * X k ,t −1 )

must be significantly negative if the assumption of an equilibrium relationship is correct. In
fact, it represents how many percent of an exogenous variation from the steady state between
the rates is brought back towards the equilibrium in the next period.16

          The degree of banks’ interest rate stickiness in the short run can be analyzed by the
impact multiplier ( β 0 + β 0* X k ,t −1 ) and the total effect after three months.17



15
  For more details on data sources, variable definitions, merger treatment and trimming of the sample see
Appendix 2.
16
     Testing for heterogeneity in the loading coefficient means to verify if                                    α * is significant or not. At the same
time heterogeneity in the long-run elasticity can be proved if α *γ − αγ * is statistically different from zero.
17
     In the first case heterogeneity among banks is simply tested through the significance of                                              β 0*   while in the
second case, since the effect is given by a convolution of the structural parameters it is possible to accept the
                                                                   12


         The variable Xk,t-1 represents a bank-specific characteristic that economic theory
suggests to influence only loan and deposit supply movements, without affecting loan and
deposit demands. In particular, all bank-specific indicators ( χ k ,t ) have been re-parameterized

in the following way:

                             æ      N
                                            ö
                             ç T å χ k ,t   ÷
         X k ,t = χ k ,t   − ç å k =1       ÷ /T
                             ç t =1 N       ÷
                             ç              ÷
                             è              ø

         Each indicator is therefore normalized with respect to the average across all the banks
in the respective sample, in order to obtain a variable whose sum over all observations is
zero.18 This has two implications. First, the interaction terms between interest rates and
X k , t −1 in equations (1) and (2) are zero for the average bank (this because X k ,t −1 =0). Second,

the coefficients β0, β1, α and γ are directly interpretable as average effects.

         To test for the existence of a “bank capital channel” we have introduced the variable
ρ k , t −1∆iM that represents the bank-specific cost of monetary policy due to maturity

transformation. In particular ρ k , t −1 measures the loss per unit of asset a bank suffers when

the monetary policy interest rate is raised of one percent. The cost at time t is influenced by
the maturity transformation in t-1. This variable is computed according to supervisory
regulation relative to interest rate risk exposure that depends on the maturity mismatch
among assets and liabilities (see Appendix 2 for further details). To work out the real cost we
have therefore multiplied ρ k , t −1 for the realized change in interest rates. Therefore ρ k , t −1∆iM

represents the cost (gain) that a bank suffers (obtain) in each quarter. As formalized in
Appendix 1, this measure influences the level of bank interest rates. Since the model is
expressed in error correction form we have included this variable in first difference as well.




null hypothesis of absence of heterogeneity if and only if éë β 0α * + β 0* (1 + α + κ 1 ) + β1* + γ * ùû X k ,t −1 + α * β 0* X k2,t −1 is
equal to zero. The significance of this expression has been checked using the delta method (Rao, 1973).
    18
     The size indicator has been normalized with respect to the mean on each single period. This procedure
removes trends in size (for more details see Ehrmann et al., 2003).
                                                       13


4.1 Characteristics of the dataset

        The dataset includes 73 banks that represent more than 70 per cent of total Italian
banking system in term of loans over the whole sample period. Since information on interest
rates is not available for Mutual banks, the sample is biased towards large banks. Foreign
banks and special credit institution are also excluded.

        This bias toward large banks has two consequences. First, the distributional effects of
the size variable would be treated with extreme cautious because a “small” bank inside this
sample could not be considered with the same characteristic using the full population of
Italian banks.19 The size grouping in this study mainly controls for variations in scale,
technology and scope efficiencies across banks but it is not able to shed light on differences
between Mutual and other banks. Second, results for the average bank will provide more
“macroeconomic insights” than studies on the whole population (where the average bank
dimension is very small).

        Table 2 gives some basic information on the dataset. Rows are organized dividing the
sample with respect to the bank-specific characteristics that are potential candidates to cause
heterogeneous shifts in loan supply in case of a monetary policy shock. On the columns, the
table reports summary statistics for the two interest rates and for each indicator.

        Several clear patterns emerge. Considering size, small banks charge higher interest
rates on lending but show a lower time variation. This fits with the standard idea of a close
customer relationships between small firms and small banks that provides them with an
incentive to smooth the effect of a monetary tightening (Angelini, Di Salvo and Ferri, 1998).
Moreover, small banks are more liquid and capitalized than average and this should help
them to reduce the effect of cyclical variation on supplied credit. On the liability side, the
percentage of deposits (overnight deposits, CDs and savings accounts) is greater among
small banks, while their bonds issues are more limited than the ones of large banks.
Nevertheless, there are no significant differences that emerge in the level and volatility of the
interest rate on current accounts.

   19
      In particular, banks that are considered “small” in this study are labeled as “medium” in other studies for
the Italian banking system that analyze quantities (see for example, Gambacorta, 2003; Gambacorta and
Mistrulli, 2004). This is clear noting that the average assets of a “small” bank in my data (1.6 billions of euros)
over the sample period is very similar to that of the “medium” bank of the total system (1.7 billions of euros).
                                                     14


        High-liquid banks are smaller than average and are more capitalized. These
characteristics should reduce the speed of the “bank lending channel” transmission through
interest rates. In particular, since deposits represent a high share of their funding they should
have a smoother transmission on passive rates.

        Well-capitalized banks make relatively more short-term loans. They are in general not
listed and issue less subordinated debt to meet the capital requirement. This evidence is
consistent with the view that, ceteris paribus, capitalization is higher for those banks that
bear more adjustment costs from issuing new (regulatory) capital. Well-capitalized banks
charge a higher interest rate on lending; this probably depend upon their higher ratios of bad
loans that increase their credit risk. In other words their higher capitalization is necessary to
face a riskier portfolio. Moreover, the interest rate on deposit is lower for low-capitalized
banks indicating that agents do not perceive these deposits as riskier than those at other
banks. This has two main explanations. First, the impact of bank failures has been very small
in Italy, especially with respect to deposits.20 Second, the presence of deposit insurance that
insulates deposits of less capitalized banks from the risk of default.21

        The Berlin-Mester and the Berger-Udell indicators seem to have a high power in
explaining heterogeneity in banks’ price setting behavior. Differences in the standard
deviations of the two groups are particularly sensitive, calling for a lower interest rates
variability of banks with a high percentage of deposits and long-term loans.




   20
      During our sample period, the share of deposits of failed banks to total deposits approached 1 per cent
only twice, namely in 1987 and 1996 (Boccuzzi, 1998).
   21
      Two explicit limited-coverage deposit insurance schemes (DISs) currently operate in Italy. Both are
funded ex-post; that is, member banks have a commitment to make available to the Funds the necessary
resources should a bank default. All the banks operating in the country, with the exception of mutual banks,
adhere to the main DIS, the ‘Fondo Interbancario di Tutela dei Depositi’ (FITD). Mutual banks (‘Banche di
Credito Cooperativo’) adhere to a special Fund (‘Fondo di Garanzia dei Depositanti del Credito Cooperativo’)
created for banks belonging to their category. The ‘Fondo Interbancario di Tutela dei Depositi’ (FITD), the
main DIS, is a private consortium of banks created in 1987 on a voluntary basis. In 1996, as a consequence of
the implementation of European Union Directive 94/19 on deposit guarantee schemes, the Italian Banking Law
regulating the DIS was amended, and FITD became a compulsory DIS. FITD performs its tasks under the
supervision of and in cooperation with the banking supervision authority, Banca d’Italia. The level of
protection granted to each depositor (slightly more than 103,000 euros) is one of the highest in the European
Union. FITD does not adopt any form of deposit coinsurance.
                                                                15


5. Results

          The main channels that influence the interest rate on short term lending and that on
current accounts are summarized, respectively, in Tables 3 and 4. The first part of each table,
show the influence of the permanent and transitory component of real GDP and inflation.
These macro variables capture cyclical movements and serves to isolate shifts in loan and
deposit demand from monetary policy changes. The second part of the tables presents the
effects of bank’s efficiency, credit risk and interest rate volatility. The third part highlights
the effects of monetary policy. These are divided into four components: i) the immediate
pass-through; ii) the one-quarter pass-through; iii) the long-run elasticity between each
banking rate and the monetary policy indicator; iv) the loading coefficient of the
cointegrating relationship.22 The last part of the tables shows the significance of the “bank
capital channel”. Each table is divided in five columns that highlight, one at the time,
heterogeneous behavior of banks with different characteristics in the response to a monetary
shock. The existence of distributional effects is tested for all the four components of the
monetary policy pass-through. The models have been estimated using the GMM estimator
suggested by Arellano and Bond (1991) which ensures efficiency and consistency provided
that the models are not subject to serial correlation of order two and that the instruments used
are valid (which is tested for with the Sargan test).23




    22
         The immediate pass-trough is given by the coefficient β 0 + β 0* X k ,t −1 and heterogeneity among banks is
simply tested through the significance of β 0* . The effect for a bank with a low value of the characteristic under
evaluation is worked out through the expression β 0 + β 0* X k0.25              0.25
                                                               , t −1 , where X k , t −1 is the average for the banks below

the first quartile. Vice versa the effect for a bank with a high value of the characteristic is calculated using
     , t −1 . The total effect after three months for the average bank is given by β 0 (1 + α1 + κ 1 ) + β1 + γ ' while
 X k0.75
heterogeneity           among          banks            can         be        accepted    if   and    only   if    the     expression
éë β 0α * + β 0* (1 + α + κ 1 ) + β1* + γ * ùû X k ,t −1 + α * β 0* X k2,t −1 is equal to zero. The long run elasticity is given by:

(γ + γ * X k ) /(α + α * X k ) , while the loading coefficient is α1 + α1* X k ,t −1 . Standard errors have been
approximated with the “delta method” (Rao, 1973).
    23
     In the GMM estimation, instruments are the second lag of the dependent variable and of the bank-specific
characteristics included in each equation. Inflation, GDP growth rate and the monetary policy indicator are
considered as exogenous variables.
                                               16


Loan and deposit demand

      As predicted by theory only changes in permanent income have a positive and
significant effect on the interest rate on short term lending while the transitory component is
never significant. In fact, as discussed in Section 3, the effect of transitory changes may be
also due to a self-financing effect that reduces the proportion of bank debt. On the contrary
the interest rate on deposits is negatively influenced by real GDP. In this case the effect is
higher when a change in the transitory component occurs because it is directly channeled
through current accounts. The effect of inflation is positive on both interest rates but is
significantly higher for short-term lending.


Operating costs, credit risk and interest rate volatility

       Bank’s efficiency reduces the interest rate on loans and increase that of deposits.
Nevertheless, the effect is not always significant at conventional levels, especially in the
equation for the interest rate on current accounts. These results call for further robustness
checks using a cost-to-asset ratio (see Section 6).

      The relative amount of bad loans has a positive and significant effect on the interest
rate on loans. This is in line with the standard result that banks that invest in riskier project
ask for a higher rate of return to compensate credit risk.

      Both banking rates are positively correlated with money market rate volatility. The
correlation is higher for the interest rate on loans with respect to that of deposits. This is
consistent with the prediction of the dealership model by Ho and Saunders (1981) and its
extension by Angbazo (1997) where an increase in interbank interest rate volatility is
associated with a higher spread.


Bank capital channel

      As expected the “bank capital channel” (based on the maturity mismatch between
bank’s assets an liabilities, see Section 3) has a positive effect on the interest rate on short-
term lending and a negative effect on the interest rate on current account. The absolute
values of the coefficients are greater in the first case calling for a stronger adjustment on
credit contracts than on deposits. Since this channel can be interpreted similarly to a general
                                                       17


increase in the costs for the banks, it is worth comparing this result with that obtained for the
efficiency indicator. In both cases the effect is strongest for the interest rate on short-term
lending and this is consistent with the view that the interest rate on deposit is more sluggish.


Interest rate channel

        A monetary tightening positively influences banks’ interest rate. After a one per cent
increase in the monetary policy indicator, interest rate on short term lending are immediately
raised of around 0.5 per cent and of around 0.9 per cent after a quarter. Moreover, the pass-
through is complete in the long run (the null hypothesis of a unitary elasticity is accepted in
all models). The reaction of the short term lending rate is higher with respect to previous
studies on the Italian case and this calls for an increase in competition after the introduction
of the 1993 Banking Law. Cottarelli et al. (1995), analyzing the period 1986:02-1993:04,
find that the immediate pass through is of around 0.2, while the effect after three months is
0.6 per cent. Their long run elasticity is equal to 0.9 per cent but also in their model the null
hypothesis of a complete pass-through in the long run is accepted.24

         The long run elasticity of the interest rate on current accounts is around 0.7 per cent.
This result is in line with the recent findings by de Bondt et al. (2003) under a similar sample
period and only a little higher with respect to the long-run elasticity in Angeloni et al. (1995)
for the period 1987:1-1993:04.25

         The standard answer to the incomplete pass-through of money market changes on the
deposit rate is the existence of market power by banks. Another explanation is the presence
of compulsory reserves. To analyze this, we can refer to the theoretical elasticity in the case


   24
       The main differences between Cottarelli et al. (1995) and this paper are three. First, they use the Treasury
bill rate as the reference monetary interest rate. However from the early nineties this indicator became less
important as “reference rate” because the interbank market became more competitive and efficient (Gaiotti,
1992). This is indeed stated also by Cottarelli et al. (page 19). Second, they do not include macro variables
controls in their equation. Third, their dataset is based on monthly data. To allow comparability among the
results of this paper and those in Cottarelli et al. (1995) I have: 1) checked the results to different monetary
policy indicators (i.e. the interbank rate; see Section 6); 2) excluded the macro variables from equation (1) to
verify if the results were sensitive to their inclusion. In all cases the conclusion of an increase of speed in the
reaction of short-term interest rate on loans to money market rate resulted unchanged.
   25
       The VAR model in Angeloni et al. considers the interest rate on total deposits (sight, time deposits and
CDs), which is typically more reactive to monetary policy than that on current account because the service
component in time deposits and CDs is less important. This means that in comparing our result with Angeloni
et al. we are underestimating the potential effect of competition.
                                                      18


of perfect competition.26 This benchmark case is very instructive because it allows to analyze
what happens if banks are price takers (they take as given not only the monetary market rate
but also the interest rate on loans and that on deposits), set the quantity of loans and deposits
and obtain a zero profit (the sum of the intermediation margins equals management costs). In
                                                   ∂iL        ∂i
this case the long-run elasticities become:            = 1 and D = 1 − α where α is the fraction of
                                                   ∂iM        ∂iM

deposits invested in risk-free assets (this includes the “compulsory” reserves). Therefore in
principle, an incomplete pass-through from market rates to deposits rates is also consistent
with the fact that banks decide (or are constrained by regulation) to detain a certain fraction
of their deposits in liquid assets.

         The loading coefficients are significantly negative. It is around –0.4 in the loan
equation and –0.6 in the current account equation. This means that if an exogenous shock
occurs, respectively 40 and 60 per cent of the deviation is canceled out within the first
quarter in each banking rate.


Bank lending channel

        In case of a monetary shock, banks with different characteristics behave differently
only in the short run. On the contrary no heterogeneity emerges in the long run relationship
between each banking rate and the monetary policy indicator.

        Considering each bank’s specific characteristic one at the time (Tables 3 and 4),
interest rates of small, liquid and well-capitalized banks react less to a monetary policy
shock. Also the Berlin-Mester and the Berger-Udell indicators have an high power in
explaining heterogeneity in banks’ price setting behavior.

        Nevertheless, the robustness of these distributional effects has to be checked in a
model that takes all these five indicators together into account. In this model, in order to save
degrees of freedom, the long-run elasticity between the money market rate and the short-


   26
      The case of perfect competition can be easily obtained from equation (A1.8) and A1.9) in Appendix 1
considering loan and deposit demand (equations A1.3 and A1.4) infinitely elastic with respect the bank rates
(c0→∞, d0→∞). Moreover, we will consider the benchmark case were no heterogeneity emerges in the “bank
lending channel” (b1=0) and bonds can be issued at the risk free rate (b0=1). See Freixas and Rochet (1997) for
an analogous treatment.
                                                19


term lending rate has been imposed to one; that with the interest rate on current account has
been fixed to 0.7.

      Results are reported in Table 5. Interest rates on short-term lending of liquid and well-
capitalized banks react less to a monetary policy shock. Also banks with a high proportion of
long-term lending tend to change less their prices. Size is not significant.

      This evidence matches with previous results on lending. Liquid banks can protect their
loan portfolio against a monetary tightening simply by drawing down cash and securities
(Gambacorta, 2003). Well-capitalized banks that are perceived as less risky by the market
are better able to raise uninsured funds in order to compensate the drop in deposits
(Gambacorta and Mistrulli, 2004). Therefore the effects on lending detected for liquid and
well-capitalized banks are mirrored by their higher capacity to insulate the clients also from
the effects on interest rates. It is interesting to note that, in contrast with the evidence for the
US (Kashyap and Stein; 1995), the interaction terms between size and monetary policy are
insignificant. The fact that the interest rate on short term lending of smaller banks is not
more sensitive to monetary policy than that of larger banks is well documented in the
literature for Italy and reflects the close customer relationship between small banks and
small firms (Angeloni et al. 1995; Conigliani et al., 1997; Angelini, Di Salvo and Ferri,
1998; Ferri and Pittaluga, 1996). This result is also consistent with Ehrmann et al. (2003)
where size does not emerge as a useful indicator for the distributional effect of monetary
policy on lending not only in Italy but also in France, Germany and Spain.

      As regards the interest rate on current accounts, the Berlin-Mester indicator is the only
bank-specific characteristic that explains heterogeneity in banks price setting behavior. In
particular, banks that heavily depend upon non-deposit funding (banks with a low BM
indicator) will adjust their interest rate on current account by more (and more quickly) than
banks whose liabilities are less affected by market movements. As explained in Section 3,
the intuition of this result is that, other things being equals, it is more likely that a bank will
adjust her terms on deposits if the other conditions of her refinancing change. The liability
structure seems to influence not only the short-run adjustment but also the loading
coefficient. This implies that banks with a high BM ratio react less when there is a deviation
in the long run mark-down: banks with a higher percentage of deposits have more room in
adjusting their prices toward the optimal equilibrium. As expected, no cross sectional
                                              20


differences emerges among banks due to size, liquidity and capitalization because current
accounts are typically insured.



6. Robustness checks

      The robustness of the results has been checked in several ways. The first test was to
introduce as additional control variable a bank-specific measure of the degree of competition
that each bank faces in the market. In particular, the average value of the Herfindahl index in
the different “local markets” (corresponding to the administrative provinces of Italy) in
which the bank operates was introduced in each equation. The reason of this test is that the
fixed effect (that captures also industry structure) remains stable over the whole period while
the degree of competition could change over time due to the effect of concentration.
Therefore this test allows us also to check if the treatment of bank mergers is carried out
properly. The Herfindahl index did not show to be statistically significant and the results of
the study did not change.

      The second test was to use as bank’s efficiency indicator the cost-to-total asset ratio
instead than the ratio of total loans and deposits to the number of branches. In all cases the
results remained unchanged.

      The third test was to consider if different fiscal treatments over the sample period
could have changed deposit demand (from June 1996 the interest rate on current account is
subject to a fiscal deduction of 27 per cent; 12.5 per cent before). However, using the net
interest rate on current account instead than the gross rate nothing changed.

      The fourth robustness check was the introduction of a dummy variables to take into
account of the spike in the change of the repo interest rate caused by the EMS crisis in the
first quarter of 1995. Also in this case results remained the same.

      The fifth test was to introduce additional interaction terms combining the bank-specific
characteristic with inflation, permanent and transitory changes in real income. The reason for
this test is the possible presence of endogeneity between bank characteristics and cyclical
factors. Performing the test, however, nothing changed, and the double interactions were
almost always not significant (it turned out to be statistically not different from zero in the
case of the interaction of capitalization and permanent income).
                                               21


      The final robustness check was to introduce a dummy variable that indicates if the
bank belongs to a group (1) or not (0). Banks belonging to a group may be less influenced by
monetary changes if they can benefit of an internal liquidity management; in other words,
bank holding companies establish internal capital markets in an attempt to allocate capital
among their various subsidiaries (Houston and James, 1998; Upper and Worms, 2001). The
introduction of this dummy did not change the results of the study.



7. Conclusions

      This paper investigates which factors influence price setting behavior of Italian banks.
It adds to the existing literature in two ways. First, it analyzes systematically a wide range of
micro and macroeconomic variables that have an effect on bank interest rates: permanent
and transitory changes in income, interest and credit risk, interest rate volatility, banks’
efficiency. Second, the analysis of banks’ prices (rather than quantities) provides an
alternative way to disentangle loan supply from loan demand shift in the “bank lending
channel” literature.

      The search for heterogeneity in banks’ behavior is carried out by using a balanced
panel of 73 Italian banks that represent more than 70 per cent of the banking system. The use
of microeconomic data help in reducing the problems of aggregation that may significantly
bias the estimation of dynamic economic relations and it is less prone to structural changes
like the formation of EMU.

      The main results of the study are the following. First, heterogeneity in the banking
rates pass-through exists, but it is detected only in the short run: no differences exist in the
long-run elasticities of banking rates to the money market rate. Second, consistently with the
existing literature for Italy, interest rates on short-term lending of liquid and well-capitalized
banks react less to a monetary policy shock. Also banks with a high proportion of long-term
lending tend to change their prices less. Heterogeneity in the pass-through on the interest rate
on current accounts depends on banks’ liability structure. Bank’s size is never relevant.
                              Appendix 1 - A simple theoretical model

        This Appendix develops a one-period model of a risk neutral bank that operates under
oligopolistic market conditions.

        The balance sheet of the representative bank is as follows:

(A1.1) L + S = D + B + K

where L stands for loans, S for securities, D for deposits, B for bonds, K for capital.

        The bank holds securities as a buffer against contingencies. We assume that security
holdings are a fixed share of the outstanding deposits (α). They represent a safe asset and
fruit the risk-free interest rate.27 We have therefore:

(A1.2) S = α D

         For simplicity, bank capital is exogenously given in the period and greater than
capital requirements.28

         The bank faces a loan demand and a deposit demand. The first one is given by:

(A1.3)          Ld = c0 i L + c1 y + c 2 p + c3 i M (c0<0, c1>0, c2>0, c3>0)

that is negatively related to the interest rate on loans (il ) and it is positively related to real
income (y) and prices (p) and the opportunity cost of self-financing, proxied by the money
market interest rate (im).29


   27
      Alternatively S can be considered as the total amount of bank’s liquidity, where α is the coefficient of
free and compulsory reserves. In this case reserves are remunerated by the money market rate fixed by the
Central Bank. This alternative interpretation does not change the results of the model.
   28
      In the spirit of the actual BIS capital adequacy rules, capital requirements on credit risks are given by a
fixed amount (k) of loans. If bank capital perfectly meets Basle standard requirement the amount of loans
would be L=K/k. We rule out this possibility because banks typically hold a buffer as a cushion against
contingencies (Wall and Peterson, 1987; Barrios and Blanco, 2001). Excess capital allows them to face capital
adjustment costs and to convey positive information on their economic value (Leland and Pile, 1977; Myers
and Majluf, 1984). Another explanation is that banks face a private cost of bankruptcy, which reduces their
expected future income (Dewatripont and Tirole, 1994). Van den Heuvel (2001a) argues that even if capital
requirement is not currently binding, a low capitalized bank may optimally forego profitable lending
opportunities now, in order to lower the risk of future capital inadequacy. A final explanation for the existence
of excess capital is given by market discipline; well-capitalized banks obtain a lower cost of uninsured funding,
such as bonds or CDs, because they are perceived less risky by the market (Gambacorta and Mistrulli, 2004).
   29
    As far as the GDP is concerned, there is no clear consensus about how economic activity affects credit
demand. Some empirical works underline a positive relation because better economic conditions would
                                                              23


         The deposit demand is standard. It depends positively on the interest rate on deposits,
the level of real income (the scale variable) and the price level and negatively on the interest
rate on securities that represent an alternative to the investment to deposits.

(A1.4)          D d = d 0id + d1 y + d 2 p + d 3im                    (d0>0, d1>0, d2>0, d3<0)

       Because banks are risky and bonds are not insured, bond interest rate incorporates a
risk premium that we assume depends on specific banks’ characteristics. The latter are
balance sheet information or institutional characteristics exogenously given at the end of
previous period.

(A1.5)            ib ( im , xt −1 ) = b0im + b1im xt −1 + b2 xt −1           (b0>1)

       In other words, this assumption implies that the distributional effects via the bank
lending channel depends on some characteristics that allow the bank to substitute insured,
typically deposits, with uninsured banks’ debt, like bonds or CDs (Romer and Romer, 1990).
For example, theory predicts that big, liquid and well-capitalized banks should be perceived
less risky by the market and obtain a lower cost on their uninsured funding (b2<0). Moreover
they could react less to monetary change (b1<0)

       The effects of the so-called “bank capital channel” are captured by the following
equation:

(A1.6)            C MT = ρt −1∆im ( L + S )                  (ρ >0)

where C MT represents the total cost suffered by the bank in case of a change in monetary
policy due to the maturity transformation. Since loans have typically a longer maturity than




improve the number of project becoming profitable in terms of expected net present value and, therefore,
increase credit demand (Kashyap, Stein and Wilcox, 1993). This is also the hypothesis used in Bernanke and
Blinder (1988). On the contrary, other works stress the fact that if expected income and profits increase, the
private sector has more internal source of financing and this could reduce the proportion of bank debt
(Friedman and Kuttner, 1993). A compromise position is taken by Melitz and Pardue (1973): only increases in
permanent income have a positive influence on loan demand, while the effect due to the transitory part could
also be associated with a self-financing effect in line with Friedman and Kuttner. Taking this into account, in
the econometric part (see Section 4) I will try to disentangle the two effects using a Beveridge and Nelson
(1981). For simplicity in the model I assume that the first effect dominates and that a higher income determines
an increase in credit demand (c2>0). This is indeed consistent with the evidence provided by Ehrmann et al.
(2001) for the four main countries of the euro area.
                                                       24


bank fund-raising, the variable ρ represents the cost (gain) per unit of asset that the bank
incurs in case of a one per cent increase (decrease) in the monetary policy interest rate.

          The cost of intermediation is given by:

(A1.7) C IN = g1 L + g 2 D                   (g1>0, g2>0)

where the component g1L can be interpreted as screening and monitoring cost while g2D as
the cost of the branching.30

           Loans are risky and, in each period, a percentage j of them is written off from the
balance sheet, therefore reducing bank’s profitability.

           The representative bank maximizes her profits subject to the balance-sheet constraint.
The bank optimally sets the interest rates on loans and deposits (iL, iD), while she takes the
money market interest rate (iM) as given (it is fixed by the Central Bank).

Max π = (iL − j ) L + im S − iD D − iB B − C MT − C IN
 il ,id

            s.t.
L+Q = D+ B+ K

          Solving the maximization problem, the optimal levels of the two interest rates are:

(A1.8) iL = Ψ 0 + Ψ1 p + (Ψ 2 + Ψ 3 xt −1 )im + Ψ 4 y P + Ψ 5 ρt −1∆im + Ψ 6 j + Ψ 7 xt −1

(A1.9) id = Φ 0 + Φ1 p + (Φ 2 + Φ 3 xt −1 )im + Φ 4 y P + Φ 5 ρt −1∆im + Φ 6 xt −1

where:

     g1                  c                b    c                 b         c             1
Ψ0 =    > 0 ; Ψ1 = 2 > 0 ; Ψ 2 = 0 + 3 > 0 ; Ψ 3 = 1 ; Ψ 4 = 1 > 0 ; Ψ 5 = ;
      2                 −2c0              2 −2c0                  2      −2c0            2
     1              b            g                  d                 b (1 − α ) −d 3 α
Ψ6 = ;       Ψ7 = 2        Φ0 = − 2 < 0 ;     Φ1 = − 2 < 0 ;      Φ2 = 0        +     + >0;
     2              2             2                 2d 0                  2       2d 0 2
       b (1 − α )            d              α            b (1 − α )
Φ3 = − 1          ; Φ 4 = − 1 < 0 ; Φ5 = − < 0 ; Φ6 = 2             .
          2d 0             2d 0             2                2

     30
      The additive linear form of the management cost simplifies the algebra. The introduction of a quadratic
cost function would not have changed the result of the analysis. An interesting consequence of the additive
form of the management cost is that bank’s decision problem is separable: the optimal interest rate on deposits
is independent of the characteristic of the loan market while the optimal interest rate on loans is independent of
the characteristics of the deposit market. For a discussion see Dermine (1991).
                                               25


      Equation (A1.8) states that a monetary tightening determines an increase in the interest
rate on loans (Ψ2>0): the total effect could be divided into two parts: the “bank lending
channel” (b0/2>0) and the “opportunity cost” effect (-c3/2c0>0) The effect of a monetary
squeeze is smaller if the bank-specific characteristic reduces the impact of monetary policy
on the cost of funding (b1<0 and Ψ3<0). In this case banks have a greater capacity to
compensate the deposit drop by issuing uninsured funds at a lower price. Loan interest rate
reacts positively to an output expansion (Ψ4>0) and to a raise in prices (Ψ1>0). The effect of
the so-called “bank capital channel” is also positive ( Ψ 5 > 0 ); due to the longer maturity of

bank assets with respect to liabilities (ρ>0), in case of a monetary tightening ( ∆im >0) the

bank suffers a cost and a subsequent reduction in profit; given the capital constraint, this
effect determines an increase in loan interest rates (the mirror effect is a decrease in lending).

      The equation (A1.9) for deposit interest rate is slightly different. Also in this case the
impact of a monetary tightening is positive (Φ2>0) but it can now be split in three parts: the
“bank lending channel” (b0(1-α)/2>0), the “opportunity cost” (-d3/2d0>0) and the “liquidity
buffer”(α/2>0) effects. The intuition of this result is that a monetary squeeze automatically
increase the cost of borrowing of bank uninsured fund and the return on securities (the
alternative investment for depositors); therefore the first two effects push the bank to
increase the interest rate on deposits to raise more insured funds. The percentage of deposits
invested in securities (α) act, on the one hand, as a simple “reserve coefficient” that reduces
the effectiveness of the “bank lending channel” while, on the other, it increases the revenue
on liquid portfolio and the market power of the bank to offset the interest rate on deposits.
The distributional effects of monetary policy are equal to the ones described above for the
interest rate on loans. The effects on the cost of deposits are smaller for banks with certain
characteristics only if b1<0 and Ψ3<0. Deposit interest rate reacts negatively to an output
expansion (Φ4<0) and to an increase in prices (Φ1<0). An economic expansion pushes the
deposits demand to the left and causes a decrease in cost of deposits (remember that deposit
demand is upward sloping with respect to id). The effect should be greater for increases in
transitory income. Also the effect of the “bank capital channel” are negative (Φ5<0); as we
have seen, in case of a monetary tightening (ρ ∆im >0) the bank suffers a cost and a reduction

in profit; this induces the bank to increase her interest rate margin, reducing the interest rates
on deposits.
                                                        26


Appendix 2 – Technical details on the data

        The dataset has been constructed using three sources. Interest rates are taken from the
10-day report survey conducted by the Bank of Italy. Bank’s balance sheet information
comes from the Banking Supervision Register at the Bank of Italy. Data on macroeconomic
variables are taken from the International Financial Statistics.

        Data on interest rates refer to transactions in euros (Italian lira before 1999). The
deposit interest rate is the weighted average rate paid by the single banks on current
accounts, which are highly homogenous deposits products.31 The rate on domestic short-
term lending for the single bank is the weighted average of all lending positions. From this
computation, overdraft fees are excluded. The choice of the short-term rate as a measure of
the bank interest lending pass-through is due to several reasons. First, short-term lending
excludes subsidized credit. Second, short-term loans typically are not collateralised and this
allows insulating the “bank lending” channel from the “balance sheet” channel. Broadly
speaking, the pass-through from market interest rates to the interest rate on loans does not
depend upon market price variations that influence the value of collateral. Nearly half of
bank’s business is done at this rate.

        Both interest rates are posted rates that are changed at discrete intervals (often less
frequently than weekly, see Green, 1998). In our case, the quarterly frequency of the data is
sufficient enough to capture all relevant changes due to a monetary policy shock. Both rates
are gross of fiscal deduction.

        The interest rate taken as monetary policy indicator is that on repurchase agreements
between the Bank of Italy and credit institutions in the period 1993-1998, and the interest
rates on main refinancing operation of the ECB for the period 1999-2001.32


   31
      Current accounts are the most common type of deposit (at the end of 2001 they represented around 70 per
cent of total bank deposits and passive repos). Current accounts allow unlimited checking for depositor that can
close the account without notice. The bank, in turn, can change the remuneration of the account at any point in
time. Therefore differences in deposit rates are not influenced by heterogeneity in maturity (see Focarelli and
Panetta, 2003).

   32
      As pointed out by Buttiglione, Del Giovane and Gaiotti (1997), in the period under investigation the repo
rate mostly affected the short-term end of the yield curve and, as it represented the cost of banks’ refinancing, it
represented the value to which market rates and bank rates eventually tended to converge. The interest rate on
main refinancing operation of the ECB does not present any particular break with the repo rate.
                                                  27


        The cost a bank suffers from her maturity transformation function is due to the
different sensitivity of her assets and liabilities to interest rates. Using a maturity ladder, we
have:

               å(χ   j   ⋅ Aj − ζ j Pj )
        ρi =   j
                                           *100
                     åA  j
                              j




where Aj (Pj) is the amount of assets (liabilities) of j months-to-maturity and χj (ζj) measures
the increase in interest on assets (liabilities) of class j due to a one-per-cent increase in the
monetary policy interest rate (∆im=0.01). In other words, if          å(χ
                                                                       j
                                                                            j   ⋅ Aj − ζ j Pj ) >0, ρi

represents the cost per unit of asset bank i suffers in case the monetary policy interest rate is
raised of one percentage point. We obtain χi and ζi directly from supervisory regulation on
interest rates risk exposure. In particular, the regulation assumes, for any given class j of
months-to-maturity: 1) the same sensitivity parameter (χj =ζj) and 2) a non-parallel shift of
the yield curve (∆im=0.01 for the first maturity class and then decreasing for longer maturity
classes). Then, for each bank, after having classified assets and liabilities according to their
months-to-maturity class, we have computed the bank specific variable ρi . This variable has

been then multiplied by the change of the monetary policy indicator (∆im) to obtain the
realized loss (or gain) per unit of asset in each quarter.

        In assembling our sample, the so-called special credit institutions (long-term credit
banks) have been excluded since they were subject to different supervisory regulations
regarding the maturity range of their assets and liabilities. Nevertheless, special long-term
credit sections of commercial banks have been considered part of the banks to which they
belonged.

        Particular attention has been paid to the treatment of mergers. In practice, it has been
assumed that these have been taken place at the beginning of the sample period, summing
the balance-sheet items of the merging parties. For example, if bank A has been
incorporated by bank B at time t, bank B has been reconstructed backward as the sum of the
                                                 28


merging banks before the merger. Bank interest rates have been reconstructed backwards
using as weights short-term loans and current accounts of the merging parties.33

        Only banks reporting detailed lending and deposit rates over the whole sample period
were considered. I refrain from adopting short time series to ensure sufficient asymptotic in
the context of the error correction estimation. Bank observations that were missing or
misreported or that constituted clear outliers were excluded from the sample.

        Bad loans are defined as loans for which legal procedures aimed at their repayment
have been started.

        The permanent component of GDP has been computed using the Beveridge and
Nelson (1981) decomposition. An ARIMA model (1,1,1) was applied to the logarithm of the
series. Computations have been carried out using the algorithm described in Newbold
(1990). Robustness of the results have been checked by means of a statistical analysis of the
residuals.

        The possible presence of structural breaks in interest rates series have been
investigated by means of the procedure developed by Banerjee, Lumsdaine and Stock
(1992). Figure A1 shows sequential test for changes in the mean of each interest rate series.
The hypothesis of this procedure is that, if there is a break, its date is not known a priori but
rather is gleaned from the data. The results clearly show that unit-root/no-break null can be
rejected at the 2.5 per cent critical value level against the stationarity/mean-shift alternative
for the period 1995:03-1998:03. In equation (1) and (2) a convergence dummy, that takes the
value of 1 in this period and 0 elsewhere, has been introduced.




   33
     The same methodology has been used, among others by Peek and Rosengreen (1995), Kishan and Opiela
(2000) and Ehrmann et al. (2001).
                                            References

Altunbas Y., Fazylow O. and Molyneux P. (2002), “Evidence on the Bank Lending Channel in
     Europe”, Journal of Banking and Finance, forthcoming.
Angbazo, L. (1997), “Commercial Bank Net Interest Margins, Default Risk, Interest-rate risk, and
     Off-balance Sheet Banking”, Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 21, pp. 55-87.
Angelini P. and Cetorelli N. (2002), "The effects of regulatory reform on competition in the banking
     industry", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming.
Angelini, P., P. Di Salvo and G. Ferri (1998), “Availability and Cost of Credit for Small Businesses:
     Customer Relationships and Credit Cooperatives”, Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 22,
     No. 6-8, pp. 925-54.
Angeloni I., Buttiglione L., Ferri G. and Gaiotti E. (1995), “The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy
     across Heterogeneous Banks: The Case of Italy”, Banca d’Italia, Temi di discussione, No. 256.
Ausubel L. M. (1992), Rigidity and Asymmetric Adjustment of Bank Interest Rates, mimeo.
Banca d’Italia (1986), Modello trimestrale dell’economia italiana, Banca d’Italia, Temi di
     discussione, No. 80.
Banca d’Italia (1988), Modello mensile del mercato monetario, Banca d’Italia, Temi di discussione,
     No. 108.
Banerjee A., Lumsdaine R.L. and Stock J.H. (1992), “Recursive and Sequential Tests of the Unit-
     Root and Trend Break Hypotheses: Theory and International Evidence”, Journal of Business
     and Economic Statistics, Vol. 10, No. 3, pp.271-87.
Berger A.N. and Udell G.F. (1992), “Some Evidence on the Empirical Significance of Credit
     Rationing”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol.100, No. 5, pp. 1047-77.
Berlin M. and Mester L.J. (1999), “Deposits and Relationship Lending”, Review of Financial Studies,
     Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 579-607.
Bernanke B. and Blinder A.S. (1988), “Is it Money or Credit, or Both or Neither? Credit, Money and
     Aggregate Demand”, American Economic Review, Vol. 78, No. 2, pp. 435-9. Paper and
     Proceedings of the One-Hundredth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association.
Beveridge S. and Nelson C. (1981), “A New Approach to the Decomposition of Economics Time
     Series into Permanent and Transitory Components with Particular Attention to Measurement of
     the ‘Business Cycle’”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 21, pp. 151-74.
Boccuzzi, G. (1998), La crisi dell'impresa bancaria. Profili economici e giuridici, Giuffrè, Milano.
Bolton, P. and Freixas X. (2001), “Corporate Finance and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism”,
     CEPR, Discussion Paper Series, No. 2982.
Calomiris C.W. and Hubbard G.R. (1995), “Internal Finance and Investment: Evidence from the
     Undistributed Profit Tax of 1936-37”, Journal of Business, Vol. 68. No. 4.
Ciocca P. (2000), La nuova finanza in Italia. Una difficile metamorfosi (1980-2000), Bollati
     Boringhieri, Torino.
Cornett M. M. and Tehranian H. (1994), “An Examination of Voluntary Versus Involuntary Security
     Issuances by Commercial Banks: The Impact of Capital Regulations on Common Stock
     Returns”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 35, pp. 99-122.
Cottarelli C. and Kourelis A. (1994), “Financial Structure, Bank Lending Rates and the Transmission
     Mechanism of Monetary Policy”, IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 41, No. 4, pp.587-623.
Cottarelli C., Ferri G. and Generale A. (1995), “Bank Lending Rates and Financial Structure in Italy:
     A Case Study”, IMF Working Papers, No. 38.
                                                30


de Bondt G., Mojon B. and Valla N. (2003), “The Adjustment of Retail Rates in the Euro Area: Is It
     (Really) Sluggish?”, European Central Bank, mimeo.
Dermine J. (1991), Discussion to Vives. X., “Banking Competition and European Integration”, in
     Giovannini A. and Mayer C., European Financial Integration, Cambridge, Cambridge
     University Press.
Dewatripont M. and Tirole J. (1994), The Prudential Regulation of Banks, Cambridge,
     Massachusetts, MIT Press.
Ehrmann M., Gambacorta L., Martinez Pagés J., Sevestre P. and Worms A. (2003), “Financial
     Systems and the Role of Banks in Monetary Policy Transmission in the Euro Area”, in Angeloni
     I., Kashyap A. and Mojon B., Monetary Policy Transmission in the Euro Area, Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.
Focarelli D. and Panetta F. (2003), “Are Merger Beneficial to Consumers? Evidence from the Market
     for Bank Deposits”, American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Friedman B. and Kuttner K. (1993), “Economic Activity and the Short-Term Credit Markets: an
     Analysis of Prices and Quantities”, Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2, pp. 193-283.
Freixas X. and Rochet J. (1997), Microeconomics of Banking, Cambridge, MIT Press.
Gaiotti E. (1992), “L’evoluzione delle tecniche di controllo monetario nel modello mensile della
     Banca d’Italia”, mimeo, Banca d’Italia.
Gambacorta L. (2003), “The Italian Banking System and Monetary Policy Transmission: Evidence
     from Bank Level Data”, in Angeloni, I., A. Kashyap and B. Mojon (eds.), Monetary Policy
     Transmission in the Euro Area, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Gambacorta L. and Mistrulli P. (2004), “Does Bank Capital Affect Lending Behavior?”, Journal of
     Financial Intermediation, forthcoming.
Green C.J. (1998), “Banks as Interest Rate Managers”, Journal of Financial Services Research, Vol.
     14, n. 3, pp. 189-208.
Hancock D. (1991), A Theory of Production for the Financial Firm, Norwell, Massachusetts, Kluwer
     Academic Publishers.
Hannan T.H. and Berger A.N. (1991), “The Rigidity of Prices: Evidence From Banking Industry”,
     American Economic Review, Vol. 81, pp.938-45.
Harvey (1981), Time Series Models, Oxford, Allan.
Ho T.S.Y. and Saunders A. (1981), The Determinants of Bank Interest Margins: Theory and
     Empirical Evidence”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 581-
     600.
Houston J.F. and James C. (1998), “Do Bank Internal Capital Market Promote Lending?”, Journal of
     Banking and Finance, Vol. 22, pp. 899-918.
Hutchison D.E. (1995), “Retail Bank Deposit Pricing: An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Approach”,
     Journal of Money Credit and Banking, Vol. 27, pp. 217-31.
Kashyap A. and Stein J.C. (1995), “The Impact of Monetary Policy on Bank Balance Sheets”,
     Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 42, pp.151-195.
Kashyap A. and Stein J.C. (2000), “What Do a Million Observations on Banks Say About the
     Transmission of Monetary Policy”, American Economic Review, Vol. 90, No. 3, pp. 407-28.
Kashyap A., Stein J.C. and Wilcox D. (1993). Monetary Policy and Credit Conditions: Evidence
     from the Composition of External Finance, American Economic Review, Vol. 83, pp. 78-98.
Kishan R.P. and Opiela T.P. (2000), “Bank Size, Bank Capital and the Bank Lending Channel”,
     Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 32, No. 1, pp. 121-41.
Klein M. (1971), “A Theory of the Banking Firm”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 3,
     No. 2, pp. 205-18.
                                                 31


Leland H.E. and Pile D.H. (1977), “Informational Asymmetries, Financial Structures and Financial
     Intermediation”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 32, pp. 371-87.
Lim G.C. (2000), “Bank Interest Rate Adjustments: Are They Asymmetric?”, The Economic Record,
     Vol. 77, no. 237, pp.135-147.
Melitz J. and Pardue M. (1973), “The Demand and Supply of Commercial Bank Loans”, Journal of
     Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 5, No. 2, pp. 669-92.
Moore G.R., Porter R.D. and Small D.H. (1990), “Modelling the Disaggregated Demands for M2 and
     M1: the U.S. Experience in the 1980s”, Proceedings of a Federal Reserve Board Conference on
     Monetary Aggregates and Financial System Behavior.
Myers S.C. and Majluf N.S. (1984), “Corporate Finance and Investment Decisions when Firms Have
     Information that Investors Do Not Have”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 13, pp.187-221.
Neumark D. and Sharpe S.A. (1992), “Market Structure and the Nature of Price Rigidity: Evidence
     From the Market for Consumer Deposits”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, pp.657-
     80.
Newbold P. (1990), “Precise and Efficient Computation of the Beveridge-Nelson Decomposition of
     Economic Time Series”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 26, pp. 453-457.
Passacantando F. (1996), “Building an Institutional Framework for Monetary Stability”, BNL
     Quarterly Review, Vol. 49, No. 196, pp. 83-132.
Peek J. and Rosengren E.S. (1995), “Bank Lending and the Transmission of Monetary Policy”; in
     Peek J. and E.S. Rosengren (eds.), Is Bank Lending Important for the Transmission of Monetary
     Policy?, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series No. 39, pp. 47-68.
Petersen M. and Rajan R. (1994), “The Benefits of Lending Relationships: Evidence from Small
     Business Data”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 49, pp.3-37.
Rosen R.J. (2001), What Goes Up Must Come Down? Asymmetries and Persistence in Bank Deposit
     Rates, Indiana University, mimeo.
Santomero A.M. (1984), “Modeling the Banking Firm: A Survey”, Journal of Money Credit and
     Banking, Vo. 16, n. 4, pp. 576-602.
Stein J.C. (1998), “An Adverse-Selection Model of Bank Asset and Liability Management with
     Implications for the Transmission of Monetary Policy”, RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 29,
     No. 3, pp. 466-86.
Thakor A.V. (1996), “Capital Requirements, Monetary Policy, and Aggregate Bank Lending: Theory
     and Empirical Evidence”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 51, No. 1, pp. 279-324.
Upper C. and Worms A. (2001), “Estimating Bilateral Exposures in the German Interbank Market: Is
     There a Danger of Contagion?”, in BIS (ed.), Marrying the Macro and Microprudential
     Dimensions of Financial Stability, BIS papers, No. 1, pp. 211-29.
Van den Heuvel S.J. (2001a), “The Bank Capital Channel of Monetary Policy”, University of
     Pennsylvania, mimeo.
Van den Heuvel S.J. (2001b), “Banking Conditions and the Effects of Monetary Policy: Evidence
     from U.S. States”, University of Pennsylvania, mimeo.
Van den Heuvel S.J. (2003), “Does Bank Capital Matter for Monetary Transmission?”, FRBNY
     Economic Policy Review, forthcoming.
Verga G. (1984), “La determinazione dei tassi bancari in Italia: un’analisi per gli anni più recenti”,
     Banca, Impresa, Società, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp.65-84.
Weth M.A. (2002), “The Pass-Through from Market Interest Rates to Bank Lending Rates in
     Germany”, Discussion Paper No 11, Economic Research Center of the Deutsche Bundesbank.
                                                                                                          Table 1

                                         VARIABLES DESCRIPTION
       Variables           Symbols                                       Description

                              iLt         Interest rate on domestic short term loans
Dependent variables
                              iDt         Interest rate on current account deposits

Fixed effects
                               µi         Bank-specific dummy variable

                              imt         Monetary policy indicator

                           y tP , y Tt    Permanent and transitory components of real GDP computed using the
Macro variables
                                          Beveridge and Nelson (1981) decomposition
                               pt         Inflation rate
                                          Size: log of total assets (Kashyap and Stein, 1995; Ehrmann et al. 2003)

                                          Liquidity: cash and securities over total assets (Stein, 1998; Kashyap and
                                          Stein, 2000)
Bank-specific                             Excess capital: difference between regulatory capital and capital
characteristics that                      requirements (Peek and Rosengren, 1995; Kishan and Opiela, 2000;
                            X it −1
influence the “bank                       Gambacorta and Mistrulli, 2004)
lending channel”                          Deposit strength: ratio between deposits and bonds plus deposits (Berlin
                                          and Mester,1999; Weth, 2002)
                                          Credit relationship: ratio between long term loans and total loans (Berger
                                          and Udell, 1992)
Measure for the “bank
capital channel”
                             ρit −1       Cost per unit of asset that the bank incurs in case of a one per cent
                                          increase in MP
                                          Ratio between bad loans and total loans. This variable captures the
Risk-measure
                               jit        riskiness of lending operations and should be offset by a higher expected
                                          yield of loans.
Efficiency ratio                          Management efficiency: ratio of total loans and deposits to the number
                              eit
                                          of branches.
Interest rate volatility      σt          Interest rate volatility: coefficient of variation of iM .
                                          Convergence dummy: step dummy that takes the value of 1 in the period
Control variables            Φ it         1995:03-1998:03 and 0 elsewhere.
                                          Seasonal dummies.
Note: For more information on the definition of the variables see Appendix 2.
                                                                                                                                                                                       Table 2
                                                                            SUMMARY STATISTICS
                                                                               (1993:03-2001:03)

Ex special credit institutions, foreign banks and "banche di credito cooperativo" are excluded. The sample represents more than 70 per cent of total system in terms of lending. All
interest rate are annualized and given in percentages. (1) The size indicator is given by total asset (billions of euros). (2) The liquidity indicator is represented by the sum of cash and
government securities over total assets. (3) The capital ratio is given by excess capital divided by total assets. Excess capital is the difference between regulatory capital and total
capital requirements. (4) The Berlin and Mester indicator (BM) is the ratio between deposits and deposits plus bonds. (5) The Berger and Udell indicator (BU) is the ratio between
long-term loans and total loans. A bank with a "high" characteristic has the average ratio above the first quartile of the distribution. (*) A bank with a "low"characteristic has the
average ratio below the third quartile. Since the characteristics of each bank could change through time, percentiles have been worked out on mean values. For more details on the
definition of the variables see Appendix 2. The sources of the dataset are Bank of Italy supervisory returns and 10-days reports.


                                           Number         Interest rate on short term lending            Interest rate on current accounts        Size      Liq.    Cap.     BM       BU
       Bank-characteristics (*)
                                           of banks                                                                                                (1)      (2)      (3)     (4)      (5)
                                                        Mean       St. dev.     Min       Max        Mean       St. dev.     Min        Max

       Total sample                           73         9.51        2.72      3.69      16.12        3.58       1.79       0.52        8.21       16.20    24.00    3.91    82.40    37.66

       Big banks                              18        9.28         2.81      3.69      15.06        3.57       1.74       0.73        7.35       51.15    19.01    2.56    77.60    38.98
 (1)
       Small banks                            18       10.02         2.73      5.03      16.12        3.55       1.79       0.52        8.21        1.55    25.11    4.81    84.40    41.72
     Liquid banks                             18         9.51        2.72      3.69      15.94        3.57       1.80       0.65        8.21        4.67    33.07    4.27    86.27    36.15
 (2) Low liquid banks                         18         9.33        2.73      4.42      14.86        3.61       1.71       0.73        7.35       43.75    14.91    3.13    72.43    43.66
       Well capitalized banks                 18        9.71        2.73       3.69      16.12        3.68       1.80       0.52        7.18        9.66    26.15    6.86    85.49    37.22
 (3)
       Low capitalized banks                  18        9.42        2.81       4.75      15.93        3.53       1.79       0.74        8.21       24.28    20.82    1.49    78.40    38.46
       Banks with high BM ratio               18       11.78         1.49      4.88      16.12        5.15       0.96       0.74        8.21        6.58    29.69    4.46    98.53    28.72
 (4)
       Banks with low BM ratio                18        7.77         2.24      3.69      15.06        2.41       1.45       0.52        7.35       27.00    18.56    3.42    66.10    45.30

     Banks with high BU ratio                 18        8.51         2.59      3.69      15.06        2.80       1.67       0.65        7.36       21.92    19.98    3.80    71.84    53.29
 (5) Banks with low BU ratio                  18       10.97         2.12      4.00      16.12        4.68       1.44       0.53        7.43        8.51    28.26    3.95    93.13    22.46
                                                                                                                                                                   Table 3
       RESULTS FOR THE EQUATION ON THE INTEREST RATE ON SHORT-TERM LENDING
This table shows the results of the equation for the interest rate on short term lending. The model is given by the following equation, which includes
interaction terms that are the product of the monetary policy indicator and a bank specific characteristic:
                         2                    1
    ∆ iL k ,t = µ k +   å κ j ∆iL k ,t − j + å ( β j + β *j X k ,t −1 )∆iM t − j + ϕ   pt + δ1∆ ln ytP + δ 2 ∆ ln ytT + λX k ,t −1 + φ∆ ( ρ k ,t −1∆iM t ) +
                        j =1                 j =0

    + (α + α * X k ,t −1 )iL k ,t −1 + (γ + γ * X k ,t −1 )iM t −1 + θ jk ,t + ξ ek ,t + ψσ t + Φ k ,t + ε k ,t

with k=1,…, N (k=number of banks) and t=1, …,T (t= periods). Data are quarterly (1993:03-2001:03) and not seasonally adjusted. The panel is
balanced with N=73 banks. Lags have been selected in order to obtain white noise residuals. The description of the variables is reported in Table 1.
The model have been estimated using the GMM estimator suggested by Arellano and Bond (1991) which ensures efficiency and consistency
provided that the models are not subject to serial correlation of order two and that the instruments used are valid (which is tested for with the Sargan
test). A bank with “low characteristic” has the average ratio of the banks below the first quartile, a bank with "high characterisic” has the average
ratio of the banks above third quartile. For more details on the data see Appendix 2. *=significance at the 10 per cent; **=significance at the 5 per
cent; ***=significance at the 1 per cent.
Dependent variable: quarterly change                                                                                                                           (5)
                                                              (1)                    (2)                        (3)                     (4)
of the interest rate on short-term                                                                                                                       Long term loans/
                                                             Size                 Liquidity                Capitalization        Dep./(Bonds+Dep.)
lending                                                                                                                                                    Total loans
                                                    Coeff.          S.Error Coeff.           S.Error Coeff.           S.Error Coeff.            S.Error Coeff.      S.Error
Loan demand
Inflation:                                          0.159 *** 0.019          0.145 ***        0.017      0.145 ***     0.015      0.149 ***        0.018 0.187 ***    0.015
Permanent Income:                                   0.033 ** 0.015           0.030 ***        0.012      0.032 **      0.013      0.025 **         0.012 0.043 ***    0.010
Transitory Income:                                  0.012     0.031          0.013            0.025      0.012         0.026      0.012            0.024 0.026        0.020
Costs, credit risk and int.rate volatility
Bank's efficiency:                         -0.004 ** 0.002 -0.001                             0.002 -0.006 **          0.002     -0.001            0.001 -0.001       0.001
Bad loans:                                  0.020 *** 0.002 0.016 ***                         0.002 0.017 ***          0.001      0.020 ***        0.002 0.019 ***    0.002
Interest rate volatility:                   0.011 *** 0.001 0.012 ***                         0.001 0.010 ***          0.001      0.014 ***        0.001 0.012 ***    0.001
Immediate pass-through
Average bank:                                       0.569 *** 0.027          0.403 ***        0.031      0.533 ***     0.023      0.465 ***        0.030 0.497 ***    0.034
Ho: no heterogeneity (p-value)                                0.003                           0.018                    0.418                       0.023              0.000
Low characteristic                                  0.556 *** 0.028          0.414 ***        0.027      0.536 ***     0.022      0.474 ***        0.028 0.529 ***    0.033
High characteristic                                 0.586 *** 0.026          0.383 ***        0.036      0.529 ***     0.026      0.456 ***        0.032 0.463 ***    0.035
Pass-through after a quarter
Average bank:                                       0.938 *** 0.013          0.941 ***        0.018      0.954 ***     0.012      0.869 ***        0.016 0.878 ***    0.013
Ho: no heterogeneity (p-value)                                0.000                           0.000                    0.037                       0.159              0.000
Low characteristic                                  0.913 *** 0.015          0.962 ***        0.018      0.958 ***     0.011      0.862 ***        0.017 0.889 ***    0.014
High characteristic                                 0.971 *** 0.014          0.920 ***        0.018      0.949 ***     0.015      0.878 ***        0.016 0.863 ***    0.012
Long run elasticity
Average bank:                                       1.017 *** 0.014          0.996 ***        0.014      1.023 ***     0.012      0.982 ***        0.015 1.012 ***    0.018
Ho: unitary long run elasticity (p-val.)                      0.056                           0.816                    0.047                       0.235              0.489
Ho: no heterogeneity (p-value)                                0.509                           0.822                    0.883                       0.924              0.644
Low characteristic                                  0.996 *** 0.014          0.987 ***        0.015      1.031 ***     0.013      0.990 ***        0.026 0.992 ***    0.016
High characteristic                                 1.049 *** 0.016          1.005 ***        0.015      1.015 ***     0.012      0.978 ***        0.012 1.040 ***    0.023
Loading of the long run relationship
Average bank:                                       -0.477 *** 0.023 -0.422 ***               0.019 -0.507 ***         0.023     -0.381 ***        0.043 -0.382 ***   0.017
Ho: no heterogeneity (p-value)                                 0.000                          0.000                    0.035                       0.000              0.000
Low characteristic                                  -0.505 *** 0.026 -0.391 ***               0.023 -0.482 ***         0.028     -0.234 ***        0.021 -0.434 ***   0.017
High characteristic                                 -0.441 *** 0.023 -0.451 ***               0.019 -0.539 ***         0.026     -0.519 ***        0.020 -0.330 ***   0.020

Bank capital channel                                0.104 *          0.055   0.409 ***        0.070      0.178 ***     0.051      0.197 ***        0.066 0.109 *      0.066
Miss-specification tests
MA(1), MA(2) (p-value)                              0.000            0.949   0.000            0.367      0.000         0.702      0.000            0.185 0.000        0.116
Sargan test (p-value)                                                0.087                    0.099                    0.088                       0.101              0.057
No of banks, no of observations                        73             2336       73            2336          73        2336           73            2336    73         2336
                                                                                                                                                                 Table 4
                 RESULTS FOR THE EQUATION ON INTEREST RATE ON CURRENT ACCOUNTS
This table shows the results of the equation for the interest rate on current accounts. The model is given by the following equation, which includes
interaction terms that are the product of the monetary policy indicator and a bank specific characteristic:
                         2                   1
   ∆i D k , t = µ k +   åκ j ∆iD k ,t − j + å ( β j + β *j X k ,t −1)∆iM t − j + ϕ pt + δ1∆ ln ytP + δ 2∆ ln ytT + λX k ,t −1 + φ∆( ρ k ,t −1∆iM t ) +
                        j =1                j =0

   + (α + α X k ,t −1 )iD k ,t −1 + (γ + γ * X k ,t −1 )iM t −1 + ξ ek ,t + ψσ t + Φ k ,t + ε k ,t
             *



with k=1,…, N (k=number of banks) and t=1, …,T (t= periods). Data are quarterly (1993:03-2001:03) and not seasonally adjusted. The panel is
balanced with N=73 banks. Lags have been selected in order to obtain white noise residuals. The description of the variables is reported in Table 1. The
model have been estimated using the GMM estimator suggested by Arellano and Bond (1991) which ensures efficiency and consistency provided that
the models are not subject to serial correlation of order two and that the instruments used are valid (which is tested for with the Sargan test). A bank
with “low characteristic” has the average ratio of the banks below the first quartile, a bank with "high characterisic” has the average ratio of the banks
above third quartile. For more details on the data see Appendix 2. *=significance at the 10 per cent; **=significance at the 5 per cent; ***=significance
at the 1 per cent.

                                                                                                                                                            (5)
                                                             (1)                     (2)                    (3)                      (4)
Dependent variable: quarterly change                                                                                                                  Long term loans/
                                                            Size                  Liquidity            Capitalization         Dep./(Bonds+Dep.)
of the interest rate on current accounts                                                                                                                Total loans
                                                   Coeff.          S.Error Coeff.           S.Error Coeff.         S.Error Coeff.            S.Error Coeff.      S.Error
Deposit demand
Inflation:                                          0.049 *** 0.015 0.091 ***                 0.012 0.058 ***       0.015      0.099 ***        0.008 0.039 ***      0.009
Permanent Income:                                  -0.058 *** 0.006 -0.048 ***                0.006 -0.058 ***      0.005     -0.024 *          0.013 -0.052 ***     0.004
Transitory Income:                                 -0.222 *** 0.012 -0.204 ***                0.012 -0.223 ***      0.011     -0.102 ***        0.012 -0.202 ***     0.010

Costs, credit risk and int.rate volatility
Bank's efficiency:                                 0.001            0.001   0.001             0.001   0.001         0.002      0.012 ***        0.001    0.002 *     0.001
Interest rate volatility:                          0.001 **         0.001   0.002 ***         0.001   0.001 ***     0.001      0.005 ***        0.000    0.002 ***   0.001
Immediate pass-through
Average bank:                                      0.413 *** 0.013          0.411 ***         0.010   0.410 ***     0.008      0.418 ***        0.009    0.388 ***   0.008
Ho: no heterogeneity (p-value)                               0.000                            0.000                 0.742                       0.000                0.000
Low characteristic                                 0.400 *** 0.015          0.431 ***         0.010   0.411 ***     0.009      0.451 ***        0.009    0.408 ***   0.007
High characteristic                                0.429 *** 0.012          0.394 ***         0.010   0.409 ***     0.009      0.387 ***        0.010    0.366 ***   0.010
Pass-through after a quarter
Average bank:                                      0.546 *** 0.009          0.541 ***         0.008   0.544 ***     0.007      0.507 ***        0.006 0.540 ***      0.006
Ho: no heterogeneity (p-value)                               0.000                            0.000                 0.049                       0.000                0.776
Low characteristic                                 0.512 *** 0.010          0.551 ***         0.008   0.551 ***     0.007      0.526 ***        0.006 0.536 ***      0.006
High characteristic                                0.588 *** 0.008          0.530 ***         0.008   0.535 ***     0.009      0.493 ***        0.008 0.542 ***      0.008
Long run elasticity
Average bank:                                      0.685 *** 0.013          0.685 ***         0.009   0.676 ***     0.009      0.643 ***        0.007    0.669 ***   0.010
Ho: unitary long run elasticity (p-val.)                     0.000                            0.000                 0.000                       0.000                0.000
Ho: no heterogeneity (p-value)                               0.905                            0.205                 0.463                       0.444                0.717
Low characteristic                                 0.688 *** 0.014          0.670 ***         0.010   0.663 ***     0.009      0.631 ***        0.006    0.675 ***   0.010
High characteristic                                0.682 *** 0.013          0.699 ***         0.009   0.694 ***     0.011      0.654 ***        0.009    0.661 ***   0.011
Loading of the long run relationship
Average bank:                                      -0.572 *** 0.018 -0.646 ***                0.018 -0.609 ***      0.020     -0.760 ***        0.016 -0.572 ***     0.016
Ho: no heterogeneity (p-value)                                0.000                           0.016                 0.000                       0.000                0.000
Low characteristic                                 -0.537 *** 0.018 -0.657 ***                0.020 -0.645 ***      0.019     -0.725 ***        0.019 -0.610 ***     0.017
High characteristic                                -0.610 *** 0.023 -0.634 ***                0.017 -0.564 ***      0.025     -0.795 ***        0.017 -0.533 ***     0.017

Bank capital channel                               -0.055 *** 0.015 -0.036 ***                0.012 -0.049 ***      0.009     -0.039 ***        0.013 -0.034 ***     0.009
Miss-specification tests
MA(1), MA(2) (p-value)                             0.000            0.953   0.000             0.976   0.000         0.785      0.000            0.340    0.000       0.508
Sargan test (p-value)                                               0.091                     0.960                 0.094                       0.092                0.095
No of banks, no of observations                       73             2336       73            2336      73           2336         73             2336      73         2336
                                                                                                                                                                  Table 5
                                                                        BANK LENDING CHANNEL
This table shows the results of the equation for the interest rate on short-term lending (panel A) and current accounts (panel B) when all bank-specific
characteristics are taken simultaneously into account. The model is given by the following equation, which includes interaction terms that are the
product of the monetary policy indicator and each bank-specific characteristic:
                         2                    5     1                                                                                5
  ∆iψ   k ,t   = µk +   å κ j ∆iψ k ,t − j + å å ( β j + β *j X k , m,t −1)∆iM t − j + ϕ pt + δ1∆ ln ytP + δ 2∆ ln ytT + å λm X k , m,t −1 +
                        j =1                m =1 j = 0                                                                            m =1
                                      5
  + φ∆ ( ρ k ,t −1∆iM t ) + (α +     å α m* X k ,m,t −1)(iψ k ,t −1 − γ iM t −1) + θ   jk ,t + ξ ek ,t + ψσ t + Φ k ,t + ε k ,t
                                     m =1
with i ψ= quarterly change of the interest rate on short-term lending or current accounts k=1,…, N (k=number of banks) and t=1, …,T (t= periods).
Bank-specific characteristics are size,liquidity, capitalization, Berlin-Mester and Berger-Udell indicators (m =5). Data are quarterly (1992:03-
2001:03) and not seasonally adjusted. The panel is balanced with N=73 banks. Lags have been selected in order to obtain white noise residuals. The
description of the variables is reported in Table 1. The model have been estimated using the GMM estimator suggested by Arellano and Bond (1991)
which ensures efficiency and consistency provided that the models are not subject to serial correlation of order two and that the instruments used are
valid (which is tested for with the Sargan test). A bank with “low characteristic” has the average ratio of the banks below the first quartile, a bank
with "high characterisic” has the average ratio of the banks above third quartile. For more details on the data see Appendix 2. *=significance at the 10
per cent; **=significance at the 5 per cent; ***=significance at the 1 per cent.
                                                                                                                                                            (5)
                                                          (1)                    (2)                     (3)                       (4)
                                                                                                                                                      Long term loans/
                                                          Size                Liquidity             Capitalization          Dep./(Bonds+Dep.)
                                                                                                                                                        Total loans
                                              Coeff.             S.Error Coeff.        S.Error Coeff.            S.Error Coeff.              S.Error Coeff.      S.Error

                               (A) Dependent variable is the quarterly change of the interest rate on short-term lending
Immediate pass-through
Average bank:                                     0.452 *** 0.062         0.452 ***       0.062   0.452 ***        0.062     0.452 ***        0.062   0.452 ***     0.062
Ho: no heterogeneity (p-value)                              0.159                         0.027                    0.043                      0.702                 0.016
Low characteristic                                0.492 *** 0.064         0.476 ***       0.058   0.558 ***        0.065     0.460 ***        0.059   0.519 ***     0.050
High characteristic                               0.393 *** 0.080         0.421 ***       0.069   0.308 ***        0.110     0.437 ***        0.077   0.375 ***     0.084
Pass-through after a quarter
Average bank:                                     0.879 *** 0.039         0.879 ***       0.039   0.879 ***        0.039     0.879 ***        0.039 0.879 ***       0.039
Ho: no heterogeneity (p-value)                              0.639                         0.317                    0.744                      0.913                 0.912
Low characteristic                                0.895 *** 0.058         0.891 ***       0.036   0.914 ***        0.082     0.883 ***        0.050 0.888 ***       0.039
High characteristic                               0.857 *** 0.040         0.868 ***       0.033   0.847 ***        0.075     0.876 ***        0.047 0.873 ***       0.053
Long run elasticity
All banks:                                        1.000    -        -     1.000   -        -      1.000      -       -       1.000       -     -      1.000   -      -
Loading of the long run relationship
Average bank:                                 -0.354 *** 0.050 -0.354 ***                 0.050 -0.354 ***         0.050    -0.354 ***        0.050 -0.354 ***      0.050
Ho: no heterogeneity (p-value)                           0.681                            0.990                    0.536                      0.761                 0.773
Low characteristic                            -0.377 *** 0.072 -0.354 ***                 0.063 -0.318 ***         0.070    -0.332 ***        0.089 -0.332 ***      0.086
High characteristic                           -0.324 *** 0.092 -0.354 ***                 0.046 -0.399 ***         0.095    -0.375 ***        0.085 -0.376 ***      0.095
Miss-specification tests
MA(1), MA(2) (p-value)                            0.000           0.073
Sargan test (p-value)                                             0.985
No of banks, no of observations                     73            2336

                                (B) Dependent variable is the quarterly change of the interest rate on current accounts
Immediate pass-through
Average bank:                                     0.452 *** 0.042         0.452 ***       0.042   0.452 ***        0.042     0.452 ***        0.042   0.452 ***     0.042
Ho: no heterogeneity (p-value)                              0.972                         0.129                    0.529                      0.032                 0.112
Low characteristic                                0.453 *** 0.043         0.470 ***       0.050   0.479 ***        0.054     0.509 ***        0.044   0.497 ***     0.062
High characteristic                               0.452 *** 0.050         0.434 ***       0.037   0.419 ***        0.074     0.400 ***        0.054   0.406 ***     0.062
Pass-through after a quarter
Average bank:                                     0.545 *** 0.033         0.545 ***       0.033   0.545 ***        0.033     0.545 ***        0.033 0.545 ***       0.033
Ho: no heterogeneity (p-value)                              0.160                         0.978                    0.481                      0.203                 0.224
Low characteristic                                0.572 *** 0.032         0.546 ***       0.038   0.566 ***        0.055     0.590 ***        0.045 0.563 ***       0.041
High characteristic                               0.524 *** 0.043         0.545 ***       0.033   0.517 ***        0.045     0.516 ***        0.039 0.525 ***       0.034
Long run elasticity
Average bank:                                     0.700    -        -     0.700   -        -      0.700      -       -       0.700       -     -      0.700   -      -
Loading of the long run relationship
Average bank:                                 -0.570 *** 0.043 -0.570 ***                 0.043 -0.570 ***         0.043    -0.570 ***        0.043 -0.570 ***      0.043
Ho: no heterogeneity (p-value)                           0.388                            0.820                    0.481                      0.004                 0.575
Low characteristic                            -0.537 *** 0.048 -0.565 ***                 0.050 -0.607 ***         0.019    -0.452 ***        0.062 -0.589 ***      0.059
High characteristic                           -0.612 *** 0.074 -0.575 ***                 0.047 -0.523 ***         0.025    -0.680 ***        0.054 -0.550 ***      0.051
Miss-specification tests
MA(1), MA(2) (p-value)                            0.000           0.915
Sargan test (p-value)                                             0.180
No of banks, no of observations                     73            2336
                                                                                                                                                             Fig. 1
                                                          Banking interest rates
                                                   (quarterly data, percentage points)


19.0
                     3-month interbank rate

                     Repo rate
17.0
                     Interest rate on current accounts
                                                                                                             Estimation period
                     Short term lending rate
                                                                                                              1993:03-2001:03
15.0



13.0



11.0                                                                                                                                           Euro



 9.0



 7.0



 5.0
                                  Period before T.U.B.
                                    1987:01-1993:02
 3.0



 1.0
       1987   1988        1989          1990    1991        1992       1993      1994       1995     1996        1997     1998        1999    2000    2001




                                                                                                                                                             Fig. 2

              Cross sectional and time series dispersion of interest rates

                       0.350

                                                                (a) Interest rate on short-term loans
                       0.300



                       0.250



                       0.200



                       0.150



                       0.100



                       0.050



                       0.000
                                 1987    1988   1989     1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000    2001


                       0.350

                                                                 (b) Interest rate on current accounts
                       0.300



                       0.250



                       0.200



                       0.150



                       0.100



                       0.050



                       0.000
                                 1987    1988   1989     1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001

                                    ACROSS BANKS                OVER TIME
                                                                                                                                                                  Fig. 3
                                            Determinants of bank’s interest rates

               i L = f ( y P , y T , p, i M ,                              X t −1 , i M X t −1 , ρ t −1 ∆i M , j , costs , σ , µ k )
                           +            ?          +          +                 ?                 ?                +              +        +             +


          Loan
         demand
                                                                                                                                  Cost of inter-
                                                                                                                                    mediation,
                                                Interest                          Bank                      Bank                                                 Industry
                                                                                                                                    credit risk
                                                  rate                           lending                   capital                                               structure
                                                                                                                                   and interest
                                                channel                          channel                  channel
                                                                                                                                  rate volatility
         Deposit
         demand




               i D = f ( y P , y T , p, i M ,                               X t −1 , i M X t −1 , ρ t −1 ∆i M , costs , σ , µ k )
                               −            −       −           +                ?                 ?                −                  −            +

Note: the meaning of all the symbols is reported in Table 1.


                                                                                                                                                                 Fig. A1

                                                        Search for mean shift breaks
                                       (monthly data, sequential minimum unit root tests)


                      0
                      Dec-87       Dec-88       Dec-89      Dec-90      Dec-91       Dec-92   Dec-93   Dec-94   Dec-95   Dec-96   Dec-97   Dec-98       Dec-99

                      -1



                      -2



                      -3



                      -4



                      -5



                      -6



                      -7

                                                Interest rate on current accounts

                      -8                        Interest rate on short-term loans

                                                3-month interbank market rate

                      -9                        10% critical value

                                                2.5% critical value

                     -10


Note: The estimated model tests for a shift in the constant. No trend is included. Sequential statistic are
computed using the sample 1984:7-2002:12, sequentially incrementing the date of the hypothetical shift.
A fraction equal to 15 per cent of the total sample at the beginning and at the end of the sample is not
considered for the test. For more details see Banerjee, Lumsdaine and Stock (1992).
