                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        ASBESTOS AND THE FUTURE OF MASS TORTS

                                            Michelle J. White

                                         Working Paper 10308
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10308


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Michelle J. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Asbestos and the Future of Mass Torts
Michelle J. White
NBER Working Paper No. 10308
February 2004
JEL No. K13, K41, L5, I18

                                             ABSTRACT

Asbestos was once referred to as a “miracle mineral” for its ability to withstand heat and it was used
in thousands of products. But exposure to asbestos causes cancer and other diseases. As of the
beginning of 2001, 600,000 individuals had filed lawsuits for asbestos-related diseases against more
than 6,000 defendants. 85 firms have filed for bankruptcy due to asbestos liabilities and several
insurers have failed or are in financial distress. More than $54 billion has been spent on the litigation
– higher than any other mass tort. Estimates of the eventual cost of asbestos litigation range from
$200 to $265 billion.
The paper examines the history of asbestos regulation and asbestos liability and argues that it was
liability rather than regulation that eventually caused producers to eliminate asbestos from most
products by the late 1970s. But despite the disappearance of asbestos products from the marketplace,
asbestos litigation continued to grow. Plaintiffs’ lawyers used forum-shopping to select the most
favorable state courts, developed new techniques for mass processing of claims, and substituted new
defendants when old ones went bankrupt. Because representing asbestos victims was extremely
profitable, lawyers had an incentive to seek out large numbers of additional plaintiffs, including
many claimants who were not harmed by asbestos exposure.
The paper contrasts asbestos litigation to other mass torts involving personal injury and concludes
that asbestos was unique in a number of ways, so that future mass torts are unlikely to be as big.
However new legal innovations developed for asbestos are likely to make future mass torts larger
and more expensive. I explore two mechanisms-- bankruptcies and class action settlements--that the
legal system has developed to resolve mass torts and show that neither has worked for asbestos
litigation. The first, bankruptcy by individual asbestos defendants, exacerbates the litigation by
spreading it to non-bankrupt defendants. The second, a class action settlement, is impractical for
asbestos litigation because of the large number of defendants. As a result, Congressional legislation
is needed and the paper discusses the compensation fund approach that Congress is currently
considering.


Michelle J. White
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
miwhite@ucsd.edu
                       Asbestos and the Future of Mass Torts
                                        Michelle J. White 1


        Legal claims for injuries from asbestos involve more plaintiffs, more defendants,
and higher costs than any other type of personal injury litigation in U.S. history. As of the
beginning of 2001, 600,000 individuals had filed lawsuits against more than 6,000
defendants and the total amount that defendants and insurers had spent on resolving
claims—including all legal costs—was estimated to be $54 billion (Carroll et al., 2002). .
Eighty-five corporations have filed for bankruptcy due to asbestos liabilities and several
insurance companies have either failed or are in financial distress (White, 2002b).
Estimates of the total number of people who will eventually file claims range from 1.1
million to 3.0 million and estimates of the eventual cost of asbestos litigation range from
$200 to $265 billion (Carroll et al., 2002).
        Asbestos was once referred to as the “miracle mineral” for its ability to withstand
heat. It was heavily used as a fireproofing and insulating material in ships, buildings and
consumer products, including wallboard, roofing, flooring, cement, insulation, drinking
water pipes, automobiles, clothing, paper, hair dryers, garden products, home appliances,
artificial firelogs, and children’s toys. Estimates of the number of Americans exposed to
asbestos range from 27 million to 100 million (Biggs et al, 2001).
     Breathing asbestos fibers—which can be microscopic – causes a variety of diseases.
Two of these diseases, asbestosis and mesothelioma, are uniquely associated with
asbestos exposure. Asbestosis is scarring of the lungs that reduces breathing capacity; it
can range from non-disabling to fatal. Mesothelioma is cancer of the pleural lining
around the chest and abdomen and is quickly fatal. Other asbestos diseases such as lung
cancer, gastrointestinal cancer, and pleural plaque (thickening of the pleural lining that is
non-disabling) can be caused either by asbestos exposure or by other factors including
smoking. Asbestos diseases have a long latency period: 20 to 40 years usually elapse

1
 I am grateful to the National Science Foundation for research support under grant #0212444 and to Eli
Berman, Roger Gordon, Jim Hines, Andrei Shliefer, Tim Taylor, and Michael Waldman for very helpful
comments.



                                                                                                         1
between exposure and diagnosis. Longer and heavier exposure to asbestos increases the
probability of developing asbestos diseases, but they can also occur in people who had
only limited exposure (Carroll et al., 2002). A famous study of 370 insulation workers
who were union members in 1942 illustrates the grim effects of asbestos: between 1963
and 1968, 113 of the workers died when 60 deaths would normally be expected. The
deaths included 28 from lung cancer (2.5 would be normal) and 8 from gastrointestinal
cancer (2 would be normal), plus 15 from asbestosis and 13 from mesothelioma (0 would
be normal) (Brodeur, 1973, p. 29). Asbestos can also cause disease in workers’ family
members and bystanders, who are exposed to asbestos dust on workers’ clothes or in the
environment.
       In this article, I first examine why regulation failed to prevent asbestos from
becoming so widely used and how asbestos litigation widened from a trickle into a
torrent. I also consider other countries’ experience with asbestos and whether regulation
or liability is more effective in deterring production of dangerous products. The article
then asks how asbestos litigation differs from other mass torts: does asbestos litigation
represent a “perfect storm” where many factors came together with disastrous results, or
does it represent a path that is likely to be followed by other mass torts involving
personal injury? Various ways in which the asbestos crisis might be resolved are
considered, including bankruptcy, a class action settlement, legislation now pending in
Congress to establish a national asbestos compensation fund, and an alternative approach
that would centralize asbestos lawsuits in a single federal court.


Liability versus Regulation of Asbestos Exposure

The failure of regulation

       As early as the 1920s, physicians recognized that exposure to asbestos caused
disease and asbestosis was named and described in British medical journals. Around the
same time, insurance companies in the U.S. and Canada stopped selling life insurance to
asbestos workers. In 1931, the British government began regulating workplace safety in
the asbestos industry, monitoring workers for asbestosis, and providing worker’s
compensation to those who were disabled by it (Tweedale, 2000, p. 21). Safer



                                                                                            2
substitutes for many uses of asbestos were known as early as the 1930s (Castleman,
1996, ch. 6). Nonetheless, U.S. consumption of asbestos increased from 100,000 metric
tons in 1932 to 700,000 metric tons in 1951 and peaked at 750,000 metric tons in 1974.
Thereafter, usage declined to about 25,000 metric tons in 1994 (Castleman, 1996, p.
788). That asbestos was so widely used from the 1950s to the 1980s suggests that
multiple regulatory systems failed, including workers’ compensation, workplace safety
regulation, product safety regulation, and liability law.
        In the United States, many states’ workers’ compensation systems began to cover
occupational diseases starting in the 1930s, but few workers with asbestos-related
diseases received compensation. 2 In response to lobbying by asbestos producers and
insurers, asbestos-related claims were subject to highly restrictive eligibility rules.
Asbestos diseases develop slowly and symptoms are easily mistaken for other diseases,
so that workers often left their jobs without knowing that they had asbestos disease and
this often meant that they did not quality for compensation. Indeed, asbestos producers
such as Johns-Manville conducted physical examinations of their workers, but did not
inform them if they had asbestosis in order to keep down the number of compensation
claims. Other workers were ineligible because of short statutes of limitations for filing
claims (Castleman, 1996, pp. 194 and 238-242). As a result, producers of asbestos
products did not face high workers’ compensation insurance premiums, which would
have given them an incentive to improve workplace safety. Also since workers’
compensation was workers’ exclusive remedy against their employers, workers could not
sue their employers for damages if their workers’ compensation claims were denied.
        As for regulation of workplace and product safety, there were scattered federal
and state programs in the 1950’s and 60’s, but most were voluntary and, even when rules
limiting asbestos exposure were adopted, they were not enforced (Sherrill, 1972, and
Brodeur, 1973). Moreover, some regulatory efforts actually increased exposure to
asbestos, such as building codes that required use of asbestos insulation in the ventilation
systems of commercial buildings. As the insulation aged, it deteriorated and asbestos
fibers were blown throughout the buildings.

2
  Workers’ compensation is a state-mandated insurance system that compensates workers for injuries on the
job and for occupational diseases, using funds from a tax on wages. Injured workers receive partial to full
replacement of wages, but no compensation for “pain and suffering.”


                                                                                                         3
       In the early 1970’s, efforts to regulate workplace and consumer product safety
increased with the creation of the Occupational Health and Safety Administration
(OSHA) in 1970, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 1970, and the
Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) in 1972. OSHA quickly adopted a
maximum limit of 5 asbestos fibers per cubic centimeter of air, with the standard to fall
to 2 fibers in 1976. Even the 2- fiber standard was not very strict, since an exposed
worker would breathe 10 million asbestos fibers in an 8-hour day. When unions and
public interest groups petitioned OSHA to tighten the standard, it shortened the phase- in
period for the 2- fiber standard. But a few years later when studies indicated that the 2-
fiber standard was not strict enough to prevent asbestosis, OSHA had become more
responsive to industry concerns and it did not respond. Only in 1983 was the standard
lowered again to 0.5 fibers (McCaffrey, chs. 5-6). In the late 1970s the Consumer
Product Safety Commission pressured manufacturers to voluntarily remove asbestos
from products such as hair dryers and children’s toys. But these efforts were halted in
the 1980s under the Reagan administration. In 1989, the Environmental Protection
Agency proposed a ban on asbestos use. But the ban was overturned by a federal circuit
court in 1991 over technical issues, and since the EPA never appealed the decision to a
higher court or resubmitted the proposal, it never went into effect (Bowker, 2002). As
of 2004, the U.S. has still not banned asbestos.
       Thus because the large asbestos producers were able to capture the regulators, the
government was very slow to limit asbestos exposure in the U.S. Since regulation
largely failed, what about liability?



A short history of asbestos litigation

     Workers who are harmed by asbestos products fall into two groups: those who
produce the products and those who install or demolish them (such as shipyard and
construction workers). While asbestos producers’ liability to their own employees was
limited by workers’ compensation, their liability to non-employees who use their
products was not.




                                                                                             4
       The liability environment became less favorable for asbestos producers in the
1960s, for several reasons. First, the number of workers’ compensation claims was
increasing. In 1969, Johns-Manville—the largest U.S. asbestos producer—paid nearly
$1 million in workers’ compensation to 285 employees who had become disabled with
asbestosis (Brodeur, 1973, p. 46). Second, a number of epidemiological studies were
published in the 1960s that showed strong links between asbestos exposure and
asbestosis, cancer, and mesothelioma.
       Third, products liability law itself was changing. Before the 1960s, producers
were liable for damage to users of their products only if producers were negligent. In
practice this standard was ineffective in deterring dangerous behavior because it was
difficult for plaintiffs to prove negligence, regardless of how badly producers behaved.
But during the 1960s, the law of products liability moved away from the negligence
standard and toward making producers “strictly liable” for damages. Under the strict
liability rule, producers are liable for damage to users regardless of whether they were
negligent or not, as long as their products are “unreasonably dangerous” or users were
not adequately warned of the danger. This change in the law made it easier for asbestos
users to win lawsuits against the asbestos manufacturers, because asbestos products were
both extremely dangerous and rarely contained warnings. In response to the changed
legal environment, asbestos producers began putting mild warnings on asbestos
insulation starting in 1964 and on sacks of asbestos fiber in 1969 (Castleman, 1996), pp.
386-87). In theory, both the negligence and the strict liability rules give producers
economically efficient incentives to increase product safety (Shavell, 1987). But in
practice, the move to strict liability rule gave producers a much stronger incentive to
substitute safer materials for asbestos.
     The first trial in which a user of asbestos products--an insulation worker--won
damages from the large asbestos manufacturers was Borel v. Fibreboard, 443 F.2nd 1076
(5th Cir. 1973), which occurred in 1973. During the following decade, 25,000 additional
products liability lawsuits were filed. These lawsuits gradually became more successful
as plaintiffs’ lawyers obtained evidence showing that the major producers had known the
dangers of asbestos exposure for decades (Brodeur, 1986). One important piece of
evidence was that, during the 1930s, the major producers commissioned research that



                                                                                            5
demonstrated the health hazards of asbestos, but kept the results secret and did not warn
either their workers or product users of the danger. Evidence of a cover- up combined
with defendants’ failure to warn frequently led juries to award punitive as well as
compensatory damages. About one-sixth of all damage awards in asbestos trials from
1987-2002 included punitive damages—a high fraction compared to other types of
litigation (White, 2002a). Because punitive damages are often uninsurable, many
defendants shifted from a strategy of vigorously defending against all claims to a
strategy of settling. But when defendants settle claims rather than going to trial,
representing claimants becomes very profitable for plaintiffs’ lawyers, since most of
their costs are incurred at trial. Plaintiffs’ lawyers therefore began seeking out additional
claimants and the volume of asbestos litigation grew. The large number of plaintiffs is
one of the distinguishing features of asbestos litigation.
       Plaintiffs’ lawyers search for plaintiffs by screening large numbers of workers
who might have been exposed to asbestos, such as textile factory workers. They file
lawsuits on behalf of anyone whose X-rays show scarring or thickening of the pleural
lining or the lungs. Few of these claimants have any asbestos-related impairment, but in
many states they meet the legal standard for injury. Various studies have estimated that
between two-thirds and nine-tenths of asbestos claimants are unimpaired and that many
claims are fraudulent. But when lawsuits are settled rather than going to trial, plaintiffs’
injury claims are never verified. The legal standards that allowed such a loose
connection between being a plaintiff and having an actual asbestos-related disability are
a second distinctive feature of asbestos litigation.
       In asbestos lawsuits, plaintiffs may sue as many as 50 to 100 defendants,
including all producers of products that the plaintiff might have been exposed to.
Potential asbestos defendants include any firm that ever produced, installed or sold
asbestos-related products, used some form of asbestos in its production process or in its
products, or owned a building that contained asbestos. Defendants include Sears (sold
asbestos-containing products), Gerber Baby Food (owns factories that contained
asbestos), Dow Jones & Co. (operates workplaces that contained asbestos), GM and Ford
(vehicle brakes contained asbestos), and 3M (produced a respirator that did not protect
users from asbestos). Plaintiffs’ law firms have aggressively pursued litigation against



                                                                                               6
insurers, too, and sometimes succeeded in collecting far more than the coverage limits of
the original insurance policies. Recently, two separate insurers paid about $1 billion
each to resolve liabilities based on small insurance policies that they issued many years
ago to a former distributor of asbestos insulation (Oster, 2002, and Treaster, 2003).
Another insurer, MetLife, is currently being sued on the grounds that it was involved in
research during the 1930’s that showed the adverse health effects of asbestos, but failed
to disclose the results (Oster, 2003). The extraordinarily high number of defendants is a
third important factor that is distinctive about asbestos litigation.
          Forum-shopping is also an important part of plaintiffs’ success in asbestos
litigation. During the 1980s, many asbestos claims were filed in federal courts. But
federal courts rarely allow punitive damages in asbestos trials and, starting in the 1990’s,
they began requiring that all asbestos claims be transferred to a single federal judge in
Pennsylvania for pre-trial discovery. This substantially lengthened the litigation process
and, in response, most plaintiffs’ lawyers shifted to filing their asbestos claims in state
courts. They particularly sought out states whose laws and legal procedures favor
plaintiffs and jurisdictions within those states whose judges and juries are pro-plaintiff.
They also seek out individual judges who pressure defendants to settle.
          Favored locations have varied over time (Carroll et al., 2002). Texas was
favored in the 1990’s, until it adopted legislation that limited punitive damages and
restricted plaintiffs’ lawyers’ right to choose among jurisdictions (Glaberson, 1999).
Currently favored locations include Madison County, Illinois, various counties in West
Virginia, and especially Mississippi – where 20 percent of all asbestos claims are
reportedly filed (Parloff, 2002). Mississippi courts favor asbestos plaintiffs in a number
of ways. First, they have no limits on the size of punitive or compensatory damage
awards. Second, they allow plaintiffs’ lawyers to join hundreds or thousands of asbestos
claims from all over the country under a single docket number (at least one plaintiff must
be a Mississippi resident). Joined claims differ from class actions in that, if they go to
trial, the judge or jury decides each claim separately. But they are handled as a group for
pre-trial purposes and, if a trial occurs, multiple claims from the group are tried together.
This increases the degree of correlation of trial outcomes, which raises the risk of trial
and encourages defendants to settle (White, 2002a). For example, a recent Mississippi



                                                                                              7
trial involved 12 asbestos plaintiffs who were selected from a group of 1,738 joined
claims. The 12 plaintiffs were awarded total damages of $48 million, with some
receiving $2 million or more despite having no detectable asbestos disease. After the
trial, the judge directed the parties to settle the remaining 1,726 claims and threatened
that, otherwise, he would use the same jury for the remaining claims and would direct it
to consider awarding punitive damages. In response, defendants settled all claims on
what were reported to be very favorable terms for plaintiffs (Parloff, 2002). Third,
Mississippi courts do not require judges to approve the terms of mass settlements, which
means that plaintiffs’ legal fees are not subject to judicial scrutiny. As a result, although
plaintiffs’ lawyers gain from economies of scale in litigating large numbers of joined
claims, they can still charge plaintiffs the same high legal fees—25 to 40% of
settlements or damage awards--that prevail in individual litigation. Fourth, in some
Mississippi counties, courts do not allow defendants to verify disease claims by
conducting medical exams of plaintiffs.
      White (2002a) examined the effect of forum shopping on the value of asbestos
claims, using a dataset of all asbestos trials since 1987. I found that the expected value
of an asbestos claim at trial in favorable jurisdictions such as Mississippi, West Virginia,
and Houston, Texas, was $3 million higher than in other jurisdictions (in 2000 dollars).
When asbestos claims went to trial in groups rather than individually, plaintiffs’
expected gain from trial was about $600,000 higher. I also found that when defendants
were found liable for punitive damages, their settlement costs increased sharply in later
years and they attracted thousands of additional claims. Punitive damage awards signal
that a defendant is a particularly vulnerable target.
       One question that asbestos litigation raises is why particular states and
jurisdictions are so strongly pro-plaintiff. Since state court judges are elected, one
answer is that plaintiffs’ lawyers contribute generously to judges’ re-election campaigns
in jurisdictions where they frequently file claims. Plaintiffs’ lawyers have an advantage
over defendants’ lawyers as contributors, since they choose where to file claims and tend
to file in particular jurisdictions repeatedly. If judges do not treat them favorably, they
can move their claims elsewhere. Another factor is that, for a small county seat, playing
host to high-stakes trials that attract many out-of-state lawyers is a form of economic



                                                                                              8
development, supporting local hotels and restaurants and increasing the number of jobs
in the county courthouse. States also gain from having pro-plaintiff laws because some
plaintiffs are state residents and litigation transfers resources to them from out-of-state
defendants. State court judges sometimes encourage juries to award high damages in
asbestos trials on the grounds that funds for damage awards are limited and will
otherwise go to residents of other states. Plaintiffs’ lawyers also sometimes arrange the
terms of mass asbestos settlements to reward favorable states by paying higher damages
to their residents. For example, one large asbestos settlement paid damages of $263,000
to plaintiffs who were residents of Mississippi, but only $14,000 to plaintiffs who had
the same disease but were residents of Pennsylvania or Ohio (Rothstein, 2001). But
there are cost to attracting mass filings of asbestos and other tort claims--Texas changed
its legal rules because of concern that excessive litigation was driving firms to leave the
state (Glaberson, 1999).
        Between 1982 and 2001, the total number of asbestos claimants grew from 1,000
to 600,000, the total number of firms that have been sued grew from 300 to 6,000, and
the amount spent by defendants and insurers on asbestos litigation grew from $1 billion
to $54 billion in nominal dollars. Because plaintiffs sue multiple defendants, the total
number of asbestos claims – that is, the number of claims by individual plaintiffs against
individual defendants -- is in the millions. The number of new claims filed with the
Manville Trust—which pays asbestos claims for the bankrupt asbestos producer Johns-
Manville—increased from about 20,000 per year in the early 1990s to 91,000 in 2001.
Average damage awards in asbestos trials rose from $675,000 in 1990-91 to about $3
million in 2000-03.3



Lessons from Europe

      Did other countries manage the asbestos problem better than the U.S.? The answer
is no. Levels of asbestos exposure were even higher in Europe than in the U.S. and
consumption levels declined more slowly (see table 1). Death rates from mesothelioma


3
  All data are taken from Carroll et al (2002), except for the number of Manville Trust claims, which comes
from www.mantrust.org, and the damage award figures, which are taken from White (2002a).


                                                                                                         9
as of 1998 are higher in Europe than in the U.S.: 1.85 versus 1.0 per 100,000 people,
respectively. Moreover, while the death rate from mesothelioma peaked in the 1990’s
and is starting to decline in the U.S., it is predicted to double in Europe over the next 20
years. 4
    The European countries, like Britain, mandated compensation for workers who
developed asbestos disease through their workers’ compensation or national insurance
systems. But because of industry pressure, few workers actually received compensation
so that there was little pressure on producers to reduce use of asbestos. In France, 500
new cases of mesothelioma occurred annually in the mid-1980’s, but only 20-40 cases
per year received compensation. Similarly in Italy, 400 new cases of mesothelioma
occurred annually in the 1990’s, but none received compensation between 1988 and 1995
(Castleman, p. 813). In both countries, long and complicated administrative procedures
discouraged victims from filing claims. In Switzerland and the Netherlands, relatively
short statutes of limitations that start from the date of exposure rather than the date of
discovery of disease prevented many asbestos victims from receiving compensation. In
the U.K. in 1986, there were four times the number of mesothelioma cases per capita as
in the U.S., but only one-fifth the number of asbestos-related legal claims (Kazan-Allen,
2000a). Asbestos victims in the U.K. were discouraged from filing lawsuits against
either the workers’ compensation system or asbestos producers, because contingency fees
are not allowed and the loser in a lawsuit must pay the winner’s legal costs. This means
that potential plaintiffs are deterred both by high initial costs and by the risk of having to
pay the other side’s legal costs if they lose at trial. Also, British plaintiffs cannot collect
punitive damages against producers and do not have the extensive rights of discovery that
enabled plaintiffs’ lawyers in the U.S. to build strong cases against asbestos producers.
The situation appears to have changed in the past few years, with more asbestos claims
being filed and more claimants obtaining compensation, although compensation levels
remain modest by U.S. standards. Ironically, one of the largest asbestos producers in the
U.K., Turner and Newall Industries, went bankrupt because of the cost of paying asbestos
claims by American plaintiffs who sued its U.S. subsidiary.


4
 European data are for the U.K., Germany, France, Switzerland, the Netherlands and Italy (Peto et al,
1999). U.S. data are from the National Cancer Institute, 2003, table I-7.


                                                                                                        10
   Like the U.S., the European experience suggests that government regulation of
asbestos was weak because of regulatory capture. But, unlike the U.S., liability did
emerge as a substitute for regulation and, as a result, European asbestos producers were
slower to reduce asbestos use than their counterparts in the U.S. It was only when the
European countries began to adopt bans on asbestos importation and use in the 1990’s
that asbestos exposure fell sharply. Switzerland banned use of asbestos in 1990, and ten
other European countries adopted full or partial bans during the 1990’s. The European
Union adopted a ban on all types of asbestos in 1999, to take effect in 2005 (Kazan-
Allen, 2000b).


The effectiveness of liability versus regulation

    Does the asbestos saga suggest any lessons concerning the effectiveness of liability
versus regulation in controlling workplace and product dangers? For the U.S., neither
policy was effective until the early 1970’s, when OSHA imposed new limits on
workplace asbestos exposure and the Borel trial occurred. The coincidence of events in
that period makes it difficult to draw any conclusions. But later events suggest that
liability was more effective than regulation in driving asbestos from the marketplace. In
particular, the regulatory efforts of OSHA, CPSC and EPA were quite ineffective
throughout the 1970’s, while the Borel trial was followed by a litigation explosion. By
the late 1970’s, producers had eliminated asbestos from many products and overall U.S.
consumption had declined sharply.     However for Europe, neither liability nor regulation
was effective until later.
       The asbestos saga also suggests that, the worse the failure of regulation, the more
likely that the courts will respond with high liability. This is because the callous behavior
of producers in consciously exposing workers and product users to danger tends to make
judges and juries very sympathetic to plaintiffs. In the asbestos context, this caused
judges to change the law in asbestos victims’ favor and juries to award high
compensatory and punitive damages.



Is Asbestos Different from Other Mass Torts?


                                                                                           11
   Several mass torts involving personal injury have been largely or fully resolved in
recent years: for example, the Fen-Phen diet supplement litigation was resolved in 2000;
a settlement of the tobacco claims involving the 50 states was reached in 1998; claims
for harm due to breast implants were resolved in 1994; the Dalkon Shield (intrauterine
contraceptive device) litigation was settled in 1988, and the Agent Orange litigation was
settled in 1984. Along with asbestos, a number of other mass torts are still in litigation,
includ ing claims of harm due to lead exposure, firearms, and fast food, and individual
claims involving harm from tobacco. Table 2 gives some characteristics of asbestos and
other mass torts involving personal injury. In this section I consider how asbestos
differs from other mass torts and how asbestos litigation might be resolved.



Number of Defendants and Plaintiffs

     While 600,000 people have filed asbestos claims so far, other mass torts also have
hundreds of thousands of claimants. The Agent Orange litigation eventually involved
about 250,000 claimants and the breast implant litigation involved 440,000. Tobacco
and fast food litigation potentially involve many more plaintiffs than asbestos, since
huge numbers of Americans smoked or are obese. But while many plaintiffs are
necessary for a mass tort, they are not sufficient. There must also be funds to pay high
damages.
   Where asbestos differs strongly from other mass torts is in the number of defendants
involved. About 6,000 defendants have been sued for asbestos damage, while no
previous mass tort has had more than about a dozen. Because so many firms were
involved with asbestos production, plaintiffs’ lawyers have been able to substitute new
defendants as old ones go bankrupt. Also the large number of defendants means that
there are many insurers with obligations to pay. As a result, even with hundreds of
thousands of asbestos claims, there are enough deep pockets to keep the litigation going.



The Law is Different for Asbestos

       Asbestos developed its own legal doctrines that differ from those applied in other
areas of tort litigation. One difference is that the burden on asbestos claimants of


                                                                                           12
proving causation is lower. Normally, plaintiffs must show that a particular defendant’s
product caused their harm. Providing this kind of evidence would be difficult for most
asbestos plaintiffs, since they often were exposed to many different asbestos products
and cannot establish that any particular product caused their harm. In response, courts
loosened the rules of causation, so that asbestos plaintiffs were only required to present
evidence that particular defendants’ products were used at their workplaces. Co-
workers’ recollections of seeing a particular product in the workplace are usually
allowed, even though this type of evidence would not normally be admitted in court
(Brickman, 1992). Asbestos is not the first mass tort in which relaxed standards of
causation have been used—an earlier example is litigation over the drug DES, which
harmed the daughters of women who took it during pregnancy. Because multiple
manufacturers produced DES and victims did not know which manufacturer’s DES
harmed them, all were found liable for damages based on their market shares. But many
mass torts remain small because plaintiffs cannot meet the burden of demonstrating
causation. For example in the lead paint litigation, plaintiffs generally lose lawsuits
against paint manufacturers, because the ir homes have many layers of lead paint and
they cannot show that any particular manufacturer’s paint caused their harm (Dean,
2001, and Cupp, 2000).
   Another way that asbestos claims differ from other tort claims is in how cla imants
with no asbestos-related impairment are treated. Under normal tort law, the ir claims
would not be allowed to proceed in the legal system, because they have not suffered any
harm. Some state courts follow this general approach by putting these claims on an
“inactive docket,” which preserves plaintiffs’ right to sue in the future if they develop a
serious asbestos disease, but otherwise prevents their claims from proceeding. Other
states allow these claimants to collect for “asbestos exposure” or fo r “fear of cancer.”
Still others allow them to collect twice, once for asbestos exposure and again for a
disabling asbestos disease if one develops in the future. At trial, asbestos plaintiffs who
have exposure only (for example, they have pleural plaque but are not disabled or
injured) have been awarded damages as high as $5 million and they have also received
high settlements.




                                                                                            13
       Other legal developments have expanded insurers’ liability for asbestos claims.
Suppose a plaintiff was exposed to asbestos in 1955 and diagnosed with asbestosis in
1985. Under the “triple trigger” doctrine that many states have adopted, inhaled asbestos
fibers are treated as continuously injuring plaintiffs’ lungs, so that a plaintiff can collect
from the insurers that covered the firm in 1955, in 1985, and any date in-between. By
allowing a single plaintiff to claim under many insurance policies, the doctrine increases
the amount of compensation that victims can collect. In addition, courts have
reinterpreted many products liability insurance policies as “premises liability” policies.
Products liability policies have an aggregate limit on coverage, but premises policies –
which were intended for perils such as fire and hurricanes -- have only a coverage limit
for each occurrence. If each asbestos claim is treated as a separate occurrence, then
insurers effectively have unlimited liability (Rheingold, 1996). The result of these
changes in insurance law is to greatly expand insurers’ liability for asbestos claims.
    Why did tort law as applied to asbestos claims change so dramatically and in so
many ways? Concerning insurers’ liability, one answer is that the policies were vague
and judges applied a principle of insurance law that requires construing ambiguous
insurance contracts against the interest of the insurer. Another answer is that judges’
indignation at asbestos defendants’ callous behavior sometimes led them to give juries
instructions that favored plaintiffs. And once plaintiffs win a case and the decision
survives on appeal, the case becomes a precedent that increases plaintiffs’ probably of
winning later cases.



The search for the “next asbestos”

     Plaintiffs’ lawyers have long been searching for the next big mass tort, but with the
exception of tobacco, no other mass tort has achieved the same scale. Some mass torts,
including the lead paint litigation, have remained small because plaintiffs have not been
able to establish causation and the courts have not loosened the requirements, as they did
for asbestos claimants. In other mass torts, causation can be established, but defendants
have been found not liable because they provided adequate warnings of the dangers of
using their products or because the design of the product was not defective. Thus in the



                                                                                             14
firearms litigation, most lawsuits brought by gun victims have been dismissed on the
grounds that guns cause injury because they are not defective, while manufacturers are
only liable for harm when their products are defective (Kimball and Olson, 2000). In
any case, firearms litigation will probably remain small, both because there are only a
few gun manufacturers and because Congress may end the litigation by passing
legislation to protect gun manufacturers from liability.
      In the tobacco litigation, there is a long history of individual smokers losing
lawsuits against cigarette manufacturers, because juries considered the Congressionally-
mandated warnings on cigarette packages to be sufficient and therefore smokers were
held to have assumed the risks of smoking. Because individual plaintiffs were
unsuccessful, several state attorneys-general decided in 1994 to bring suit against the
tobacco companies. To keep the states’ initial costs down, private law firms were hired
to represent the states on a contingency fee basis, i.e., the law firms would be paid a
share of whatever damages the states received. After several false starts, the tobacco
companies and all 50 states concluded settlements in 1997-98 which required the
tobacco industry to pay the states $246 billion (undiscounted) over 25 years (Derthick,
2002). The tobacco settlement did not bar individual plaintiffs from suing the tobacco
companies, however, and in 2000 a jury in Florida awarded punitive dama ges of $145
billion to a class of 500,000 Florida smokers (Bragg, 2000). Thus despite the settlement
with the states, tobacco litigation still has the potential to grow.
       Finally, fast food litigation is at an early stage, but will probably never be as large
as asbestos (Ives, 2002). Plaintiffs seem unlikely to succeed in their lawsuits, simply
because there are so many different ways of over-eating. Also, while punitive damages
were an important element in the growth of asbestos litigation, juries seem unlikely to
develop a similar level of outrage over McDonald’s promotion of hamburgers as they did
over asbestos producers’ extreme disregard of workers’ and users’ safety.



High legal fees and future mass torts

   Asbestos litigation has gene rated a massive transfer to lawyers, far greater than any
other mass tort. The combination of plaintiffs’ and defendants’ legal expenses consumed



                                                                                            15
about 66 percent of asbestos compensation paid during the 1980s and about 60 percent
of compensation paid dur ing the 1990s (Carroll et al, 2002). Based on these figures, of
the $54 billion already spent on asbestos litigation, about $34 billion went to lawyers. If
total asbestos litigation costs eventually reach $200 billion, then legal fees could
consume an additional $88 billion.
    These legal fees far exceed even the enormous amounts paid to lawyers in the
tobacco settlement. Suppose we assume that plaintiffs’ lawyers received half of the $34
billion already paid to lawyers in asbestos litigation, or $17 billion as of 2000. In
contrast, plaintiffs’ lawyers earned a total of $13 billion (undiscounted) from the 50
states in the tobacco settlement, but the money is to be paid out over 25 years (Derthick,
2002).
    High profits from asbestos litigation have changed the legal industry by encouraging
more lawyers to enter the business of representing mass tort plaintiffs and provid ing
start-up funds and expertise for new mass torts. The same plaintiffs’ law firms that got
their start representing asbestos claimants later represented the states in the tobacco
litigation. They also initiated other mass torts including lead paint, firearms, Fen-phen,
health care fraud, and fast food, as well as representing victims in the Ford/Firestone
defective tire litigation and the World Trade Center attacks. Many of the innovations
that plaintiffs’ lawyers developed in representing asbestos claimants—including
concentrating claims in favorable state courts, joining large numbers of claims together,
and suing insurers for funds well beyond the limits of their insurance policies—are likely
to used in future mass torts. Plaintiffs’ lawyers have also become large contributors to
political campaigns of favorable candidates, including candidates for state judgeships,
state attorneys-general, and Congress. Several have run for Congress themselves
(Derthick, 2002, p. 187). As a result of the growth of asbestos litigation, future mass
torts are likely to be more numerous and more expensive and future legislation that
plaintiffs’ lawyers oppose is less likely to be passed.


Bankruptcies Resolve Other Mass Torts, But Not Asbestos

         Bankruptcy proceedings are designed to resolve all claims against a bankrupt
firm, including both current claims and claims that will come due in the future. As a


                                                                                           16
result, they are one method of resolving mass torts. This is clearest in a Chapter 7
bankruptcy liquidation. Here the bankrupt company’s assets are sold, either as a going
concern or piecemeal, and it ceases to exist. The sale proceeds are used to pay all
claims, including tort claims, according to a predetermined priority ordering. If the
bankrupt company instead reorganizes under Chapter 11, it continues to operate rather
than shutting down. Creditors then must approve a reorganization plan that provides for
partial payment of all claims, with the funds coming mainly from the reorganized firm’s
future profits. This procedure preserves the company’s going concern value by allowing
it to emerge from Chapter 11 free of its tort and other pre-bankruptcy claims (White,
1989).
      Most mass tort defendants that file for bankruptcy reorganize under Chapter 11.
For bankrupt asbestos defendants, this makes sense economically because most of them
no longer produce asbestos-containing products and would be profitable if not for their
asbestos liabilities. The reorganization plan always involves setting up a compensation
trust that takes over responsibility for paying present and future asbestos claims. The
funding for the trust comes from the reorganized firm’s future profits and from its
insurers, who contribute money to the trust in return for a discharge from liability to the
firm’s tort claimants. 5
         Bankruptcy filings were used successfully to resolve the Dalkon Shield and breast
implant mass torts. But while many asbestos producers have filed for bankruptcy, these
bankruptcies have worsened the asbestos crisis rather than resolving it, by spreading the
litigation to new defendants. The problem is that, when an asbestos defendant goes
bankrupt, it stops paying claimants until its compensation trust begins to operate and
even then, the value of payments will be low. As a result, plaintiffs’ lawyers shift their
litigation focus to non-bankrupt defendants, since the latter are more lucrative. In
addition, many states have “joint and several liability,” which means that each defendant
found liable for a damage award is responsible for paying up to the entire amount if
other defendants don’t pay their shares. Therefore, when one defendant goes bankrupt,


5
  In 1994, Congress adopted a set of amendments to the Bankruptcy Code that apply only to bankruptcies
of firms with asbestos claims. The amendments require that a compensation trust be set up. They also
specify special voting rules for adoption of reorganization plans—see below. White (2002b) discusses
recent asbestos bankruptcies and reorganization plans.


                                                                                                     17
the remaining defendants’ liability increases. Similarly, if an insurer fails, some of its
asbestos liabilities are transferred to other insurance companies, because multiple
insurers are liable for the same claims under the triple trigger doctrine.
       Thus an important problem with bankruptcy is that it contains no mechanism for
coordinating among multiple defendants that share liability for tort claims. As a result,
bankruptcies by individual asbestos defendants shift liability to non-bankrupt defendants
and therefore spread the asbestos crisis rather than resolving it.
       Bankruptcy filings by asbestos defendants also create additional distortions. One
is that in order for a bankrupt asbestos firm’s reorganization plan to be adopted, 75
percent of current tort claimants must vote in favor of the plan, but future tort claimants
do not have the right to vote at all. (The 75 percent approval requirement is higher than
the normal standard for adopting reorganization plans.) As a result, asbestos
reorganization plans over-compensate present claimants relative to future claimants.
Another problem is that if asbestos producers expect to file for bankruptcy, their
managers have an incentive to encourage the filing of claims by the unimpaired. After
all, these claimants have an incentive to vote in favor of a reorganization plan even if it
provides only low compensation, and because there are too few claimants with serious
asbestos diseases to block adoption of the plan, those with serious diseases tend to be
under-compensated (White, 2002b). Thus the voting rules for adoption of asbestos
firms’ reorganization plans lead to over-compensation of unimpaired claimants and
under-compensation of future claimants and those with serious asbestos diseases. This
pattern of compensation further increases the cost of asbestos litigation by encouraging
plaintiffs’ lawyers to continue filing additional claims by the unimpaired.



No Class Action Settlement of Asbestos Claims

     Another method that the legal system has developed for resolving mass torts is the
class action settlement, which was successfully used to resolve both the Agent Orange
and Fen-Phen litigation. In a class action, a judge certifies a class consisting of all
plaintiffs having a particular type of claim against one or more defendants that produced
a harmful product. If the class action goes to trial, the judge or jury makes a single



                                                                                             18
decision for each defendant—that is, all plaintiffs either win or lose against each
defendant. But most class actions are resolved by settlements rather than trials and class
actions frequently are certified only after a settlement is reached. As in a bankruptcy,
class action settlements often involve setting up a compensation trust to pay all present
and future tort claims, using assets provided by the defendant and its insurers.
       An important advantage of class action settlements is that they can be used to
collectively resolve mass torts that involve multiple defendants. If multiple defendants
produced a single dangerous product and individual plaintiffs cannot identify which
defendant’s product harmed them, a class action settlement can set up a single
compensation trust to pay all plaintiffs’ claims, with defendants and insurers agreeing on
a formula for dividing the cost. Unlike bankruptcy filings by individual defendants, a
class action settlement of this type prevents the mass tort from spreading. The settlement
of the Agent Orange litigation followed this pattern—claims against all twelve producers
of Agent Orange were resolved collectively by creating a single compensation trust.
       During the mid-1990’s, the asbestos mass tort seemed to be headed for resolution
using this route. A large class action settlement was agreed on and certified that
involved all of the tort claims against the Center for Claims Resolution, a consortium of
twenty asbestos producers that were conducting their legal defenses jointly. But in
Amchem Products v. Windsor, 521 U.S. 591 (1997), the Supreme Court overturned the
class certification. Two years later in Ortiz v. Fibreboard Corp., 527 U.S. 815 (1999),
the Supreme Court overturned the certification of another asbestos class action
settlement that involved only a single large defendant. After the two decisions,
defendants concluded that no class action settlement of asbestos claims would succeed
and 22 of them quickly filed for bankruptcy (Hensler, 2002).
    Economists have strongly criticized the federal rules that determine when a class
action can be certified, arguing that judges certify class actions too frequently. Their
concern is that class actions are often certified even when plaintiffs’ claims are very
weak and they would lose in a trial. The problem is that, once a class is certified,
defendants nearly always settle since going to trial is too risky when losing could force
the firm into bankruptcy (Priest, 1997). But economists have overlooked a benefit of
certifying class actions in the mass tort context, which is that they can be used to resolve



                                                                                            19
multi-defendant mass torts collectively and can therefore stop the spread of mass torts to
new defendants.
       But in the asbestos context, even if the Supreme Cour t justices changed their
minds and allowed a large class action of all asbestos claimants to be certified, it would
probably be impossible for the parties to agree on a settlement. Plaintiffs and defendants
would have to agree on how much is needed to compensate all present and future
claimants and defendants and insurers would have to agree on a formula for dividing the
cost. The agreement concerning the cost allocation would have to be voluntary, since
class action settlements have no mechanism for forcing dissenting defendant s to agree
(in contrast, dissenting plaintiffs can be forced to agree since only the judge must
approve the settlement). And while asbestos has 6,000 defendants, the largest number of
defendants in a single mass tort class action settlement so far has only been a dozen -- in
the Agent Orange litigation. Schuck (1986) discusses how difficult it was for the twelve
Agent Orange defendants to reach a settlement, even with an activist judge who forced
them to bargain around the clock and refused to let them out until they reached an
agreement.



        The arguments of this section suggest that, while asbestos litigation shares many
characteristics with other mass torts, it is the only one that defies resolution within the
court system. Given the large number of asbestos defendants, collective solution
mechanisms such as class action settlements and bankruptcy that worked for other mass
torts do not work for asbestos. In addition, since most asbestos litigation occurs in state
courts, tort reforms at the state level would be ineffective unless they were adopted
simultaneously by a number of states. This is because reforms adopted by a particular
state would either have no effect, if the state has few asbestos claims, or would merely
shift the focus of litigation to the next- most- favorable state, if the state has many
asbestos claims. In the next section, I discuss how Congress proposes to solve the
asbestos crisis.



Legislative Solutions to the Asbestos Crisis


                                                                                              20
       In Ortiz v. Fibreboard, 527 U.S.815 (1999), Supreme Court Justice David Souter
wrote that “the elephantine mass of asbestos cases … defies customary judicial
administration and calls for national legislation.” An ideal solution to the asbestos
litigation mess wo uld accomplish several goals: 1) compensate present and future
claimants equitably based on their harm, but do not compensate those who are
unimpaired; 2) reduce litigation costs; 3) resolve uncertainty for claimants, defendants
and insurers; and 4) stop the spread of claims to new defendants that had little or no
involvement in asbestos production.
     Congress is now considering the “Fairness in Asbestos Injury Resolution Act of
2003,” S. 1125, which would resolve the asbestos crisis by establishing a privately-
funded, publicly- run administrative procedure for compensating asbestos victims.
Asbestos defendants and insurance companies would each pay a total of $52 billion to
the fund over 27 years. An additional $10 billion in assets would be transferred to the
fund from existing asbestos compensation trusts that were set up as part of asbestos
bankruptcies, for a total of $114 billion. Defendants would be required to pay either a
proportion of their revenues or a flat dollar amount to the fund each year, with the
obligation depending on individual defendants’ size and past asbestos liabilities. Small
businesses and firms with no previous asbestos liabilities would be exempt. For insurers,
a commission would be established to determine individua l companies’ assessments,
which are to depend on past exposure to asbestos liabilities.
       To receive compensation, claimants must provide evidence showing that they had
particular levels of exposure to asbestos for at least a minimum number of years and must
submit medical evidence to prove that they have a qualifying asbestos disease. (Specific
requirements vary by disease.) Claimants are not required to show that they were harmed
by particular asbestos products. The act specifies that independent medical experts will
review all applications for compensation and it also gives the fund authority to require
that claimants submit to medical examinations and provide tissue biopsies.

       Proposed compensation levels are shown in Table 3. Claimants with
mesothelioma would receive $1 million, those with asbestos-related cancers would
receive between $25,000 and $1 million (depending on disease and smoking behavior),
and those with severe or disabling asbestosis would receive between $300,000 and


                                                                                           21
$750,000 (depending on severity). Claimants with no impairment would receive free
medical monitoring, but no cash. Compensation would be paid over three to four years
and future payments would be inflation-adjusted. Table 3 also shows expected asbestos
compensatory damage awards at trial since 1987 (punitive damage awards are excluded
since payments by the fund are intended to be compensatory only). The comparison
suggests that the act’s proposed compensation levels for severe asbestos diseases are in
the same range as compensatory damage awards at trial. But most tort claimants receive
much less, since claims are generally settled out of court and settlement levels are much
lower than damage awards. 6 The act also includes a long-overdue ban on asbestos use.

        Another way to estimate the adequacy of the proposed fund is to use figures on
the annual number of new lawsuits filed by plaintiffs with serious asbestos disease.
Currently, about 2,000 new lawsuits are filed each year filed by plaintiffs with
mesothelioma, 2,000 to 3,000 are filed by plaintiffs with other asbestos-related cancers,
and a “smaller number” are filed by plaintiffs with serious asbestosis (Biggs et al., 2001).
To err on the high side, suppose both of the latter figures are 3,000 per year. Also
suppose that the fund pays mesothelioma victims $1 million each, other cancer victim
$512,500 each, and asbestosis victims $385,000 each (the latter two figures are the
midpoints of the act’s proposed ranges). Then compensating all claimants wo uld cost
$4.7 billion per year, so that the $114 billion dollar fund would be adequate to pay all
claims for the next 24 years. Since the number of new cases of serious asbestos disease is
likely to decline over time, this approach also suggests that the proposed fund would be
adequate.
    Another way to estimate the adequacy of the proposed fund is to use figures on the
annual number of new lawsuits filed by plaintiffs with serious asbestos disease.
Currently, about 2,000 new lawsuits are filed each year filed by plaintiffs with
mesothelioma, 2,000 to 3,000 are filed by plaintiffs with other asbestos-related cancers,
and a “smaller number” are filed by plaintiffs with serious asbestosis (Biggs et al., 2001).
To err on the high side, suppose both of the latter figures are 3,000 per year. Also
suppose that the fund pays mesothelioma victims $1 million each, other cancer victims
6
  Data on settlement levels broken down by disease are not available. The average asbestos settlement level
for all diseases is about $5,000 (in 2000 dollars), but claimants usually receive separate settlements from
multiple defendants. Damage and settlement figures are calculated from data described in White (2002a).


                                                                                                        22
$512,500 each, and asbestosis victims $525,000 each (the latter two figures are the
midpoints of the act’s proposed ranges). Then compensating all claimants would cost
$5.1 billion per year, so that the $114 billion dollar fund would be adequate to pay all
claims for the next 22.3 years. Since the number of new cases of serious asbestos disease
is likely to decline over time, this approach also suggests that the proposed fund would be
adequate.
       How well might a fund of this sort accomplish the four goals named at the
beginning of this section? $114 billion appears to be enough to compensate present and
future claimants, but only if the fund is aggressive in weeding out claims by the
unimpaired. In order to do so, it will have to spend substantial resources on auditing
claims, conducting medical examinations and examining biopsies, even though these
activities are expensive. Past experience by the Manville Trust suggests that, without
careful auditing, claimants with pleural plaque will claim to have asbestosis, claimants
with asbestosis who are unimpaired will claim to be disabled, and the number of claims
will increase rapidly. These factors will quickly cause the fund to overrun its budget.
       Will adoption of the fund reduce litigation costs relative to the current system?
The answer is unclear, since the fund’s own cost of auditing claims will be high and, on
the other side, the act does not specify limits on plaintiffs’ attorneys’ fees. Other asbestos
compensation trusts, including the Manville Trust, often limit plaintiffs’ attorneys’ fees to
25% of compensation. But, perhaps to reduce opposition by plaintiffs’ lawyers, the act’s
drafters did not set any limits (although they specified that a legal assistance program for
claimants be set up).

      The fund would certainly give greater certainty to all parties. Claimants would
receive a uniform level of compensation by disease, in comparison to the tort system
where they individually bear the risk of winning a multi- million dollar damage award at
trial, losing at trial and receiving nothing, or receiving much smaller settlements.
Adoption of the fund also increases the probability that money will be available to
compensate individuals who develop serious asbestos diseases in the future. Claimants
would also receive their compensation more quickly than in the tort system, where
lawsuits often take many years. The fund also eliminates defendants’ uncertainty




                                                                                           23
concerning their future asbestos liabilities and stops the spread of asbestos litigation to
new defendants.

   Whether the act will be adopted is unclear. While defendants and insurers have
agreed to the $114 billion figure, the AFL-CIO announced in the fall of 2003 that at least
$153 billion is needed and Democrats in the Senate have backed the AFL-CIO’s demand.

       An alternative approach for resolving the asbestos crisis would also new
legislation, but would be less complicated than the fund-based approach. It would
require, first, that all asbestos claims be filed in federal court and, second, that all
asbestos claims be transferred to a single federal judge for pre-trial discovery and trial.
(Currently, many asbestos lawsuits are transferred to a particular federal judge for pre-
trial discovery, but they are returned to the jurisdiction where they were filed for trial.)
Third, claims involving mesothelioma, asbestos-related cancers, and severe asbestosis
would be placed on an “active docket,” while all other asbestos claims would be placed
on an inactive docket. Only claims on the active docket would proceed. Congress
would need to provide sufficient resources for the court to audit all claims for disease
type and to process all claims on the active docket. At current rates, there would be
about 8,000 new active docket claims each year, which—given settlements—would
require that several hundred trials be conducted each year. (These figures wo uld be
expected to decline over time.) By reducing the amount spent on compensating
claimants with no asbestos-related disability, this approach would at least partially
achieve the four goals specified above. It would also eliminate the need for agreement
on how to pay for a compensation fund.



Conclusion

       The asbestos litigation mess is a combination of a difficult situation and a series
of unwise decisions. The difficult situation was that asbestos was so widely used, so
demonstrably harmful to health, and a number of firms engaged in cover-ups and political
pressure to hide their behavior. The bad decisions include prevent ing workers with
asbestos-related diseases from collecting workers’ compensation; not regulating asbestos



                                                                                               24
until the 1970s; not banning asbestos in the early 1990’s; allowing uninjured claimants to
collect damages; allowing asbestos liability to spread to defendants with little asbestos
involvement; and rewriting the meaning of past insurance policies to increase insurers’
liability.

         The asbestos situation suggests several lessons that may be applicable to other
mass torts. First, because of capture by the large asbestos producers, regulation was
ineffective in preventing large-scale asbestos exposure. However the large producers
were unable to capture the courts and liability was eventually effective in driving
asbestos from the U.S. marketplace. Second, regulation and liability are related in the
sense that, the worse is the regulators’ failure, the stronger the courts’ reaction is likely to
be. Thus when producers knowingly expose large numbers of workers and consumers to
highly dangerous products and attempt to cover up their behavior, judges and juries are
likely to respond by punishing them with massive compensatory and punitive damages.
Third, asbestos is fairly unique as a mass tort because it was used in thousands of
products, millions of plaintiffs were exposed, and thousands of defendants with deep
pockets were potentially liable. This made it more likely that once the litigation got
started, it would spiral out of control. But it also means that the same scenario is unlikely
to happen for other mass torts. After all, plaintiffs’ lawyers have been searching for the
next asbestos for years now, and, so far, they don’t seem to have found it.

         Fourth, the legal system has two methods to collectively resolve mass torts--
bankruptcy and class action settlements--but neither of them worked for asbestos.
Bankruptcy is effective in resolving mass torts that involve only a single defendant, but
not in resolving those with many defendants, because it has no mechanism for preventing
the spread of liability from bankrupt to non-bankrupt defendants. A large class action
settlement could potentially resolve mass torts involving multiple defendants, but the
Supreme Court blocked this route for asbestos and, in any case, it would be near
impossible to get 6,000 defendants and hundreds of insurers to voluntarily agree on a
settlement. By a simple process of elimination, this suggests that Congress will
eventually have to pass legislation to resolve the asbestos crisis. But, not surprisingly,
the current bill in Congress is stalled over the same issue—how to decide on individual
defendant’s and insurer’s contribution to the compensation fund.


                                                                                             25
    Finally, while other mass torts are unlikely to replicate the size and scope of asbestos
litigation, the legal techniques and precedents that lawyers developed for asbestos
litigation are likely to be applied to other mass torts in the future. As a result, mass torts
in the future will be more common and more expensive.
    Will the asbestos mess at least have the beneficial effect of changing firms’ attitudes
toward the risks of using asbestos-like products in the future? Unfortunately, neither
liability nor regulation works very well when the harm that results from exposure has a
long latency period like that of asbestos. Because managers tend to heavily discount the
future, if they can increase profits for 20 or more years by using dangerous substances,
they are likely to ignore the high price that their firms and society will eventually pay.




                                                                                             26
                               Table 1:
            Consumption of Asbestos in the U.S. versus Europe
                           (metric tons per million population)

                          UK Germany          France         US       World
            1970          6.69   3.91           5.32         3.46      0.92
            1975          5.46   5.57           5.24         3.01      1.05
            1980          3.07   4.07           3.42         1.53      1.05
            1985          1.04   1.08           1.13         0.63      0.91
            1990          0.92   0.58           3.40         0.20      0.80


       Notes: Figures for the UK, France and Germany are calculated from the value of
asbestos imports per million population, taken from the NBER Trade Database, Disk 2,
World Trade Flows, 1970-1992. Import figures are converted to tons consumed using
price data from the Statistical Abstract of the U.S., various editions. (None of the three
European countries produces asbestos.) Figures for the U.S. and the world are based on
consumption of asbestos, taken from Castleman (1996, pp. 788 and 838). Population
figures are from U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base,
www.census.gov/ipc/www/idbnew.html.




                                                                                        27
                                      Table 2:
                Characteristics of Personal Injury Mass Torts

            type of     number of     number/       amount     year      type of resolution
            product     defendants     type of         of
                                      plaintiffs    compen-   resolved
                                                     sation
                                                      fund
Asbestos      insula-    6,000 as    600,000 as                              individual
             tion and    of 2000      of 2000                                defendant
               other                                                       bankruptcies
            products                                                            only
Agent       defoliant      12         250,000        $180      1984         class action
Orange        used in                               million                  settlement
                the
            Vietnam
                War
Dalkon      defective       1         140,000        $2.3      1988         bankruptcy
Shield        I.U.D.                                billion
Breast        silicon       3         440,000        $4.2      1994         class action
implants        gel                                 billion              settlement (later
               breast                                                         the main
            implants                                                      defendant filed
                                                                          for bankruptcy)
Fen-          diet          1          filing       $3.76      2000         class action
Phen         drugs                   period still   billion              settlement (non-
                                        open                                mandatory)
Tobacco      cigar-         4         50 U.S.        $246      1998          settlement
              ettes                    states       billion                 between 50
                                                                           states and the
                                                                               tobacco
                                                                             companies
                                                                         (private lawsuits
                                                                           still pending)
Lead         leaded                   state and                                  none
              paint                  local govts
Firearms      guns                      cities,                                none
                                      counties,
                                      U.S. govt
                                     and private
                                      plaintiffs
Fast food    ham-                      private                                 none
            burgers,                  plaintiffs
              etc.




                                                                                         28
Sources: Mintz (1985) for Dalkon Shield; Schuck (1986) for Agent Orange; Tidmarsh
(1998) and Rheingold (1996, p. 3.31) for breast implants; Dean (2001) and Butterfield
(2003) for lead paint and firearms; Derthick (2002) for tobacco; Ives (2002) for fast food.




                                                                                         29
                             Table 3:
           Proposed Compensation Levels under S. 1125 and
       Expected Compensatory Damage Awards in Asbestos Trials



                                    Proposed                Expected
                                  compensation            compensatory
                                  under S. 1125          damage awards,
                                                           1987-2002
          Mesothelioma              $1,000,000             $2,340,000
          Lung and other       $25,000 - $1,000,000         $760,000
          cancers
          Asbestosis           $300,000 - $750,000          $460,000

Note: Compensatory damage awards are in 2000 dollars and are calculated from data
described in White (2002a). Punitive damage awards are excluded from the calculations.
Damage awards take into account plaintiffs’ probability of losing at trial, which is
approximately one-third.




                                                                                    30
                                      References

Biggs, Jennifer L., et al. 2001. Overview of Asbestos: Issues and Trends. Report
prepared by the American Academy of Actuaries Mass Torts Work Group.
www.actuary.org/pdf/casualty/mono_dec01asbestos.pdf

Bragg, Rick. 2000. “Juror Says a 'Sense of Mission' Led to Huge Tobacco Damages.”
New York Times, July 16, 2000.

Bowker, Michael. 2003. Fatal Deception: The Untold Story of Asbestos. Rodale.

Brickman, Lester. 1992. “The Asbestos Litigation Crisis: Is There A Need For An
Administrative Alternative?” Cardozo L. Rev., vol. 13, p. 1819.

Brodeur, Paul. 1985. Outrageous Misconduct: The Asbestos Industry on Trial. New
York: Pantheon Books.

Brodeur, Paul, 1973. Expendable Americans. New York: Viking Press.

Carroll, S.J., D. Hensler, A. Abrahamse, J. Gross, M.White, S. Ashwood, and E. Sloss.
2002. Asbestos Litigation Costs and Compensation: An Interim Report. Santa Monica:
RAND Corporation, DB-397-ICJ.

Castleman, Barry I. 1996. Asbestos: Medical and Legal Aspects, 4th edition. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Aspen Law & Business.


Cupp, Richard L., Jr. 2000. “Beyond Tobacco Symposium: Tort Issues in Light of the
Cigarette Litigation: State Medical Reimbursement Lawsuits after Tobacco: Is the
Domino Effect for Lead Paint Manufacturers and Others Fair Game?” Pepperdine Law
Review, vol. 27, p. 685.

Dean, Amber E. 2001. “Lead Paint Public Entity Lawsuits: Has the Broad Stroke of
Tobacco and Firearms Litigation Painted a Troubling Picture for Lead Paint
Manufacturers?” Pepperdine Law Review, vol. 28, p. 915.

Derthick, Martha A. 2002. Up in Smoke: From Legislation to Litigation in Tobacco
Politics. Washington, D.C.: CQ Press.

Gibson, S. Elizabeth. 2000. Case Studies of Mass Tort Limited Fund Class Action
Settlements and Bankrutpcy Reorganizations. Wash., D.C.: Federal Judicial Center.

Glaberson, William. 1999. “Some Plaintiffs Losing Out In Texas' War on Lawsuits,”
New York Times, June 7, 1999.



                                                                                     31
Hensler, Deborah R. 2002. “As Time Goes By: Asbestos Litigation After Amchem and
Ortiz,” Texas Law Review, vol. 80, pp. 1899-1924.

Ives, Nat. 2002. “Food companies are urged to act to deflect blame for the nation’s
increase in obesity,” New York Times. Dec 4, 2002, pg. C4.

Kazan-Allen, Laurie. 2000. “Asbestos Compensation in Europe,” Newsletter,
International Ban Asbestos Secretariat, www.btinternet.com/~ibas/f_lka_eu_comp.htm.

Kazan-Allen, Laurie. 2000. “Europe Bans Asbestos,” Newsletter, International Ban
Asbestos Secretariat, www.btinternet.com/~ibas/f_lka_eu_comp.htm.

Kimball, Anne G., and Sarah L. Olson. 2000. “Symposium: Municipal Firearm
Litigation: Ill Conceived from Any Angle,” Connecticut Law Review, vol. 32, p. 1277.

McCaffrey, David P. 1982. OSHA and the Politics of Health Regulation. NY: Plenum
Press.

Mintz, Morton. 1985. At any cost : corporate greed, women, and the Dalkon Shield.
NY: Pantheon Books.

National Cancer Institute. 2003. SEER Cancer Statistics Review 1975-2000.
(seer.cancer.gov/scr/1975-2000/results_single/sect_01-table.07.pdf)

Oster, Christopher. 2003. “MetLife Records Asbestos Charge Linked to Research.”
Wall Street Journal, Feb. 11, 2003, p. C.16.

Oster, Christopher. 2002. “Chubb, Hartford Take Asbestos Hits.” Wall Street Journal,
Oct. 31, 2002, p. A.6.

Parloff, Roger. 2002. “Asbestos: The $200 Billion Miscarriage of Justice,” Fortune,
Monday, March 4, 2002.

Peto, J., A Decarli, et al. 1999. “The European mesothelioma epidemic,” British Journal
of Cancer, vol. 79, no. 3/4, pp. 666-672

Priest, George (1997), “Procedural versus Substantive Controls of Mass Tort Class
Actions,” J. of Legal Studies, vol. XXVI(2), Pt. 2, pp. 521-574.

Rheingold, Paul D. 1996. Mass Tort Litigation. Deerfield IL: CBC.


Rothstein, Paul F. 2000. “What Courts Can Do In the Face of the Never-Ending
Asbestos Crisis,” Mississippi Law Journal, vol. 71, pp. 1-34.




                                                                                       32
Schuck, Peter H. 1986. Agent Orange on Trial: Mass Toxic Disasters in the Courts.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Shavell, Steven. 1987. Economic Analysis of Accident Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Sherrill, Robert. 1973. “Asbestos, the Saver of Lives, Has a Deadly Side,” New York
Times, Jan 21, 1973, p. 256.

Tidmarsh, Jay. 1998. Mass Tort Settlement Class Actions: Five Case Studies. Federal
Judicial Center, Washington, DC.

Treaster, Joseph B., “Hartford to Pay $1.5 Billion to Settle Asbestos Claims,”
New York Times, Dec 20, 2003, pg. C.4

Tweedale, Geoffrey. 2000. Magic Mineral to Killer Dust: Turned & Newall and the
Asbestos Hazard. Oxford University Press.

White, Michelle J. 1989. “The Corporate Bankruptcy Decision," Journal of Economic
Perspectives, vol. 3, pp. 129-152.

White, Michelle J. 2002a. “Explaining the Flood of Asbestos Litigation: Consolidation,
Bifurcation and Bouquet Trials,” NBER w.p. 9362, December.

White, Michelle J. 2002b. “Why the Asbestos Genie Won’t Stay in the Bankruptcy
Bottle,” University of Cincinnati Law Review, vol. 70:4, pp. 1319-1340.




                                                                                      33
