                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                TECHNOLOGY SHOCKS IN THE NEW KEYNESIAN MODEL

                                             Peter N. Ireland

                                         Working Paper 10309
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10309


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Peter N. Ireland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Technology Shocks in the New Keynesian Model
Peter N. Ireland
NBER Working Paper No. 10309
February 2004
JEL No. E32

                                          ABSTRACT

In the New Keynesian model, preference, cost-push, and monetary shocks all compete with the real

business cycle model's technology shock in driving aggregate fluctuations. A version of this model,

estimated via maximum likelihood, points to these other shocks as being more important for

explaining the behavior of output, inflation, and interest rates in the postwar United States data.

These results weaken the links between the current generation of New Keynesian models and the

real business cycle models from which they were originally derived. They also suggest that Federal

Reserve officials have often faced difficult trade-offs in conducting monetary policy.

Peter N. Ireland
Boston College, Department of Economics
Administration Building
140 Commonwealth Ave.
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3806
and NBER
irelandp@bc.edu
     Technology Shocks in the New Keynesian Model

                                    Peter N. Ireland∗

                              Boston College and NBER

                                      February 2004


                                          Abstract

         In the New Keynesian model, preference, cost-push, and monetary shocks all com-

     pete with the real business cycle model’s technology shock in driving aggregate fluc-

     tuations. A version of this model, estimated via maximum likelihood, points to these

     other shocks as being more important for explaining the behavior of output, inflation,

     and interest rates in the postwar United States data. These results weaken the links

     between the current generation of New Keynesian models and the real business cy-

     cle models from which they were originally derived. They also suggest that Federal

     Reserve oﬃcials have often faced diﬃcult trade-oﬀs in conducting monetary policy.

         JEL: E32.



1    Introduction

The development of the forward-looking, microfounded, New Keynesian model stands, in the
eyes of many observers, as one of the past decade’s most exciting and significant achievements
in macroeconomics. To cite just two especially prominent examples: Clarida, Gali, and
Gertler (1999) place the New Keynesian model at center stage in their widely-read survey

                                               1
of recent research on monetary policy, while Woodford (2003) builds his comprehensive
monograph around the same analytic foundations.
   In its simplest form, the New Keynesian model consists of just three equations. The
first, which Kerr and King (1996) and McCallum and Nelson (1999) call the expectational
IS curve, corresponds to the log-linearization of an optimizing household’s Euler equation,
linking consumption and output growth to the inflation-adjusted return on nominal bonds,
that is, to the real interest rate. The second, a forward-looking version of the Phillips curve,
describes the optimizing behavior of monopolistically competitive firms that either set prices
in a randomly staggered fashion, as suggested by Calvo (1983), or face explicit costs of
nominal price adjustment, as suggested by Rotemberg (1982). The third and final equation,
a monetary policy rule of the kind proposed by Taylor (1993), dictates that the central bank
should adjust the short-term nominal interest rate in response to changes in output and,
especially, inflation. The New Keynesian model brings these three equations together to
characterize the dynamic behavior of three key macroeconomic variables: output, inflation,
and the nominal interest rate.
   Thus, the New Keynesian model places heavy emphasis on the behavior of nominal
variables, calls special attention to the workings of monetary policy rules, and contains
frequent allusions back to the traditional IS-LM framework. All this makes it easy to forget
that the New Keynesian models of today share many basic features with, and indeed were
originally derived as extensions to, a previous generation of dynamic, stochastic, general
equilibrium models: the real business cycle models of Kydland and Prescott (1982), Long
and Plosser (1983), King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988), and many others. In real business cycle
models, technology shocks play the dominant role in driving macroeconomic fluctuations.
Monetary policy either remains absent, as in the three papers just cited, or has minimal
eﬀects on the cyclical behavior of the economy, as in Cooley and Hansen (1989).
   Yet technology shocks also play a role in the New Keynesian model where, for instance,

                                               2
an increase in productivity lowers each firm’s marginal costs and thereby feeds into its opti-
mal pricing decisions. The New Keynesian model therefore retains the idea that technology
shocks can be quite important in shaping the dynamic behavior of key macroeconomic vari-
ables. It merely refines and extends this idea by suggesting, first, that other shocks might be
important as well and, second, that in any case the presence of nominal price rigidities helps
determine exactly how shocks of all kinds impact on and propagate through the economy.
   This paper re-exposes and further explores this link between the current generation of
New Keynesian models and the previous generation of real business cycle models. More
specifically, it examines, quantitatively and with the help of formal econometric methods,
the importance of technology shocks within the New Keynesian framework.
   Towards that end, section 2 of the paper develops a version of the New Keynesian model in
which three additional disturbances–to households’ preferences, to firms’ desired markups,
and to the central bank’s monetary policy rule–compete with the real business cycle model’s
technology shock in accounting for fluctuations in output, inflation, and interest rates. Since
this New Keynesian model allows, but does not require, technology shocks to remain domi-
nant as the primary source of business cycle fluctuations, it provides a useful framework in
which the most basic, technology-driven, specification can be compared, statistically, to a
more general and flexible alternative.
   Section 3 of the paper then uses maximum likelihood, together with quarterly data from
the postwar United States, to estimate the parameters of this more general New Keynesian
model. There, a series of exercises conducted with the estimated model leads directly to the
paper’s main results on the role of technology shocks in the New Keynesian model. Section
4 concludes by summarizing those results and highlighting their implications.




                                              3
2     The New Keynesian Model

As explained above, this section develops a version of the New Keynesian model that will
be used, later, for an econometric analysis of the relative importance of technology shocks
in generating variability in the postwar United States data. The model economy consists of
a representative household, a representative finished goods-producing firm, a continuum of
intermediate goods-producing firms indexed by i ∈ [0, 1], and a central bank. During each
period t = 0, 1, 2, ..., each intermediate goods-producing firm produces a distinct, perishable
intermediate good. Hence, intermediate goods may also be indexed by i ∈ [0, 1], where firm
i produces good i. The model features enough symmetry, however, to allow the analysis to
focus on the activities of a representative intermediate goods-producing firm, identified by
the generic index i. The behavior of each of these agents, together with their implications
for the evolution of equilibrium prices and quantities, will now be described in turn.


2.1    The Representative Household

The representative household enters each period t = 0, 1, 2, ... with money Mt−1 and bonds
Bt−1 . At the beginning of the period, the household receives a lump-sum monetary transfer
Tt from the central bank. Next, the household’s bonds mature, providing Bt−1 additional
units of money. The household uses some of this money to purchase new bonds of value
Bt /rt , where rt denotes the gross nominal interest rate between t and t + 1.
    During period t, the household supplies ht units of labor to the various intermediate
goods-producing firms, earning Wt ht in total labor income, where Wt denotes the nominal
wage. The household also consumes Ct units of the finished good, purchased at the nominal
price Pt from the representative finished goods-producing firm. Finally, at the end of period
t, the household receives nominal profits Dt from the intermediate goods-producing firms.




                                              4
It then carries Mt units of money into period t + 1, chosen subject to the budget constraint


                            Mt−1 + Bt−1 + Tt + Wt ht + Dt ≥ Pt Ct + Bt /rt + Mt            (1)


for all t = 0, 1, 2, ....
    Faced with these budget constraints, the household acts to maximize the expected utility
function
                                     X
                                     ∞
                                 E         β t [at ln(Ct ) + ln(Mt /Pt ) − (1/η)hηt ],
                                     t=0

with 1 > β > 0 and η ≥ 1. In this utility function, the preference shock at follows the
autoregressive process
                                             ln(at ) = ρa ln(at−1 ) + εat ,                (2)

with 1 > ρa ≥ 0, where the zero-mean, serially uncorrelated innovation εat is normally distrib-
uted with standard deviation σ a . Driscoll (2000) and Ireland (2002a) show that the additive
separability of this utility function in its three arguments–consumption, real money bal-
ances, and hours worked–is needed to obtain a conventional specification for the model’s IS
curve that, in particular, excludes additional terms involving real balances and employment.
Meanwhile, King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988) show that given this additive separability, the
logarithmic form for utility from consumption is needed for the model to be consistent with
balanced growth.
    The first-order conditions for the household’s problem include the intratemporal opti-
mality condition
                                              hη−1
                                               t   = (at /Ct )(Wt /Pt ),                   (3)

linking the real wage to the marginal rate of substitution between leisure and consumption,




                                                            5
and the intertemporal optimality condition


                                 at /Ct = βrt Et [(at+1 /Ct+1 )(Pt /Pt+1 )],                  (4)


linking the inflation-adjusted nominal interest rate–that is, the real interest rate–to the
intertemporal marginal rate of substitution. The household’s first-order conditions also in-
clude the budget constraint (1) with equality and an optimality condition for money holdings,
which plays the role of the model’s money demand relationship. Under an interest rate rule
for monetary policy like the one introduced below, however, this money demand equation
serves only to determine how much money the central bank needs to supply to clear markets
given its interest rate target rt . Hence, so long as the dynamic behavior of the money stock
is not of independent interest, this equation can be dropped from consideration, together
with all future reference to the variable Mt . Each of these optimality conditions must hold,
of course, for all t = 0, 1, 2, ....


2.2     The Representative Finished Goods-Producing Firm

During each period t = 0, 1, 2, ..., the representative finished goods-producing firm uses Yt (i)
units of each intermediate good i ∈ [0, 1], purchased at the nominal price Pt (i), to manu-
facture Yt units of the finished good according to the constant-returns-to-scale technology
described by
                                   ∙Z      1                          ¸θt /(θt −1)
                                                    (θt −1)/θt
                                               Yt (i)            di                  ≥ Yt .
                                       0

As shown below and in Smets and Wouters (2003) and Steinsson (2003), θt measures the
time-varying elasticity of demand for each intermediate good; hence, it acts as a markup,
or cost-push, shock of the kind introduced into the New Keynesian model by Clarida, Gali,




                                                             6
and Gertler (1999). Here, this cost-push shock follows the autoregressive process


                            ln(θt ) = (1 − ρθ ) ln(θ) + ρθ ln(θt−1 ) + εθt ,                    (5)


with θ > 1 and 1 > ρθ ≥ 0, where the zero-mean, serially uncorrelated innovation εθt is
normally distributed with standard deviation σθ .
    The finished goods-producing firm maximizes its profits by choosing


                                       Yt (i) = [Pt (i)/Pt ]−θt Yt


for all i ∈ [0, 1] and t = 0, 1, 2, ..., which confirms that θt measures the time-varying elasticity
of demand for each intermediate good. Competition drives the finished goods-producing
firm’s profits to zero in equilibrium, determining Pt as

                                          ∙Z    1                       ¸1/(1−θt )
                                                            1−θt
                                   Pt =             Pt (i)         di
                                            0



for all t = 0, 1, 2, ....


2.3      The Representative Intermediate Goods-Producing Firm

During each period t = 0, 1, 2, ..., the representative intermediate goods-producing firm hires
ht (i) units of labor from the representative household to manufacture Yt (i) units of interme-
diate good i according to the constant-returns-to-scale technology described by


                                           Zt ht (i) ≥ Yt (i).                                  (6)




                                                        7
Here, as in many versions of the real business cycle model, the aggregate technology shock
Zt follows a random walk with positive drift:


                                ln(Zt ) = ln(z) + ln(Zt−1 ) + εzt ,                           (7)


with z > 1, where the zero-mean, serially uncorrelated innovation εzt is normally distributed
with standard deviation σ z .
   Since the intermediate goods substitute imperfectly for one another in producing the
finished good, the representative intermediate goods-producing firm sells its output in a
monopolistically competitive market: during period t, the intermediate goods-producing
firm sets the price Pt (i) for its output, subject to the requirement that it satisfy the finished
goods-producing firm’s demand at its chosen price. In addition, the intermediate goods-
producing firm faces an explicit cost of nominal price adjustment, measured in terms of the
finished good and given by
                                          ∙            ¸2
                                        φ   Pt (i)
                                                    − 1 Yt ,
                                        2 πPt−1 (i)

where φ ≥ 0 governs the magnitude of the price adjustment cost and π ≥ 1 measures the
gross steady-state rate of inflation.
   This quadratic cost of nominal price adjustment, first proposed by Rotemberg (1982),
makes the intermediate goods-producing firm’s problem dynamic. In particular, the firm
must choose a sequence for Pt (i) to maximize its total market value, given by

                                        X
                                        ∞
                                   E          β t (at /Ct )[Dt (i)/Pt ],
                                        t=0


where β t (at /Ct ) measures the marginal utility value to the representative household of an




                                                      8
additional unit of real profits generated during period t and where

                   ∙        ¸1−θt      ∙        ¸−θt µ ¶ µ ¶     ∙            ¸2
          Dt (i)     Pt (i)              Pt (i)       Wt  Yt   φ   Pt (i)
                 =                Yt −                       −             − 1 Yt                     (8)
           Pt         Pt                  Pt          Pt  Zt   2 πPt−1 (i)

measures real profits, incorporating the linear production function from (6) as well as the
requirement that the firm produce and sell output on demand at its chosen price Pt (i) during
each period t = 0, 1, 2, .... The first-order conditions for this problem are

                          ∙        ¸−θt µ ¶
                            Pt (i)       Yt
               (θt − 1)                                                                               (9)
                             Pt          Pt
                  ∙        ¸−θt −1 µ ¶ µ ¶ µ ¶              ∙              ¸∙             ¸
                    Pt (i)           Wt      Yt     1           Pt (i)             Yt
             = θt                                        −φ             −1
                     Pt               Pt     Zt    Pt         πPt−1 (i)         πPt−1 (i)
                         ½µ         ¶µ       ¶∙            ¸∙        ¸∙          ¸¾
                             at+1        Ct     Pt+1 (i)       Yt+1     Pt+1 (i)
               +βφEt                                     −1
                                at      Ct+1    πPt (i)       Pt (i)    πPt (i)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, .... In the special case where φ = 0, (9) collapses to


                                    Pt (i) = [θt /(θt − 1)](Wt /Zt ),


indicating that in the absence of costly price adjustment, the intermediate goods-producing
firm sets its markup of price Pt (i) over marginal cost Wt /Zt equal to θt /(θt −1) where, again,
θt measures the price elasticity of demand for its output. Thus, more generally, θt can be
interpreted as a shock to the firm’s desired markup; with costly price adjustment, the firm’s
actual markup will diﬀer from, but tend to gravitate towards, the desired markup over time.


2.4     Symmetric Equilibrium

In a symmetric equilibrium, all intermediate goods-producing firms make identical decisions,
so that Yt (i) = Yt , ht (i) = ht , Pt (i) = Pt , and Dt (i) = Dt for all i ∈ [0, 1] and t = 0, 1, 2, ....
In addition, the market-clearing conditions Mt = Mt−1 + Tt and Bt = Bt−1 = 0 must hold for

                                                    9
all t = 0, 1, 2, .... With these equilibrium conditions imposed, (3), (6), and (8) can be used to
solve out for the real wage Wt /Pt , hours worked ht , and real profits Dt /Pt . The representative
household’s budget constraint (1) can then be rewritten as the aggregate resource constraint

                                                  φ ³ πt    ´2
                                      Yt = Ct +          − 1 Yt ,                               (10)
                                                  2 π

the household’s Euler equation (4) can be rewritten as


                                at /Ct = βrt Et [(at+1 /Ct+1 )(1/π t+1 )],                      (11)


and the representative intermediate goods-producing firm’s first-order condition (9) can be
rewritten as

                            µ        ¶µ
                                   ¶η−1 µ ¶      ³π      ´ ³π ´
                                Ct
                                Yt        1         t          t
               θt − 1 = θt                   −φ       −1                                        (12)
                                at
                                Z        Z         π          π
                              ∙µ t ¶ µ t ¶ ³           ´ ³        µ     ¶¸
                                at+1     Ct   π t+1        π t+1 ´ Yt+1
                        +βφEt                       −1                     ,
                                 at     Ct+1    π            π      Yt

where π t = Pt /Pt−1 denotes the gross inflation rate for all t = 0, 1, 2, ....


2.5    Eﬃcient Allocations and the Output Gap

As a first step in interpreting the model’s equilibrium conditions, consider the problem faced
by a social planner who can overcome the frictions that cause real money balances to show
up in the representative household’s utility function and that give rise to the cost of nominal
price adjustment facing the representative intermediate goods-producing firm. During each
period t = 0, 1, 2, ..., this social planner allocates nt (i) units of the representative household’s
labor to produce Qt (i) units of each intermediate good i ∈ [0, 1], then uses those various
intermediate goods to produce Qt units of the finished good, all according to the same


                                                   10
constant-returns-to-scale technologies described above.
    Thus, the social planner chooses Qt and nt (i) for all i ∈ [0, 1] and t = 0, 1, 2, ... to
maximize the household’s welfare, as measured by

                                X
                                ∞      ½                   ∙Z 1          ¸η ¾
                                       t
                            E         β at ln(Qt ) − (1/η)      nt (i)di
                                t=0                                             0



subject to the feasibility constraints

                                      ∙Z       1                          ¸θt /(θt −1)
                                                        (θt −1)/θt
                                 Zt                nt (i)            di                  ≥ Qt
                                           0



for all t = 0, 1, 2, .... The first-order conditions to this problem define the eﬃcient level of
output Qt as
                                                                 1/η
                                                        Qt = at Zt

for all t = 0, 1, 2, .... According to this definition, the eﬃcient level of output increases after
a favorable preference shock at or technology shock Zt . By contrast, the eﬃcient level of
output does not depend on the realization of the cost-push shock θt . The model’s output
gap xt , defined as the ratio between the actual and eﬃcient levels of output, can therefore
be calculated as
                                                   xt = (1/at )1/η (Yt /Zt )                    (13)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, ....


2.6      The Linearized Model

Equations (2), (5), (7), and (10)-(13) describe the behavior of the five endogenous variables
Yt , Ct , π t , rt , and xt and the three exogenous shocks at , θt , and Zt . These equations imply
that in equilibrium, output Yt and consumption Ct both inherit a unit root from the process


                                                              11
(7) for the technology shock Zt . On the other hand, the stochastically detrended variables
yt = Yt /Zt , ct = Ct /Zt , and zt = Zt /Zt−1 remain stationary, as do the output gap xt and the
growth rate of output gt , defined as


                                                 gt = Yt /Yt−1                                     (14)


for all t = 0, 1, 2, ....
    These equations also imply that in the absence of shocks, the economy converges to a
steady-state growth path, along which all of the stationary variables are constant over time,
with yt = y, ct = c, π t = π, rt = r, xt = x, gt = g, at = 1, θt = θ, and zt = z for all
t = 0, 1, 2, .... Accordingly, let ŷt = ln(yt /y), ĉt = ln(ct /c), π̂ t = ln(π t /π), r̂t = ln(rt /r),
x̂t = ln(xt /x), ĝt = ln(gt /g), ât = ln(at ), θ̂t = ln(θt /θ), and ẑt = ln(zt /z) denote the
percentage deviation of each variable from its steady-state level. In a log-linearized version
of the model, the resource constraint (10) implies that ĉt = ŷt , while (2), (5), (7), and
(11)-(14) become
                                              ât = ρa ât−1 + εat ,                               (15)

                                               êt = ρe êt−1 + εet ,                              (16)

                                                    ẑt = εzt ,                                    (17)

                            x̂t = Et x̂t+1 − (r̂t − Et π̂ t+1 ) + (1 − ω)(1 − ρa )ât ,            (18)

                                          π̂ t = βEt π̂t+1 + ψx̂t − êt ,                          (19)

                                                 x̂t = ŷt − ωât ,                                (20)

and
                                              ĝt = ŷt − ŷt−1 + ẑt                              (21)


                                                        12
for all t = 0, 1, 2, .... To assist in the econometric analysis of these equations, the new
parameter ω in (18) and (20) has been defined as ω = 1/η and the new parameter ψ in
(19) has been defined as ψ = η(θ − 1)/φ. The transformed cost-push shock êt in (19) has
been defined as (1/φ)θ̂t , so that in (16), ρe = ρθ and the zero-mean, serially uncorrelated
innovation εet is normally distributed with standard deviation σ e = (1/φ)σ θ .
   In this linear system, (15)-(17) govern the behavior of the preference, cost-push, and
technology shocks ât , θ̂t , and ẑt , while (20) and (21) serve to define the output gap x̂t and
the growth rate of output ĝt . Equation (18) takes the form of the expectational IS curve, and
(19) is a version of the New Keynesian Phillips curve. Note that although the preference
and technology shocks ât and ẑt do not appear explicitly in the model’s Phillips curve, both
enter implicitly through the definition of the output gap x̂t .1 More traditional analyses of the
Phillips curve, such as Ball and Mankiw’s (2002), typically draw a distinction between shocks
that aﬀect the natural rate of unemployment and shocks that do not. Here, by analogy, (19)
draws a distinction between the shocks ât and ẑt that impact on the eﬃcient level of output
and the shock êt that does not.
   Note, too, that in the absence of the cost-push shock êt , the IS and Phillips curves (18)
and (19) imply that the central bank can stabilize both the inflation rate and the output gap
by adopting a monetary policy that allows the real market rate of interest r̂t −Et π̂ t+1 to track
the natural rate of interest, defined as (1 − ω)(1 − ρa )ât . As emphasized by Clarida, Gali and
Gertler (1999), Gali (2002), and Woodford (2003), only the cost-push shock confronts the
central bank with a trade-oﬀ between inflation and output gap stabilization as competing
goals of monetary policy.




                                               13
2.7    The Central Bank

The central bank conducts monetary policy by following the modified Taylor (1993) rule


                             r̂t − r̂t−1 = ρπ π̂t + ρg ĝt + ρx x̂t + εrt ,                  (22)


according to which it raises or lowers the short-term nominal interest rate r̂t in response
to deviations of inflation π̂ t , output growth ĝt , and the output gap x̂t from their steady-
state levels. When adopting a rule of this form, the central bank takes responsibility for
choosing the steady-state inflation rate π; it also chooses the response parameters ρπ , ρg ,
and ρx . In particular, a positive response of the interest rate to movements in inflation,
as measured by ρπ , insures that this policy rule remains consistent with the existence of a
unique rational expectations equilibrium; for details, see Parkin (1978), McCallum (1981),
Fuhrer and Moore (1995), Kerr and King (1996), and Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000).2
Since it is unclear whether it is more appropriate to depict the central bank as responding
to movements in output growth–a variable that it can observe directly–or movements in
the output gap–a variable that is more closely related to the representative household’s
welfare–both measures of real economic activity appear in this interest rate rule. Finally,
in (22), the zero-mean, serially uncorrelated innovation εrt is normally distributed with
standard deviation σ r .



3     Econometric Strategy and Results

Equations (15)-(22) now form a system involving three observable variables–output growth
ĝt , inflation π̂ t , and the short-term nominal interest rate r̂t –two unobservable variables–
stochastically detrended output ŷt and the output gap x̂t –and four unobservable shocks–to
preferences ât , desired markups êt , technology ẑt , and monetary policy εrt . The solution to


                                                  14
this system, derived using Klein’s (2000) modification of the Blanchard-Kahn (1980) pro-
cedure, takes the form of a state-space econometric model. Hence, the Kalman filtering
algorithms outlined by Hamilton (1994, Ch.13) can be applied to estimate the model’s pa-
rameters via maximum likelihood and to draw inferences about the behavior of the model’s
unobservable components based on the information contained in the three observable series.
   Here, this econometric exercise uses quarterly United States data running from 1948:1
through 2003:1. In these data, quarterly changes in seasonally-adjusted figures for real GDP,
converted to per-capita terms by dividing by the civilian noninstitutional population, age
16 and over, serve to measure output growth. Quarterly changes in the seasonally adjusted
GDP deflator yield the measure of inflation, and quarterly averages of daily readings on the
three-month US Treasury bill rate provide the measure of the nominal interest rate.
   This econometric exercise has as its principal goal, of course, the objective of measuring
the contributions made by the various shocks in driving fluctuations in the model’s observable
and unobservable variables. With this goal in mind, the empirical strategy followed here
begins by adding lagged output gap and inflation terms to the model’s IS and Phillips
curves, so that (18) and (19) are replaced by


              x̂t = αx x̂t−1 + (1 − αx )Et x̂t+1 − (r̂t − Et π̂ t+1 ) + (1 − ω)(1 − ρa )ât   (23)


and
                          π̂ t = β[απ π̂ t−1 + (1 − απ )Et π̂ t+1 ] + ψx̂t − êt              (24)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, .... These modifications serve to guard against the possibility that estimates
of the purely forward-looking specification might falsely attribute dynamics found in the
data to serial correlation in the shocks when instead those dynamics are more accurately
modelled as the product of additional frictions–not explicitly considered here–that give



                                                   15
rise to backward-looking behavior on the part of households and firms. The new parameters
αx and απ in (23) and (24) both lie between zero and one; conveniently, they summarize the
importance of backward-looking elements in the economy. And if, in fact, the data do prefer
the original microfounded specifications (18) and (19) to the more general alternatives (23)
and (24), the estimation procedure remains free to select values of αx and απ equal to zero.
    The empirical model consisting of (15)-(17) and (21)-(24) has 16 parameters: z, π, β, ω,
ψ, αx , απ , ρπ , ρg , ρx , ρa , ρe , σ a , σ e , σ z , and σ r . Among these parameters, z and π serve only
to pin down the steady-state values of output growth and inflation; they have no impact on
the model’s dynamics. Hence, prior to estimating the remaining parameters, z is set equal
to 1.0048, matching the average growth rate of per-capita output in the data, which equals
1.95 percent on an annualized basis. Likewise, π is set equal to 1.0086, matching the average
inflation rate in the data, which equals 3.48 percent when annualized.
    A problem then arises, because according to the model, the steady-state nominal interest
rate is determined as r = π(z/β). Given the settings for z and π, the model requires a
value of the representative household’s discount factor β that exceeds its upper bound of
unity to match the average nominal interest rate in the data, which equals 5.09 percent
when annualized. Fundamentally, of course, this problem stems from Weil’s (1989) “risk-
free rate puzzle,” according to which representative agent models like the one used here
systematically overpredict the historical returns on US Treasury bills. To help resolve this
diﬃculty, the model’s restrictions are loosened slightly: the parameter β is simply set equal
to 0.99, implying an annual discount rate of 4 percent, and the steady-state nominal interest
rate is treated as an additional parameter that is then set to match the average nominal
interest rate in the data.3 In eﬀect, this procedure allows the series for output growth,
inflation, and the interest rate to be accurately demeaned before using them for maximum
likelihood estimation. Again, this approach guards against the possibility that otherwise, the
estimated model will attempt to account for systematic deviations of the observed variables

                                                    16
from their steady-state levels by overstating the persistence of the exogenous shocks.
   Preliminary attempts to implement the maximum likelihood procedure led consistently
to unreasonably small estimates of ψ, the coeﬃcient on the output gap in the Phillips curve
(24). Since, as noted above, ψ depends inversely on the price adjustment cost parameter φ,
these very small estimates of ψ translate into very large costs of nominal price adjustment.
Hence, in deriving the final set of results, this parameter is also fixed prior to estimation at
ψ = 0.1, the same value used previously in Ireland (2000, 2002a). The formulas displayed
in Gali and Gertler (1999) provide a convenient way of interpreting this parameter setting:
they imply that in a simpler version of the New Keynesian model in which price setting is
staggered according to Calvo’s (1983) specification and in which utility is linear in hours
worked so that the output gap always moves in lockstep with firms’ real marginal costs, a
value of ψ = 0.1 corresponds to the case where individual goods prices are reset on average
every 3.74 quarters–or just a little more frequently than once per year.
   And so, with z, π, β, and ψ held fixed, table 1 displays the maximum likelihood es-
timates of the remaining 12 parameters together with their standard errors, computed by
taking the square roots of the diagonal elements of minus one times the inverted matrix of
second derivatives of the maximized log-likelihood function. Looking first at the individual
parameters, the point estimate of ω = 0.0617 is small and lies within one standard error
of zero. Since ω = 1/η by definition, this small estimate of ω translates into a very large
estimate of η–and hence a very inelastic labor supply schedule in the theoretical model.
In the empirical model with ψ = η(θ − 1)/φ = 0.1 held fixed, however, ω serves mainly to
determine, via (20), the extent to which the preference shock ât impacts on the eﬃcient level
of output Qt and hence on the output gap x̂t . The small estimate of ω, therefore, simply
implies that the data prefer a version of the model in which the eﬃcient level of output
remains largely unaﬀected by the preference shock. The estimate of αx = 0.0836 is also
quite small and statistically insignificant, and the estimate of απ lies up against its lower

                                              17
bound of zero, providing evidence in support of the purely forward-looking versions of the IS
and Phillips curves. These results echo those reported previously in Ireland (2001), a study
that focuses more specifically on the importance of backward-looking elements in the New
Keynesian Phillips curve.
   The large and significant estimates of ρπ = 0.3597 and ρg = 0.2536 suggest that his-
torically, Federal Reserve policy has responded strongly to movements in both inflation and
output growth; the much smaller estimate of ρx = 0.0347 indicates that the welfare-theoretic
output gap as defined by the New Keynesian model has played less of a role in the policy-
making process. The estimates of ρa = 0.9470 and ρe = 0.9625 imply that, like the model’s
technology shock, the preference and cost-push shocks are highly persistent. Finally, the
estimates of σ a = 0.0405, σ e = 0.0012, σz = 0.0109, and σ r = 0.0031 all appear large
compared to their standard errors, suggesting that all four shocks contribute in some way
towards explaining movements in the data. And, interestingly, the estimate of σz = 0.0109
for the standard deviation of the innovation to the technology shock is of the same order
of magnitude as the calibrated values assigned to this parameter in Kydland and Prescott
(1982), Cooley and Hansen (1989), and other real business cycle studies.
   Thus, the individual parameter estimates shown in table 1 suggest that while the real
business cycle model’s technology shock continues to play a role in the New Keynesian model,
the competing shocks–to preferences, desired markups, and monetary policy–take on some
importance as well. To dig deeper into these issues, figure 1 plots the impulse responses of
output, inflation, the nominal interest rate, and the output gap to each of these four shocks.
   The graphs show that after a one-standard-deviation preference shock, output growth
rises by slightly more than 50 basis points–that is, one-half of one percentage point–and
the annualized rate of inflation increases by about 28 basis points. Under the estimated
policy rule, these movements in output growth and inflation push the short-term nominal
interest rate up by 65 basis points and, in fact, hold the short-term rate well above its

                                             18
steady-state level for more than four years after the shock. The output gap increases as well.
   Meanwhile, a one-standard-deviation cost-push shock increases output growth by 25 basis
points and reduces the annualized inflation rate by 140 basis points. The fall in inflation
allows for an easing of monetary policy under which the short-term nominal interest rate
falls by about 30 basis points and, again, remains well away from its steady-state level for
more than four years. Since, as noted above, the cost-push shock leaves the eﬃcient level of
output unchanged, the increase in the equilibrium level of output leads to a sizeable rise in
the output gap, which is amplified and propagated by the systematic monetary easing.
   A one-standard-deviation technology shock increases output growth by 53 basis points
and lowers the annualized inflation rate by about 75 basis points; on balance, these changes
generate a small increase in the short-term nominal interest rate. And since the eﬃcient level
of output responds strongly to the technology shock, the output gap falls even as output
growth rises in this case.
   Finally, the estimated monetary policy shock translates into an exogenous 21-basis-point
increase in the short-term nominal interest rate, which dies oﬀ over a period of about two
years. This monetary tightening causes output growth to fall by 63 basis points and inflation
to fall by 83 basic points; the output gap falls sharply as well.
   Looking across all of these impulse responses provides some insight into how the various
shocks are identified in the estimated New Keynesian model. The preference shock and the
monetary policy shock, for instance, both work to increase the nominal interest rate. But in
the case of the preference shock, this rise in the interest rate coincides with faster rates of
output growth and inflation, whereas after the monetary policy shock, output growth and
inflation both fall. Likewise, the cost-push shock and the technology shock both work to
increase the rate of output growth and lower the rate of inflation, but the cost-push shock
leads to a decline in the nominal interest rate and opens up a positive output gap while
the technology shock generates a rise in the nominal interest rate and produces a negative

                                              19
output gap. Furthermore, according to (5) and (7), only the technology shock can impact
permanently on the level of output. Hence, in figure 1, the positive response of output
growth that follows immediately from a favorable cost-push shock must be oﬀset later by a
sustained period of slightly below-average output growth, whereas the positive response of
output growth that follows a favorable technology shock is never reversed.
   Looking across all of these results also suggests that the technology shock plays, at most,
a supporting role in this estimated New Keynesian model. Instead, in figure 1, the monetary
policy shock generates the largest movements in output growth, the cost-push shock drives
the largest changes in inflation, and the preference shock gives rise to the largest responses
in the short-term nominal interest rate. Table 2 confirms these findings by decomposing the
forecast error variances in output growth, inflation, the short-term nominal interest rate,
and the output gap into components attributable to each of the four shocks.
   The results of these variance decompositions show that technology shocks make their
largest contribution in explaining movements in output growth, accounting for about 25 per-
cent of the fluctuations in that variable across all forecast horizons. Even for output growth,
however, the preference shocks contribute nearly the same amount–20 to 25 percent–and
the monetary policy shocks account for considerably more–almost 40 percent. Moreover,
consistent with the impulse response analysis, the variance decompositions reveal that the
cost-push shock dominates in explaining movements in inflation and the output gap, while
the preference shock is most important in driving movements in the nominal interest rate.
   Uniformly, then, these results point to the same conclusion: in the estimated New Key-
nesian model, the preference, cost-push, and monetary policy shocks all appear to be more
important than the technology shock in explaining the dynamic behavior of key macroeco-
nomic variables. But are these findings robust? Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000) formal-
ize the idea that the monetary policies adopted by Federal Reserve Chairmen Volcker and
Greenspan diﬀer from those pursued by their predecessors by showing that the coeﬃcients

                                              20
of an estimated Taylor (1993) rule shift when the sample is split around 1980. Moreover,
Kim and Nelson (1999), McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000), and Stock and Watson (2003)
find that a shift in the time-series properties of real GDP occurs at roughly the same point
in the United States data, raising the possibility that diﬀerent sets of shocks hit the Amer-
ican economy before and after 1980. Table 3, therefore, presents the results of one check
for robustness by showing what happens when the model is reestimated with data from two
disjoint subsamples: the first running from 1948:1 through 1979:4 and the second running
from 1980:1 through 2003:1.
   In table 3, the estimated policy coeﬃcients ρπ , ρg , ρx do shift across subsamples, consis-
tent with Clarida, Gali, and Gertler’s (2000) findings. Here, in particular, Federal Reserve
policy appears to have become more responsive to movements in all three variables–inflation,
output growth, and the output gap–during the post-1980 period. Moreover, evidence of in-
stability appears for other parameters as well. Most notably, the estimate of αx = 0.2028
is significantly diﬀerent from zero for the pre-1980 period, suggesting that backward-looking
behavior on the part of consumers is more important in explaining the data from the earlier
subsample. In addition, the cost-push shocks become considerably smaller but considerably
more persistent moving from the first subsample to the second.
   Figure 2 displays impulse responses generated from the model as estimated with pre-
1980 data; similarly, table 4 repeats the forecast error variance decompositions for that
earlier subsample. The results of these exercises fit nicely with less formal accounts of
postwar United States economic history. In particular, the variance decompositions reveal
that for the pre-1980 period, monetary policy shocks assume an even greater importance
in generating fluctuations in output growth; and while the cost-push shock continues to
explain a large fraction of the movements in inflation, the monetary policy shock emerges
as an equally significant driving force for that variable as well. Meanwhile, the impulse
response of the interest rate to a pre-1980 monetary shock traces out a stylized pattern of

                                             21
“stop-go” policy, according to which an initial tightening is quickly reversed, presumably
in an attempt to partially oﬀset the negative eﬀects on output. For the pre-1980 period,
therefore, these results point to monetary policy as a major destabilizing influence on the
United States economy; and even more so than in the full sample, technology shocks play a
subsidiary role.
    The post-1980 results shown in figure 3 and table 5, on the other hand, display some
diﬀerences. There, monetary policy contributes less to macroeconomic instability and the
technology shock becomes more important in driving movements in output growth. These
results, too, display some coherence with popular accounts that attribute the superior perfor-
mance of the United States economy during the 1990s to improved monetary policymaking
coupled with unexpected gains in productivity of exactly the type captured by the real
business cycle model’s technology shock.4 Nevertheless, even in table 5 where the technol-
ogy shock appears most important, it still explains less than half of the variation in output
growth across all forecast horizons. And, once again, cost-push and preference shocks explain
most of the action in inflation and the nominal interest rate.



4     Conclusions and Implications

This paper develops a New Keynesian model in which three additional disturbances–to
households’ preferences, to firms’ desired markups, and to the central bank’s monetary policy
rule–compete with the real business cycle model’s technology shock in driving aggregate
fluctuations. It then applies maximum likelihood to estimate the parameters of this New
Keynesian model and uses the estimated model to assess the relative importance of these
various shocks in accounting for the dynamic behavior of output growth, inflation, and
interest rates as seen in the postwar United States data.
    The empirical results, described in detail above, point to monetary policy shocks as a ma-


                                              22
jor source of instability in output growth, particularly in the period before 1980. Meanwhile,
the markup, or cost-push, shock emerges as the most important contributor to movements in
inflation, and the preference shock is identified as the principal factor behind movements in
the short-term nominal interest rate. Throughout, the technology shock plays only a mod-
est role. Even during the post-1980 period, where they appear most important, technology
shocks account for less than half of the observed variability in output growth and an even
smaller fraction of the variation in inflation and interest rates. Overall, these results serve
to weaken the links between the New Keynesian models of today and the real business cycle
models from which they were originally derived.5
   Long and Plosser (1983) emphasize one of the most striking implications of real business
cycle models: to the extent that aggregate fluctuations are driven by technology shocks,
those fluctuations are actually preferred by private agents and should not be oﬀset by ac-
tive stabilization policies. The results obtained here suggest that, by contrast, American
households would have most likely preferred a more stable path for the United States econ-
omy than the one that was actually observed. On the other hand, the results derived here
have a monetarist flavor as well, suggesting that significant improvements might have been
achieved simply by removing monetary policy as an independent source of instability–again,
especially during the years before 1980.
   Finally, Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999), Gali (2002), and Woodford (2003) also work
with New Keynesian models that feature both technology and cost-push shocks. These
studies show that for monetary policymakers, only the cost-push shock generates a painful
trade-oﬀ between stabilizing the inflation rate and stabilizing a welfare-theoretic measure of
the output gap; in the face of technology shocks alone, then tension between these two goals
disappears. By highlighting the role of cost-push shocks in explaining the United States data,
therefore, the empirical results obtained here also suggest that Federal Reserve policymakers
have, in fact, faced diﬃcult trade-oﬀs throughout the postwar period.

                                              23
      Of course, these results admit alternative interpretations. One could argue, for instance,
that the basic New Keynesian model used here ignores capital accumulation, an important
process through which technology shocks are propagated in most real business cycle models;
and, to be sure, extending the analysis performed here to account for the eﬀects of capital
accumulation remains an important task for future research. Furthermore, one could also
argue that the additional shocks introduced here actually work, within the econometric
model, to soak up specification error in the microfounded, New Keynesian model. Even
under this last, more pessimistic, interpretation, however, the ultimate conclusions remain
much the same: presumably, one would still be led towards other specifications that go even
farther beyond the original, real business cycle model.



5       Footnotes
 ∗
     Please address correspondence to: Peter N. Ireland, Boston College, Department of Eco-
        nomics, 140 Commonwealth Avenue, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3859. Tel: (617) 552-
        3687. Fax: (617) 552-2308. Email: irelandp@bc.edu. I would like to thank Miles
        Kimball, Julio Rotemberg, and two referees, along with conference and seminar par-
        ticipants at the Federal Reserve Board, the National Bureau of Economic Research,
        the University of Kansas, and the University of Quebec at Montreal, for very help-
        ful comments and suggestions. This material is based upon work supported by the
        National Science Foundation under Grant No. SES-0213461. Any opinions, findings,
        and conclusions or recommendations expressed herein are my own and do not neces-
        sarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the National
        Science Foundation. All data and programs used in this research are available at
        http://www2.bc.edu/~irelandp.

 1
     In addition, the technology shock would appear together with the preference shock in

                                                24
       the model’s IS curve (18) were it not for the fact that here, technology is assumed
       to follow a pure random walk. See the earlier version of this paper, Ireland (2002b),
       for an alternative implementation of the same exercise conducted here, but where the
       technology shock follows a stationary autoregressive process instead.

2
    Fuhrer and Moore (1995), in particular, also use an interest rate that is specified in terms
       of the first-diﬀerenced interest rate; they provide a detailed explanation of how a rule
       of this form supports a unique equilibrium in which the interest rate is stationary in
       levels.

3
    Of course, an alternative solution to this problem could be found by allowing for a de-
       parture from the logarithmic form of the representative household’s preferences over
       consumption. As indicated above, however, this logarithmic form is essential if the
       model is to be consistent with balanced growth.

4
    Also, Gali, Lopez-Salido, and Valles (2003) present related results: their study uses a more
       conventional identified vector autoregression to show that post-1980 improvements in
       US monetary policy include changes that have allowed the economy to respond more
       eﬃciently to technology shocks.

5
    Accordingly, this paper joins several others from the recent literature, including Basu,
       Fernald, and Kimball (1998), Gali (1999), and Francis and Ramey (2003), which take
       a variety of diﬀerent empirical approaches to distinguish between the real business
       cycle and New Keynesian models and to argue against the importance of technology
       shocks as a source of aggregate fluctuations.




                                               25
6   References

Ball, Laurence and N. Gregory Mankiw, “The NAIRU in Theory and Practice,” Journal of
    Economic Perspectives 16 (Fall 2002), 115-136.

Basu, Susanto, John Fernald, and Miles Kimball, “Are Technology Improvements Contrac-
    tionary?” International Finance Discussion Paper 625 (Washington: Federal Reserve
    Board, September 1998).

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Charles M. Kahn, “The Solution of Linear Diﬀerence Models
    Under Rational Expectations,” Econometrica 48 (July 1980), 1305-1311.

Calvo, Guillermo A., “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of
    Monetary Economics 12 (September 1983), 383-398.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New
    Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature 37 (December 1999), 1661-
    1707.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeco-
    nomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115
    (February 2000), 147-180.

Cooley, Thomas F. and Gary D. Hansen, “The Inflation Tax in a Real Business Cycle
    Model,” American Economic Review 79 (September 1989), 733-748.

Driscoll, John C., “On the Microfoundations of Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply,”
    Manuscript (Providence: Brown University, October 2000).

Francis, Neville and Valerie A. Ramey, “Is the Technology-Driven Real Business Cycle
    Hypothesis Dead? Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations Revisited,” Manuscript (San


                                         26
    Diego: University of California at San Diego, September 2003).

Fuhrer, Jeﬀrey C. and George R. Moore, “Monetary Policy Trade-oﬀs and the Correlation
    between Nominal Interest Rates and Real Output,” American Economic Review 85
    (March 1995), 219-239.

Gali, Jordi, “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks
    Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?” American Economic Review 89 (March 1999), 249-
    271.

Gali, Jordi, “New Perspectives on Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle,”
    Working Paper 8767 (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, February
    2002).

Gali, Jordi and Mark Gertler, “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics 44 (October 1999), 195-222.

Gali, Jordi, J. David Lopez-Salido, and Javier Valles, “Technology Shocks and Monetary
    Policy: Assessing the Fed’s Performance,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (May
    2003), 723-743.

Hamilton, James D., Time Series Analysis (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994).

Ireland, Peter N., “Interest Rates, Inflation, and Federal Reserve Policy since 1980,” Journal
    of Money, Credit, and Banking 32 (August 2000, Part 1), 417-434.

Ireland, Peter N., “Sticky-Price Models of the Business Cycle: Specification and Stability,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics 47 (February 2001), 3-18.

Ireland, Peter N., “Money’s Role in the Monetary Business Cycle,” Manuscript (Chestnut
    Hill: Boston College, May 2002a).


                                             27
Ireland, Peter N., “Technology Shocks in the New Keynesian Model,” Working Paper 536
    (Chestnut Hill: Boston College, Department of Economics, August 2002b).

Kerr, William and Robert G. King, “Limits on Interest Rate Rules in the IS Model,” Federal
    Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 82 (Spring 1996), 47-75.

Kim, Chang-Jin and Charles R. Nelson, “Has the U.S. Economy Become More Stable?
    A Bayesian Approach Based on a Markov-Switching Model of the Business Cycle,”
    Review of Economics and Statistics 81 (November 1999), 608-616.

King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser, and Sergio T. Rebelo, “Production, Growth and Busi-
    ness Cycles: I. The Basic Neoclassical Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics 21
    (January 1988), 195-232.

Klein, Paul, “Using the Generalized Schur Form to Solve a Multivariate Linear Rational Ex-
    pectations Model,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 24 (September 2000),
    1405-1423.

Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott, “Time To Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,”
    Econometrica 50 (November 1982), 1345-1370.

Long, John B., Jr. and Charles I. Plosser, “Real Business Cycles,” Journal of Political
    Economy 91 (February 1983), 39-69.

McCallum, Bennett T., “Price Level Determinacy with an Interest Rate Policy Rule and
    Rational Expectations,” Journal of Monetary Economics 8 (November 1981), 319-329.

McCallum, Bennett T. and Edward Nelson, “An Optimizing IS-LM Specification for Mon-
    etary Policy and Business Cycle Analysis,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 31
    (August 1999, Part 1), 296-316.


                                           28
McConnell, Margaret M. and Gabriel Perez-Quiros, “Output Fluctuations in the United
    States: What Has Changed Since the Early 1980’s?” American Economic Review 90
    (December 2000), 1464-1476.

Parkin, Michael. “A Comparison of Alternative Techniques of Monetary Control Under
    Rational Expectations.” Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies 46 (Sep-
    tember 1978): 252-287.

Rotemberg, Julio J., “Sticky Prices in the United States,” Journal of Political Economy 90
    (December 1982), 1187-1211.

Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters, “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium
    Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association 1 (September
    2003), 1123-1175.

Steinsson, Jon, “Optimal Monetary Policy in an Economy with Inflation Persistence,” Jour-
    nal of Monetary Economics 50 (October 2003), 1425-1456.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, “Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?”
    NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2002 (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003), 159-218.

Taylor, John B., “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Confer-
    ence Series on Public Policy 39 (December 1993), 195-214.

Weil, Philippe, “The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-Free Rate Puzzle,” Journal of
    Monetary Economics 24 (November 1989), 401-421.

Woodford, Michael. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy
    (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003).




                                           29
Table 1. Maximum Likelihood Estimates and Standard Errors

                                    Standard
             Parameter   Estimate     Error

                ω         0.0617     0.0634
                αx        0.0836     0.1139
                απ        0.0000     0.0737
                ρπ        0.3597     0.0469
                ρg        0.2536     0.0391
                ρx        0.0347     0.0152
                ρa        0.9470     0.0250
                ρe        0.9625     0.0248
                σa        0.0405     0.0157
                σe        0.0012     0.0003
                σz        0.0109     0.0028
                σr        0.0031     0.0003
        Table 2. Forecast Error Variance Decompositions

Output Growth

   Quarters         Preference      Cost-Push       Technology        Policy
    Ahead             Shock          Shock            Shock           Shock

      1                  25.6             6.6              27.5           40.3
      4                  22.2             13.7             26.3           37.8
      8                  22.1             13.8             26.3           37.8
      12                 22.1             13.9             26.3           37.7
      20                 22.0             14.2             26.2           37.6
      40                 22.0             14.5             26.1           37.4
      ∞                  21.9             14.6             26.1           37.4


   Inflation

   Quarters     Preference       Cost-Push       Technology       Policy
    Ahead         Shock            Shock           Shock          Shock

      1            2.3             61.6             15.9           20.3
      4            1.8             64.3             14.9           19.0
      8            1.7             66.4             14.0           17.9
      12           1.7             67.3             13.6           17.4
      20           1.7             68.1             13.3           16.9
      40           1.7             68.8             12.9           16.5
      ∞            1.7             69.0             12.9           16.4
       Interest Rate

          Quarters            Preference      Cost-Push      Technology      Policy
           Ahead                Shock          Shock           Shock         Shock

              1                  76.1            9.1             6.5           8.3
              4                  78.8            15.8            2.4           3.0
              8                  76.7            20.2            1.4           1.7
              12                 75.0            22.6            1.0           1.3
              20                 72.9            25.3            0.8           1.1
              40                 70.5            27.8            0.7           0.9
              ∞                  69.7            28.7            0.7           0.9


        Output Gap

          Quarters           Preference      Cost-Push      Technology       Policy
           Ahead               Shock          Shock           Shock          Shock

              1                  7.7             7.8            37.1          47.4
              4                  4.3            47.6            21.1          27.0
              8                  2.2            72.9            10.9          14.0
              12                 1.5            81.3            7.6           9.7
              20                 1.1            86.8            5.3           6.8
              40                 0.8            89.7            4.2           5.3
              ∞                  0.8            89.7            4.2           5.3


Note: Entries decompose the forecast error variance in each variable at each forecast horizon
    into percentages due to each shock.
  Table 3. Subsample Estimates and Standard Errors

            Pre-1980   Standard   Post-1980   Standard
Parameter   Estimate     Error    Estimate      Error

   ω         0.0000     0.0115     0.0581      0.0693
   αx        0.2028     0.0704     0.0000      0.0213
   απ        0.0000     0.1092     0.0000      0.0154
   ρπ        0.3053     0.0591     0.3866      0.2526
   ρg        0.2365     0.0601     0.3960      0.0615
   ρx        0.0000     0.0068     0.1654      0.1136
   ρa        0.9910     0.0112     0.9048      0.0583
   ρe        0.5439     0.0061     0.9907      0.0133
   σa        0.1538     0.1839     0.0302      0.0157
   σe        0.0035     0.0004     0.0002      0.0002
   σz        0.0104     0.0016     0.0089      0.0013
   σr        0.0033     0.0007     0.0028      0.0004
Table 4. Forecast Error Variance Decompositions: Pre-1980 Subsample

 Output Growth

     Quarters         Preference      Cost-Push       Technology        Policy
      Ahead             Shock          Shock            Shock           Shock

        1                   10.3            15.0             12.5           62.3
        4                    9.9            16.2             14.1           59.8
        8                    9.7            17.7             14.3           58.4
        12                   9.6            17.9             14.2           58.2
        20                   9.6            17.9             14.2           58.2
        40                   9.6            17.9             14.2           58.2
        ∞                    9.6            17.9             14.2           58.2


     Inflation

     Quarters      Preference      Cost-Push       Technology       Policy
      Ahead          Shock           Shock           Shock          Shock

        1             4.9            46.8             16.9           31.4
        4             6.0            33.5             21.2           39.3
        8             5.9            34.5             20.9           38.7
        12            5.8            34.7             20.8           38.6
        20            5.8            34.7             20.8           38.6
        40            5.9            34.7             20.8           38.6
        ∞             5.9            34.7             20.8           38.6
       Interest Rate

          Quarters            Preference      Cost-Push      Technology      Policy
           Ahead                Shock          Shock           Shock         Shock

              1                  91.2            2.5             2.2           4.1
              4                  95.4            0.9             1.3           2.4
              8                  97.1            0.8             0.8           1.4
              12                 97.9            0.6             0.5           1.0
              20                 98.6            0.4             0.4           0.6
              40                 99.2            0.2             0.2           0.4
              ∞                  99.6            0.1             0.1           0.2


        Output Gap

          Quarters           Preference      Cost-Push      Technology       Policy
           Ahead               Shock          Shock           Shock          Shock

              1                  8.5            12.4            27.7          51.4
              4                  6.9            29.3            22.4          41.5
              8                  6.4            33.5            21.0          39.0
              12                 6.4            33.8            20.9          38.9
              20                 6.4            33.8            20.9          38.8
              40                 6.4            33.8            20.9          38.8
              ∞                  6.4            33.8            20.9          38.8


Note: Entries decompose the forecast error variance in each variable at each forecast horizon
    into percentages due to each shock.
Table 5. Forecast Error Variance Decompositions: Post-1980 Subsample

  Output Growth

      Quarters        Preference      Cost-Push      Technology        Policy
       Ahead            Shock          Shock           Shock           Shock

        1                   31.9            0.0             43.9           24.2
        4                   30.3            1.6             43.6           24.5
        8                   30.3            1.7             43.5           24.5
        12                  30.3            1.7             43.5           24.5
        20                  30.3            1.7             43.5           24.5
        40                  30.3            1.7             43.5           24.5
        ∞                   30.3            1.7             43.5           24.5


     Inflation

      Quarters     Preference      Cost-Push      Technology       Policy
       Ahead         Shock           Shock          Shock          Shock

        1             2.8            49.1            29.5           18.6
        4             1.5            61.4            22.8           14.4
        8             1.5            69.8            17.6           11.1
        12            1.6            74.5            14.7           9.3
        20            1.4            80.0            11.4           7.2
        40            1.0            85.9            8.0            5.1
        ∞             0.6            91.5             4.8           3.1
       Interest Rate

          Quarters            Preference      Cost-Push      Technology      Policy
           Ahead                Shock          Shock           Shock         Shock

              1                  80.5            7.2             7.5           4.8
              4                  81.1            12.6            3.9           2.4
              8                  77.4            18.5            2.5           1.6
              12                 73.0            23.6            2.0           1.3
              20                 65.2            32.1            1.7           1.0
              40                 52.8            45.1            1.3           0.8
              ∞                  36.9            61.6            0.9           0.6


        Output Gap

          Quarters           Preference      Cost-Push      Technology       Policy
           Ahead               Shock          Shock           Shock          Shock

              1                  13.5            0.0            53.0          33.5
              4                  11.6            7.3            49.7          31.4
              8                  9.2            24.3            40.8          25.8
              12                 7.6            37.4            33.7          21.3
              20                 5.8            52.7            25.4          16.1
              40                 3.9            68.0            17.2          10.9
              ∞                  3.9            68.0            17.2          10.9


Note: Entries decompose the forecast error variance in each variable at each forecast horizon
    into percentages due to each shock.
            output growth to preference shock                    output growth to cost-push shock                   output growth to technology shock                   output growth to policy shock

 0.6                                                  0.3                                                0.6                                                  0.4
                                                                                                         0.5                                                  0.2
 0.4                                                  0.2
                                                                                                         0.4                                                    0
 0.2                                                  0.1                                                0.3                                                 -0.2
                                                                                                         0.2                                                 -0.4
   0                                                    0
                                                                                                         0.1                                                 -0.6
 -0.2                                                 -0.1                                                 0                                                 -0.8
        0             4         8         12     16          0          4         8        12       16          0          4         8        12        16          0        4         8         12     16




                 inflation to preference shock                     inflation to cost-push shock                       inflation to technology shock                       inflation to policy shock

 0.3                                                    0                                                  0                                                   0
 0.2                                                                                                     -0.2                                                -0.2
                                                      -0.5
                                                                                                                                                             -0.4
 0.1                                                                                                     -0.4
                                                       -1                                                                                                    -0.6
   0                                                                                                     -0.6                                                -0.8
 -0.1                                                 -1.5                                               -0.8                                                 -1
        0             4         8         12     16          0          4         8        12       16          0           4        8         12       16          0         4        8         12     16




            interest rate to preference shock                    interest rate to cost-push shock                   interest rate to technology shock                   interest rate to policy shock

 0.8                                                    0                                                0.25                                                0.25
 0.6                                                  -0.1                                                0.2                                                 0.2
                                                                                                         0.15                                                0.15
 0.4                                                  -0.2
                                                                                                          0.1                                                 0.1
 0.2                                                  -0.3                                               0.05                                                0.05
  0                                                   -0.4                                                  0                                                   0
        0             4         8         12     16          0          4         8        12       16          0           4         8        12       16          0         4         8         12    16




                output gap to preference shock                    output gap to cost-push shock                      output gap to technology shock                      output gap to policy shock

   0.3                                                 1                                                    0                                                  0
  0.25                                                0.8                                                -0.1
   0.2                                                                                                                                                       -0.2
                                                                                                         -0.2
  0.15                                                0.6
                                                                                                         -0.3                                                -0.4
   0.1                                                0.4
  0.05                                                                                                   -0.4
                                                      0.2                                                                                                    -0.6
     0                                                                                                   -0.5
 -0.05                                                 0                                                 -0.6                                                -0.8
            0             4      8        12     16          0          4         8        12       16          0           4        8         12       16          0        4         8         12     16




Figure 1. Impulse Responses.
      Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model's variables to a one-standard-deviation shock.
      The inflation and interest rates are expressed in annualized terms.
            output growth to preference shock                   output growth to cost-push shock                    output growth to technology shock                        output growth to policy shock

  0.4                                                 0.5                                                0.5                                                   0.4
  0.3                                                 0.4                                                0.4                                                   0.2
  0.2                                                 0.3                                                                                                        0
                                                      0.2                                                0.3                                                  -0.2
  0.1
                                                      0.1                                                0.2                                                  -0.4
    0                                                   0                                                                                                     -0.6
 -0.1                                                -0.1                                                0.1
                                                                                                                                                              -0.8
 -0.2                                                -0.2                                                 0                                                     -1
        0           4        8        12        16          0             4         8        12     16          0             4         8        12      16          0             4        8         12     16




              inflation to preference shock                          inflation to cost-push shock                        inflation to technology shock                         inflation to policy shock

  0.6                                                0.5                                                    0                                                   0
  0.5                                                  0                                                 -0.2
  0.4                                                                                                    -0.4                                                 -0.5
  0.3                                                -0.5
  0.2                                                                                                    -0.6
                                                      -1
  0.1                                                                                                    -0.8                                                  -1
    0                                                -1.5                                                  -1
 -0.1                                                 -2                                                 -1.2                                                 -1.5
        0           4        8        12        16          0             4         8        12     16          0              4        8        12      16          0             4        8         12     16




            interest rate to preference shock                   interest rate to cost-push shock                    interest rate to technology shock                        interest rate to policy shock

 0.6                                                   0.1                                                 0.1                                                0.15
 0.5                                                                                                                                                            0.1
                                                     0.05                                                0.05
 0.4
                                                                                                                                                              0.05
 0.3                                                        0                                                   0
 0.2                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                     -0.05                                               -0.05                                                -0.05
 0.1
   0                                                  -0.1                                                -0.1                                                 -0.1
        0           4        8        12        16              0             4     8        12     16              0             4      8        12     16              0          4        8         12    16




             output gap to preference shock                         output gap to cost-push shock                       output gap to technology shock                        output gap to policy shock

 0.4                                                 0.8                                                   0                                                    0
 0.3                                                 0.6                                                 -0.2                                                 -0.2
                                                                                                                                                              -0.4
 0.2                                                 0.4                                                 -0.4
                                                                                                                                                              -0.6
 0.1                                                 0.2                                                 -0.6                                                 -0.8
  0                                                   0                                                  -0.8                                                  -1
        0           4        8        12        16          0             4         8        12     16          0              4        8        12      16          0             4        8         12     16




Figure 2. Impulse Responses: Pre-1980 Subsample.
     Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model's variables to a one-standard-deviation shock.
     The inflation and interest rates are expressed in annualized terms.
            output growth to preference shock                    output growth to cost-push shock                    output growth to technology shock                       output growth to policy shock

  0.5                                                 0.08                                                0.5                                                      0.2
  0.4                                                 0.06                                                0.4                                                      0.1
  0.3                                                                                                                                                                0
  0.2                                                 0.04                                                0.3
  0.1                                                                                                                                                             -0.1
                                                      0.02                                                0.2
    0                                                                                                                                                             -0.2
 -0.1                                                        0                                            0.1                                                     -0.3
 -0.2                                                 -0.02                                                0                                                      -0.4
        0              4        8        12      16              0          4        8        12     16          0              4         8        12        16          0         4        8         12     16




                 inflation to preference shock                        inflation to cost-push shock                         inflation to technology shock                       inflation to policy shock

   0.2                                                   0                                                   0                                                      0
  0.15                                                -0.1                                                -0.1                                                    -0.1
   0.1                                                -0.2                                                -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                  -0.2
  0.05                                                -0.3                                                -0.3
     0                                                -0.4                                                -0.4                                                    -0.3
 -0.05                                                -0.5                                                -0.5                                                    -0.4
  -0.1                                                -0.6                                                -0.6                                                    -0.5
            0             4      8        12     16          0             4         8        12     16          0               4        8        12        16          0         4        8         12     16




            interest rate to preference shock                    interest rate to cost-push shock                        interest rate to technology shock                   interest rate to policy shock

  1                                                       0                                                0.3                                                    0.25
 0.8                                                  -0.05                                               0.25                                                     0.2
 0.6                                                   -0.1                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                  0.15
                                                      -0.15                                               0.15
 0.4                                                                                                                                                               0.1
                                                       -0.2                                                0.1
 0.2                                                  -0.25                                               0.05                                                    0.05
  0                                                    -0.3                                                  0                                                       0
        0             4         8        12      16              0          4        8        12     16              0           4         8        12       16          0         4         8        12     16




                output gap to preference shock                       output gap to cost-push shock                       output gap to technology shock                      output gap to policy shock

  0.25                                                  0.2                                                 0                                                       0
   0.2                                                0.15                                                -0.1                                                    -0.1
  0.15
                                                        0.1                                               -0.2
   0.1                                                                                                                                                            -0.2
                                                      0.05                                                -0.3
  0.05
                                                             0                                            -0.4                                                    -0.3
     0
 -0.05                                                -0.05                                               -0.5                                                    -0.4
            0             4      8        12     16              0          4        8        12     16          0               4        8        12        16          0         4        8         12     16




Figure 3. Impulse Responses: Post-1980 Subsample.
     Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model's variables to a one-standard-deviation shock.
     The inflation and interest rates are expressed in annualized terms.
