REARRANGING THE FAMILY?
INCOME SUPPORT AND ELDERLY LIVING ARRANGEMENTS
IN A LOW INCOME COUNTRY
Eric Edmonds
Kristin Mammen
Douglas L. Miller
Working Paper 10306

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REARRANGING THE FAMILY?
INCOME SUPPORT AND ELDERLY LIVING ARRANGEMENTS
IN A LOW INCOME COUNTRY
Eric Edmonds
Kristin Mammen
Douglas L. Miller
Working Paper 10306
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10306
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2004

The authors wish to thank Kristin Butcher, Anne Case, Angus Deaton, Nina Pavcnik, Dori Posel, Duncan
Thomas, Martin Wittenberg, NEUDC participants, and participants in the UC-Berkeley Development seminar
for their helpful comments. Correspondence to Eric Edmonds, 6106 Rockefeller Hall, Department of
Economics, Dartmouth College, Hanover NH 03755 USA, eedmonds@dartmouth.edu. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Eric Edmonds, Kristin Mammen, and Douglas L. Miller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Rearranging the Family? Income Support and Elderly Living Arrangements in
a Low Income Country
Eric Edmonds, Kristin Mammen, and Douglas L. Miller
NBER Working Paper No. 10306
February 2004
JEL No. J12, H55, I38, O15
ABSTRACT
Despite the importance of living arrangements for well-being and production, the effect of changes
in household income on living arrangements is not well understood. This study overcomes the
identification problems that have limited the study of the link between income and living
arrangements by exploiting a discontinuity in the benefit formula for the social pension in South
Africa. In contrast to the findings of the existing literature from wealthier populations, we find no
evidence that pension income is used to maintain the independence of black elders in South Africa.
Rather, potential beneficiaries alter their household structure. Prime working age women depart, and
we observe an increase in children under 5 and young women of child-bearing age. These shifts in
co-residence patterns are consistent with a setting where prime age women have comparative
advantage in work away from extended family relative to younger women. The additional income
from old age support may induce a change in living arrangements to exploit this advantage.
Eric Edmonds
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
eedmonds@dartmouth.edu
Kristin Mammen
Department of Economics
Barnard College
Columbia University
kmm13@columbia.edu

Douglas L. Miller
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
dlmiller@ucdavis.edu

1. Introduction
In this paper we study the impact of pension income on living arrangements in the
context of a low income country.1 An evaluation of the effect of pension income on living
arrangements is particularly timely given the rapid aging of the population in low income
countries. The aggregate growth rate of elderly in low income countries is more than double that
of wealthy countries, and as a result, many countries are considering adopting or expanding
pension programs (Kinsella and Velkoff 2001). Living arrangements are of interest to
economists because they are an important component of well-being. The U.S. literature on
pensions and living arrangements emphasizes the consumption element of living arrangements
(Costa 1997 and 1999, Englehardt, Gruber, and Perry 2002). People care directly about with
whom they live, and living arrangements affect each person's ability to influence household
decisions. In addition, living arrangements can affect the organization of household production
(Benjamin 1992). This issue may be particularly relevant in the developing country context, but
has not received much attention in the existing literature.2 Finally, the effect of pension income
on living arrangements is relevant to the broader literature analyzing household responses to
fluctuations in income such as the literatures on labor supply, consumption insurance, intrahousehold allocation, and the permanent income hypothesis. While many authors note concerns
about potential biases attributable to endogenous living arrangements, little evidence exists
documenting how significant these biases may be.3

1

We use the phrases "living arrangements" and "household composition" interchangeably. Strauss and Thomas
(1995) point to a large literature documenting that the concept of the household extends beyond a residential unit.
We study the impact of pension income on the demographic traits of individuals that occupy the same physical
residence as the elder.
2
Living arrangements may also affect how the household copes with risk and how household decisions are made.
These issues are discussed in section 2.
3
We are aware of the following studies that consider changes in household composition with income changes in a
developing country context. Ainsworth (1996) considers the determinants of child-fostering in Cote d'Ivoire and
finds that the receiving family's demand for labor is highly correlated with the level of fostering. Butcher (1993)

1

The paucity of evidence on the link between pensions or income more generally on living
arrangements is driven by three main empirical challenges. First, household decisions that
impact income are made by those living in the household; changing household members may
change these decisions. This creates the problem of disentangling the effect of income on living
arrangements from the effect of living arrangements on income. Second, income varies over the
life cycle, and pension income in particular is age dependent. Living arrangements change over
the life cycle as well. Disentangling the impacts of pension income from the impacts of aging is
challenging. Third, income (especially pension income) depends on cumulative work histories.
Thus, income today depends on decisions made earlier, and these decisions may also
independently influence today's living arrangements.
In this paper we study the impact of an old-age income support program on the living
arrangements of elder, black women in South Africa. This is a good context for considering the
impact of income on household composition, because the unique benefit structure of the South
African social pension enables us to address the identification problems that have limited
research on the effects of income on living arrangements. For elder black women in South
Africa, social pension income depends primarily on age-eligibility - women become eligible for
the pension at age 60.4 Thus, pension income does not depend on the presence of extended
families nor cumulative work histories. We identify the impacts of pension income on elderly
living arrangements, overcoming the problem that pension income is age dependent, by

uses the same dataset as Ainsworth and finds that changes in child fostering and the number of adults are highly
correlated with changes in household economic status. Grimard (2000), also using data from Cote d'Ivoire, finds an
association between rainfall, income, and household composition, although he posits that changes in household
composition are driven by labor demand. Frankenberg, Smith, and Thomas (2003) find that Indonesia's financial
crisis induced a movement of dependents and some types of workers from high cost urban areas to lower cost rural
areas.
4
There is a means-test to the social pension, but it is set at such a high level that it does not bind for most black
households (Alderman 1999). For this reason we focus on blacks. For other groups in South Africa, pension
eligibility is more likely to be an endogenous decision.

2

exploiting the discontinuous nature of the age eligibility rule in the pension benefit formula. We
assume that absent the pension, changes in living arrangements associated with the aging of
black women are smooth.5 We then look for discontinuous changes in composition that occur at
the age of pension eligibility, allowing for flexible smooth trends in age.
Our results differ from the previous literature in several interesting ways. In particular,
the existing literature on pensions and living arrangements (which is primarily set within
developed countries) focuses on how pensions enable the elderly to maintain their independence
(Costa 1997 and 1999, Carvalho 2000, McGarry and Schoeni 2000, Englehardt, Gruber, and
Perry 2002). There is nearly universal empirical support for the hypothesis that income enables
the elderly to maintain their preferred state of independence. We examine the effects of pension
age-eligibility on the household size of the elderly, as well as the probability that they live alone,
or only with a spouse. In contrast to much of the previous literature, we find no increase in
independence associated with pension eligibility.
However, we do uncover several interesting changes in living arrangements associated
with pension receipt. First, we find an increase in the number of children aged 0-5 present when
an elder woman becomes pension eligible. Second, we find an increase in the number of women
aged 18-23 – about the right age to be the children’s mothers. Third, we find a decrease in the
number of women aged 30-39. The magnitudes of these responses are meaningful – with
changes of approximately 10% of the base age-specific population numbers. We suspect that
women 18-23 and women 30-39 are good substitutes in household production, but that women
30-39 have an advantage in work away from home, perhaps because the child care obligations of
young mothers make them less productive in the market or less able to live away from home.

5

We focus on women because we believe our smoothness assumption is more tenable for women than men, for
reasons discussed in Section 3.

3

Moreover, the grandmother may help with the child care of young children, thereby improving
the ability of young mothers to work in addition to their household production activities.
In the next section, we review the role living arrangements play in household decisions
and why they may be affected by pension income. In section 3, we describe the South African
pension program in greater detail in the context of our identification strategy. Section 4 presents
our findings from the 1996 South African population and housing census and discusses other
possible interpretations. Section 5 concludes by summarizing our findings and discussing their
implications for researchers evaluating the effects of pensions (or income more generally) on
various household attributes.
2. Income and Living Arrangements - Theoretical Background
We use the term "household" to refer to a set of co-resident individuals and the term
"family" to refer to the broader kin network, many of whom may not live together. In this
section, we consider why a change in the income of an individual family member may influence
household living arrangements. We classify possible explanations into three broad categories:
consumption, contracts, and production.
2.1 Household composition as consumption
Most previous studies of the effects of income on living arrangements view these
arrangements as something that individuals have preferences over, and argue that additional
income increases consumption of more preferred living arrangements. Individuals may prefer
children or certain family members more than others, but most authors emphasize independence
as the preferred living state (Michael, Fuchs, and Scott (1980), Costa (1997), Costa (1999),
Carvalho (2000), McGarry and Schoeni (2000), and Englehardt, Gruber, and Perry (2002)).
When living arrangements are viewed as consumption, differences in household composition

4

associated with variation in income are interpreted as revealing preferences over living
arrangements.
In collective decision making models (Bourguignon and Chiappori 1992), additional
income in the hands of an individual may increase their influence on the allocation of family
resources (Lundberg and Pollak 1993). In this way, additional income to an elder may then
increase her influence in her family's affairs. This rising power may affect the desirability of
some living arrangements. Alternatively, she may use her power to change her living
arrangements by choosing preferred household members or living environments. Thus, as within
a unitary household model, changes in household composition associated with variation in
income can be viewed as indicative of the elder's preferences over living arrangements.
2.2 Household composition and intra-familial (informal) contracts
Increased income may change the informal contracts that families engage in, and can
subsequently affect household composition. For instance, if family members insure each other's
consumption against uncertain dates of death (Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981)), or uncertain income
shocks (Rosenzweig (1988)), then an increase in income may induce a change in these contracts.
Moreover, geographic diversification may be an important part of intra-familial insurance
strategies (Rosenzweig and Stark (1989). Thus, an increase in income may alter the types of
diversification strategies that are optimal. For example, Butcher (1993) emphasizes that child
fostering may be a mechanism through which families smooth fluctuations in resources.
In addition, household composition may be a direct factor in the enforcement of intrafamilial contracts. Suppose, for instance, that the elderly wish to transfer resources to their
grandchildren, but are unable to monitor their adult children's compliance with these wishes. In
this case, they may choose to have the grandchildren come live with them. Alternatively, if the

5

family's contract calls for the elderly to share their pension income with their families, but this
sharing cannot be enforced when the family members live apart, we may see an increase in cohabitation. The change in household composition in this case (as with the case of the children
mentioned above) does not arise from preferences over living arrangements per se. Instead, it
arises because household composition is an important input to enforcing intra-familial contracts.
2.3 Household composition and production
On the production side, additional income may enable the elderly to purchase market
substitutes for goods or services otherwise provided by household members (Hoerger, Picone,
and Sloan 1996 examine substitution between market care and family care of the elderly in the
US context). Alternatively, additional income may overcome credit constraints which prevent
the family from making efficient changes to how it arranges production. The pension income
may enable an elderly household to take in grown children or grandchildren to provide nontradable goods or services that improve the well being of their family.6 Similarly, movements to
exploit earnings opportunities and to minimize living costs have been shown by Frankenberg,
Smith, and Thomas (2003) to be important coping mechanisms for the shock of the Indonesian
financial crisis.
To summarize, the theoretical literature offers a wide variety of ways in which additional
income may impact the living arrangements of the elderly, and there are not clear predictions in
the theory about which mechanisms should dominate. Given the range of possible impacts, the
effect of additional resources on household composition is ultimately an empirical question.

6

In data from the Cote d'Ivoire, Ainsworth (1996) finds that the receiving family’s demand for child labor is an
important determinant of the child fostering decision (even more so than the level of the sending family's resources),
and Grimard (2000) finds that labor demand is a driving force for changes in labor demand among adults as well.

6

3. Identification
Empirical examination of the effects of old age support on the living arrangements of the
elderly poses several challenges, because support generally depends on a recipient's cumulative
labor history, household composition, and life-cycle attributes. Several unique attributes of
South Africa's Old Age Pension Program in South Africa's black population make it well suited
for considering the effect of old age support on elderly living arrangements.
The uniqueness of the South African program stems from its origin. At the end of
apartheid the white social pension was extended to the black population. Blacks are substantially
poorer than whites in South Africa, and so the maximum pension benefit for a black South
African is approximately twice the median per capita monthly household income of blacks (Case
and Deaton 1998). There is a means test to the pension, but it is set as such a high level that it
does not exclude most black South Africans (Alderman 1999). Moreover, the means test does
not take in to account the income of family members, so there is no incentive to rearrange
households in order to be eligible for the pension (as many have argued exists for social transfer
systems such as Aid to Families with Dependent Children in the United States, e.g. Bishop
1980). Thus, the determining factor for pension eligibility is age rather than labor histories or
household composition. Women become eligible for the pension at age 60.7
Our empirical approach is driven by this age-discontinuity in the benefit structure of the
social pension. Our approach is to compare living arrangements just before pension eligibility to
living arrangements immediately after; thus, pension eligible individuals are older than their noneligible counterparts. If there is any trend in household composition with respect to age, simple
eligible/ineligible comparisons will confound the impact of the pension with the impact of age.
To allow for age trends, we follow Porter (2000) and (in a nonparametric fashion) model the
7

See Case and Deaton 1998 and van der Berg 2001 Chapter 4 for further details.

7

smooth age trend in living arrangements. Our estimate of the effect of pension eligibility on
living arrangements comes from measuring any discontinuous changes in living arrangements at
the age of pension eligibility.
Specifically, the living arrangements variable, y, for a woman of age a depends on
resources and characteristics of the household and all of its potential members. We assume the
effects of these (unobserved) resources and characteristics on living arrangements are smooth
with respect to an individual's age. We write the expectation of the outcome variable y
conditional on age as:
(1)

y = m ( a ) + dα + ε

where d is an indicator that is 1 if a person is pension eligible, E ⎡⎣ε A⎤⎦ = 0 (where a=A is the age
of pension eligibility), and m ( ) is continuous at the age of pension eligibility.8 Porter suggests
rewriting (1) as:
(2)

( y − dα ) = m ( A ) + ε .

We have a new dependent variable: ( y − dα ) . α is estimated by finding a value of α that
minimizes the averaged squared deviation between this new dependent variable and the
nonparametric estimate of m ( A) . Thus, we use data from both above and below the
discontinuity in pension eligibility at age 60 in a kernel regression, with more weight given to

8

In the data, observed age is discrete. In a set of Monte Carlo experiments where the generated data has moments
that match those in the observed data, we have compared results when age is observed continuously to results when
age is rounded down to the nearest integer. We find that both the continuous results and the results where age is
rounded down to an integer have similar distributions of estimated treatment impacts and t-statistics with
approximately normal distributions.

8

data points closest to age 60, to estimate the change in the conditional expectation of the living
arrangements variable at the age when an individual becomes pension eligible.9
Two assumptions are critical for the consistency of this regression discontinuity estimator
and deserve special emphasis. The first is that the probability of treatment (pension eligibility)
varies discontinuously at the age cut-off point. This assumption follows directly from the
pension benefit formula, and we will show that the data are consistent with this assumption. The
second assumption is that if there were no treatment (i.e., no pension program), the outcome of
interest would be continuous at the age cut-off. That is, while we expect that a given household
characteristic (number of small children in the household, for example) may vary with the age of
the oldest woman, there is no a priori reason to think that at age 60 (and not at 59 or 61)
household characteristics should change dramatically. Retirement that would occur even in the
absence of the pension program is one possible concern. However, the data do not suggest that
retirement is a substantive issue for women (this issue is discussed in Appendix A).
One important qualification to this discontinuity approach is that we are limited in the
types of household changes it can detect. For example, we cannot identify effects that occur if
households respond to the pension either before or after actual eligibility. If pension receipt
tends to cause relatives to move in with an elder woman, they may do so when she turns 59, in
anticipation of her becoming eligible. Alternatively, it may take several years for household
9

In our kernel estimation, we use an Epanechnikov kernel (specifically: K ( z ) = (.75) (1 − .2 z 2 )

5 for z < 5 ),

and a bandwidth of 2. Standard errors are calculated following the discussion in Porter (2000). For reference of
future researchers interested in using the Porter regression-discontinuity methodology, the constant ck in Theorem 1
(Porter 2000, pg. 12) is 6.3582 for the indicated form of the Epanechnikov kernel.
Our choice of bandwidth is driven by a desire to balance identifying locally against the need for smoothing
to account for age trends and to prevent us from identifying off of idiosyncratic bumps in the data. We have
compared the findings presented below to what we would find with alternate bandwidths of 1.5 and 3. We reach
qualitatively the same conclusions with either alternative bandwidth. The main exception to this is that with the
bandwidth equal to 3, the coefficient on children 0-5 is not significantly different from zero. We cannot reject
statistically that our results for bandwidths 1.5 or 3 are the same as the point estimates using a bandwidth of 2 in
every result highlighted below with the exception of the income results where a bandwidth of 3 returns a 17
percentage point decline in the probability that a woman reports no income with pension eligibility.

9

members to adjust their composition in response to pension eligibility. Both of these timing
issues attenuate any measured program impact. We note, however, that Lund (1993) finds no
descriptive evidence of individuals being able to borrow in advance of pension eligibility even
though pensioners have better access to credit once they have attained eligibility. Hence
liquidity constraints may restrict the ability of individuals to act in anticipation of the pension.
A second issue is that we focus on age-eligibility rather than actual pension receipt. We
do so because pension take-up is an endogenous household choice whereas an individual’s age is
not. Our estimates are an attenuated measure of the true impact if take-up of the pension is
incomplete (as it certainly is) or does not coincide exactly with eligibility. Moreover, there is apt
to be measurement error in reported ages. If this measurement error is classical, it will further
attenuate our findings based on age-eligibility. In practice, there appears to be a moderate degree
of rounding in reported ages in the data to either ages in round decades or to ages that correspond
to birth years reported in round decades.10 This creates a problem for identification, because the
pension eligibility of women begins at age 60. In the presentations of the raw data below, it will
be obvious that women at age 60 generally look different than would be predicted by the trend
prior to age 60 and the trend after age 60 (see especially Figures 1,2,4, and 5). Thus, we exclude
women at age 60 from estimation.11 This alters the population to which our results are

10

In a set of Monte Carlo simulations, we have generated data with a continuous age distribution and with heaped
ages that correspond to what we observe in the data used in this study. Using the regression discontinuity design
described in this section, we found that estimated treatment effects were more disperse with heaped data. However,
the distributions of the T-statistics were approximately standard normal in both generated datasets. Thus, statistical
inference is not adversely impacted by age heaping per se.
11
In the simulations described in the previous footnote, we observed that when we excluded observations at age 60
from the heaped data, the standard deviation of the distribution of T-statistics increased by roughly 30-50 percent.
As a check on our results, we have used a bootstrapping procedure to generate empirical standard errors for each of
our models. In simulations, bootstrapped standard errors generated T-statistics that were approximately standard
normal. In our data, bootstrapping increases estimated standard errors by approximately 45 percent. The statistical
significance of our results is generally unaffected by using bootstrapped standard errors. The only exception to this
in the main results (presented in the next section) is that the findings for children 0-5 are only significant at 10
percent (T=1.92).

10

applicable. That is, our estimated impacts are most relevant for the population that is less likely
to misreport its age.
4. Data and Main Findings
4.1 Data
While the identification assumptions in our empirical work are weak, the methodology
requires a large dataset for our analysis to have statistical power. As a result, we focus on the
living arrangements of black elder women in black headed households in the 10 percent public
use sample of the 1996 Population and Housing Census of South Africa.12 Households are
defined in the census as a group of people (or one person) who live together at least 4 days a
week and jointly provide themselves with food and other necessities. Live-in employees were
regarded as separate households (Statistics South Africa. n.d. (c)).13 Our analysis is then based
on the 299,885 (unweighted) black women 40 and older living in households with black heads.14
We focus exclusively on women in this paper, because we are concerned that our
identification assumptions are more suspect for men. First, we are more comfortable with our
assumption that the underlying age trends in our measures of household composition are smooth
absent the pension for women. Men are more likely to face retirement incentives (absent the
pension) at the age of pension eligibility in the formal sector of the South African economy. As
12

Statistics South Africa (Stats SA) administered the 1996 census to cover the night of October 9th to 10th .
Respondents either filled in the questionnaires themselves or were interviewed by enumerators. Questionnaires
were translated into all 11 official languages of South Africa. Data were adjusted for undercount (with both
household and person weights) on the basis of a nationwide post-enumeration survey. (Statistics South Africa. n.d.
(a)) The data we use come from a 10 percent public use sample representing 40,578,900 individuals and 9,058,540
households. Individuals not living in households but in hostels or institutions such as prisons and hospitals were
counted in the census but are excluded from our analysis (Statistics South Africa. n.d. (b)).
13
We designate black households by the race of the household head. In a small percentage of cases where no head
of household was indicated, we designated a black household by the race of the next most closely related family
member (usually the spouse). The census allowed more than one household head to be reported; for the 0.4 percent
of households with multiple heads we chose the oldest head for determining the race of the household (in the
instance of a tie for oldest, we chose the oldest male)
14
3 percent of the sample is dropped because age information is missing for one or more household members. We
dropped 62 individuals in households with at least one member indicating institutional residence (this being
inconsistent with our sample definition).

11

discussed in appendix A, the data do not suggest that formal retirement is a significant issue for
women. Second, Bertrand, Mullainathan, and Miller (2003) report that in some provinces men
report pension take up upon turning 60, rather than 65. Thus, our assumption that treatment is
discontinuous at the age of pension eligibility may not be fully accurate in the male population.
Moreover, in addition to these identification concerns, much of the previous literature on the
South African pension program (Duflo 2003, Bertrand, Mullainathan, and Miller 2003, for
example) has concluded that female pensioners are more likely to share their pension income
with household members. Thus, we are more likely to find program effects in the female
population.
Table 1 presents means and standard deviations for the living arrangements of women
within 10 years of pension eligibility. Column 1 contains summary statistics for women that are
not yet pension eligible, and column 2 refers to eligible women. Individuals who are pension
eligible live in slightly larger households. There are more young children ages 0 to 5 in
households with a pension eligible individual. There are fewer individuals aged 18-23 living
with the older women. In addition, we observe more persons of prime work age (30-39) in
pension eligible households.
This naive comparison of households with and without a pension eligible person does not
reflect the causal impact of the pension program, because age trends are confounded with the
pension program. The differences in household structure found in table 1 may be due entirely to
age and have nothing to do with the pension per se. This problem of separating age differences
from the effect of the pension benefit is the reason for using the regression discontinuity
estimator applied in the next section.

12

4.2 Pension Eligibility Affects Income
Our focus is on how living arrangements change discontinuously at the age of pension
eligibility. Although we do not attempt to directly measure an income elasticity of living
arrangements, we interpret the changes in living arrangements associated with pension eligibility
as an effect of pension income. Figure 1 presents some support for the idea that pension
eligibility substantially impacts income. Figure 1 also illustrates how our empirical approach
works in practice.
The Census asks for each household member’s income, with possible responses grouped
into 14 categories. In panel A of figure 1, we plot the probability that a woman reports receiving
zero income against her age. The circles in panel A are (unsmoothed) nationally representative
means from the census, and 95 percent confidence bounds for these means are also graphed. The
curve is the result of using our semi-parametric regression discontinuity estimator. We regress
an indicator that is 1 if a woman reports no earnings in the last year against age, allowing a
change (as described above) at age 60 when a woman becomes pension eligible. Panel A shows
that about 58 percent of women in their early 50’s report zero income during the previous year.
This proportion declines slightly among women in their late 50’s, and drops dramatically - 12.5
percentage points – as women become age-eligible for the pension. The T-statistic for the null
hypothesis that the jump at age 60 is zero is over 15. 15 In panel B we consider the probability
that a pension-eligible black woman reports a personal income that is equal to or greater than the
amount of the pension. This probability increases by 12 percentage points at age 60, a
statistically significant increase. Thus, we treat the effects of age eligibility as income effects
throughout this study.
15

This estimate (as well as most estimates that follow in the paper) is based on 53,834 individuals receiving nonzero weight. For readers who wish to compute hypothesis testing using a Schwarz (or Bayesian Information)-type
Criterion, we calculate that sqrt(log(53,834))=3.3 could be used as an alternate critical value to the usual 1.96.

13

4.3 Pensions do not alter the trend away from independence
We have noted that most of the existing literature on elderly living arrangements in high
income countries finds that additional income enables the elderly to continue their
independence.16 We begin examining whether pension eligibility affects elderly independence in
South Africa by considering whether there are changes in household size around the elderly with
pension eligibility. In Figure 2 we plot household size against a woman’s age; as before, the
circles represent the weighted, unsmoothed census means, and 95 percent confidence bounds for
these means are pictured. The regression curve shows a general trend towards increasing
household size as women approach the age pension eligibility. This upward trend in household
size with age may reflect that older individuals are less able to rely on their own earnings and
physical output or that older individuals will have older children who are thereby more likely to
have children or even grandchildren of their own. Our discontinuity approach captures any
discrete changes associated with pension eligibility in this trend towards increasing household
size.
The point estimates of the size of the discontinuity are reproduced in table 2, row 1. We
find an increase of approximately 0.09 household members associated with pension eligibility.
This corresponds to an approximate 1 percent increase in household size.17 This small increase
in household size is not statistically significant at conventional levels.
We also examine directly the effects of pension eligibility on the probability that an elder
woman lives independently – either alone or only with a spouse. In Figure 3 the dependent
16

For examples, see Michael, Fuchs, and Scott (1980), Borsch-Supan, McFadden, and Schnabel (1993), Costa
(1997), Costa (1999), and Engelhardt, Gruber, and Perry (2002). For middle income countries, DaVanzo and Chan
(1994) and Carvalho (2000) find similar results for Malaysia and Brazil.
17
In order to calculate percentage changes, we need to know what the mean household size (or any other dependent
variable) would be at the age of pension eligibility in the absence of the pension program. To calculate this, we use
the age trend before pension age to project the expected household size at the pension age. These projected means
are the means reported in tables 2 and 3 and referenced henceforth in the text.

14

variable is an indicator that is one if woman lives alone or only with a spouse. We see that living
independently is rare among elder South Africans- only 8 percent of women age 59 do so. In
addition, there is a general trend away from living independently as a black woman ages. Figure
3 shows there is no statistically significant break in this trend associated with pension eligibility.
Estimates of α, the pension eligibility associated change in the probability an individual lives
alone or with only a spouse, are in table 2, rows 2 and 3. These coefficients are small and
statistically insignificant. Thus, the data fail to reject the hypothesis of no impact of pension
eligibility on elderly independence. This finding contrasts with almost all of the research on
pension effects on living arrangements from populations richer than black South Africa.
There are a number of possible explanations for why the results on elderly independence
are different in South Africa. First, the preferences of the elderly over independence could be
different in South Africa. However, we do not have strong priors that elderly South Africans
care more about their extended family or have more desire to live with kin than do elders
elsewhere. Second, there may be little scope for pension income to affect independence (even if
the elderly would prefer it) given that an independent arrangement is rare. A third possibility is
that the pension in South Africa could be so large that (due to the absence of complete contracts)
adult children merge households with the elderly to monitor the sharing of the funds, inducing a
decline in elderly independence. However, our results do not suggest a decline in independence
with the pension. Rather, the general age trend away from independence continues unabated
with the pension eligibility.
Another explanation for the lack of increased independence is that there may be missing
markets in South Africa for goods and services that would enable the elderly to compensate for
the diminishing capacity for home production that accompanies age. Alternatively, these goods

15

and services may be available, but substantially more expensive than using within household
labor to provide them. In this case, pension income may be used by elders to alter household
composition in order to either bring in additional labor to provide these goods and services.
Finally, liquidity constraints could also be relevant. With liquidity constraints, an increase in
income could lead a decline in the cost of home production by a reorganization of production
(either through purchased inputs or changes in the labor mix). Thus, to the extent that household
production is more significant in low income countries because of missing markets or because of
labor market imperfections, the effect of income on shadow prices may be more important. In
this way, incomplete or underdeveloped markets for goods and services consumed by the elderly
might be an important reason why we do not observe income effects on independence for black
South Africans.
4.4 Pensions are associated with increases in the number of young children and women of
age to be their mothers as well as a decline in the presence of prime working age women
Though we observe no break in the trend away from independent living and no
statistically significant changes in household size, the discussion of why household composition
may change with income suggests scope for important changes in living arrangements when
women become pension eligible. We examine changes in living arrangements by looking at
changes in the presence of females and males for various age groupings in Appendix B. This
section highlights the most important of these results. Figures 4-6 contain the census means and
kernel regression results by the age of the elder woman for the number of children ages 0 to 5
(figure 4), the number of women ages 18 – 23 (figure 5), and the number of women ages 30 –39
(figure 6). These graphs show the basic elements of how the households of pension-eligible
women are re-shaped. The regression discontinuity estimates of the impacts are reproduced in

16

Table 3. One obvious question is whether the findings in figures 4-6 represent the movement of
the elderly or the movement of others. The discussion in Appendix C suggests that all of our
main findings are present in the sub-sample of elders who live in rural areas and have not moved
in the last 7 years.18
We find a large and statistically significant increase of 0.05 in children 0-5 with pension
eligibility. This corresponds to a 7 percent increase in the number of young children in a
household on average. This increase in the number of young children does not appear to be an
effect of the pension on fertility that is timed with pension eligibility. We examine whether the
pension is associated with an increase in births in the household. In Table 3, row 4, we do not
find any statistically significant relationship between births in the year prior to pension eligibility
and female pension receipt. The estimated change in fertility with the pension eligibility of
women is actually slightly negative. Of course, our method does not capture the effect of
anticipated pension income on fertility. Hence, the results in figure 4 reflect either children
being brought into the household or fertility in anticipation of the pension by more than a year.
We observe an increase in the presence of young women ages 18-23 of .04 young women
per elder. This corresponds to more than a 10 percent increase in the presence of young women.
The rise in young children and 18-23 year old women may be related, because it is not unusual
for a black woman in the 18-23 year old group to have a child, and that child is likely to be aged
5 or younger.19

18

The point estimates are very similar for most variables when we condition on rural non-movers. However,
statistical significance for impacts on children 0-5 and women 18-23 are not robust to using the bootstrapped
standard errors discussed in footnote 11.
19
Age-specific fertility rates for black South African women ages 20-24 are estimated to be from 0.104 to 0.159
(Moultrie and Timaeus, 2002). The relationship identifiers in our data do not permit the matching of individual
children to their mothers. Frankenberg, Smith, and Thomas (2003) also find evidence of the co-movement of young
children and women who are probably their mothers during Indonesia's financial crisis.

17

At first glance, a comparison of figures 4 and 5 might seem inconsistent with a
relationship between the increased cohabitation of women 18-23 and children 0-5. Rather, they
illustrate the usefulness of our regression discontinuity approach. If a researcher were to look
only at the age trends in these variables (figures 4 and 5), she would note that the number of
children increases with the elder’s age, and the number of young women decreases with the
elder’s age. By focusing on the age trends alone, she might conclude that these two variables
move in opposite directions. This conclusion is reinforced by comparing the means in Table 1.
However, our discontinuity estimator uncovers a different pattern that we think is more likely to
be related to exogenous changes in income. With pension eligibility, there is a large increase in
women 18-23 even though there is a decreasing trend in number of young women in the
household. With this discontinuous increase in young women at the start of their child-bearing
years, we also observe a large change in the number of children 0-5 in the household.
The data also reveal a decline in women age 30-39 that is of a similar magnitude to the
increase in young women. That is, 0.04 women 30-39 depart and 0.04 women 18-23 arrive with
pension eligibility. As with young women, the change in the presence of 30-39 associated with
pension eligibility is opposite in direction to the overall age trend in the presence of women 3039. As such, it is an effect of pension eligibility that would be missed without focusing on the
discontinuity in the pension eligibility rules.
Why do we observe an increase in the number of children and young women with
pension eligibility? An obvious potential reason is the direct consumption of child
companionship by the elderly. Elders may consume more child companionship with an increase
in income if child companionship is a normal good or they may prefer to live with small children
and the additional income strengthens their influence on consumption choices. A number of

18

studies have found that increases in income are associated with increased decision-making power
of the income recipient (e.g. Lundberg, Pollak, and Wales 1997, Thomas and Rubalcava 2001).
Additionally, the increase in children and young women may be due to a change in how the
family organizes its production. Children may accompany parents moving back to the household
of the pensioner; or they may arrive unaccompanied, because the pensioner is taking care of
them while the parents work. In this latter case, the rise in women at the start of their childbearing years would be purely coincident.
It is interesting to note that the entrance of young women is similar in magnitude to the
decline in the presence of prime working age women. Is there an explanation for this pattern that
does not depend on preferences or changes in intrahousehold influence? These results are not
necessarily consistent with the idea that "predators" are moving in to co-opt the income of elders
or that living arrangements are changing to monitor elderly management of the cash, if prime age
workers (rather than young mothers) are most effective at this sort of behavior. Rather, we
speculate that young mothers and older women are similarly productive in home production but
that young women have a lower relative value of market time than prime age women. This may
be because they have accumulated less work experience and because there are complementarities
in raising young children and working at home.20 Thus, the elder uses the pension income to
shift towards the relatively low cost input into household production. This appears in the data as
an outflow prime age working women and an inflow of young mothers. The comparative
advantage of prime age women in work away from home may stem from the fact that they have
older children that do not require continual supervision. Hence, the help of a grandmother is not
20

Differences in the relative value of time between older women and younger mothers may also interplay with
household risk management strategies. For example, when the pension provides a stable source of income at home,
the prime age woman may be able to move to an employment opportunity where transfers back home are difficult to
do quickly in response to a crisis, because she knows that the household will be able to use the pension income to
cope with the short-term consequences of a shock.

19

required to increase the mother’s productivity. It is plausible that for younger women whose
children need more care, the grandmother serves a caretaking role that helps improve the family's
return on young mothers. We find this explanation plausible, although it cannot be distinguished
from an explanation based on preferences.
5. Conclusion
In this paper we document the changes in living arrangements that result from pension
eligibility for elderly black South African women. We do so using a regression discontinuity
estimator that relies on weak assumptions to obtain the causal impacts of pension income on
composition. In particular, we assume that the underlying age-composition relationship is
smooth in age and that the probability of receiving the pension changes discontinuously at the
age of pension eligibility. In this way, our study illustrates how administrative program rules can
be a useful source of identification to circumvent the endogeneity problems that have limited the
study of the relationship between income and household composition.
In contrast to much of the literature on wealthy countries, we find no evidence that the
additional pension income leads to an increased propensity to live alone. Both the probability of
independent living and the average size of the household do not change with pension eligibility.
Our findings offer a counterexample to the notion that “[as the financial] status of elderly people
improves, a larger proportion are able to afford to live alone and choose to do so in independent
dwellings…” (Kinsella and Velkoff 2001, p. 68). Instead, our findings emphasize the role that
the elderly play in supporting their extended families as well as the support the elderly in turn
depend upon. One important reason for why this interdependence dominates the desire to live
independently may be the less developed markets for many of the goods and services consumed
by households in the South African context.

20

Instead of using pension income to maintain their independence, elder women use their
income to alter living arrangements. These adjustments take several forms. First, when a
woman becomes pension eligible, we observe a decline in the number of co-resident women in
their 30s, who may have a comparative advantage in work away (labor force participation rates
peak for women in the census around age 40, and are high for women 30-50 years old). Second,
we find increases in the presence of young children (0 to 5) and of women whose age group
suggests that they could be these children’s mothers (18 to 23). This is consistent with the
caretaking role of grandmothers emphasized in some of the descriptive literature. Alternatively,
missing markets and labor market imperfections in the developing country context may be
responsible for this distinct result although we cannot rule our explanations that depend on
preferences or changes in family decision-making. Young mothers may have comparative
advantage (relative to older women) in working within the household and in the presence of
elders both because of their significantly shorter work experience and because of the burdens and
costs of rearing young children. The pension income then enables the household to allocate
labor more optimally by moving young women in and prime-age women out.
The changes in living arrangements that we observe have several implications. First,
there is a large literature documenting that grandparents help their grandchildren and hence that
social policy directed at the elderly benefits other generations (e.g. Case 2003, Case and Deaton
1998, Duflo 2003, Edmonds 2003, Jensen 2004, Lund 1993). This paper highlights another
mechanism by which elders may assist other generations: enabling individuals to move out of the
household and others to move in.
Second, policy makers need to use caution in designing income transfer programs given
the substantive changes in living arrangements observed with pension eligibility. In addition to

21

the usual distortions imposed by government transfer programs, a policy that is conditioned on
household composition may introduce additional distortions, by interfering with households'
optimal responses to income changes. For example, targeting cash transfers to children but
varying transfers with household size or limiting transfers to households with single parents may
prevent individuals from adjusting their living arrangements in response to income fluctuations.
Third, the systematic changes in living arrangements in response to income changes
highlight the fact that household members move in and out as a response to changes in income.
This ability to shift living arrangements has implications for the consumption, insurance, growth,
intrahousehold, and labor supply literatures that require further investigation.
We conclude with three examples of how our results might have implications for other
studies evaluating the effects of a pension program or changes in household income. For
example, there is a literature on whether targeting or labeling income affects how it is spent
(Thaler 1990, Kooreman 2000, Edmonds 2002). In the context of the South African pension,
Case and Deaton (1998) consider whether the marginal propensity to spend pension income is
different than for other sources of income (they do not find it to be different). As they point out,
the effects of the pension on living arrangements could temper their conclusions. Changes in
household composition will change expenditure patterns directly. Therefore a different marginal
propensity to spend out of pension income could reflect either the treatment of pension income
or underlying changes in household composition if the marginal propensity to consume does not
vary across types of income.
A second example applies to the literature that considers the effects of income increases
on individual well-being. For example, Duflo (2000, 2003) finds that the Old Age Pension
improves the nutritional status of co-resident children. Our study documents an inflow of

22

children due to the pension. As Duflo (2003) notes, if this inflow is comprised of particularly
health (or less healthy) children, then estimates of the impact of the pension on the health may be
biased. For example, an altruistic grandmother might bring in relatively disadvantaged children
to care for when she begins to receive the pension. This selection of disadvantaged
grandchildren could cause estimates of the pension's impact on child nutrition to understate its
true impact. Interestingly, Duflo (2000, 2003) finds an impact of the pension on the health of
girls, but not boys. We find that the pension results in an inflow of boys more than girls. One
possibility is that Duflo's "zero result" for boys may reflect a positive impact on health,
combined with a negative selection effect in terms of household composition.
A third example relates to research that considers the impacts of government transfer
programs on labor supply. In the South African context, Bertrand, Mullainathan, and Miller
(2003) find declines in the labor supply of adult males associated with the pension receipt of
elder women, but they do not observe declines in the labor supply of prime-age women. Our
finding of substantive decreases in the number of prime-age women with female pension
eligibility might imply that the absence of measured labor supply effects for women may be
driven by an outflow of prime-age women, who would otherwise stop working in the presence of
the pension. Naturally, as with the other examples, one could imagine other selection stories that
generate different types of bias. However, in general it is critical to consider changes in
household composition when evaluating response to changes in household income.

References
Ainsworth, M. (1996): “Economic Aspects of Child Fostering in Cote d'Ivoire,” in Research in
Population Economics, Volume 8, T. Paul Schultz editor. Greenwich, Ct: JAI Press,
1996.

23

Alderman, H. (1999): "Safety Nets and Income Transfers in South Africa." World Bank Africa
Region Discussion Paper 19335. February.
Becker, G. (1973): "A Theory of Marriage." Journal of Political Economy. 81: 813-846.
Benjamin, D. (1992): “Household Composition, Labor Markets, and Labor Demand: Testing
for Separation in Agricultural Household Models,” Econometrica, 60(2), 287-322.
Benjamin, D., Brandt L., and Fan J. Z. (2003): "Ceaseless Toil? Health and Labour Supply
of the Elderly in Rural China," University of Toronto Manuscript.
Bertrand, M., S. Mullainathan, and D. Miller (2003): “Public Policy and Extended Families:
Evidence from Pensions in South Africa.” World Bank Economic Review, 17(1), 27-50.
Bishop, J (1980): "Jobs, Cash Transfers, and Marital Instability," Journal of Human Resources,
14, 301-34.
Borsch-Supan, A. (1989): “A Dynamic Analysis of Household Dissolution and Living
Arrangement Transitions by Elderly Americans.” NBER Working Paper #2808. January.
Borsch-Supan, A., D. McFadden, and R. Schnabel (1993): “Living Arrangements: Health and
Wealth Effects.” NBER Working Paper #4398. July 1993.
Butcher, K. (1993): “Household Size, Changes in Household Size, and Household Responses to
Economic Conditions: Evidence from the Cote d’Ivoire,” Three Essays in Household
Size, Resource Allocation, and Migration, Princeton University Ph.D. Dissertation, 1993.
Cameron, L., (2000): "The residency decision of elderly Indonesians: A nested logit analysis."
Demography, 37(1), 17-27.
Cameron, L. and Cobb-Clark, D. (2001): "Old-Age Support in Developing Countries: Labor
Supply, Intergenerational Transfers, and Living Arrangements." University of Melbourne
Manuscript.
Carvalho Filho, I. E. (2000): “Elderly Women and Their Living Arrangements in Brazil,” MIT
Manuscript.
Case, A. (2001): “Does Money Protect Health Status? Evidence from South African Pensions.”
Princeton Manuscript.
Case, A. and A. Deaton (1998): “Large Cash Transfers to the Elderly in South Africa.”
Economic Journal, 108(September): 1330-1361.
Costa, D. (1997): “Displacing the Family: Union Army Pensions and Elderly Living
Arrangements,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 1269-1292.
Costa, D. (1999): “A House of Her Own: Old Age Assistance and the Living Arrangements of
Older Nonmarried Women,” Journal of Public Economics, April, 72(1), 39-59.
DaVanzo, J. and A. Chan (1994): “Living Arrangements of Older Malaysians: Who Coresides
with their Adult Children,” Demography, 31(1), 95-113.
Duflo, E (2003): “Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old Age Pensions and Intra-Household
Allocation in South Africa.” World Bank Economic Review, 17(1), 1-25.
Edmonds, E. (2002): " Reconsidering the Labeling Effect for Child Benefits: Evidence from a
Transition Economy," Economics Letters 76(3), August 2002, 303-309
24

Edmonds, E. (2003): “The Response of Child Labor Supply to Anticipated Income” Dartmouth
College Manuscript.
Englehardt G., J. Gruber, and C. Perry (2002): “Social Security and Elderly Living
Arrangements,” NBER Working Paper #8911, April.
Foster, A. (1993): "Household Partition in Rural Bangladesh." Population Studies. 47 (1993).
97-114.
Foster, A. (1999): “Altruism, Household Coresidence and Women’s Health Investment in
Bangladesh,” Brown University Manuscript.
Foster, A. and Rosenzweig M. (2001): "Household Division and Rural Economic Growth."
Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Frankenberg, E., Smith, J., and Thomas D. (2003): "Economic Shocks, Wealth, and
Welfare," Journal of Human Resources.
Grimard, F. (2000): "Rural Labor Markets, Household Composition, and Rainfall in Cote
d'Ivoire." Review of Development Economics 4(1). 70-86.
Hoerger, T., G. Picone, and F. Sloan (1996): “Public Subsidies, Private Provisions of Care and
Living Arrangements of the Elderly.” Review of Economics and Statistics. 428-440.
Jensen, R. (2004): “Do private transfers `displace' the benefits of public transfers? Evidence
from South Africa” Journal of Public Economics 88(1), 89-112.
Kinsella, K. and V. A. Velkoff: (2001): An Aging World: 2001, U.S. Census Bureau, Series
P95/01-1. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
Lucas, R. E. B. and O. Stark (1985): "Motivations to Remit: Evidence from Botswana."
Journal of Political Economy. 93(1). 901-918.
Lund, F. (1993): “State Social Benefits in South Africa.” International Social Security Review
46(1) pp. 5-25.
Lundberg, S. and Pollak R. (1993): "Separate Spheres Bargaining and the Marriage Market."
Journal of Political Economy. 101(2). 988-1010.
Lundberg, S., R. Pollak, and T. Wales (1997): "Do husbands and wives pool their resources?
Evidence from the UK Child Benefit," Journal of Human Resources, 32(3), 463-80.
McGarry, K. and R. Schoeni (2000): “Social Security, Economic Growth, and the Rise in
Independence of Elderly Widows in the 20th Century,” Demography, 37(2), 221-236.
Michael, R., V. Fuchs, and S. Scott (1980): “Changes in the Propensity to Live Alone: 19501976,” Demography, 17(1), 39-56.
Moultrie, T. A., and I. M. Timaeus (2002): "Trends in South African fertility between 1970
and 1998," Technical Report, Medical Research Council, South Africa.
www.mrc.ac.za/bod/trends.pdf.
Pollak, R. (1994): "For better or worse: The roles of power in models of distribution within
marriage," American Economic Review, 84(2), 148-52.
Porter, J. (2000): “Semiparametric Estimation of Regression Discontinuity Models,” Harvard
University Manuscript. November 2000.
25

Rosenzweig, M. R. (1988): “Risk, Implicit Contracts, and the Family in Rural Areas of LowIncome Countries,” The Economic Journal, 98(393), 1148-1170.
Rosenzweig, M. and O. Stark (1989): "Consumption Smoothing, Migration, and Marriage:
Evidence from Rural India." Journal of Political Economy. 97. 905-926.
Statistics South Africa (No date (a)): "The Count And How It Was Done." (Census, Census
'96, Methodology Reports and Meta-Data)
Statistics South Africa (No date (b)): "Sample (5a)." http://www.statssa.gov.za/ (Census,
Census '96, Methodology Reports and Meta-Data)
Statistics South Africa (No date (c)): "Definitions." http://www.statssa.gov.za/ (Census, Census
'96, Methodology Reports and Meta-Data)
Strauss, J. and D. Thomas (1995): "Human Resources: Empirical Modeling of Household and
Family Decisions." in Handbook of Development Economics IIIA, J. Behrman and T. N.
Srinivasan, eds. Elsevier: Amsterdam, 1883-2023.
Thomas, D. (1990): "Intra-household Resource Allocation, An Inferential Approach," Journal
of Human Resources, 25(4), 635-664.
Thomas, D. (1994): “Like Father, Like Son; Like Mother, Like Daughter: Parental Resources
and Child Height,” Journal of Human Resources, 29(4), 950-988.
Thomas, D., E. Frankenberg, K. Beegle, and G. Teruel (1999): "Household budgets,
household composition, and the crisis in Indonesia: Evidence from longitudinal
household survey data." UCLA Manuscript.
Thomas, D. and Rubalcava, L. (2000): "Family Bargaining and Welfare," UCLA Manuscript.
Van der Berg, S. (2001): “Issues in South African Social Security.” Stellenbosch Economic
Working Paper, University of Stellenbosch Department of Economics. Reprint of World
Bank Manuscript (May 1994).
Wolf, D. and B. Soldo (1988): “Household Composition Choices of Older Unmarried Women,”
Demography, 25(3), 387-403.
Appendix A: Formal Retirement and the Pension Eligibility of Women
Perhaps the most important identifying assumption of our methodology is the following:
in the absence of the pension, family composition would change only smoothly (with respect to
age) at age 60 for women. This assumption would be violated, for example, if other institutional
features in the South African economy induced changes in family composition at these ages.
One such institution would be incentives in the formal work sector that induce retirement at age
60 for women. If these institutions are prevalent, we will confound the impacts of the pension
with the impacts of these other institutions.
We are unable to look directly at retirement patterns at the eligibility ages because the
pension itself is likely to induce retirement. For example, the pension income may enable an
elder female to stop working. This in turn may change her preferences for family composition.
This type of retirement effect is not an identification problem for this paper – indeed, this is part

26

of what we hope to capture. Instead, we are concerned about the possibility that, in the absence
of the pension, retirement would largely occur at pension ages.
We cannot test directly for this in our data because of the above-mentioned direct effects
of the pension on elderly retirement. However, several points suggest that in practice the
problem is minor for women pensioners. First, most black South Africans are not engaged in
formal employment that would have a fixed retirement age. This is especially true for women,
most of whom report no income prior to receiving the pension (Panel A of figure 1). Second,
most black South Africans are sufficiently poor that they do not have the luxury of terminating
employment at a specified age (in the absence of the pension). This has been found consistently
in other low income countries (e.g. Cameron and Cobb-Clark 2001, Benjamin, Brandt, and Fan
2003). Typically, poor health and other problems associated with aging force the elderly out of
employment, but there is no reason why we should expect health shocks for women at 60 versus
59 or 61.
In order to examine the extent of formal retirement issues, we compare the retirement
patterns of elder women who are likely affected by formal retirement to those that are not. First,
we classify workers into two groups: those we think are very unlikely to have formal retirement
incentives (workers in agriculture, fisheries, or what the South African Census classifies as
"elementary occupations21.") We then compare these workers' retirement patterns around the
ages of pension eligibility against those in the other industries which are more likely to be
formal. We hypothesize that formal retirement should only affect individuals engaged in formal
work, while both formal and informal workers should experience the retirement induced by the
pension program. Thus, we use the change in work that we observe in the informal sector as a
baseline to compare to the change in work that we observe in the formal sector where formal
retirement is more likely. If the pension affects formal and informal workers similarly, then any
extra change that we observe in the formal sector could be attributed to formal retirement.
In the our sample, 12.6 percent of black women aged 59 are working in what we have
defined as informal work and are hence unlikely to face formal retirement (only 19 percent of
black women are working at age 59, so 66 percent of these participate in informal work). The
fraction of women in informal work declines to 6.7 percent of the population by age 61. This
represents a relative decrease of 47 percent. For women who are working in occupations
potentially subject to formal retirement, we observe a drop from 6.5 percent of the population
aged 59 to 3.9 percent of the population aged 61, a relative decrease of 40 percent. Thus, formal
retirement is not likely to be a serious complication in our results when women become pension
eligible, because we observe similar declines in employment in both formal and informal groups.
Our calculations for men at pension eligibility were less encouraging, and thus we restrict our
attention in this paper to the pension eligibility of women.
Appendix B: Regression Discontinuity Results for all Age-Sex Groups

21

Three subcategories of elementary occupations are listed in the Census documentation: Sales and services
elementary occupations; Agricultural, fishery and related labourers; and Labourers in mining, construction,
manufacturing, and transport. However, we reclassify anyone in this category who also reports their industry as
mining as engaged in possibly formal work.

27

We examine changes in household composition by looking at changes in the presence of
females and males in age groupings 0 to 5, 6 to 11, 12 to 17, 18 to 23, 24 to 29, 30 to 39 and 40
to 49. To present this information succinctly, we change our presentation slightly. We create a
set of gender - age group counts and run a series of regressions (still using Porter’s methodology)
to estimate the change in that gender - age group count associated with female pension
eligibility. For example, we estimate the impact of women’s pension eligibility on the number of
girls 0-5 in the household. Then, we estimate the impact of eligibility on the number of girls 611 and so on through age group 40-49. We repeat this process to estimate the impact of pension
eligibility for the same age groups for males.
The by age group changes in the number of females associated with the pension
eligibility of a woman are in figure 7. The points labeled M indicate the estimated change in the
number of men for each group, and the points labeled F indicate the estimated changes in
women. Each point in the figure represents an estimate of α in (2) from one regression. Thus,
the point (X,Y) has the interpretation of “the number of X-year old females in the household
increases by Y as a woman becomes pension eligible.” 95 percent confidence intervals for the
estimated change in the number of co-resident persons in each group are also pictured in figure
7.
To aid interpretation, we present these results in slightly different form in Figure 8. Since
the distribution of ages in the population is not perfectly uniform, the results would be easier to
interpret if expressed as percentage changes. Hence, in figure 8, we present confidence intervals
and point estimates for the semi-elasticities calculated by dividing the discontinuity estimate by
the mean number of individuals in a given gender - age group that are co-resident with elderly
women at the age of pension eligibility. Using the notation of (2), the y-axis in figure 8 is:

αˆ
mˆ ( AgeofPensionEligiblilty )

.

Thus, the semi-elasticities in figure 8 are based on the estimates of α pictured in figure 7 and the
corresponding estimates of mˆ ( AgeofPensionEligiblilty ) .
There are two main changes when women become pension eligible. First, the number of
0-5 year olds (the magnitude of the effect and the statistical significance is greater for boys than
girls) and 18-23 year olds (both sexes) increase.22 As noted in the text, the rise in 18-23 year old
women and 0-5 year olds is likely to be related. It is possible that the increase in young men is
also related to the increase in young women, in that they may be partners. Second, the number
of women 30-39 and of men 40-49 decrease.
Appendix C: Regression Discontinuity Results for Non-movers
Our primary results identify the impact of pension eligibility on the household
composition of elder women. However, we are unable to determine directly if these changes are
due to family members moving in with (or away from) the elderly, or if the elderly themselves
22

The statistical significance of the results for men 18-23 is not robust to using the bootstrapped standard errors
discussed in footnote 11.

28

are changing location. One way we can shed light on this issue is to examine changes in the
household composition for the elderly who do not move.
To study whether our results hold true for the non-migratory elderly, we re-estimate
selected models conditioning on those elderly who live in rural settings and who do not report
moving within the past seven years. This selection drops approximately one half of the
observations used in the text. Results from estimating our main models on this sample are in
table 4.
When we consider the household composition results, we find that they are robust to
conditioning on rural non-movers. Again, total household size does not seem to change, nor
does the propensity to live independently. Pension eligibility is also associated with large
increases in the number of children 0-5 and women 18-23, and decreases in the number of
women 30-39. Overall, the migration of the elderly does not appear to be the driving force
behind our results. Instead, the observed changes in household composition appear to reflect
movements around the elderly rather than movements of the elderly.

29

Table 1:
Household Characteristics
Variable
# Individuals - unweighted
Age
Household size
# kids 0-5 in HH
# women 18-23 in HH
# men 18-23 in HH
# women 30-39 in HH
# men 30-39 in HH

Women aged 50-59 Women aged 60-69
74,211

63,084

54.3

64.1

(2.8)

(2.8)

5.74

5.90

(3.18)

(3.31)

0.74

0.82

(1.02)

(1.08)

0.41

0.34

(0.65)

(0.61)

0.35

0.29

(0.61)

(0.57)

0.22

0.30

(0.49)

(0.56)

0.19

0.25

(0.46)

(0.52)

Standard deviations in parentheses. All means are weighted to be representative of the black
headed population of households in South Africa. All data are from the 1996 population
census, black women living in black headed households.

Table 2: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of the Effect of Pensions on
Independent Living
Variable
Household size
Lives Alone
Lives alone or with spouse only

Effect
0.085
(1.51)
-0.002
(0.44)
0.005
(0.99)

[mean]
[5.82]
[0.05]
[0.08]

T-statistics in parentheses. RD estimates of treatment effects estimate the jump in household size
associated with turning 60 for women. RD methodology based on Porter (2000), as discussed in
text. Conditional mean at treatment age of LHS variable in brackets. Data are from the 1996
census, black individuals living in black headed households. Estimates are based on 10% census
samples, with 53,834 observations having nonzero weight in estimation of treatment effect.

30

Table 3: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of the Effect of Pensions on
Household Composition
Variable
# kids 0-5

Effect
0.051

[mean]
[0.78]

(2.80)
# women 18-23

0.041

[0.35]

(3.75)
# women 30-39

-0.038

[0.31]

Births in HH in past year

(4.03)
-0.006

[0.09]

(0.83)
T-statistics in parentheses. RD estimates of treatment effects estimate the jump in household size
associated with turning 60 for women. RD methodology based on Porter (2000), as discussed in
text. Conditional mean at treatment age of LHS variable in brackets. Data are from the 1996
census, black individuals living in black headed households. Estimates are based 10% census
samples, with 53,834 observations having nonzero weight in estimation of treatment effect.

Table 4: Regression Discontinuity Estimates for Non-migrant Women Pensioners
Conditioning on not moving within 7 years and living in Rural area
Variable
Household size
Lives alone
Lives alone or with spouse
# kids 0-5
# women 18-23
# women 30-39

Effect
0.003
(0.05)
-0.001
(0.13)
0.006
(1.09)
0.069
(2.62)
0.034
(2.82)
-0.034
(2.90)

[mean]
[6.09]
[0.04]
[0.06]
[0.89]
[0.37]
[0.26]

T-statistics in parentheses. RD estimates of treatment effects estimate the jump in household size associated with
turning 60 for women. RD methodology based on Porter (2000), as discussed in text. Conditional mean at treatment
age of LHS variable in brackets. Data are from the 1996 census, black individuals living in black headed households.
Estimates are based on 10% census samples, with 35,496 observations having nonzero weight in estimation of treatment
effect.

31

.6
.5
.4
.3

Probability that Income = 0

.2
.1
50

55

60

65

70

Age of Woman
Estimate of Discontinuity (alpha) = -0.125, T-statistic = 15.27

.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3

Prob. Income is at or above Pension Benefit

Panel A
Probability that an individual reports no personal income

50

55

60

65

70

Age of Woman
Estimate of Discontinuity (alpha) = 0.120, T-statistic = 14.50

Panel B
Probability that income is at least 200 Rand per month
Figure 1
Income and Pension Eligibility, Census Means and Regression Discontinuity Results

32

6
5.9
5.8
5.7

Household Size

5.6
5.5
50

55

60

65

70

Age of Woman
Estimate of Discontinuity (alpha) = 0.085, T-statistic = 1.51

.1
.08
.06

Prob. Lives Alone or with Spouse

.12

Figure 2
Household Size and Pension Eligibility, Census Means and Regression Discontinuity Results

50

55

60

65

70

Age of Woman
Estimate of Discontinuity (alpha) = 0.005, T-statistic = 0.99

Figure 3
The probability of living alone or only with spouse and Pension Eligibility, Census Means and
Regression Discontinuity Results

33

.85
.8
.75
.7

Number of Children Age 0-5

.65
50

55

60

65

70

Age of Woman
Estimate of Discontinuity (alpha) = 0.051, T-statistic = 2.80

.4
.35
.3
.25

Number of Young Women Age 18-23

.45

Figure 4
The number of resident children age 0-5 and pension eligibility, Census Means and Regression
Discontinuity Results

50

55

60

65

70

Age of Woman
Estimate of Discontinuity (alpha) = 0.041, T-statistic = 3.75

Figure 5
The number of resident women 18-23 and pension eligibility, Census Means and Regression
Discontinuity Results

34

.35
.3
.25
.2

Number of Women Age 30-39

.15
50

55

60

65

70

Age of Woman
Estimate of Discontinuity (alpha) = -0.038, T-statistic = 4.03

F*
M*
M*

F
F
F

M
M

F

M

M

F
M*

M-Male, F-Female

Change in # of Residents

-.06 -.05 -.04 -.03 -.02 -.01 0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06

Figure 6
The number of resident women 30-39 and pension eligibility, Census Means and Regression
Discontinuity Results

F*

0-5

6-11

12-17

18-23

24-29

30-39

40-49

Age Category
* Significant at 95%. 95% confidence intervals are pictured

Figure 7
Age-by-age changes in the number of resident females and males when a woman becomes
pension eligible at age 60, regression discontinuity results

35

.3

F

M

F

M
M

F

-.1

0

M-Male, F-Female

.1

.2

M*

F

M

F

-.2

F*
M*

-.3

Percentage Change in # of Residents

F*

M*

0-5

6-11

12-17

18-23

24-29

30-39

40-49

Age Category
* Significant at 95%. 95% confidence intervals are pictured

Figure 8
Age-by-age percentage changes in the number of resident females and males when a woman
becomes pension eligible at age 60, regression discontinuity results

36

