NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ROBUSTNESS OF PRODUCTIVITY ESTIMATES
Johannes Van Biesebroeck
Working Paper 10303
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10303
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2004

I would like to thank Mel Fuss, Robert Gagné, Marc Melitz, Ariel Pakes, Peter Reiss, Chad Syverson, Frank
Wolak, and participants at the NBER 2002 Summer Institute and SITE 2003 for comments. All remaining
errors are my own. Financial support from the Connaught Fund is gratefully acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by Johannes Van Biesebroeck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Robustness of Productivity Estimates
Johannes Van Biesebroeck
NBER Working Paper No. 10303
February 2004
JEL No. D24, C13, C14, C15, C43
ABSTRACT
Researchers interested in estimating productivity can choose from an array of methodologies, each
with its strengths and weaknesses. Many methodologies are not very robust to measurement error
in inputs. This is particularly troublesome, because fundamentally the objective of productivity
measurement is to identify output differences that cannot be explained by input differences. Two
other sources of error are misspecifications in the deterministic portion of the production technology
and erroneous assumptions on the evolution of unobserved productivity. Techniques to control for
the endogeneity of productivity in the firm's input choice decision risk exacerbating these problems.
I compare the robustness of five widely used techniques: (a) index numbers, (b) data envelopment
analysis, and three parametric methods: (c) instrumental variables estimation, (d) stochastic
frontiers, and (e) semiparametric estimation. The sensitivity of each method to a variety of
measurement and specification errors is evaluated using Monte Carlo simulations.
Johannes Van Biesebroeck
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
jovb@chass.utoronto.ca

1

Motivation

Accurate measurement is at the heart of productivity comparisons. Fundamentally, the
objective is to identify output differences that cannot be explained by input differences.
To perform this exercise, one needs to observe inputs and outputs accurately and control
for the input substitution that the production technology allows. Problems can arise from
misspecifications in the deterministic or stochastic portion of the production technology and
from measurement errors in the data.
Firms use different input combinations to produce one unit of output because their
technology differs, which I label productivity differences, or because they face different factor
price, which leads firms to pick different points on the production frontier.1 The extent to
which one input can be substituted for another is determined by the shape and position of
the production function—or any other representation of technology—and is naturally not
observable. Methodologies to estimate productivity differ by the mix of statistical techniques
and economic assumptions they employ to control for input substitution. Misspecifications
in the deterministic part of the production function or in the statistical model underlying the
evolution of unobserved productivity will have repercussions on the productivity estimates.
Mismeasurement can result, among other things, from unobserved quality or price
differences, aggregation problems, recall errors in surveys, or incompatibilities in reference
period for output and inputs. The effect on productivity estimates obviously depend on
the estimation method. For example, Griliches and Hausman (1986) argue that while firstdifferencing is useful to control for unobserved firm-specific effects, identification based on
thinner slices of the data are more vulnerable to measurement errors. Solutions exist for
dealing with well-defined forms of measurement error, but they are rarely used in practice.
One of the goals in this paper is to verify how sensitive different methods for productivity
measurement are to different forms of measurement error.
I evaluate the robustness to misspecification and measurement errors for five popular
1

Some authors have argued that some of the output shortfall relative to the best practice frontier is the
result of inefficiency. I still classify such shortfall as productivity differences, to remain consistent with a
profit maximizing model of the firm. Lower output might be caused by differences in production technology,
unmeasured inputs, or quality differences in outputs. See Stigler (1976) for a more elaborate motivation.

2

methodologies. The first two methods, index numbers and data envelopment analysis, are
very flexible in the specification of technology, but do not allow for unobservables, making
the effect of measurement error completely unpredictable. The three parametric methods
calculate productivity from an estimated production function. In the simplest linear regression model, measurement error in the dependent variable has no effect on the consistency of
least squares estimates, while errors in the independent variables biases coefficient estimates
downwards. For most production function estimators, the effects are not so straightforward,
because more complicated estimators are devised to deal with the simultaneity of productivity and input choice. Moreover, the principal interest is in the residual of the production
function, which is always affected. I evaluate the robustness of both productivity level and
growth estimates using simulated data.2
In the next section, I start with some background on productivity measurement and,
subsequently, I introduce the different methodologies. An attempt is made to present the
general idea of each methodology in a consistent framework and convey the distinctive features as briefly as possible. Links to the literature for more extensive information and
discussion are provided. Section 3 describes the data generation process, starting from the
input choices of a profit maximizing representative firm. For each set of assumptions on the
evolution of productivity that have been considered in the literature, I solve analytically or
numerically for the optimal investment policy. In Section 4, the sensitivity of the different
estimation methodologies to variations of three elements of the data generating process is
evaluated. First, different assumptions are used to model the unobserved productivity term.
Second, measurement error of varying size is added to output and inputs. Third, the returns
to scale of the production technology is varied. Lessons to take away from these exercises
are summarized at the end.
2

For a related study that uses manufacturing data from Colombia to compare the different methodologies,
see Van Biesebroeck (2003b).

3

2

Measuring Productivity

In plain English, one firm is more productive than another if it is able to produce the same
outputs with less inputs or if it produces more outputs from the same amount of inputs.
Similarly, a firm has experienced positive productivity growth if outputs have increased more
than inputs or inputs have decreased more than outputs. The comparison becomes more
interesting if one firm (or the same firm in one of the comparison periods) uses more of one
input, while the other relies more on a second input. In that case, it becomes necessary
to specify a transformation function that links inputs to outputs. Since a firm’s input
substitution possibilities are determined by the technology it employs, each productivity
measure is only defined with respect to that specific production technology.
Measuring productivity necessarily involves decomposing differences in the inputoutput combinations into shifts along a production frontier and shifts of the frontier itself.
In Figure 1, two production plans, P0 and P1 , are compared in input space and the frontier
is represented by the unit isoquant. Part of the difference, from P0 to 1, is a shift along
the frontier, exploiting the input substitution the technology allows. The remainder of the
difference, from 1 to P1 , is an actual shift of the frontier, which is counted as technical change
or productivity growth. In this example, an intuitive measure of P0 ’s productivity relative
to P1 is

0P1
.
01

If the shape of the unit isoquant in Figure 1 is not known, it can be estimated parametrically if one is willing to make functional form assumptions. Simultaneity of productivity
and input choice is the main econometric issue. I discuss three different estimators that
control for it in Section 2.3.
Another approach is to rely on index number theory, which is discussed in Section
2.2. If the first order conditions for input choices hold, the factor price ratio will equal the
slope of the input isoquant, which determines input substitution possibilities. Taking the
average of the ratio for both production plans that are compared, it is possible to control
for input differences without having to estimate anything. Figure 2 compares the same two
production plans as before. The reference production plan (P0 ) uses more labor (less capital)
which will be accounted for in proportion to the average labor share (capital share) in costs.

4

Figure 1: Decomposing shifts along the frontier from a shift of the frontier: parametrically

L

x P0
Unit isoquant

1

x
P1

K
A third, nonparametric approach, constructs a piece-wise linear isoquant to maximize
the productivity for P1 , without allowing any other plan to lie below the isoquant. The
relevant section of the isoquant, connecting P2 and P3 in Figure 3, implicitly defines relative
weights for labor and capital. Weights are chosen to maximize productivity for P1 , i.e. to
minimize its distance to the isoquant. When evaluating different production plans, different
weights are used, as discussed in Section 2.1.
Using each method, two production plans are compared, which can refer to two
different firms or to a single firm at two different points in time. Productivity measures
can be output- or input-based. Output-based measures provide an answer to the question:
“How much extra output does a firm produce, relative to another firm, conditional on its
(extra) input use?” Input-based measures ask “What is the minimum input requirement
for one firm to produce the same output as another firm?” Under constant returns to scale
both measures will coincide. Most applications limit themselves to a single output and only
calculate output-based measures and I’ll do likewise.3
3

In practice, most data sets only contain deflated sales or value added as single output aggregate, implying

5

Figure 2:
Decomposing shifts along the frontier from a shift of the frontier:
with index numbers

L

x P0

t1
t0

tmean

Unit isoquant 0

t0

tmean

x

Unit isoquant 1

P1

t1

K
A final restriction is to consider only Hicks-neutral productivity differences. These are
represented by a multiplicative term in the production function, Ait , which differs between
firms and time periods and affects all inputs identically:4
Qit

=

Ait F(it) (Xit ).

(1)

The deterministic portion of the technology is represented by the production function F (.).
If the technology is allowed to vary across observations—for the index number and DEA
methods—one has to be explicit which technology underlies the comparison, hence the (it)
subscript.
The productivity of firm i relative to firm j, both at time t, is given by log AAjtit . For
productivity level, multilateral comparisons are more common, using the average productivsome aggregation of products using prices within the firm.
4
Most studies use a Cobb-Douglas production function, which makes it impossible to identify the factorbias of technological change.

6

Figure 3: Decomposing shifts along the frontier from a shift of the frontier: nonparametrically

L
Unit isoquant

x P0
x P2
x P1
x P3
K
ity level for all plants in the denominator. In practice, log Ait − log At is most often used
for multilateral productivity comparisons, taking the average of the logarithm. For comparability purpose, I follow this practice. The productivity growth for firm i from t − 1 to t is
it
measured as log AAit−1
. Rearranging the production function as

log

Ait
Ajτ

= log

Qit
F (Xit )
− log
.
Qjτ
F (Xjτ )

(2)

illustrates that productivity is intrinsically a relative concept. The calculation of the last
term in (2)—the ratio of input aggregators—distinguishes the different methods.5
Three broad classes of methodologies are introduced in the following sections. They
are ordered by increasing sensitivity to specification error and decreasing vulnerability to
measurement error, at least that is the a priori expectation. The Monte Carlo simulations
will confirm or reject these priors and give an idea of the robustness of each method. Readers
familiar with the different methodologies might still find the expositions useful, as estimates
5

I dropped the technology subscripts for the input aggregators as different methods use different assumptions, see below.

7

from different literatures are presented in a unified framework.6

2.1

Data envelopment analysis (DEA)

The first approach to productivity measurement relies on nonparametric estimation techniques using linear programming. The basic method dates back to Farrell (1957) and it was
operationalized by Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978).7 No particular production function
is assumed. Instead, productivity equals the ratio of a linear combination of outputs over a
linear combination of inputs. Weights are chosen optimally for the unit under consideration,
with the restriction that the efficiency of all (other) observations cannot exceed 100% when
the same weights are applied to them. Observations that are not dominated are labeled 100%
efficient. Domination occurs when another firm, or a linear combination of other firms, uses
less of all inputs to produce the same outputs or produces more of all outputs using the same
inputs.
Figure 4 provides some intuition for the DEA methodology. It is drawn for a single
input and output, but the intuition is similar for higher dimensional problems as the inputs
and outputs are always aggregated linearly.8 P1 to P5 are production plans of different
firms. The solid line represents the frontier under variable returns to scale. It fits a piecewise linear frontier over the extreme points. Four of the five observations lie on the frontier
and are deemed 100% efficient. If the technology is restricted to constant returns to scale,
the frontier is forced to go through the origin and is extrapolated beyond observed data
points, resulting in the dashed line as production frontier. Only P2 is fully efficient in this
case. Imposing constant returns to scale adds a constraint to the problem, restricting the
weights and lowering the maximized objective value—the efficiency.
The distance of each unit to the frontier represents its (in)efficiency. In an input
orientation, efficiency is improved by reducing inputs: a horizontal projecting onto the fron6

On the measurement front, I abstract from a number of issues that researchers have dealt with. These
include, but are not limited to, the appropriateness of deflated sales as output measure if competition is
imperfect; value added versus gross output production functions; the aggregation of heterogeneous inputs
and outputs; variations in capacity utilization; and regulated firms.
7
More information on the method and applications can be found in Seiford and Thrall (1990).
8
Because weights to construct the input and output aggregate are chosen optimally for the observation
under consideration, the axes will be different for each comparison unit, with multiple inputs or outputs.

8

Figure 4: Nonparametric production frontiers

Q
X P4
X P3

X P2

input

output

X P5

X
P1

0
X

tier. In an output orientation, the projection is vertical, increasing output holding inputs
constant. Figure 4 makes clear that under variable returns both orientations yield different
results, as the frontier does not go through the origin and the slope of the segments the unit
gets projected onto might differ.
To obtain the efficiency measures, a linear programming problem is solved separately
for each observation. Input and output weights are chosen to maximize efficiency. The number of restrictions equals the number of observations, plus sign restrictions on the weights.
For unit 1, the problem amounts to
max
θ1 =
vl ,uk
subject to

PL

vl q1l + v ∗
k=1 uk x1k

l=1

PK

P
∗
l vl qil + v ≤ 1
P

i = 1...N

uk xik
vl , uk ≥ 0

l = 1...L, k = 1...K,

v∗ ≥ 0

(v ∗ = 0 for constant returns to scale),

k

(3)

i indexes firms, l outputs, and k inputs. The problem is linearized by multiplying both sides

9

of the restrictions by the denominator and normalizing the linear combination of inputs in
the denominator of the objective function to one.9 In practice, most applications solve the
dual problem, where θ1 is chosen directly.10 Setting the slack variable (v ∗ ) to zero enforces
constant returns to scale, which will result in a lower minimized value for θ1 .
The efficiency measures θi can be interpreted as the productivity difference between
unit i and the most productive unit: θi = AAi . To obtain a measure comparable to the
max
ones obtained with other methodologies, I define the relative productivity level as
log ADEA
− log A
i

DEA

= log θi −

N
1 X
log θi .
N i=1

(4)

Productivity growth is less often measured in the DEA framework. Including the different
firm-years as separate observations in the analysis, it is possible to calculate productivity
growth as
log ADEA
− log ADEA
it
it−1 = log θit − log θit−1 .

(5)

While these transformations are arbitrary, they do not change the ranking of firms, only the
absolute productivity levels and growth rates.
DEA has the advantage that it deals with many outputs in a consistent way and leaves
the underlying technology unspecified, even allowing it to vary across firms. No functional
form or behavioral assumptions are made. While there is no theoretical justification for
the linear aggregation, it is natural in an activities analysis framework. Each firm can be
considered a separate process that is combined with others to replicate the production plan of
the unit under investigation. On the other hand, the flexibility in weighting has drawbacks.
Each firm with the highest ratio for any output-input combination is 100% efficient, as it can
put maximum weight on these factors. Under variable returns to scale, each firm with the
lowest input or highest output level in absolute terms is also fully efficient. The method is
9

Without normalization, multiplying all weights by a multiplier does not change the problem in (3).
θ1 gives an input-based efficiency measure for firm 1. Interchanging the roles of inputs and output in (3)
and minimizing the objective function, gives the corresponding output-oriented programming problem. In
that case, efficiency is given by the inverse of the optimized objective value. The problem is similar to the
Malmquist index, see equation (7) later, but instead of assuming a translog input distance function, inputs
are aggregated linearly.
10

10

not stochastic, which makes it sensitive to outliers.11 Because each observation is compared
to all others, measurement error for a single firm can affect all productivity estimates.

2.2

Index numbers (IN)

The second approach to productivity measurement, index numbers, provides a theoretically
motivated aggregation method for inputs and outputs. It remains fairly agnostic on the shape
of the underlying production technology and allows some heterogeneity. Under a number of
assumptions, it is possible to calculate the last term in (2) from observables, without having
to specify or estimate the production function.
The first growth accounting exercise by Solow (1957) used the following total factor
productivity (TFP) growth formula:
log

Ait
Qit
Lit
sL +sL
= log
− ( it 2 it−1 ) log
− (1 −
Ait−1
Qit−1
Lit−1

L
sL
it +sit−1
) log
2

Kit
,
Kit−1

(6)

where sLit is the fraction of the wage bill in output or total cost. Diewert (1976) showed how
the ratio of two unknown functions evaluated at different points can be calculated exactly
with an index number without knowledge of the parameters. In particular, if the production
function is translog, the Törnqvist index number in equation (6) gives an exact expression for
the second term in (2). The comparison is valid for bilateral productivity level comparisons
between firms as well as for two time periods. With multiple outputs, the single output ratio
is simply replaced by a weighted sum of each log-output difference, using average revenue
shares as weights, similar as for inputs.
Subsequently, Caves et al. (1982a) extended (6) further, allowing for technical change
that is not Hicks-neutral and variable returns to scale in production. They also provided a
more general interpretation, starting from the Malmquist productivity index. For example,
the firm i input-based index is the ratio of two input distance functions, each evaluated at
11

More recently, stochastic DEA methods have been developed, but most application still use the deterministic variants.

11

a different production plan:12
Mi ≡

Di (q j , xj )
xj
i j
=
max
{δ
:
f
(q
,
) ≥ q1j }.
−1
i
i
i
δ
D (q , x )
δ

(7)

It measures how much to deflate firm j’s inputs for its production plan to lay on the transformation frontier of firm i. A firm j based index would use the technology embodied in
f j . An output-based productivity index would make the comparison by inflating or deflating output, keeping inputs constant. Under the same assumptions as before, the geometric
mean of firm i and firm j output-based indices, µO (xi , xj , qi , qj ), exactly equals the difference
between a Törnqvist output index and the corresponding input index with a scale factor to
account for non-constant returns to scale.13
log µO (xi , xj , qi , qj ) =

L
X

ril +rjl
2

log

l

K k k
K
qil X
xki X
si +sj
log
−
+
2
qjl
xkj
k
k

ski (1−i )+skj (1−j )
2

log

xki
xkj

(8)

rzl is the revenue share of output l and firm z, skz is the cost share of input k, and z are
the (local) returns to scale for firm z. In applications, the third term, the scale adjustment,
is usually omitted, reproducing equation (6). This amounts to lumping the effect of scale
economies with the productivity measure. For comparability with the other methodologies,
I do include the scale factor.14
Equation (8) can be used for productivity growth calculations by replacing the i and
j subscripts by t and t − 1. For productivity level, multilateral comparisons are generally
preferred, because Törnqvist indices are not transitive. Caves et al. (1982b) propose one
12

The transformation function f (q−1 , x) = q1 and the distance function D(q, x) = 0 are two alternative
ways to represent the technology. The latter measures the amount of input deflation (or inflation) needed
for a production plan to lay on the transformation function; by definition, Di (q i , xi ) = 1.
13
The input-based productivity index, µI (xi , xj , qi , qj ), differs only in the scale factor:
log µI (xi , xj , qi , qj )

=

L
X
l

... −

K
X
k

14

... +

L
X
r l (1/i −1)+r l (1/j −1)
i

j

2
l

log

qil
.
qjl

To implement the Törnqvist index number with variable returns to scale, I estimate the returns using
least squares. The labor share is calculated as percentage of revenue, as in the constant returns to scale case,
rather than as a percentage of total cost. Few real world applications calculate the price of capital needed
for the second approach.

12

where each firm is compared with a hypothetical firm—with average log output (log Q), labor
share (sL ), etc. For example, to compare firms i and j at time t, equation (8) becomes15
log

AIN
it
AIN
jt

= log

Qit
−  [s̃it (log Lit − log Lt ) − s̃jt (log Ljt − log Lt )]
Qjt

(9)

−  [(1 − s̃it )(log Kit − log K t ) − (1 − s̃it )(log Kjt − log K t )],
with s̃it =

L
sL
it +st
.
2

This can be used for multilateral comparisons, yields bilateral comparisons

that are transitive, and still allows for technology that is firm-specific.
The main advantages of the index number approach are the straightforward computations, the flexible specification of technology, and the ability to handle multiple outputs
and many inputs. The only separability assumption is between outputs and inputs, i.e. homotheticity. To some extent, firms can produce with different technologies, because only the
coefficients on the second order terms have to be equal for the two units compared. Technical change can be non-neutral and returns to scale can vary, although one needs to know
them to implement equation (8).16 The main disadvantages are the deterministic nature
and the necessary assumptions on firm behavior and market structure. It is impossible to
account for measurement errors or to deal with outliers, except for some ad hoc trimming
of the data. The formulas assume that firms maximize profits, are price takers on input and
output markets, and that the underlying technology can be characterized by translog output
or input distance functions.17 More sophisticated extensions exist for regulated firms, noncompetitive output markets, and temporary equilibrium, but they either involve estimating
some structural parameters or are more data intensive. Even the calculations under variable
returns to scale require data on the local returns to scale for each firm and on the price of
capital, which are not easily obtained.
15

Throughout, returns to scale are assumed to be equal for all observations.
If some conditions do not hold, the index number is not exact, but still a valid second-order approximation
to the productivity ratio. The Törnqvist index is just one possibility and different functional forms for the
underlying technologies require different index numbers. One of its attractions is that it rationalizes Solow’s
original TFP formula.
17
In the single-output case, only cost minimization is needed.
16

13

2.3

Parametric methods

The parametric methods assume that the input tradeoff and returns to scale are the same
for all observations. Functional form assumptions often yield more precise estimates at the
expense of concentrating all heterogeneity across firms in the productivity term.18 On the
plus side, the explicit stochastic framework is likely to make estimates less susceptible to
measurement error.
I follow most of the literature by using a Cobb-Douglas production function,
qit = α0 + αl lit + αk kit + ωit + it ,

(10)

in logarithms. ωit represents unobserved productivity differences, while it captures all other
sources of error. Productivity comparisons are straightforward as the input aggregator is
now assumed constant over time and across firms. Substituting (10) in (2) yields a simple
productivity comparison19
log

Ait
Qit
Lit
Kit
= ωit − ωjτ = log
− αl log
− αk log
− (it − jτ ).
Ajτ
Qjτ
Ljτ
Kjτ

(11)

While it is sometimes possible to subtract the errors from the deterministic part of the
production function, the last term is often ignored because E(it − jτ ) = 0. In such case,
the difference in random noise (ˆit − ˆjτ ) ends up in the productivity term on the left-hand
side.
Consistent estimation of the input parameters faces an endogeneity problem, first
discussed by Marschak and Andrews (1944).20 Firms choose inputs knowing their own level
of productivity, which is unobservable to the econometrician. A least squares regression
of output on inputs will give inconsistent estimates of the production function coefficients.
Three different techniques to overcome this problem are implemented. The most straightfor18

While it is possible to estimate production functions with random coefficients, allowing technology to
differ between firms, this approach has not been fruitful, see Mairesse and Griliches (1990) for a discussion.
Ait
Ait
19
Depending on one’s taste one can look at log( A
) as in Griliches and Mairesse (1998), at A
as in
jτ
jτ
A −A

Olley and Pakes (1996), or at itAjτ jτ as in Solow (1957).
20
Griliches and Mairesse (1998) decompose the error term further and show explicitly that the untransmitted stochastic component of inputs will also end up in , further complicating consistent estimation.

14

ward solution is to use instrumental variables that are uncorrelated with productivity. The
stochastic frontier literature makes explicit distributional assumptions about the unobserved
productivity factor and estimates the primitives of the distribution. Olley and Pakes (1996)
invert the investment function nonparametrically to obtain an expression for unobserved
productivity. I discuss each of the three approaches in turn.21

2.3.1

Instrumental variables estimation (GMM)

Using instrumental variables is the most straightforward solution to an endogeneity problem. In the context of production functions, researchers have largely been unsuccessful in
obtaining valid or strong instruments. One exception are demand shifters in geographically
differentiated industries, see for example Syverson (2001). Often, methods dictate estimating the production function in first difference form to control for unobserved fixed-effects,
but the results have generally been unsatisfactory, see for example Griliches and Mairesse
(1998). The coefficient on capital is estimated much lower than in the level equation and
returns to scale are often estimated implausibly low. This is what one might expect if inputs
and output are persistent over time and instruments are weak.
A general approach to estimate error component models was developed in Blundell
and Bond (1998) and applied to production functions in Blundell and Bond (2000). They
propose a new set of moment conditions with a more solid theoretical underpinning and
obtain more plausible results. The production function they estimate takes the form
qit = αt + αl lit + αk kit + (ωi + ωit + it )
|ρ| < 1

ωit = ρωit−1 + ηit
it , ηit ∼ i.i.d.
21

I only derive output-based productivity measures (AO ). For homogeneous production functions, there
is a simple one-to-one relationship with input-based productivity measures (AI ): log AO =  log AI . For
example, if firm l produces only 80% of the output of firm m using the same inputs, its output-based relative
AlO
productivity ( Am
) is 0.8 or in logarithms -0.22. If returns to scale () are increasing and equal to 1.5, this
O
corresponds to an input-based productivity of 0.86 or -0.15 in logarithms. The scale economies embodied in
the technology make it easier to replicate another unit’s performance by reducing inputs than by increasing
output.

15

The three errors in the production function are a firm specific fixed-effect ωi , an autoregressive component ωit with ηit an idiosyncratic productivity shock, and it is measurement
error. The equation includes year specific intercepts. The goal is to consistently estimate
the structural parameters of the model, αl , αk , αt , and ρ, when the number of time periods
is fixed. In its dynamic representation, the model becomes
qit = αl lit − ραl lit−1 + αk kit − ραk kit−1 + ρqit−1

(12)

+ (αt − ραt−1 ) + ωi (1 − ρ) + (ηit + it − ρit−1 ).
|
{z
} | {z } |
{z
}
εit
α∗
ω∗
t

i

All variables on the first line are observable; firm and year dummies will take care of the
first two terms on the second line. There is still a need for moment conditions to provide
instruments, because the inputs and lagged output will be correlated with the composite
error εit , through ηit .
Standard assumptions on the initial conditions,
E[li1 ηit ] = E[ki1 ηit ] = E[qi1 ηit ] = 0

t = 2, ..., T

E[li1 it ] = E[ki1 it ] = E[qi1 it ] = 0,

t = 2, ..., T

yield three times T − 3 moment conditions
E[lit−s ∆εit ] = 0,

E[kit−s ∆εit ] = 0,

E[qit−s ∆εit ] = 0,

with s ≥ 3.

(13)

These moment conditions allow the estimation of (12) in first-differenced form using at least
three times lagged inputs and output as instruments. Blundell and Bond (1998) illustrate
theoretically and with a practical application that these instruments can be weak. If one is
willing to make the additional assumptions that
E[∆lit ωi∗ ] = E[∆kit ωi∗ ] = 0
and

E[∆qi2 ωi∗ ] = 0

16

t = 2, ..., T
as initial condition,

one can derive two additional moment conditions
E[∆lit−2 (ωi∗ + εit )] = 0

and

E[∆kit−2 (ωi∗ + εit )] = 0.

(14)

Twice lagged first differences of inputs are valid instruments for the production function
(12) in levels. Further lagged differences can be shown to be redundant once the moment
conditions in (14) have been exploited.22
The GMM-SYS estimator combines both versions of the production function—in first
differences and levels—as a system with the appropriate set of instruments for each equation.
To calculate productivity, the estimated coefficients are substituted in (11), dropping the last
term. It is not possible to take out the random measurement error.23 This really amounts
to calculating
M1
log AGM
= ω̂i + ω̂it + ˆit .
it

(15)

Advantages of this method are the flexibility in generating instruments and the possibility of testing for overidentification. It allows for an autoregressive component to productivity, in addition to a fixed and an idiosyncratic component. The major disadvantage
is the need for a long panel. One needs at least four time periods to estimate the model
if there is measurement error. The number of overidentifying moment restrictions is equal
to the number of independent variables if cross-equation restrictions are enforced. At least
five years of data are needed to generate additional overidentifying moment conditions. If
instruments are weak, the method risks underestimating the coefficients.

2.3.2

Stochastic frontier estimation (SF)

The stochastic frontier literature uses assumptions on the distribution of the unobserved
productivity component to separate it from the deterministic part of the production function
22

Blundell and Bond (1998) show that joint stationarity of the inputs and output, conditional on common
year dummies, is sufficient, but not necessary for (14) to hold.
23
Taking the difference of the errors from the production function in levels and first differences gives an
estimate of ωi +ρ(ωit−1 +it−1 ). This is close to the OP2 productivity measure, introduced below, measuring
the firm’s own estimate of its productivity before shocks are realized.

17

and the random errors. The productivity term is modeled as a stochastic variable, drawn
from a known distribution with negative support. The method is credited to Aigner et al.
(1977) and Meeusen and van den Broeck (1977) who used respectively, the negative of an
exponential and half-normal distribution for unobserved productivity. Stevenson (1980)
introduced a truncated normal distribution that is more flexible on the location of the mode
of the distribution. Estimation is usually with maximum likelihood.
In the production function (10), the term ωit is weakly negative and interpreted as
the inefficiency of firm i at time t. The production plan of firm i is said to lie below the best
practice production frontier. An alternatively interpretation is that firm i produces according
to a production function which is shifted down by ωit with respect to best practice. The
shift is zero for the most efficient firm, producing at the frontier.
The original stochastic frontier models were developed to assess productivity in a
cross section of firms.24 The model was subsequently generalized for panel data in a number
of different ways. Battese and Coelli (1992) provide the most straightforward, but also the
most restrictive generalization, modeling the inefficiency term as
ωit

=

−e−η(t−T ) ωi ,

(16)

with ωi ∼ N + (γ, σ 2 ).
Relative productivity between firms, ωi , is time-invariant and comes from a truncated normal
distribution. To obtain the (in)efficiency at time t, it is multiplied by a factor that increases
(if η is positive) or decreases (if η is negative) deterministically over time. The ranking of
firms is unchanged over time and the inefficiency evolves identically for all firms.
If one observes firms only once, making strong assumptions is the only possibility
to separate the productivity component from the random error. Panel data contains more
information on each firm and allows identification under weaker assumptions. Schmidt and
Sickles (1984) propose to reinterpret the standard fixed-effects panel data estimator as a
stochastic frontier function. Normalized firm dummies give a direct estimate of ωi . The
problematic correlation between inputs and unobserved productivity has been ruled out by
24

The same holds for DEA, which is also called deterministic frontier analysis.

18

assumption. Cornwell et al. (1990) generalize the method by estimating a time-varying effect
that is still firm-specific. They adopt a quadratic specification and estimate three coefficients
per firm:
ωit = αi0 + αi1 t + αi2 t2 .

(17)

Firm-level productivity evolves deterministically over time, but the growth rate is not necessarily constant and it differs between firms.25
I estimate both panel data models. For the first stochastic frontier method it is
customary to calculate technical (in)efficiency as T Eit = E(eωit |ωit +it ), which is complicated
by the nonlinear transformation. To compare the results with the other methods, I only
need the expected logarithm of productivity. Because the best estimate of E(ωit |ω̂it + ˆit ) is
1
log ASF
= ω̂it + ˆit , if ωit is independent of it , I stick with the calculations in equation (11),
it

dropping the last term. For the second stochastic frontier estimator, productivity level and
growth can be calculated as
2
log ASF
− log At
it

SF 2

= (α̂i0 − α̂0 ) + (α̂i1 − α̂1 )t + (α̂i2 − α̂2 )t2

2
2
log ASF
− log ASF
it
it−1 = (α̂i1 − α̂i2 ) + 2α̂i2 t,

(19)
(20)

where the overlined variables denote the average over all firms active in year t.
An advantage of stochastic frontiers is their relative simplicity to implement. The
deterministic part of the production function can be generalized easily to allow more sophisticated specifications, e.g. to incorporate factor-bias in technological change. The two
variations I implement trade off flexibility in the characterization of productivity with estimation precision. Note that the second estimator uses many degrees of freedom and it is the
25

An intermediate model, introduced by Huang and Liu (1994), specifies
ωit

∗ ∗
= −(Zit δ + Zit
δ + νit ),

(18)

with νit drawn from a normal distribution, such that ωit is negative. The variables in Z are exogenous
determinants of efficiency and those in Z ∗ are interactions between input variables and variables in Z. The
model is called non-neutral because inefficiency varies by input use. Because the truncation depends on
variables that vary by firm, the inefficiency terms are still independently, but not identically distributed.

19

only estimator where consistency relies on asymptotics in the time dimension. One might
be uncomfortable with the identification coming solely from functional form assumptions,
which are especially restrictive in the first specification.

2.3.3

Semi-parametric estimation (OP)

The last method was introduced by Olley and Pakes (1996) to estimate productivity effects of
restructuring in the U.S. telecommunications equipment industry. They not only addressed
the simultaneity of inputs and unobserved productivity, but argue also that correlation of exit
from the sample with inputs leads to an additional sample selection bias. More specifically,
if low productivity firms tend to exit and the exit-threshold is decreasing in capital, selection
will bias the least squares estimate of the capital coefficient downwards.26
They propose a three step estimator, which relies on the theoretical model in Ericson
and Pakes (1995), to remedy both problems. Investment is a function of the state variables,
capital and productivity, and under weak conditions it is shown to be a monotonically
increasing function of productivity. The relationship can be inverted to express productivity
as an unknown function of capital and investment. Substituting that expression in the
production function (10) gives the estimating equation for the first step:
qit = α0 + αl lit + φt (iit , kit ) + 1it .

(21)

The function φt is approximated nonparametrically by a fourth order polynomial or a kernel
density. The inversion depends on the market structure and can be estimated as time-variant.
The first step produces estimates of α̂l and φ̂it , which are needed in subsequent steps.
The second step controls for the exit decision. The intuition is that exit is conditional
on the realization of productivity and the exit-threshold. Both are different, unknown functions of investment and capital. They are approximated nonparametrically and included on
the right-hand side of a probit regression for exit. Estimation of the second step produces
26

One mechanism that creates such dependency is a profit function that is increasing in capital. Firms
with more capital expect a higher future profitability for a given level of productivity and will support larger
drops in productivity before exiting the industry. An alternative mechanism that generates the same result
are imperfect capital markets, i.e. if a bankrupt firm incurs a loss proportional to the capital stock.

20

an estimate of the survival probability P̂it .
Finally, in the third step, only the capital coefficient is estimated. Details on identification are in Olley and Pakes (1996), but the intuition is straightforward. From the production function (10), one can write the conditional expectation of qit − αl lit as α0 + αk kit plus
the conditional expectation of productivity. Assuming that productivity evolves according
to a stochastic Markov process, the conditional expectation is a function of two variables:
productivity in the previous period and the exit threshold. This unknown relationship is
again approximated nonparametrically. The lagged value of productivity is obtained from
the first step results as φ̂it−1 − αk kit−1 . An expression for the exit-threshold is obtained from
the second step, by inverting the monotonically increasing relationship between the survival
probability and the exit threshold. The estimation equation for the third step is given by27
qit − α̂l lit = αk kit + ψ(φ̂it−1 − αk kit−1 , P̂it−1 ) + 2it .

(22)

Once the coefficients in the production function are estimated, it is possible to calculate productivity as in Olley and Pakes (1996) from (11), dropping the last term. It is also
possible to calculate a direct estimate of ω̂it , purged from random noise ˆit , as
log

2
AOP
it
= (φ̂it − α̂k kit ) − (φ̂jτ − α̂k kjτ ).
2
AOP
jτ

(23)

This measure can only be calculated for firms with positive investment, i.e. the firms included in the estimation procedure, while the calculations in equation (11) are also feasible
for firms with zero investment. The interpretations also differ between the two measures.
Productivity estimates calculated from (23) only capture the part of productivity known to
the firm at the time it chooses investment, not the subsequent innovation in productivity
that still contributes to output. This is fine for the parameter estimation, as only the known
27

The methodology is more general than this exposition makes appear. Fundamental is the idea to use
another decision by the firm to provide separate information on the unobserved productivity term. An
alternative implementation was proposed by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003), who invert the material input
demand instead of the investment equation. Van Biesebroeck (2003a) inverts an entirely different first order
condition; the decision how many workers to employ on each shift. Firms can produce the same output by
operating many shifts at a slower pace or running fewer shifts at higher speed, which requires more workers
per shift. This tradeoff is monotonic in the unobserved productivity of the installed capital stock.

21

part can lead to inconsistency. Productivity estimates calculated from (11), on the other
hand, capture the entire productivity term, known to the firm or not, and include random
measurement error.
The main advantage of this approach is the flexible characterization of productivity.
The only restrictive assumption is that productivity evolves according to a Markov process.
A potential weakness is the accuracy of the nonparametric approximations. The investment
and other functions to be inverted are likely to be very complicated mappings from states to
actions, since they have to hold for all firms regardless of their size or competitive position.
The accuracy of the method depends on the extent to which interactions of investment,
capital, and the survival probabilities capture variations in productivity.

3
3.1

Data Generation
A representative firm

The different methodologies are compared using simulated data, constructed from a representative firm model. Each of the methodologies presented earlier relies only on a subset
of the assumptions I use to generate the data. Because the assumptions are hardly ever
contradictory, no estimator is “wrong”, apart from the neglect of measurement error.
At the core of the data generating process is a firm that chooses labor input and
investment over time to maximize the net present value of profits, subject to a production
function and a capital accumulation equation:28
∞
max E X β t [Q − W L − g(I )]
Lt ,It
t
t
t t
t
t=0

subject to Qt = At Lαt l Ktαk

(24)

Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt + It .
Qt is the value of output, Wt the wage rate, and g(.) is a convex function capturing all
28

The exposition in this section benefited from Chapter 4 in Syverson (2001). The firm-subscript i on all
variables in (24) is omitted. All parameters are assumed constant across firms.

22

costs associated with investment, including adjustment costs and the cost of capital. The
nonlinearity in the cost of capital makes the factor shares differ from the production function
parameters in the short run. The firm observes all variables at time t, including its own
productivity level At . Current investment only becomes productive the next period.
The first order condition for labor input is
α A  1
l t 1−αl

Lt =

Wt

αk
1−αl

Kt

,

(25)

and the Euler equation for investment is
1
1−αl

g 0 (It ) = βαk αl

αl
1−α

1
1−α

h

αl +αk −1
1−αl

Et At+1 l Wt+1 l Kt+1

i

0
+ β(1 − δ)Et gt+1
(It+1 ).

(26)

With constant returns to scale, the capital-labor ratio can be solved explicitly as a function
of At and Wt from (25) and the capital stock is eliminated from (26). Further assuming
quadratic investment costs, g(I) = 2b I 2 , and forward substituting investment in (26) gives
the investment function as a function of current and future exogenous variables,
1
1−αl

βαk αl
It =
b

Et

∞
hX

1
1−α

−αl
1−α

i

l
l
[β(1 − δ)]τ At+1+τ
Wt+1+τ
.

(27)

τ =0

Adding rational expectations and assumptions on the evolution of exogenous variables, current investment can be expressed as a function of one state variable, current productivity, independent of the second state variable, the current capital stock. This only holds
for constant returns to scale and I relax it in Section 4.5. One possibility is to model wages
as a random walk and log-productivity as an autoregressive process. It makes investment a
complicated but deterministic function of the current productivity level and the parameters
of the model,
1
1−αl

βαk αl
It = f1 (At ) =
b

∞ h
X

iτ h

β(1 − δ)

τ =0

1
1−αl

At

τ
iρτ +1 h Y
s=0

23

e

s
1 σa ρ 2
(
)
2 1−αl

i

.

(28)

Summarizing all assumptions:
αl + αk = 1
gt (It ) =

b
2

Cobb-Douglas technology with constant returns to scale

It2

uniform investment and adjustment costs

Wt ∼ i.i.d. N (1, σw2 ) wages not propagated over time
at = ρat−1 + t

at = log At , |ρ| ≤ 1

t ∼ i.i.d. N (0, σa2 )

log productivity follows an AR(1) process.

Simulating the sample starts with drawing values for Wit and it for all time periods and starting values ai0 and Ki0 for each firm.29 Adding a set of parameters Γ =
[αl , αk , β, δ, b, σw , σa , ρ] one can generate a set of (endogenous) variables y = [Q, K, L, I] from
which productivity growth, log Âit −log Âit−1 , and relative productivity levels, log Âit −log Ât ,
can be estimated using each methodology. These estimates will be compared to the true productivity numbers, calculated directly from the Ait ’s in the data generating process.
I also add exit to the model. This is done in an admittedly ad hoc fashion, but theory
gives little guidance on this point, except that the exit threshold for productivity is likely to
depend positively on capital. Firms for which the sum of a normal i.i.d. term, the normalized
capital stock, and the normalized productivity level is below the eight percentile, exit the
industry. Firms do not take the potential future exit into account when they decide on
investment. Relaxing this assumption makes it impossible to solve the model analytically.30
The final catch is that researchers do not observe output and inputs accurately, but
with measurement error:
X̂ = X + ηx
ηx ∼

for X = Qit , Lit , Kit , (W L)it , Iit

(29)

i.i.d. N (0, σx ).

29

The capital series is initialized by drawing the initial capital stock from a Chi-squared distribution with
3 degrees of freedom. This distributions is chosen to mimic the empirical distribution of capital in the
Colombian data set, which is introduced later. The normality assumption on wages is convenient to obtain
an explicit functional form for investment, but it can lead to negative wages. Therefore, I normalize the
absolute level of the wage rate such that the average wage share in revenue matches the observed value for
Colombian firms.
30
In the Colombian sample, on average eight percent of the firms exit the industry each year. Capital and
productivity are normalized to have the same mean and variance (0,1) as the i.i.d. term.

24

dL) , and Iˆ . The output
The only variables a researcher observes are Q̂it , L̂it , K̂it , (W
it
it

error, ηy , can be interpreted as the usual random error appended to the production function.
Measurement error on inputs is not controlled for in any of the methodologies.
Four elements of the data generating process will be varied to perform different robustness checks; assumptions on (a) the evolution of productivity; (b) the size and incidence
of measurement error; (c) heterogeneity in adjustment cost or production technology; (d)
returns to scale. In some cases, this will lead to a different investment function than (28).
Varying the assumptions on the evolution of productivity, for example, will influence
a firm’s investment policy. The process described earlier already embodies a number of
interesting economic cases. The autoregressive component captures that productivity spills
over across periods, but only imperfectly. Decreasing the variance of  makes the process
more predictable. If ρ rises to unity, there is a plant-fixed productivity effect with random
noise. The investment function becomes a straightforward increasing function in the constant
component of the firm’s productivity level. If ρ decreases to zero, investment will vary less
with current productivity, because it does not predict future productivity anymore. A fixedeffect and autoregressive component can also be included jointly, as is done in the benchmark
case.31
Different assumptions on the investment cost function, in Section 4.4, will also lead to
different investment equations. Three possibilities are included. If all firms share the same b
parameter, the investment equation is given by f1 (Ait ) in equation (28). If part of the cost
of new investment varies between firms and over time, git (I) = rit I + 2b I 2 , the investment
equation will take the following form: Iit = −rit + β(1 − δ)E(rit+1 ) + f1 (Ait ). If the shock is
transitory, similar to the wage rate, the second term drops out. An autoregressive component
to the cost of capital will result in a smaller drop in investment for a given increase in the
cost of capital as Iit = −(1 − βρ(1 − δ))rit + f1 (Ait ). A permanently different adjustment cost
for different plants, gi (I) =

bi 2
I ,
2

gives a plant specific investment function, Iit =

b
f (Ait ).
bi 1

Finally, allowing nonconstant returns to scale, in Section 4.5, makes it impossible to
solve the investment function analytically as a function of exogenous variables. Because the
31

Incorporating a truncated distribution for productivity, as the stochastic frontier literature assumes, had
little impact on the results.

25

future capital stock is a function of current investment, equation (26) is a nonlinear function
of It and I need to resort to numerical methods to describe the dependency of investment
on productivity and the capital stock. Univariate bifurcation methods can be used to find
the investment that solves for φ[I] = 0 in
φ[I(At , Kt )] = bI(At , Kt ) − α1 Et [g1 (At+1 , Wt+1 ,
| {z }
Aρt et

= bI(At , Kt ) − α1
α2

Z

Z

W

Z




Kt+1 )] − α2 Et [I(At+1 ,
| {z }

(1−δ)Kt +I(At ,Kt )

| {z }
Aρt et

Kt+1 )]
| {z }

(1−δ)Kt +...

g1 (At , Kt , I(At , Kt ), , W )f ()f (W )ddW −

I(Aρt e , (1 − δ)Kt + I(At , Kt ))f ()d.

I rely on the Newton-Raphson algorithm. The two integrations are handled by Gaussian
quadrature, using five points of support. The remainder of the data simulation is unchanged
from the constant returns to scale case.

3.2

A reality check

To verify that the samples simulated with the previous data generating process resemble an
actual sample of firms, I compare some summary statistics with the equivalent statistics for
a sample of Colombian manufacturing firms. The data was taken from the Colombian census
of manufacturing; details are in Roberts (1996).32 I limit the sample to 256 textile firms over
a ten year period (1981-1991). For the simulated data, I draw 50 unbalanced samples of
200 firms over 10 years, similar to the samples used in the robustness exercises in the next
section, and report the average statistics. With the exit rule as described earlier, this yields
samples with 1433 observations.
Table 1 confirms that many features of a real sample of firms are replicated rather
well in the benchmark case. This assumes that productivity evolves according to an AR(1)
process, investment costs are uniform, all firms share the same constant returns to scale
32

I wish to thank Jim Tybout and Mark Roberts who graciously provided me with the data. I use data
from a developing country, because I do not have access to a representative sample of firms from a developed
country. Obtaining access to U.S. Census data, for example, is an arduous endeavor, while publicly available
data in Compustat only capture large firms. For productivity estimates using the Colombian data and the
same methodologies as in this paper, see Van Biesebroeck (2003b).

26

production technology, and a standard deviation of 0.5 for the measurement error is added
to all variables. The most important difference of the simulated versus the Colombian data
is the lower variation of investment and capital—but not the investment share in capital—
and the wage share. In the benchmark case, all heterogeneity between firms is introduced
through the wage rate, a fixed productivity term subject to i.i.d. shocks that decay rapidly,
and random measurement error. Adding heterogeneity in other parts of the model, in Section
4.4, provides a better fit with the real data. Heterogeneity in investment costs leads directly
to much higher standard deviations on investment and capital. Random coefficients in the
production technology makes the wage share statistics more similar to the Colombian ones,
almost by construction.33
Estimation of a Cobb-Douglas production function by OLS also produces similar
results for both samples. With the simulated data, the labor coefficient is overestimated
relative to its true value of 0.6, with a downward bias in the capital coefficient. This tendency will show up in the majority of the exercises later on, even with more sophisticated
estimation methods. Returns to scale are erroneously estimated to be increasing. Enforcing
constant returns to scale (results not reported) brings the labor coefficient down, closer to
its true value. The exit of relatively less productive firms from the sample leads to a positive
coefficient on the time trend, even though αt is zero in the data generating process. In the
Colombian data, many of the same tendencies seem to be at work. The labor coefficient is
surprisingly high, especially relative to the modest 0.62 average wage share, while the capital
coefficient is implausibly low. Some of the 6.1% productivity growth in the Colombian case
is likely to be attributable to selection.
[Table 1]
Table 2 illustrates that the partial correlation coefficients between all observable variables for the simulated data match the corresponding correlations for the Colombian sample
reasonably well. Output has the highest correlations with the other variables, while investment has the lowest, both in the simulated (top-right) and actual (bottom-left) samples.
33

A translog production function will also produce variation in the wage share, but the investment function
cannot be solved analytically in that case. Moreover, the added generality of flexible functional forms only
become really valuable if more than two inputs are included.

27

Correlations between output and inputs are large and positive and those with labor and
wages exceed that with capital.
For the results limited to a single year, to focus on the across firm correlation, the
similarity is at least as high. The correlation over time, in the bottom panel of Table 2, is
less well captured. Correlations between year-on-year growth rates of the different variables
are generally higher for the simulated data. The growth rates of output and investment
are especially more alike those of other variables. A likely reason is that the AR(1) process
dominates the fixed effect in modeling persistency of the unobserved productivity in the
benchmark case. Changes in variables, especially investment and output, will have a builtin persistence over time as firms respond gradually to productivity shocks. Increasing the
variance of the fixed effect or lowering the autoregressive coefficient or the variance of the
productivity shocks, in Section 4.2, will lower the correlation of the growth rates in the
simulated samples.
[Table 2]

4

Simulation Results

Using the simulated samples, productivity levels (T F Pit = log Ait − log At ) and growth rates
(T F P Git = log Ait − log Ait−1 ) are estimated using all the previously discussed methodologies. As a benchmark, productivity measures are also calculated using least squares estimates
of the production function parameters in equation (10). The table below summarizes the
superscripts and links to formulas for the different estimation methods.

4.1

The benchmark model

In this section, the different methodologies are compared using data generated from the
benchmark model; the same that was used to compare the simulated with the Colombian
data in the previous section. All firms share the same investment function and production
technology. All variables are observed with measurement error of equal variance. Productivity is the sum of two terms, a normally distributed fixed-effect (with standard deviation
28

superscript
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

method
Least squares estimation of VA on L and K (benchmark)
Törnqvist Index with correction for returns to scale
Data Envelopment Analysis
GMM-SYS estimation of equation (12)
Semiparametric, as in Olley and Pakes (1996)
Estimation as in OP1, productivity calculated differently
Stochastic frontier, as in Battese and Coelli (1992)
Stochastic frontier, with 3 sets of dummies per plant

(equation)
(11)
(9)
(4) and (5)
(15)
(11)
(23)
(16)
(19) and (20)

0.2) and a productivity innovation that evolves according to an AR(1) process (with ρ = 0.3
and standard deviation of the normally distributed shock of 0.5).
Different statistics can be used to evaluate the methodologies; the correlation between
the estimated and true underlying productivity levels and growth rates is one. For the level
comparisons, I calculate the Spearman rank-correlation statistics, to focus on the order of
firms, rather than the absolute size of the estimates, but results would be very similar for
partial correlation statistics. Correlations are calculated by year and then averaged over the
ten years in the sample. An alternative criterion to evaluate the results is the mean squared
error between the actual and estimated productivity factors:

MSE =

Nt X
T
1 X
(T F Pit − Td
F P it )2 ,
Nt T i=1 t=1

and similarly for productivity growth. If the absolute size of the estimates is off, even though
the relative position of firms in the productivity rankings are accurate, the MSE will tend to
be large. Outliers as well have more impact on the MSE than on the correlation statistics.
While the two previous measures allow a thorough comparison of the different methods, the correlations and MSE’s are not necessarily the type of information an applied
researcher would like to base his choice of method on. In another paper, Van Biesebroeck
(2003b), I revisit three standing productivity debates using the Colombian data. With the
simulated data, I can revisit one of those debates; whether aggregate productivity growth is
mainly driven by plant-level productivity growth, by compositional changes between plants,
or by (entry and) exit from the sample. The answer to this debate relies on both productivity
29

level and growth estimates. The decomposition results are in Table 4 and will be discussed
after the correlation and MSE results, for which the averages over fifty simulated samples
are in the first column of Table 3. The average input coefficient estimates, as well as the
sum of the MSE for each input coefficient, are also included.
In the benchmark case, the Olley-Pakes method estimates productivity levels most
accurately, especially if the random measurement error is taken out (OP2). The correlation between estimated and true productivity is highest and the MSE is lowest. The least
restrictive stochastic frontier estimator (SF2), with three sets of dummies per firm, comes
in second. Using the correlation criterion, the two estimators are very close, 0.76 for OP2
versus 0.70 for SF2. The MSE criterion accentuates the difference. It is almost twice as large
for SF2. Both the index numbers and data envelopment results are still very respectable.
The performance of the DEA method is notably better for the correlation criterion than
using MSE, which is not surprising as the efficiency measures had to be converted to log
productivity differences. Only the GMM and the first stochastic frontier (SF1) estimators
barely leave the naive least squares estimator behind, producing a correlation with true
productivity just exceeding 0.30. The difference between the best and worse estimators are
definitely not negligible.
[Table 3]
The different estimators are less accurate and produce relatively similar results for
productivity growth. The Olley-Pakes estimator is still preferred, but the index number
calculations are almost equally accurate. Most other methods are not far behind, with
the exception of the second stochastic frontier method. SF2 yields results that are hardly
correlated with the true productivity growth rates. On the other hand, the MSE is second
lowest, indicating that the size of the growth rates was captured relatively well. It turns out
that methods that estimate productivity levels very accurately are not necessarily equally
adapt at estimating productivity growth, and vice versa, e.g. the index numbers.34
The bottom two panels in Table 3 contain the coefficient estimates that drive the
34

The underlying DGP contains no built-in productivity growth, but in a sample of surviving firms average
productivity growth is positive because of selection.

30

productivity results. The true labor coefficient is 0.6 throughout and returns to scale are
constant. The least squares results have the predicted bias: the labor coefficient is overestimated and the reverse is true for the capital coefficient. Returns to scale are estimated
to be increasing, in most cases significantly so. The GMM and SF1 results hardly improve
on the OLS results. The upward bias in the labor coefficient is only slightly reduced; the
capital coefficient is estimated even lower, which goes in the wrong direction. The OP and
SF2 estimators produce labor coefficient estimates that are notably lower, but the capital
coefficient is now hardly different from zero anymore. The labor and capital shares that
are used in the index numbers—obtained without estimation, but scaled down in the TFP
calculations according to (8) as returns to scale are estimated to be increasing—turn out to
be closest to the truth. The average input weights used in the DEA are also closer to the
true input shares than any of the parametric estimates.35
The results for the decomposition of aggregate productivity growth (from year one
to year ten) are in Table 4.36 One can aggregate individual firms using shares in an input
aggregate (LαitL KitαK ), in the top panel, or using output shares, in the bottom panel. The
results are similar using both weights and I will only discuss the former. Aggregate productivity grew by 7.7% over ten years. The different methodologies produce a wide range of
estimates; the DEA, OP2 and OP1 methods come closest and the GMM and SF2 methods
are least accurate, at opposite extremes.
This aggregate growth is decomposed into the contribution of plants that survive over
ten years and those that exit from the sample. Less productive plants leaving the sample
adds 6.2% to aggregate productivity growth. This is almost the entire productivity advance,
not surprisingly, as there is no built-in productivity growth in the data generating process.
All methods get the sign right and the methods that predicted aggregate growth best, also
isolate the effect of exit most accurately: DEA, OP1 and OP2. Surviving plants contribute
only modestly to productivity growth. The SF2 results overestimate their contribution, while
the GMM estimator inexplicably finds a very strong negative effect.
35

The MSE statistics for IN and DEA sum over the fifty samples, using the average input coefficients.
While it is possible to use the observation-specific input shares and sum over 50×1433 observations, this
would not be comparable to the parametric results.
36
For the exact decomposition formula, I refer to Van Biesebroeck (2003b).

31

The contribution of surviving plants is further decomposed. Using initial input share
as weight on productivity growth for surviving plants reveals that, on average, productivity
growth at the plant-level was strongly negative, adding up to -21.7%. The range of estimates
is even more disparate and the DEA method, where plant-level growth rates are constructed
ad-hoc, is surprisingly the most accurate. Summing up changes in input shares, weighted
by initial productivity, indicates that less productive plants used an even larger share of
inputs by the end of the sample, lowering aggregate productivity by 21.1%. Similar to the
within component, the OLS and SF1 methods get it completely wrong. The GMM methods
is now most accurate, followed by DEA. The largest contribution to aggregate productivity
is made by co-movements in input shares and productivity. Plants improving productivity,
while at the same time increasing their input use, raise aggregate productivity by 44.4%.
For this to happen output growth has to outweigh input growth. OLS, GMM, and SF1 miss
this large positive effect completely and assign it a negative contribution. While a negative
correlation between input growth and productivity growth is intuitive, it is strongly at odds
with the data generating process. The DEA, SF2, and OP2 methods approach the actual
contribution most closely.
The GMM, SF1, and OLS methods predict an incorrect sign for many components
and estimate many magnitudes quite inaccurately. The OP1 and SF2 methods estimate
all signs correctly, but are not very successful in estimating the magnitudes of the different
contributions. The decomposition by the DEA and OP2 methods are clearly most reliable. Using output weights instead, these two methods tend to overestimate the different
contributions, but to a lesser extent than the other approaches.
[Table 4]

4.2

Different specifications for productivity

The results in subsequent columns of Table 3 are for variations in the specification of the
unobserved productivity term in the data generating process. The benchmark model in
column 1 contained three components that contributed to the persistency of productivity
over time, each of these is now studied in isolation. In the second column, only the AR(1) part
32

is maintained, while in the third column all productivity differences are constant over time.
In the fourth specification, the productivity shock is completely transitory, disappearing after
a single period. In each specification all variables are observed with the same measurement
error as before.
Looking across the different columns of Table 3, the results seem to be all over the
map. At the very least, this leads to one solid conclusion: no single method is the most
appropriate for every form of underlying productivity. No method has one of the three highest
correlations with true productivity in each of the four specification, not for productivity levels
nor for growth rates. At the same time, for each of the specifications considered, at least
one method manages to achieve a correlation of 0.73 or higher.
Still, the performance of different methods is not completely random. Overall, the
OP2 method has a high correlation for almost all specifications. It outperforms OP1 in most
cases, especially for productivity differences that are constant over time. The big exception
is the last column, where productivity is completely transitory. Here, OP1 is superior and
the difference is very large, as OP2 measures register hardly any positive correlation with
true productivity. Both methods rank at the top of the pack in most specifications, but the
inability of OP2 to pick up transitory shocks does not make either method clearly preferable
over the other.
The choice between the two stochastic frontier methods is more clear-cut. SF2, which
takes out the random measurement error, outperforms SF1 in productivity level estimations,
except for completely transitory productivity differences. The differences between the two in
the transitory case is much smaller than for the two Olley-Pakes variants, while the advantage
of SF2 is larger in the first three columns. SF2 is clearly preferable to estimate levels. For
productivity growth, on the other hand, the conclusion is reversed. Here, SF1 dominates SF2,
although neither ranks among the most attractive approaches. The surprising conclusion is
that SF2 is one of the best ways to estimate productivity levels, especially when there is
a fixed-effect, but it has the lowest correlation with productivity growth of all methods
considered.
The reverse is true for the index numbers. While lousy at estimating productivity levels, except when all productivity differences are transitory, they excel at estimating
33

productivity growth. Both findings are as expected. When there is no risk of confounding
random measurement error with structural productivity differences, they perform well. Their
widespread use in estimating productivity growth also seems justified.37 DEA is equally apt
at estimating productivity differences if they are completely transitory. Surprisingly, the
method seems relatively better at estimating growth rates than levels.
Finally, the OLS results are among the weakest of the bunch. There is some payoff
to more sophisticated approaches to estimate productivity. However, the payoff is marginal
or even negative for the GMM approach.
Looking across specifications, the nonparametric estimators, IN and DEA, have an
especially hard time coping with a permanent productivity component, where the stochastic
frontiers excel. The semiparametric estimators, OP1 and OP2, are best able to deal with
autoregressive components to productivity. If all productivity is transitory, methods that
take out random measurement error, OP2 and SF2, perform awfully, while the nonparametric
methods perform great. It is, of course, impossible to know how productivity evolves for
actual data, which makes the enormous differences between methods worrying. One could
prefer the index numbers to estimate productivity levels if differences are transitory, running
the risk of very inaccurate estimates if true productivity is relatively constant over time.
Similarly, a prior expectation of stable productivity differences might lead one to use OP2
or SF2, with the risk of missing the mark widely if real differences are transitory.
Glancing over the different coefficient estimates in the bottom panels, we find that the
upward bias in the labor coefficient depends negatively on the persistence of productivity over
time. If transitory shocks are important, the problem is especially pronounced. Even though
the correlation between productivity estimates is reasonably high, the input coefficients are
estimated surprisingly off-mark. The OLS estimator yields an average estimate for scale
economies ranging from 0.34 to 1.16 across specifications and most other estimators are not
much better. No standard errors are reported on these coefficient estimates, but they are
generally estimated very precisely. This is worrying as counterfactual simulations based on
37

It is worth noting that two of the preferred estimators are generally not implemented as I did here.
Studies using the semiparametric estimator have followed the original and used OP1. Studies calculating
productivity as an index number generally force returns to scale to be constant.

34

the production function depend directly on the point estimates of the input coefficients.
In sum, I believe it is fair to conclude that the OP2 estimator performs best if productivity is relatively persistent, with OP1 and SF2 also producing reliable estimates. In
the face of transitory productivity shocks, it is best abandon the parametric framework,
especially methods that attempt to take out measurement error, and stick with the index
numbers.

4.3

Varying the severity of measurement error

Next, I investigate the sensitivity to measurement error, assuming throughout that productivity evolves according to the benchmark specification, i.e. with an AR(1) component and
small fixed-effect. In all columns of Table 5, normally distributed measurement error with
equal variance is added to all observable variables. In successive columns, the standard deviation, σx in (29), is gradually increased from 0 to 1.25. For some methods, IN, DEA, and
SF2, this leads to a gradual decrease in the correlation between estimated and actual productivity levels, but this trend is by no means universal. For the OP1 and OP2 estimators,
the correlations decrease gradually with a sudden but isolated and inexplicable improvement
for one standard error. For the OLS and SF1 methods, the pattern of the correlations for
increasing measurement error is U-shaped. More measurement error leads initially to lower
correlations, but this bottoms out in the benchmark case and correlations increase for larger
measurement errors. The SF1 method even performs best with very high measurement error.
Finally, for the GMM estimator, the correlations start out very low, increase initially, but
decrease eventually when measurement error grows very large. Everything seems possible.
It is comforting to find that the parametric methods perform best when measurement
error gets very large, especially OP2 and SF2, which explicitly take out additive measurement
error. Note the remarkable resilience of SF2, having only 0.1 lower correlation even for an
enormous amount of measurement error. On the other hand, it is surprising to find that
many parametric methods give poor results when there is no or very low measurement error.
The explication for this can be found in the bottom panels. The much stronger correlation
between labor input and productivity in the absence of any measurement error leads to

35

very high labor coefficient estimates. The correction for endogenous input choices tends
to overcorrect. For example, the GMM and OP methods estimate the capital coefficient
close to or even above its true value of 0.4 without a corresponding decrease in the labor
coefficient estimate relative to OLS. More measurement error lowers the coefficient estimates,
but unfortunately this affects the capital as much as the labor coefficient.
The haphazard evolution of correlations with productivity level stands in marked
contrast with the uniformity of experience for productivity growth calculations. Here, correlations decrease monotonically, with as lone exception an isolated bump in correlation for
the GMM estimator for a standard error of 1.00. In every other case, more measurement
error translates into lower correlations and higher MSE. The rate of worsening is higher for
the productivity growth calculations than for levels, which makes sense as the measurement
error is i.i.d. and two time periods are involved in the growth calculations.
Even though the pattern is homogeneous, the methods are affected to a different
extent. The OP methods are affected most, dropping from the top two spots to number
three and seven. While they achieve an astounding correlation of 0.95 and 0.89 without
measurement error, these fall by at least three quarters when the errors get very large. It is
surprising to find that the OP2 method, which is supposed to take out measurement error, is
affected even more than OP1. At the other side of the spectrum, the SF2 method, which also
takes out measurement error, is hardly affected, not even for large errors, although it started
from a very low correlation. The robustness of this method is even more apparent using the
MSE criterion. It is noteworthy, as well, that the deterministic index number calculations
produce very robust productivity growth estimates. For small or moderate errors, only the
Olley-Pakes measures are preferred, while the index numbers have the highest correlations
with true productivity if measurement error gets very high. The SF1 and GMM methods
are also rather resilient in the face of measurement error. Their correlations drop for initial
increases in measurement error, but bottom out relatively fast.
[Table 5]
In the previous exercise, the size of measurement error was the same for all variables.
Given the considerable differences in standard error for the different variables in Table 1, this
36

is admittedly unrealistic. In Table 6, the benchmark comparison is repeated in column 1;
results for a standard deviation equal to one third of the standard deviation of the variables
in the Colombian data set are in column 2; measurement error with a standard deviation
of one third of the average standard deviation of the simulated variables without standard
error is added to each variable in column 3.
Most findings are robust to the assumption of uniform or varying size of measurement
error. In the productivity level calculations, the index method is most affected and the SF2
method least. The ranking of the different methods hardly depends on the assumption on
the relative size of measurement error added to different variables, even though it depended
crucially on the absolute size of measurement error in Table 4. For productivity growth, the
results for the OP1 and SF2 methods hardly change, while the index numbers are again most
affected. The index numbers are especially hard-hit when the error is proportional to the
variation in the underlying variable without measurement error, not surprising given that
the wage bill is one of the most volatile variables.
With measurement error proportional to the standard deviation of the underlying
variables, arguably the most natural assumption, the average correlation both for productivity levels and growth rates is reduced relative to the benchmark case with uniform errors.
The SF2 measures have the highest correlation with unobserved productivity levels and OP1
edges past OP2 for productivity growth estimates. Using the MSE criterion, the method of
choice would unambiguously be the OP2 method. The index numbers lose much of their appeal. The disparity in correlations comparing across methods remains virtually unchanged.
[Table 6]
Finally, Table 7 shows the impact of measurement error when only a single variable
is measured imprecisely. All variables but one are measured with tiny measurement error
(σx = 0.1), while each variable in turn is observed with a lot of noise, adding measurement
error with a standard deviation of 0.75.
Adding noise to output, in column 2, cuts the level correlations approximately in
half relative to the low measurement error case, in column 1. This masks large differences.
The OP2 estimator is not affected in the least; it even increases its correlation with true
37

productivity. All other parametric estimators turn out to be particularly vulnerable. Only
the deterministic approaches, IN and DEA, post correlations that are at least half the correlations in the low measurement error case. Results for productivity growth are almost
identical. The only parametric method that holds its ground is OP2, while the deterministic
approaches become relatively more attractive. The correction for measurement error in the
semiparametric methodology works remarkably well. The coefficient estimates of the OP
estimator are by no means better than for the other methods, which is also reflected in the
poor performance of OP1.
When the capital stock is the most mismeasured variable, results are very different.
Most methods are much less affected, not surprisingly given that the capital coefficient
is relatively small and estimated even smaller. More surprisingly, the Olley-Pakes results
improve substantially and the GMM method improves enormously. Both estimators rely
on lags for the identification of the capital parameter. The capital coefficient is estimated
near zero for all methods, but this tends to be less damaging for productivity estimates
than the overestimation of returns to scale, which is ubiquitous with low measurement error.
Productivity growth estimates only suffer noticeably from imprecisely observed capital if one
uses the OLS or SF1 methodology. In a sense, these results are reassuring, as capital is often
the variable most suspect to be measured with error.
All parametric methods estimate productivity levels and growth rates more accurately
if labor is measured with error. It tends to reduce the positive bias in the labor coefficient
estimate. Only the index numbers are extremely sensitive to imprecisely measured labor
input. Measurement error in the wage bill only affects the index number calculations, but
here it tends to raise the correlations slightly. It lowers the wage share in output, but given
that the estimated returns to scale are unaffected (estimated by OLS), it increases the capital
share. The net effect is to lower the MSE of the coefficient estimates, which in turn leads to
lower MSE and higher correlations for productivity level and growth.
Obviously, measurement error in investment only affects the Olley-Pakes results. The
impact is relatively large, lowering the level and growth correlations by a third for OP1 and
by more than half for OP2. Given that investment is more likely to be measured with error
than output, labor, or wages, this finding should not be discarded too easily.
38

[Table 7]

4.4

Allowing for plant heterogeneity

Thus far, the data generating process was identical for all firms, assuming the same production technology and investment cost function. The only structural sources of variation were
the random wages and productivity shocks. Adding random measurement error, we were
able to match most of the volatility and correlation between observed variables with the
corresponding statistics of a real-world sample of firms. Heterogeneity across plants provides
an alternative to measurement error to make the simulated samples resemble actual data.
Several possibilities are explored.38
The first column in Table 8 repeats the benchmark results as comparison. In subsequent columns, more structural heterogeneity is introduced and the measurement errors are
omitted. The statistics in the second column are generated from a sample of plants that differ
in the adjustment cost of investment, the b coefficient in g(I); heterogeneity that is persistent over time. The third column introduces transitory firm heterogeneity in the investment
function instead. The cost of new capital is assumed to be i.i.d. distributed across firms
and over time, just like wages. The last three columns introduce heterogeneous production
functions, always persistent over time. In column 4, the labor coefficient varies with opposite
variation in the capital coefficient, keeping returns to scale constant. In column 5, on the
other hand, returns to scale vary freely, but the relative importance of labor and capital is
as before, 60% and 40%. Finally, in column 6, both input coefficients vary independently
across firms, leading to variable scale economies as well. In the latter two cases, I have to
resort to numerical solutions for the investment equation.
Most methods, even the Olley-Pakes estimators, deal well with heterogeneous investment costs. The correlations are almost uniformly higher than in the benchmark case for
homogeneous firms, for productivity levels as well as for growth rates. Often, they even
exceed the correlations in the no measurement error case, column 1 in Table 5. Persistent
38

E.g. adding a transitory shock to the price of capital in the investment cost function brings the standard
deviations of capital and investment much closer to the values for the Colombian data in Table 1.

39

heterogeneity is handled better than transitory. For productivity growth and transitory differences, the Olley-Pakes methods are affected most, even though they remain among the
most accurate ones. The coefficient estimates indicate that the higher estimate for the labor
coefficient is the main culprit. For an investment function with random variation across
firms that the method cannot pick up, the endogeneity adjustment does not work nearly as
well.
Heterogeneity in the labor coefficient improves the results for some and worsens them
for other methods, but most importantly, it reduced the differences.39 No method achieves
a Spearman rank correlation coefficient over 0.68, while the worst method still achieves a
correlation of 0.32. Excluding the stochastic frontier methods, which end up at the bottom
of the pack, all methods become virtually indistinguishable to estimate productivity levels
and only the index numbers have a less than 0.7 correlation for productivity growth. For
productivity growth, all correlations coefficients increase considerably, relative to the benchmark case where measurement error generated the variation. Surprisingly, the index number
is one of the most affected estimators, even though homogeneity in the technology is not even
assumed. Some of the deterioration is driven by the overestimate of average scale economies
by OLS. Enforcing constant returns to scale would certainly improve the estimates as 64%
of the weight is on labor, in line with previous results.
All methods, save for GMM, perform worse if returns to scale vary freely across plants.
The average correlation for productivity levels drops from 0.51 to 0.37. The GMM estimator
manages to estimate the capital coefficient accurately, with a lower labor coefficient than in
most specifications. Its improved correlation is even more apparent for productivity growth.
The results are similar whether the relative importance of both inputs are left free or not.
The nonparametric approaches, IN and DEA, are affected most in each of the last three
columns. This is unexpected as both estimators do not assume plants to be homogeneous
and we expected them to shine in this exercise. It severely lowers their attractiveness as
dealing with unobserved heterogeneity in the primitives should be their advantage. On the
other hand, these nonparametric methods were affected less by measurement error than most
parametric approaches, which is also counterintuitive.
39

The actual input coefficients in the bottom panel of Table 7 are the averages across plants.

40

[Table 8]
The results in Table 8 indicate that all methods have less problems with structural
sources of heterogeneity than with random measurement error. If we believe that most of the
variation in the data are random errors, there is little hope of estimating productivity well.
Deterministic methods were not even found to be disadvantaged in dealing with measurement
error. On the other hand, if the variation is driven by firms facing different factor prices,
investment functions, or production technologies, the prospects are better. It hardly matters
whether the methods explicitly allow for the heterogeneity or not. Most parametric methods
are not particularly affected by random variation in the production function parameters and
the semiparametric method deals adequately with different investment equations.

4.5

Varying returns to scale

The last robustness check on the estimation methodologies is to vary the scale economies
of the data generating process, keeping them the same for all plants, and to estimate productivity with constant returns enforced or not.40 In the odd columns of Table 9 returns to
scale are estimated freely, while the actual scale economies for the underlying data generating process are, respectively, decreasing, constant, and increasing. In the even columns,
constant returns to scale is enforced on the estimator, while the same three data generating
processes are considered. For the Olley-Pakes methodology, constant returns are enforced
by only estimating the first stage. For the other parametric methodologies, the production
function is estimated by regressing the logarithm of output per worker on the logarithm of
the capital-labor ratio. In each case, the capital coefficient is calculated as one minus the
estimated labor coefficient.
The most important finding in Table 9 is that, with the exception of SF2, the correlations for the productivity level are higher when constant returns to scale are enforced;
40

Ideally, I would like to investigate the impact of the functional form of the production function more
thoroughly, as was done with U.S. data in Berndt and Khaled (1979). Previous Monte Carlo studies, for
example Gagné and Ouellette (1998) and sources cited there, use exogenously generated inputs. In the
current framework, input choices consistent with the firm’s optimization problem could not even be solved
explicitly for the simplest of technologies (Cobb-Douglas) if scale economies are present. Incorporating more
flexible functional forms is left for future research.

41

irrespective of the data generating technology. Restricting returns to scale to unity is generally a good idea, independent of the actual scale economies. For some methods, e.g. the
Olley-Pakes and GMM estimators, the differences are quite large.
The estimated returns to scale are fairly independent of the data generating process
for all parametric methods. The labor coefficient is estimated only slightly higher if the data
is generated with larger scale economies, while the capital coefficient estimate even goes
down for some methods. While returns to scale are invariably overestimated if they are truly
decreasing, the estimates are much closer to the truth for increasing scale economies. The
average correlations for productivity levels are higher for higher underlying scale economies.
For productivity growth, the SF2 results are still more accurate if constant returns
are not enforced (even when they are really constant), but the same is now also true for
OLS, GMM, and SF1. Even when returns to scale are constant it is best not to enforce
this. Each of these methods estimate the capital coefficients extremely small, often even
negative.41 However, the IN and OP2 methods still show a marked increase in correlation if
returns to scale are fixed. As these are the two methods that have the highest correlations
and are probably most attractive to estimate productivity growth, allowing variable returns
to scale does not seem necessary.
Not a single method finds it optimal to allow for variable returns if the underlying
data is generated by a nonconstant returns to scale technology, and vice versa; fixing constant
returns to scale only when it is correct for the simulated data. The correlations, both for
productivity levels and growth, are relatively independent of the returns to scale in the data
generating process. They are more dependent on the scale assumptions used in estimation.
[Table 9]

41

The measurement error added to all variables for the exercises in Table 9 has a standard deviation of
only 0.1. In light of the results in Table 5, the results for the parametric methods might look differently if
larger measurement error were incorporated.

42

5

Lessons

I believe a number of findings from these exercises were unexpected:
• It does matter what method is used to estimate productivity. For different assumptions
on the evolution of productivity, an inherently unobservable phenomenon, different
methodologies are preferred.
• The Olley-Pakes estimator is remarkably robust to a number of complications. The
OP2 estimator performs especially well when a large part of productivity is nontransitory.
• Most parametric methods are not very sensitive to small amounts of measurement
error, but do not perform well if errors get large. Moreover, some random noise helps
them to avoid overcorrecting for the biases in the production coefficient estimates. The
deterministic methods, DEA and IN, do not seem at a disadvantage in dealing with
random measurement error.
• The same two nonparametric methods, DEA and IN, that do not assume homogeneity
across firms, are not more robust than parametric methods in coping with heterogeneity
in adjustment costs or production technology.
• Using the same returns to scale assumption in estimation as the one used to generate
the data (constant or not), is necessary nor sufficient for accurate results.

43

References
Aigner, D., C. K. Lovell, and P. Schmidt (1977). Formulation and Estimation of Stochastic
Frontier Production function Models. Journal of Econometrics 6, 21–37.
Battese, G. E. and T. J. Coelli (1992). Frontier Production Functions, Technical Efficiency
and Panel Data: With Application to Paddy Farmers in India. Journal of Productivity
Analysis 3, 153–69.
Berndt, E. R. and M. S. Khaled (1979). Parametric Productivity Measurement and Choice
among Flexible Functional Forms. Journal of Political Economy 87 (6), 1220–45.
Blundell, R. W. and S. R. Bond (1998). Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in
Dynamic Panel Data Models. Journal of Econometrics 87, 115–43.
Blundell, R. W. and S. R. Bond (2000). GMM Estimation with Persistent Panel Data:
An Application to Production Functions. Econometric Reviews 19 (3), 321–340.
Caves, D. W., L. R. Christensen, and E. W. Diewert (1982a). The Economic Theory of
Index Numbers and the Measurement of Input, Output, and Productivity. Econometrica 50 (6), 1393–1414.
Caves, D. W., L. R. Christensen, and E. W. Diewert (1982b). Multilateral Comparisons
of Output, Input, and Productivity using Superlative Index Numbers. Economic Journal 92, 73–86.
Charnes, A., W. W. Cooper, and E. Rhodes (1978). Measuring the Efficiency of Decision
Making Units. European Journal of Operational Research 2, 429–444.
Cornwell, C., P. Schmidt, and R. C. Sickles (1990). Productivity Frontiers with Crosssectional and Time Series Variation in Efficiency Levels. Journal of Econometrics 46,
185–200.
Diewert, W. E. (1976). Exact and Superlative Index Numbers. Journal of Econometrics 4,
115–145.
Ericson, R. and A. Pakes (1995, January). Markov Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for Empirical Work. Review of Economic Studies 62 (1), 53–85.
Farrell, M. J. (1957). The Measurement of Productive Efficiency. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society, Series A. 120, 253–290.
Gagné, R. and P. Ouellette (1998, January). On the Choice of Functional Forms: Summary
of a Monte Carlo Experiment. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 16 (1),
118–124.
Griliches, Z. and J. A. Hausman (1986, February). Errors in Variables in Panel Data.
Journal of Econometrics 31 (1), 93–118.
Griliches, Z. and J. Mairesse (1998). Production Functions: The Search for Identification.
In S. Strom (Ed.), Econometrics and Economic Theory in the Twentieth Century: The
Ragnar Frisch Centennial Symposium, pp. 169–203. Cambridge University Press.
Huang, C. J. and J.-T. Liu (1994, June). Estimation of a Non-neutral Stochastic Frontier
Production Function. Journal of Productivity Analysis 5 (2), 171–80.
44

Levinsohn, J. and A. Petrin (2003, April). Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs
to Control for Unobservables. Review of Economic Studies 70 (2), 317–342.
Mairesse, J. and Z. Griliches (1990). Heterogeneity in Panel Data: Are There Stable
Production Functions. In P. C. et al. (Ed.), Essays in Honor of Edmond Malinvaud,
Volume 3, pp. 125–147. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Marschak, J. and W. H. Andrews (1944). Random Simultaneous Equations and the Theory
of Production. Econometrica 12, 143–205.
Meeusen, W. and J. van den Broeck (1977). Efficiency Estimation from Cobb-Douglas
Production functions with Composed Error. International Economic Review 8, 435–44.
Olley, G. S. and A. Pakes (1996). “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment Industry”. Econometrica 64 (6), 1263–97.
Roberts, M. (1996). Colombia, 1977-85: Producer Turnover, Margins, and Trade Exposure. In M. Roberts and J. R. Tybout (Eds.), Industrial Evolution in Developing
Countries, Chapter 10, pp. 227–59. New York: Oxford University Press for the World
Bank.
Schmidt, P. and R. C. Sickles (1984). Productivity Frontiers and Panel Data. Journal of
Business and Economic Statistics 2, 367–374.
Seiford, L. L. and R. M. Thrall (1990). Recent Developments in DEA. The Mathematical
Programming Approach to Frontier Analysis. Journal of Econometrics 46, 7–38.
Solow, R. M. (1957). Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function. Review
of Economics and Statistics 39, 312–320.
Stevenson, R. E. (1980). Likelihood Functions for Generalized Stochastic Frontier Estimation. Journal of Econometrics 13, 57–66.
Stigler, G. J. (1976, March). Xistence of X-efficiency. American Economic Review 66 (1),
213–16.
Syverson, C. W. (2001). Market Structure and Productivity. Ph.D. dissertation, University
of Maryland.
Van Biesebroeck, J. (2003a, January). Productivity Dynamics with Technology Choice:
An Application to Automobile Assembly. Review of Economic Studies 70 (1), 167–198.
Van Biesebroeck, J. (2003b, November). Revisiting some Productivity Debates. NBER
Working paper, No. 10065.

45

Table 1: Summary statistics for Colombian and simulated samples
Colombian sample
(textile industry)

Simulated samples1
(average over 50 samples)

Observed variables

mean

st.d.

mean

st.d.

log Y
log K
log L
log WL
log I

7.49
5.29
3.91
6.88
3.76

1.36
1.73
1.04
1.30
1.93

7.56
3.92
4.29
7.33
3.03

1.90
0.93
1.78
1.89
0.97

wage share
investment share (if positive)

0.62
0.32

1.39
1.22

0.62
0.56

0.23
1.20

OLS regression
with log Y as dependent variable2
log K
log L
time

mean
0.124
0.983
0.074

s.e.
0.009
0.016
0.004

mean
0.299
0.885
0.019

s.e.
0.028
0.014
0.007

R2
number of firms
number of observations (plant-years)

0.82
256
2164

1

Parameters in the data generating process are set to their benchmark values, see Section 4.1.

2

In the data generating process: aK=0.4, aL=0.6, and at=0.

46

0.83
200
2000

Table 2: Correlation coefficients between all observed variables: Simulated & Colombia
All observations
in levels:
log Y
log L
log WL
log K
log I

log Y
0.89
0.92
0.69
0.57

log L

log WL

log K

log I

0.92

0.93
0.92

0.72
0.70
0.72

0.79
0.75
0.78
0.63

0.96
0.69
0.55

0.68
0.56

Simulated
sample
(10 years)

0.79

Colombian sample (1981-91)
Last year
in levels:
log Y
log L
log WL
log K
log I

log Y
0.80
0.85
0.66
0.51

log L

log WL

log K

log I

0.91

0.91
0.89

0.68
0.61
0.67

0.67
0.62
0.65
0.55

0.98
0.63
0.53

0.63
0.53

Simulated
sample
(year 10)

0.81

Colombian sample (1991)
Last year growth
rates:
log Yt/Yt-1
log Lt/Lt-1
log WLt/WLt-1
log Kt/Kt-1
log It/It-1

log Yt/Yt-1
0.12
0.18
0.20
-0.12

log Lt/Lt-1

log WLt/WLt-1

log Kt/Kt-1

log It/It-1

0.75

0.73
0.72

0.04
0.09
0.05

0.36
0.29
0.30
-0.07

0.94
0.07
0.07

0.07
0.09

Colombian sample (1990 to 1991)

47

0.54

Simulated
sample
(year 9 to 10)

Table 3: Different specifications for productivity
AR coeff. (?)
st. dev. of ? it
st. dev. of ? i

0.3
0.5
0.2

0.5
0.5
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.2

0.0
0.8
0.0

Productivity level: Spearman rank-correlation with true values
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.308
0.547
0.484
0.357
0.607
0.762
0.323
0.703

0.373
0.595
0.490
0.395
0.622
0.825
0.378
0.559

0.329
0.211
0.278
0.225
0.433
0.631
0.444
0.728

0.313
0.764
0.465
0.254
0.313
0.022
0.312
0.187

0.348
0.392
0.418
0.375
0.340
0.033
0.340
0.170

0.821
0.416
0.708
0.907
0.822
0.624
0.822
0.687

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.314
0.767
0.467
0.254
0.314
0.022
0.313
0.046

1.005
0.848
0.961
1.020
0.766
0.156
1.001
0.386

0.670
0.782
0.800
0.751
0.620
0.044
0.614
0.052

1.645
0.902
1.398
1.823
1.647
1.235
1.647
1.299

0.600 0.400
0.877 0.204
0.654 0.452

0.600 0.400
0.467 0.320
0.494 0.297

0.600 0.400
0.975 0.002
0.618 0.408

0.885
0.675
0.875
0.743

0.514
0.434
0.399
0.320

1.007
0.975
0.976
0.973

Productivity level: Mean squared error
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.652
0.500
0.578
0.569
0.460
0.181
0.639
0.314

0.550
0.418
0.516
0.551
0.389
0.096
0.545
0.268

Productivity growth: correlation with true values
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.300
0.401
0.345
0.287
0.398
0.467
0.303
0.102

0.325
0.490
0.388
0.314
0.481
0.733
0.327
0.136

Productivity growth: Mean squared error
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.993
0.884
0.948
0.974
0.798
0.204
0.983
0.309

Average coefficient estimates
actual
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP
SF1
SF2

0.600
0.861
0.714
0.691
0.859
0.725
0.857
0.671

0.400
0.297
0.444
0.312
0.221
0.151
0.287
0.003

0.129
0.208
0.199
0.073

0.478
0.142
0.152
0.008

-0.020
0.013
0.003
-0.004

Coefficient mean square errors
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP
SF1
SF2

0.081
0.010
0.041
0.119
0.080
0.081
0.165

0.116
0.003

0.027
0.050

0.302
0.002

0.117
0.044
0.117
0.129

0.029
0.096
0.105
0.234

0.359
0.295
0.301
0.306

48

Table 4: Decomposing aggregate productivity growth

Aggregate input weight

actual
OLS
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2
Output weights

actual
OLS
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

aggregate

exiting
plants

surviving
plants

within

between

correlation

0.077
0.021
0.088
-0.805
0.104
0.078
0.027
0.190

0.062
0.009
0.057
0.008
0.059
0.052
0.011
0.110

0.016
0.012
0.031
-0.812
0.046
0.027
0.016
0.080

-0.217
0.091
-0.138
-0.557
-0.059
-0.091
0.082
-0.078

-0.211
0.177
-0.122
-0.240
-0.031
-0.098
0.169
-0.098

0.444
-0.256
0.291
-0.015
0.136
0.216
-0.235
0.256

aggregate

exiting
plants

surviving
plants

within

between

correlation

0.060
0.111
0.165
-0.904
0.033
0.079
0.031
0.092

0.027
0.025
0.039
0.005
0.002
0.030
0.006
0.028

0.033
0.086
0.127
-0.909
0.031
0.049
0.024
0.063

-0.167
-0.497
-0.333
-1.370
-0.349
-0.371
-0.367
-0.565

-0.154
-0.448
-0.326
-0.995
-0.275
-0.319
-0.293
-0.539

0.354
1.031
0.786
1.456
0.655
0.739
0.684
1.167

49

Table 5: Amount of measurement error
(s x=0.00)

(s x=0.10)

(s x=0.25)

no error

tiny error

low error

(s x=0.50)

(s x=0.75)

benchmark med-high error

(s x=1.00)

(s x=1.25)

high error

huge error

Productivity level: Spearman rank-correlation with true values
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.434
0.930
0.758
0.095
0.699
0.653
0.435
0.777

0.403
0.844
0.708
0.145
0.679
0.662
0.404
0.760

0.335
0.673
0.591
0.256
0.761
0.819
0.337
0.719

0.308
0.547
0.484
0.357
0.607
0.762
0.323
0.703

0.324
0.488
0.433
0.390
0.514
0.662
0.379
0.700

0.348
0.445
0.407
0.482
0.471
0.572
0.449
0.691

0.367
0.407
0.385
0.380
0.450
0.496
0.481
0.675

0.652
0.500
0.578
0.569
0.460
0.181
0.639
0.314

1.067
0.954
1.074
0.949
0.902
0.229
1.006
0.590

1.623
1.622
1.739
1.400
1.487
0.276
1.508
0.957

2.307
2.528
2.544
2.263
2.198
0.319
2.169
1.352

0.300
0.401
0.345
0.287
0.398
0.467
0.303
0.102

0.256
0.353
0.291
0.254
0.313
0.320
0.271
0.102

0.235
0.319
0.260
0.301
0.272
0.240
0.270
0.099

0.224
0.290
0.234
0.234
0.247
0.190
0.267
0.093

0.993
0.884
0.948
0.974
0.798
0.204
0.983
0.309

1.948
1.832
1.939
1.858
1.676
0.288
1.865
0.383

3.134
3.188
3.248
2.720
2.808
0.368
2.870
0.477

4.497
5.005
4.802
4.486
4.150
0.439
4.017
0.590

Productivity level: Mean squared error
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.310
0.132
0.206
0.411
0.224
0.244
0.310
0.188

0.324
0.158
0.218
0.414
0.228
0.239
0.323
0.190

0.395
0.240
0.291
0.407
0.201
0.157
0.394
0.203

Productivity growth: correlation with true values
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.609
0.844
0.624
0.615
0.946
0.892
0.607
0.140

0.550
0.713
0.570
0.522
0.866
0.856
0.548
0.128

0.413
0.516
0.450
0.378
0.618
0.741
0.413
0.108

Productivity growth: Mean squared error
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.158
0.076
0.153
0.159
0.026
0.050
0.158
0.242

0.190
0.123
0.183
0.209
0.066
0.067
0.191
0.245

0.367
0.306
0.347
0.393
0.236
0.115
0.367
0.260

Average coefficient estimates
actual
OLS
IN
GMM
OP
SF1
SF2

0.600
0.965
0.844
0.964
0.724
0.966
0.928

0.400
0.228
0.349
0.401
0.678
0.225
-0.083

0.600
0.958
0.851
0.974
0.734
0.959
0.914

0.400
0.237
0.343
0.352
0.613
0.235
-0.068

0.600
0.929
0.824
0.950
0.749
0.929
0.847

0.400
0.268
0.373
0.271
0.199
0.265
-0.027

0.600
0.861
0.714
0.859
0.725
0.857
0.671

0.400
0.297
0.444
0.221
0.151
0.287
0.003

0.600
0.782
0.599
0.760
0.673
0.752
0.498

0.400
0.291
0.474
0.216
0.157
0.257
0.008

0.600
0.698
0.497
0.679
0.612
0.618
0.366

0.400
0.269
0.472
0.222
0.154
0.205
0.008

0.600
0.614
0.410
0.619
0.548
0.500
0.273

0.400
0.242
0.449
0.228
0.142
0.160
0.006

Coefficient mean square errors
OLS
IN
GMM
OP
SF1
SF2

0.163
0.024
0.147
0.093
0.165
0.342

0.155
0.026
0.157
0.080
0.156
0.319

0.127
0.020
0.155
0.091
0.128
0.245

0.081
0.010
0.119
0.080
0.081
0.165

50

0.047
0.007
0.083
0.067
0.046
0.167

0.029
0.017
0.056
0.063
0.042
0.211

0.028
0.049
0.052
0.072
0.071
0.264

Table 6: Absolute or relative measurement error
(s x=0.50) benchmark

(s x = 1/3 of real SD)

(s x = 1/3 of no-error SD)

Productivity level: Spearman rank-correlation with true values
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.308
0.547
0.484
0.357
0.607
0.762
0.323
0.703

0.270
0.648
0.490
0.323
0.590
0.787
0.280
0.673

0.305
0.381
0.465
0.284
0.471
0.623
0.308
0.691

0.572
0.385
0.473
0.500
0.381
0.177
0.564
0.256

0.765
0.747
0.720
0.777
0.636
0.243
0.762
0.392

Productivity level: Mean squared error
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.652
0.500
0.578
0.569
0.460
0.181
0.639
0.314

Productivity growth: correlation with true values
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.300
0.401
0.345
0.287
0.398
0.467
0.303
0.102

0.264
0.492
0.348
0.258
0.380
0.528
0.266
0.091

0.367
0.272
0.335
0.336
0.416
0.411
0.366
0.098

0.786
0.661
0.723
0.778
0.631
0.178
0.781
0.290

1.184
1.340
1.232
1.219
1.081
0.217
1.183
0.336

Productivity growth: Mean squared error
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.993
0.884
0.948
0.974
0.798
0.204
0.983
0.309

Average coefficient estimates
actual
OLS
IN
GMM
OP
SF1
SF2

0.600
0.861
0.714
0.859
0.725
0.857
0.671

0.400
0.297
0.444
0.221
0.151
0.287
0.003

0.600
0.946
0.654
0.942
0.807
0.943
0.784

0.400
0.174
0.468
0.124
0.086
0.170
-0.005

0.600
0.742
0.824
0.775
0.659
0.742
0.620

0.400
0.578
0.498
0.538
0.501
0.573
0.015

Coefficient mean square errors
OLS
IN
GMM
OP
SF1
SF2

0.081
0.010
0.119
0.080
0.081
0.165

0.172
0.007
0.206
0.143
0.172
0.199

51

0.055
0.030
0.097
0.035
0.054
0.154

Table 7: Measurement error for different variables
(s x=0.10)

tiny

error

(s x = 0.10)
(s y = 0.75)

(s x = 0.10)
(s k = 0.75)

(s x = 0.10)
(s l = 0.75)

(s x = 0.10)
(s w = 0.75)

(s x = 0.10)
(s i = 0.75)

Productivity level: Spearman rank-correlation with true values
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.403
0.844
0.708
0.145
0.679
0.662
0.404
0.760

0.153
0.475
0.384
0.056
0.327
0.706
0.154
0.460

0.349
0.844
0.686
0.493
0.934
0.906
0.371
0.753

0.499
0.122
0.598
0.190
0.836
0.815
0.499
0.781

0.403
0.912
0.708
0.145
0.679
0.662
0.404
0.760

0.403
0.844
0.708
0.145
0.462
0.316
0.404
0.760

0.340
0.147
0.226
0.261
0.103
0.113
0.332
0.200

0.399
1.023
0.419
0.726
0.544
0.484
0.398
0.359

0.324
0.118
0.218
0.414
0.228
0.239
0.323
0.190

0.324
0.158
0.218
0.414
0.306
0.351
0.323
0.190

0.677
0.081
0.469
0.649
0.832
0.909
0.675
0.146

0.550
0.799
0.570
0.522
0.866
0.856
0.548
0.128

0.550
0.713
0.570
0.522
0.612
0.415
0.548
0.128

0.429
1.673
0.654
0.550
0.279
0.099
0.430
0.287

0.190
0.097
0.183
0.209
0.066
0.067
0.191
0.245

0.190
0.123
0.183
0.164
0.165
0.211
0.191
0.245

Productivity level: Mean squared error
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.324
0.158
0.218
0.414
0.228
0.239
0.323
0.190

0.875
0.667
0.765
1.004
0.761
0.226
0.874
0.393

Productivity growth: correlation with true values
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.550
0.713
0.570
0.522
0.866
0.856
0.548
0.128

0.204
0.346
0.264
0.201
0.368
0.847
0.204
0.048

0.365
0.713
0.538
0.412
0.846
0.942
0.372
0.121

Productivity growth: Mean squared error
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.190
0.123
0.183
0.209
0.066
0.067
0.191
0.245

1.297
1.203
1.284
1.332
1.173
0.073
1.297
0.343

0.269
0.141
0.198
0.254
0.070
0.053
0.265
0.245

Average coefficient estimates
actual
OLS
IN
GMM
OP
SF1
SF2

0.600
0.958
0.851
0.974
0.734
0.959
0.914

0.400
0.237
0.343
0.352
0.613
0.235
-0.068

0.600
0.961
0.727
0.986
0.734
0.960
0.920

0.400
0.235
0.472
0.331
0.545
0.234
-0.072

0.600
1.029
0.773
1.010
0.740
1.026
0.912

0.400
0.056
0.311
0.038
-0.001
0.053
-0.007

0.600
0.562
1.087
0.588
0.305
0.564
0.495

0.400
0.964
0.438
1.274
0.466
0.959
0.073

0.600
0.958
0.727
0.974
0.734
0.959
0.914

0.400
0.237
0.467
0.352
0.613
0.235
-0.068

0.600
0.958
0.851
0.974
0.929
0.959
0.914

0.400
0.237
0.343
0.351
0.286
0.235
-0.068

Coefficient mean square errors
OLS
IN
GMM
OP
SF1
SF2

0.155
0.026
0.157
0.080
0.156
0.319

0.162
0.014
0.266
0.079
0.162
0.336

0.303
0.022
0.301
0.180
0.302
0.263

52

0.321
0.063
0.823
0.467
0.315
0.121

0.155
0.014
0.157
0.080
0.156
0.319

0.155
0.026
0.157
0.122
0.156
0.319

Table 8: Allowing for plant heterogeneity
(s x=0.50)

bi

benchmark

rit

ßli & 1-ßli

(ßl+ßk)i

ßli & ßki

Productivity level: Spearman rank-correlation with true values
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.308
0.547
0.484
0.357
0.607
0.762
0.323
0.703

0.442
0.970
0.726
0.558
0.766
0.746
0.481
0.757

0.443
0.966
0.713
0.358
0.701
0.651
0.452
0.763

0.523
0.554
0.621
0.602
0.650
0.681
0.322
0.402

0.221
0.409
0.193
0.497
0.492
0.573
0.227
0.345

0.306
0.418
0.270
0.494
0.472
0.599
0.220
0.295

0.298
0.394
0.329
0.256
0.251
0.238
0.443
0.436

0.430
0.467
0.586
0.278
0.374
0.320
0.454
0.466

0.415
0.615
0.630
0.365
0.398
0.320
0.532
0.569

0.902
0.556
0.712
0.869
0.930
0.879
0.679
0.140

0.839
0.482
0.411
0.883
0.937
0.877
0.612
0.135

0.878
0.496
0.509
0.888
0.926
0.869
0.622
0.140

0.045
0.248
0.137
0.062
0.034
0.059
0.132
0.241

0.073
0.254
0.281
0.056
0.044
0.076
0.155
0.242

0.056
0.285
0.247
0.054
0.042
0.071
0.150
0.240

Productivity level: Mean squared error
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.652
0.500
0.578
0.569
0.460
0.181
0.639
0.314

0.312
0.098
0.222
0.240
0.211
0.244
0.301
0.188

0.311
0.105
0.228
0.315
0.237
0.285
0.309
0.196

Productivity growth: correlation with true values
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.300
0.401
0.345
0.287
0.398
0.467
0.303
0.102

0.497
0.928
0.596
0.508
0.857
0.945
0.524
0.148

0.539
0.922
0.577
0.538
0.776
0.626
0.541
0.126

Productivity growth: Mean squared error
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.993
0.884
0.948
0.974
0.798
0.204
0.983
0.309

0.194
0.041
0.166
0.186
0.068
0.065
0.184
0.241

0.179
0.044
0.174
0.180
0.098
0.160
0.178
0.243

Average coefficient estimates
actual
OLS
IN
GMM
OP
SF1
SF2

0.600
0.861
0.714
0.859
0.725
0.857
0.671

0.400
0.297
0.444
0.221
0.151
0.287
0.003

0.600
0.999
0.780
0.987
0.840
0.989
0.921

0.400
0.107
0.325
0.076
0.338
0.116
-0.153

0.600
0.981
0.786
0.979
0.882
0.981
0.931

0.400
0.129
0.324
0.163
0.252
0.127
-0.045

0.600
0.781
0.882
0.822
0.722
0.933
0.934

0.400
0.579
0.479
0.312
0.597
0.195
-0.070

0.600
0.842
0.938
0.815
0.642
0.960
0.934

0.400
0.568
0.473
0.407
0.847
0.186
-0.047

0.600
0.792
0.914
0.816
0.691
0.955
0.937

0.400
0.635
0.515
0.320
0.704
0.168
-0.034

Coefficient mean square errors
OLS
IN
GMM
OP
SF1
SF2

0.081
0.010
0.119
0.080
0.081
0.165

0.245
0.020
0.265
0.063
0.233
0.412

0.219
0.020
0.215
0.105
0.220
0.309

53

0.071
0.036
0.084
0.111
0.154
0.334

0.089
0.043
0.068
0.267
0.176
0.313

0.100
0.045
0.064
0.172
0.182
0.303

Table 9: Impact of specifiation errors
Returns to scale
decreasing
(aK+aL=0.8)

constant

increasing

(aK+aL=1)

(aK+aL=1.2)

CRS enforced ?
no
yes
no
yes
Productivity level: Spearman rank-correlation with true values
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.408
0.773
0.698
0.350
0.633
0.590
0.408
0.749

0.563
0.886
0.749
0.447
0.893
0.888
0.638
0.689

no

yes

0.400
0.841
0.683
0.248
0.663
0.638
0.400
0.756

0.446
0.945
0.712
0.424
0.939
0.927
0.569
0.715

0.396
0.918
0.525
0.081
0.768
0.764
0.398
0.759

0.354
0.956
0.584
0.473
0.948
0.932
0.426
0.737

0.323
0.157
0.228
0.384
0.232
0.246
0.323
0.195

0.306
0.093
0.212
0.314
0.099
0.112
0.265
0.229

0.325
0.110
0.302
0.472
0.188
0.193
0.325
0.187

0.337
0.127
0.267
0.297
0.090
0.096
0.313
0.213

0.548
0.706
0.544
0.562
0.857
0.840
0.548
0.132

0.316
0.883
0.574
0.301
0.876
0.927
0.412
0.114

0.529
0.801
0.405
0.531
0.876
0.892
0.528
0.138

0.296
0.906
0.478
0.362
0.883
0.943
0.334
0.120

0.190
0.125
0.194
0.189
0.070
0.073
0.190
0.244

0.286
0.054
0.180
0.295
0.057
0.051
0.241
0.245

0.199
0.089
0.284
0.207
0.062
0.056
0.199
0.245

0.298
0.050
0.246
0.267
0.055
0.043
0.279
0.246

Productivity level: Mean squared error
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.321
0.193
0.224
0.343
0.247
0.268
0.321
0.204

0.269
0.138
0.198
0.308
0.135
0.157
0.243
0.244

Productivity growth: correlation with true values
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.556
0.659
0.622
0.556
0.831
0.787
0.555
0.127

0.407
0.837
0.644
0.291
0.851
0.873
0.490
0.109

Productivity growth: Mean squared error
OLS
IN
DEA
GMM
OP1
OP2
SF1
SF2

0.187
0.143
0.161
0.189
0.080
0.094
0.188
0.244

0.243
0.074
0.151
0.299
0.068
0.073
0.208
0.245

Average coefficient estimates
actual
OLS
IN
GMM
OP
SF1
SF2

0.480
0.940
0.855
0.940
0.708
0.941
0.891

0.320
0.260
0.344
0.239
0.564
0.259
-0.023

0.480
1.001
0.713
1.062
0.708
0.959
0.907

0.520
-0.001
0.287
-0.062
0.292
0.041
0.093

0.600
0.957
0.854
0.953
0.740
0.957
0.915

0.400
0.241
0.344
0.337
0.610
0.240
-0.032

0.600
1.038
0.713
1.045
0.740
0.998
0.922

0.400
-0.038
0.287
-0.045
0.260
0.002
0.078

0.720
0.977
0.831
0.982
0.793
0.977
0.941

0.480
0.188
0.335
0.330
0.498
0.187
-0.040

0.720
1.037
0.712
1.016
0.793
1.025
0.942

0.280
-0.037
0.288
-0.016
0.207
-0.025
0.058

Coefficient mean square errors
OLS
IN
GMM
OP
SF1
SF2

0.216
0.019
0.220
0.115
0.217
0.288

0.376
0.055
0.488
0.053
0.307
0.234

0.153
0.026
0.143
0.078
0.153
0.286
54

0.384
0.025
0.399
0.039
0.316
0.208

0.151
0.066
0.108
0.071
0.152
0.320

0.368
0.037
0.335
0.080
0.348
0.228

