                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      OPPORTUNITIES, RACE, AND URBAN LOCATION:
                            THE INFLUENCE OF JOHN KAIN

                                           Edward L. Glaeser
                                           Eric A. Hanushek
                                            John M. Quigley

                                         Working Paper 10312
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10312


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2004




John F. Kain died in Dallas, Texas on August 21, 2003 at the age of 67. A previous version of this paper was
discussed at a special session honoring his memory at the annual meetings of the Association for Public
Policy and Management, November 6, 2003. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Edward L. Glaeser, Eric A. Hanushek, and John M. Quigley. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Opportunities, Race, and Urban Location: The Influence of John Kain
Edward L. Glaeser, Eric A. Hanushek, and John M. Quigley
NBER Working Paper No. 10312
February 2004
JEL No. R2, J7, I2

                                          ABSTRACT

Today, no economist studying the spatial economy of urban areas would ignore the effects of race

on housing markets and labor market opportunities, but this was not always the case. Through what

can be seen as a consistent and integrated research plan, John Kain developed many central ideas

of urban economics but, more importantly, legitimized and encouraged scholarly consideration of

the geography of racial opportunities. His provocative (and prescient) study of the linkage between

housing segregation and the labor market opportunities of Blacks was a natural outgrowth of his

prior work on employment decentralization and housing constraints on Black households. His more

recent program of research on school outcomes employing detailed administrative data was an

extension of the same empirical interest in how the economic opportunities of minority households

vary with location. This paper identifies the influence of John Kain's ideas on different areas of

research and suggests that his scientific work was thoroughly interrelated.

Edward L. Glaeser                                    John M. Quigley
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
Harvard University                                   University of California at Berkeley
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  549 Evans Hall
and NBER                                             Berkeley, CA 94720
eglaeser@harvard.edu                                 quigley@econ.berkeley.edu

Eric A. Hanushek
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
hanushek@hoover.stanford.edu
I.      Introduction

        Today, economists routinely analyze the impact of place-based externalities on

behavior and outcomes. Few studies of central cities, regardless of focus, can ignore the

overlay of race and the effects of race on economic outcomes.       Few doubt that race

powerfully influences private markets in cities as well as urban politics, policy and

education. Yet the perspective that understands the importance of race, and particularly

racial location patterns, has not always been found among economists. In many ways,

John Kain is the scholar who made economists understand the central role of race in

America’s cities.

        This paper sketches how Kain’s varied writings have helped provide the dominant

framework for urban analysis. His early residential location and transportation studies

offer an essential background. But Kain’s early innovation was recognizing that the

simple theoretical models and the rudimentary empirical analyses of the 1960s failed to

capture essential features of the urban landscape.         This spawned two related

developments related directly to market heterogeneity. First, he moved beyond simple

models with direct analytical solutions to simulation models that emphasized market

heterogeneity in many dimensions. Second, he delved into the unique aspects of racial

location and market outcomes, introducing analysis of the clearest form of heterogeneity

that is observed in cities.

        These developments underscore Kain’s most significant impact – understanding

how race and location affect economic opportunities. This path was evident in his most

recent line of research into educational opportunities. The genesis of the Texas Schools

Project at the University of Texas at Dallas was an interest in understanding whether the




                                           3
suburbanization of the Black population in Texas expanded the educational opportunities

for Black students. The analytical aspects that most interested Kain dealt directly with

race, schooling and location.

       To frame the discussion (in a way that would appeal to John Kain’s empirical

focus), Table 1 lists his ten most cited works. The way in which these works developed

and fit together is remarkable.




II.    Housing, Transportation, Residential Location

       The problem of residential location and the tradeoffs households make between

housing and space consumption on the one hand, and commuting expenses on the other

hand, was developed in the early 1960s in John Kain’s Berkeley dissertation and in

roughly contemporaneous dissertations at Harvard by William Alonso (published in book

form in 1964) and at Chicago by Richard Muth (ultimately published in 1968). Kain’s

work on residential location, published in 1962, was both more practically relevant and

less elegantly general than the Alonso-Muth models. Kain’s model of residential location

explicitly recognized the reality of noncentral work places in urban areas and the

differing commuting costs of households of varying demographic characteristics. Kain’s

model made a large number of predictions – that centrally employed workers would

commute longer distances than workers employed at noncentral locations; that higher

income workers would commute longer distances; that multiple worker households

would locate closer to workplaces; that larger-sized households would choose longer

commutes, etc. These predictions organized a series of empirical applications – tests and




                                           4
extensions of the theory that occupied Kain and his associates throughout the decade of

the 1960s and beyond.

        Understanding the polycentric nature of U.S. metropolitan areas led to a line of

research documenting the extent of worksite dispersion and employment decentralization

in metropolitan America. In the most widely cited of these papers, “The Distribution and

Movement of Jobs and Industry,” Kain documented that the postwar decentralization of

employment was actually in full force, though somewhat disguised, during World War II,

and was evident in data as early as the 1920s. In the Urban Transportation Problem,

Kain and his collaborators documented the dispersion of employment within the borders

of central cities, from the CBD to the periphery of the city.

        This preoccupation with workplace and residence location led quite naturally to

the study of transportation systems linking these origins and destinations. Kain’s first

book, The Urban Transportation Problem, written with John Meyer and Martin Wohl

was a tour de force, analyzing the difficult choices faced by transit agencies and highway

authorities, and the regulation of the automobile. Somewhat controversially, the authors

stressed the limitations on publicly provided transport which were imposed by the

increased incomes of consumers and their resulting demands for low density living

conditions. The Meyer-Kain-Wohl analysis (Kain’s second most cited work) provided

sobering reading for advocates of large investments in fixed-rail transit systems. The

heterogeneity of origins and destinations and the value of commuters’ time meant that

these large scale investments could almost never be an efficient use of public resources.1


1
  The clear cut analytical case for lower cost, flexible transit systems and the preferences of planners and
politicians for expensive, inflexible systems stimulated a series of policy-oriented papers by Kain arguing
the economic case in its particulars. For example, the provocatively titled paper, “How to Improve Urban
Transportation at Practically No Cost,” analyzed the economic potential for reversible lanes on urban


                                                     5
         In the original Kain model, by incorporating the realism of polycentric

workplaces, it became impossible to solve for the equilibrium pattern of housing prices

by then-standard “back of the envelope” calculations. This led to early work in numerical

simulation. The simulation model ultimately developed by Gregory Ingram, Royce Ginn,

and John Kain (in collaboration with a large number of others) contained several highly

creative features which gave the model more realism and which permitted its application

to policy analysis in a more transparent way. The principal innovation in the volume2

concerned the demand side of the housing market and the time path of housing prices.

The demand side of this disaggregated housing model considered the choices by

households of given incomes and worksites about the type of housing to consume and its

location in space.        For a metropolitan area, space was represented by a series of

residential zones. Households chose a type of housing and a zone. The attractiveness of

each zone to any household depended upon housing prices in that zone and the

commuting costs from that zone to the household’s workplace. For a given set of

demand parameters, housing prices and transport costs, it was possible to allocate

households to their preferred residential zones. Excess demand in any zone provided a

signal to raise housing prices in that zone, and the pattern of excess demand provided a

signal to housing suppliers and developers to build new dwellings and to convert among

housing types at different locations.

         The economic model solved iteratively for a spatial pattern of housing prices and

housing supplier activity in response to a demand shock – the opening of new businesses



arterials, priority bus lanes on limited access freeways, congestion pricing, and the substitution of smaller
transit vehicles for large busses.
2
  Ingram, Gregory K., John F. Kain, and J. Royce Ginn, The Detroit Prototype of the NBER Simulation
Model, New York, NY: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1972.


                                                     6
in one of the workplace zones, for example. The iterations were given a temporal

interpretation, and the time pattern of price and quantity adjustment over space was

simulated.   The innovations in this model stimulated a large volume of subsequent

research on housing demand, the substitutability of housing components in consumer

demand, and the role of economic geography in affecting the choices of housing

consumers.

       Kain’s long term interest in practical policy meant that these models would be

used to illuminate important policy issues. These models were used by Kain and others to

analyze the spatial implications of housing subsidy programs and shelter allowances, the

abandonment of housing and the decline of central city neighborhoods, and urban

gentrification, for example.




III.   Economic Opportunity and Race

       Table 1 also quantifies the central fact of John Kain’s legacy—he is the father of

modern economic research on minorities in American cities. To a remarkable degree,

Kain ultimately used his work on micro economic problems as tools for his work on race.

       John Kain is responsible for two big ideas in the economics of race. First, he is

the father of the spatial mismatch hypothesis, which argues that housing market

discrimination leads to segregation which hurts Black labor market outcomes – simply

because segregation creates distance between Black workers and available jobs. Second,

Kain began the empirical literature on discrimination against minorities in housing

markets.




                                           7
       After 35 years, it is clear that Kain was right that segregation harms minorities

and that there is substantial discrimination against Blacks in the housing market. He was

probably less right about the reason that segregation harms Blacks. It is not generally

true that Blacks live further from jobs than Whites do, and it is hard to believe that the

physical costs of getting to jobs are really responsible for the pathologies of the ghetto.

But while Kain’s emphasis on the distance between people and jobs may have been an

inadequate explanation for the problems of the ghetto, it was absolutely the right theory

for starting an economic literature on Black urban America. Few empirical economists in

1969 would have been comfortable studying the formation of norms in an urban

neighborhood or human capital spillovers, but they would study transport cost problems.

And, by focusing on transport costs, Kain made it respectable – indeed, quite exciting –

for empirical mainstream economists to work on the problems of urban Black America.

By doing so, he gained his critical place in the economics of race.

       The antecedents of preoccupation with race and economic opportunity appear in

Table 1. The natural corollary of Kain’s thesis that job location influences housing

choice is that, if housing choice is fixed, job choice will be influenced by the costs of

commuting. This will push some people to work near to home and others to avoid

employment all together. In “The Distribution of Jobs and Industry,” Kain showed that

jobs were suburbanizing. This fact later pushed him to realize that Black inner-city

residences would be increasingly far from jobs. Kain’s pioneering work on housing price

hedonics, first published in the 1970 Journal of the American Statistical Association

(JASA), broke new ground in combining individual level data with a broad range of

home-level and community-level attributes. It represented a significant leap forward in




                                             8
the degree to which housing quality could be measured. This ultimately played a crucial

role in helping Kain to establish that Blacks paid more for housing—a crucial test of

housing market discrimination fully explicated in his subsequent book, Housing Markets

and Racial Discrimination: A Micro Economic Analysis.

        Stripped to its essentials, the Kain view of race in cities was that housing

segregation hurts Black labor market outcomes. The Kain model – the beginning of

economic analysis in the area – contains four essential elements that we list and then

relate to the subsequent evidence. First, the housing choices of Blacks are constrained by

discrimination; as a result, Blacks pay more for and consume less housing. Second, the

constraints on Black housing choices lead Blacks to live far from White neighbors and

more importantly, White employers. Third, because proximity matters, the distance

between Black employees and White employers hurts Black labor market outcomes.

Fourth, the decentralization of employment makes the problem worse over time.                      This

view is detailed in his 1968 Quarterly Journal of Economics (QJE) paper, the most

important single work in Kain’s career, but it is the research that was published in the

1970 JASA article, the 1972 American Economic Review (AER) article, and Housing

Markets and Racial Discrimination that enabled Kain to make the empirical case that

Black housing choices are constrained.3

        The QJE article, building on sociological studies that had conclusively shown that

Blacks and Whites were segregated far beyond the level predicted by income differences,

introduced Kain’s own work on Chicago and Detroit, showing that these places were then

(as now) among the most racially segregated cities in the country. But segregation does


3
  The 1969 Public Interest paper, the last article on the “top ten” list, should be seen as detailing the
appropriate public policy response to this worldview.


                                                   9
not prove discrimination or constraints on Black choices. Segregation could also occur if

Whites had a taste for living with other Whites, and as a result Whites were willing to pay

more to live in White communities than Blacks were willing to pay to live in White

communities. David Cutler, Edward Glaeser and Jacob Vigdor have called these two

opposing views centralized racism (racist Whites get together to restrict Black choices)

and decentralized racism (racist Whites separately decide to pay more to live in

White communities).

       Kain’s QJE paper does not present any statistical evidence to distinguish between

the two theories, but he does point to the clear historical fact that Blacks have often faced

explicit barriers to moving into White neighborhoods:



       The means by which racial segregation in housing has been maintained are
       amply documented. They are both legal and extra-legal; for example:
       racial covenants; racial zoning; violence or threats of violence; preemptive
       purchase; various petty harassments; implicit or explicit collusion by
       realtors, banks, mortgage lenders, and other lending agencies; and, in the
       not-so-distant past, the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and other
       Federal Agencies. (Kain, 1968, pp. 176-177).



       No one could argue that all of these things occurred, but Kain’s intellectual

opponents would have argued that these forces (centralized racism) were less important

in creating segregation than the White taste for White communities (decentralized

racism). Luckily, economic theory provides a clean test. If segregation is driven by White

racist tastes, these tastes effectively constrain White choices and imply that Whites




                                             10
should end up paying more for housing.          Conversely, if segregation is driven by

constraints on Black housing, Blacks will end up paying more for housing.

       The extensive work based upon data collected by Kain and his collaborators in St.

Louis directly addresses whether Blacks or Whites pay more. The 1970 JASA paper,

using a large data set with better controls than previously available, documented that

renters in Black neighborhoods of St. Louis paid more than renters in White

neighborhoods of St. Louis. The AER article took a slightly different tack and established

that Blacks are much less likely to be homeowners than Whites, and since

homeownership is often associated with lower housing costs (in part because of the

privileged tax treatment of homeownership), Blacks paid more for housing than Whites.

The long book on Housing Markets and Racial Discrimination put these pieces of

evidence together and made a strong case for the view that the costs of housing are

indeed higher for Blacks than for Whites. This is still, perhaps, the best statistical (as

opposed to historical) evidence to date that segregation stemmed from barriers to Black

mobility rather than White preferences.

       The subsequent literature on this question has been mixed, perhaps partly

reflecting changes in the world since the 1960s: In the 1950s and still in the 1960s, the

Kain emphasis on housing market discrimination was appropriate; by the 1980s and

1990s, the traditional barriers to Black mobility had fallen. Empirically, housing prices

in Black areas have been plummeting over time and, even if race was positively

associated with price in the immediate postwar period, today this is no longer true. As

such, the Kain emphasis on housing market discrimination as the source of segregation

may have been correct in its day, but may be less accurate today.




                                           11
       The second element of the spatial mismatch hypothesis is that segregation led to

distance between Blacks and Whites and especially White employers. This claim, while

not entirely central to the argument, appears to be contradicted by earlier analyses in

Meyer, Kain and Wohl and by subsequent work that has tended to show that, while

Blacks live in segregated communities, these segregated communities are not particularly

far from employment centers.

       The influential article on spatial mismatch, however, never directly addresses the

view that discrimination increases physical distance between Blacks and jobs. Instead,

the claim is shown indirectly as a result of Kain’s work on the third aspect of the

mismatch hypothesis: that distance between jobs and workers reduces employment.

While this is almost surely true, subsequent work has not shown that eradicating

segregation would increase employment.

       The empirical heart of the paper is Kain’s simulation showing that Black

employment would rise with integration. This simulation involves first regressing Black

employment on distance to the ghetto and showing that employment falls with distance

from the ghetto. Kain then assumes that in an integrated world distance from the ghetto

would be zero, and uses the estimated regression to simulate the counterfactual. He finds

that Black employment would rise after integration. Of course, if Kain had instead

regressed Black employment on proximity to the ghetto and assumed that proximity

would equal zero after integration, then he would have found exactly the opposite

result—segregation helps minority employment.

       The final element in the Kain model of race is that suburbanization will hurt

employment prospects for African-Americans. Here Kain is on solid ground. Jobs are




                                           12
clearly decentralizing.   His own data are convincing, and subsequent trends have

reinforced this insight. Kain was also right that Black workers were centralized, and they

have remained so. As the distance between the median Black resident and the median job

has risen since 1968, Kain’s analysis looks quite prescient.

       Kain’s work on race began three large academic literatures. First, he started the

large and growing literature on the effects of segregation on minorities. Early results,

prone to variety of analytical complications, found varying effects. The “Moving to

Opportunity” experiment presented an important breakthrough in dealing with this

problem because it features random assignment, enabling researchers to estimate real

economic benefits for minorities who leave the ghetto. Moreover, while the correlation

between segregation and minority outcomes was non-existent in 1970, it became

enormously strong by the 1990s. Whatever the cause, Kain’s emphasis on the costs of

segregation looks prescient today as detrimental outcomes in segregated communities

have mushroomed.

       A second, somewhat smaller set of papers have focused on some of the specifics

of the Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis; in particular, the idea that proximity from jobs

deters employment. Evidence has varied across study and location, and the jury is clearly

still out on the extent to which distance between homes and jobs deters employment.

       The third important literature evaluates the impact of discrimination towards

minorities in the housing market. The focus of this literature has generally changed. In

the early 1970s, much of this literature was focused on barriers to Black renters wanting

to live in White areas. By the 1980s and 1990s, the literature focused much more on

barriers to Black homeownership and barriers to Blacks owning homes in White areas.




                                            13
The literature has generally found that it is easier for a White to get a mortgage than a

comparable Black.

       John Kain’s work on race was pioneering; in many ways time has only served to

emphasize the accuracy of Kain’s vision. Modern research has increasingly shown

support for a connection between housing market segregation and labor market outcomes.

Discrimination in housing markets, even if it is primarily statistical in origin, is real and

continues to impose real costs on minorities. Employment has continued to suburbanize

and this has created an increasing spatial mismatch between inner city minorities and

suburban jobs. To the extent that there is still dispute about Kain’s work, this dispute

centers on whether central city segregation really increased the distance between Black

workers and jobs and the extent to which this distance really deters employment. These

controversies remain, but they are minor relative to the more important things that John

Kain clearly got right.




IV. Education and Opportunity

       Table 1 chronicles the immense influence of John Kain in modeling spatial issues

and particularly the influence of race. Kain’s involvement in educational policy debates

do not appear in this table, although they plausibly will have greater long run payoffs.

       Kain’s earliest attention to education analysis and policy grew out of the massive

government report Equality of Educational Opportunity (the “Coleman Report”), a U.S.

government publication that appeared in 1966.         The specific focus of the Coleman

Report, mandated by the Civil Rights Act of 1964, was the extent of racial discrimination

and the inequality of opportunity in U.S. public schools. Two aspects led to the broad



                                             14
attention given to it and contributed to the controversy that has followed. First, the report

took the position that the central focus of attention should be equality of student

outcomes, not equality of government inputs to schools. Second, the report was widely

interpreted to imply that “schools are not important.”

       The Coleman Report was required by Congress to evaluate the extent of racial

discrimination in the public provision of schooling. To accomplish this, a measure of the

relative importance of inputs to the schooling process was needed. This requirement led

the researchers to measure student performance and to relate various inputs directly to

these outcomes. This focus, which had not been applied very broadly in education or in

other areas of government-provided services, dramatically changed the basic form of

analysis.

       Kain heavily criticized the Coleman Report on methodological grounds. The most

serious issue was the use of an analysis of variance procedure that biased the findings

against the importance of school inputs and towards the importance of family factors.

More significantly, however, this study also confused the measurability of inputs with the

importance of teachers and schools.

       The controversy surrounding the Coleman Report conclusions led to a large

volume of other work on the performance of schools. While this subsequent analysis

helped to pinpoint the issues and to clarify some aspects of schools, it has not been

conclusive.   The subsequent studies built upon better data – such as longitudinal

information on student performance or more detailed measures of characteristics of

schools and teachers. Yet subsequent studies never matched the rich body of data

analyzed in the Coleman Report.          The original survey work behind Equality of




                                             15
Educational Opportunity included testing over 600,000 students spread across five

different grades and some 3,000 schools. Subsequent analyses relied on hundreds of

students and often lacked variation across very different schooling circumstances.

       For two decades after his original involvement in considering the Coleman

Report, Kain’s research concentrated on the issues noted in Table 1. However, in the

early 1990s, he began to see how educational research could take a quantum leap

forward.

       The specific innovation lay in formulating a plan for conducting research on

factors affecting student outcomes using the administrative records normally maintained

by schools. More specifically, while visiting Texas, he became aware of the state’s

accountability system that required annual testing in core subjects of all public school

students in the state. He began a series of discussions with the Texas Education Agency,

the owners of the data, to use the data for research purposes while simultaneously

ensuring confidentiality and protecting the privacy of the individuals involved. The

result today is a functioning prototype of ways to further our knowledge about schools

and their influence. It seems quite possible that this line of activity will have the largest

impact on future research and policy of any of his work.

       Kain’s Texas Schools Project has established a database about school

performance that is unequalled in the world. The central element is information on state

tests in core subjects for each of the four million students in Texas public schools.

Second, students can be followed over time.         This aspect of the data immediately

catapults the research potential of the database far beyond any other existing database.

Third, students can be linked to other aspects of the environment and of their outcomes.




                                             16
As students leave the K-12 public schools they can be traced into college, into work, or

into jail.

        The immediate motivation for developing this research structure is completely

consistent with Kain’s primary intellectual interests. The project that launched the Texas

Schools Project merged the life-long interests of Kain in understanding place and race.

Specifically, building on the observation that Blacks were rapidly moving into a wide

variety of suburban school districts, Kain and Daniel O’Brien pursued issues of the

changed opportunities of Blacks and the impact of that on Black achievement. This work

concentrated on characterizing the quality of schools in different locations.

        A different trajectory indicating the possibilities for expansion of the analytical

perspective is contained in work on the “ten percent plan.” With court limitations on any

affirmative action in higher education, the State of Texas developed a plan of automatic

admission at a University of Texas school of any student in the top ten percent of his or

her high school graduation class. This plan is easily seen as an extension of the issues of

race and location, because the probabilities of accepting Black students are related to the

level of school segregation. But the work also demonstrates his interest in the ultimate

effects of local schools by assessing the college and work experiences of different racial

and ethnic groups in Texas.

        In a series of other papers, Kain delved into such issues as teacher quality and

special education. Nonetheless, the topics that held his largest personal interest were the

ones related to race: the racial composition of schools, the mobility of students, and the

mobility of teachers.




                                             17
       The topics that his investment in an analytical database have opened up for other

researchers is much larger. As federal law under the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001

expands the range of administrative data collected in all states, the Kain vision is likely to

have broad ramifications for research throughout the country.




V.     Conclusion

       The impact of John Kain on the intellectual development of urban economics is

unmistakable. The model provided by his choice of research topics and the legitimacy he

provided to price theorists studying issues of race and opportunity has perhaps even

larger ramifications. While we have yet to see the full impact of his visionary foray into

educational analysis, the motion started in his analysis of Texas school performance will

continue despite his untimely death.




                                             18
                                   Table 1
                         The Most Cited Works of John Kain

Title                               Publication             Year       Approximate
                                                                       Citations
Housing Segregation, Negro          Quarterly Journal of    1968       350
Employment and Metropolitan         Economics
Decentralization
The Urban Transportation            Harvard University      1965       230
Problem                             Press
Housing Markets and Racial          Columbia University     1975       200
Discrimination                      Press for NBER

Measuring Value of Housing          Journal of the          1970       180
Quality                             American Statistical
                                    Association
The Spatial Mismatch                Housing Policy          1992       130
Hypothesis: Thirty Years Later      Debate

The Journey to Work as a            Papers of the           1962       105
Determinant of Residential          Regional Science
Location                            Association

Housing Market Discrimination,      American Economic       1972       90
Homeownership and Savings           Review
Behavior

The Distribution and Movement       Chapter in The          1968       85
of Jobs and Industry                Metropolitan
                                    Enigma, Harvard
                                    University Press

Cumulative Urban Growth and         Journal of Urban        1974       60
Urban Density Functions             Economics

Alternatives to the Gilded Ghetto   Public Interest         1969       55


Notes: Citations estimates are from the Social Science Citation Index as of October 30,
2003. This index measures only citations in a limited number of journals and as a result
significantly underestimates the full impact of these works. Bibliographic information on
these works appears in the references. A complete listing of Kain’s publications appears
at http://utdallas.edu/~jkain.




                                           19
      References

1.    Kain, John F. (1968), “Housing Segregation, Negro Employment and Metropolitan
      Decentralization,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 82(2): 175-197.

2.    Meyer, John R., John F. Kain, and Martin Wohl (1965), The Urban Transportation
      Problem, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

3.    Kain, John F. and John M. Quigley (1975), Housing Markets and Racial Discrimination,
      New York, NY: Columbia Press University for NBER.

4.    Kain, John F., and John M. Quigley (1970), “Measuring the Value of Housing Quality,”
      Journal of the American Statistical Association, 65(440): 532-548.

5.    Kain, John F. (1992), “The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis: Thirty Years Later,” Housing
      Policy Debate, 3(2): 371-462.

6.    Kain, John F. (1962), “The Journey to Work as a Determinant of Residential Location,”
      Papers of the Regional Science Association, IX: 137-160.

7.    Kain, John F. and John M. Quigley (1972), “Housing Market Discrimination,
      Homeownership and Savings Behavior,” American Economic Review, 62(3): 263-277.

8.    Kain, John F. (1968), “The Distribution and Movement of Jobs and Industry,” in James
      Q. Wilson, ed., The Metropolitan Enigma, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
      1968.

9.    Harrison, David and John F. Kain (1974), “Cumulative Urban Growth and Urban Density
      Functions,” Journal of Urban Economics, 1(1): 61-98.

10.   Kain, John F. and Joseph J. Persky (1969), “Alternatives to the Guilded Ghetto,” The
      Public Interest, 14 (Winter): 74-83.




                                                 20
