NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECONOMIC FUTURE OF EUROPE
Olivier Blanchard
Working Paper 10310
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10310
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2004

Written for the Journal of Economic Perspectives. I thank Philippe Aghion, David Autor, Tito Boeri, Ricardo
Caballero, Guillermo de la Dehesa, Francesco Daveri, Xavier Gabaix, Francesco Giavazzi, Thomas Kneip,
Giuseppe Nicoletti, Thomas Philippon, Ricardo Caballero, Andre Sapir, Stefano Scarpetta, and Andrei
Shleifer for discussions and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Olivier Blanchard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Economic Future of Europe
Olivier Blanchard
NBER Working Paper No. 10310
February 2004
JEL No. E6, I5, J6
ABSTRACT
After three years of near stagnation, the mood in Europe is definitely gloomy. Many doubt that the
European model has a future. In this paper, I argue that things are not so bad, and there is room for
optimism. Over the last thirty years, productivity growth has been much higher in Europe than in
the United States. Productivity levels are roughly similar in the European Union and in the United
States today. The main difference is that Europe has used some of the increase in productivity to
increase leisure rather than income, while the U.S. has done the opposite. Turning to the present,
a deep and wide ranging reform process is taking place. This reform process is driven by reforms
in financial and product markets. Reforms in those markets are in turn putting pressure for reform
in the labor market. Reform in the labor market will eventually take place, but not overnight and not
without political tensions. These tensions have dominated and will continue to dominate the news;
but they are a symptom of change, not a reflection of immobility.
Olivier Blanchard
Department of Economics
E52-373
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
blanchar@mit.edu

Future of Europe

2

After three years of near stagnation, the mood in Europe is definitely gloomy.
The two economics books on the bestseller’s list in France in 2003 are called “La
France qui Tombe” (the Fall of France) (Baverez [2003]), and “Le Desarroi Francais” (the French Disarray) (Duhamel [2003]). Both books offer a pessimistic vision
of France and its economic future, a future in which, unless dramatic reforms are
implemented, France will steadily lose ground against its competitors.
Governments are trying to put on a good face, but their boasts, such as the goal
adopted at the EU Lisbon conference in March 2000 to make the European Union
“the world’s most dynamic and competitive economy within ten years” are seen
as largely empty and pathetic.
The most articulate diagnoses argue that, like Stalinist growth in another time
and place, the European model worked well for post-war Europe, but is no longer
fit for the times.
For much of the post-war period, the argument goes, European growth was “catching–
up growth,” based primarily on imitation rather than innovation. For such growth,
large firms, protected in both goods and financial markets, could do a good job.
They could do much of the R&D in-house. They could develop long-term relations
with suppliers of funds. They could offer long-term relations and job security to
their workers. The rents generated in the goods markets could be shared between
firms, workers, and the state, and to help finance the welfare state.
Now that European growth must increasingly be based on innovation, now that
firms cannot be insulated from foreign competition, the European model has become dysfunctional. Relations between firms and suppliers of funds, between firms
and their workers, must all be redefined. This requires nothing short of a complete
transformation of economic and social relations.1 So far, the argument concludes,
Europe has not risen to the challenge. Instead, it seems increasingly petrified,
1. Many of these themes are developed in a recent report to the European Commission, known
as the “Sapir Report” [2004].

Future of Europe

3

unable to engage in fundamental reforms. This is why the future is bleak.2
I have a more optimistic assessment. In this paper, I want to argue that:
•

Things are not so bad. Over the last thirty years, productivity growth has
been much higher in Europe than in the United States. Productivity levels
are roughly similar today in the EU and in the U.S. The main difference
is that Europe has used some of the increase in productivity to increase
leisure rather than income, while the U.S. has done the opposite.

•

A deep and wide–ranging reform process is taking place in Europe. This
process is driven by reforms in financial and product markets. Reforms in
those markets are in turn putting pressure for reform in the labor market.
Reform in the labor market will eventually take place, but not overnight
and not without political tensions. These tensions have dominated and will
continue to dominate the news; but they are a symptom of change, not a
reflection of immobility.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 1 looks at the facts, focusing on productivity, income, and employment. Section 2 focuses on financial and product
market reforms. Section 3 discusses implications for labor market reforms. Section
4 concludes.

1

Some Facts

Two facts are often cited by Euro-pessimists: GDP per person in the European
Union, measured at purchasing power parity (PPP) prices, stands at 70% of GDP
per person in the United States. Not only that, but this ratio is the same as it was
30 years ago.3
These facts are correct. They suggest a Europe stuck at a substantially lower standard of living than the United States, and unable to catch up. This interpretation
2. For example, a description of Germany along these lines is given by Siebert [2003].
3. As of the time of this writing, the actual exchange rate of 1.20 dollars to the Euro is close to
the PPP exchange rate.

Future of Europe

4

would be misleading however, and the reason why is shown in the numbers in Table 1. Table 1 gives GDP per capita, GDP per hour, and hours per capita for the
EU-15 in general, and for France in particular, as ratios to the United States, for
both 1970 and 2000. The reason for choosing France as an example of a European
country, here and often below (showing the numbers for all 15 countries would lead
to unwieldy tables) is twofold. The first is that it is a large European country, and
one often perceived as a poster child for the European malaise.4 The second reason
is, quite simply, that I know France better than the other European countries...

Table 1. PPP GDP per person, PPP GDP per hour, and Hours per
person, 1970 and 2000: U.S., EU-15, and France. (U.S.=100)

US
EU-15
France

GDP per person

GDP per hour

Hours per person

1970

2000

1970

2000

1970

2000

100
69
73

100
70
71

100
65
73

100
91
105

100
101
99

100
77
67

Source: EU Ameco data base.

•

The first two columns, which show the evolution of GDP per capita relative to the United States, confirm the two facts presented earlier: The gap
between the EU-15 and the U.S. has remained roughly constant; the gap
between France and the U.S. has even increased a little.

4. For the same reasons, Germany would also be a natural candidate. But the German reunification of the early 1990s leads to both German-specific issues, and to issues of measurement when
looking at periods which include reunification.

Future of Europe

•

5

The next two columns show however that labor productivity, measured as
GDP per hour worked, has increased much faster in Europe than in the
United States. Relative EU productivity, which stood at 65% of the U.S.
in 1970 now stands at roughly 90%. French labor productivity now exceeds
U.S. labor productivity.

•

The last two columns, which give hours worked per person (total hours
worked divided by total population) give the key to the divergent evolutions
shown in the earlier columns. As relative EU labor productivity increased,
relative hours worked decreased in roughly the same proportion, leading to
a roughly constant relative GDP per capita.

In other words, had relative hours worked remained the same, the EU would have
today roughly the same income per capita as the U.S. The stability of the U.S–EU
gap in relative income per capita comes from the decline in hours worked.
There is another way of stating the same underlying facts, looking at absolute
rather than relative evolutions, which is quite striking. In the United States, over
the period 1970 to 2000, GDP per hour increased by 38%. Hours per person also
increased, by 26%, so GDP per person increased by 64%. In France, over the same
period, GDP per hour increased by 83%. But hours per person decreased by 23%,
so GDP per capita only increased by 60%. In that light, the performance of France
(and of the European Union in general) does not look so bad: A much higher rate
of growth of productivity than the U.S., and, as one might expect given that leisure
is a normal good, the allocation of part of that increase to increased income, and
part to increased leisure.
Is this too polemical a way of stating the facts? Is labor productivity correctly
measured? Can the decrease in hours worked really be interpreted as an increase
in leisure? What about the recent past, where the U.S. appears to have accelerated
relative to Europe? These questions require a closer look at the facts.

Future of Europe

1.1

6

Productivity

There are at least two obvious issues of interpretation with the productivity numbers presented above.
In many European countries, the unemployment rate is high, higher than in the
United States, and high unemployment disproportionately affects low skill workers.
In a number of European countries also, the ratio of the minimum wage to the
average wage is higher than it is in the United States, leading again to the potential
exclusion of low skill workers from employment.
By excluding more low productivity workers from employment, both factors tend
to increase measured labor productivity. In comparing labor productivity across
countries, we may want to control for this effect. One way to do so, if we want to
compare the U.S. and France for example, is to assume that wages reflect productivities, to use the information from the U.S. wage distribution to fill the French
wage distribution between the relative French minimum wage and the (lower) U.S.
relative minimum wage, and then to compute the resulting productivity adjustment. Such a computation was made in a comparison of productivity in France,
Germany, and the United States by McKinsey ([1997], updated [2002]); this computation gives a downward adjustment for French labor productivity of about 6%,
so yielding roughly similar labor productivity in both countries.
The second issue is that labor productivity reflects not only the state of technology,
but also the capital-labor ratio chosen by firms. Increases in the cost of labor
lead firms to decrease labor relative to capital, leading to an increase in labor
productivity. To control for this, the obvious solution, at least conceptually, is
to shift from comparisons of labor productivity to comparisons of total factor
productivity. The capital–output ratio appears indeed to be typically higher in
Europe than in the U.S. Based on OECD series for the business sector, the ratio
is, for example, 30% higher in France than it is in the U.S. A back of the enveloppe
computation suggests that, starting from roughly equal labor productivities (which
is where we started after the correction above), the level of French TFP is roughly

Future of Europe

7

10% lower than that of the U.S.5
In summary, the two adjustments lead to a more modest assessment of European
productivity relative to U.S. productivity. But the EU in general, and France in
particular, remain within close range of U.S. levels.

1.2

Hours Worked

Should we interpret the large decrease in hours worked per person in Europe as the
result of preferences leading to the choice of leisure over income as productivity
increased? Or should we interpret it instead as the result of increasing distortions,
such as higher taxes on work, an increase in the minimum wage, generous or forced
early retirement programs, and so on?6
Let’s start with a closer look at the facts. Given that different margins (how many
hours to work, whether to be employed or unemployed, whether to participate or
not) imply different choices, it is useful to start by decomposing the change in
hours worked as follows:

∆ ln(HN/P ) =

∆ ln H + ∆ ln(N/L) + ∆ ln(L/P )

= ∆ ln H + ∆ ln(1 − u) + ∆ ln(L/P )

The change in hours worked per person, HN/P , is equal to the change in hours
worked per worker, H, plus the change in the ratio of employment, N , to the labor
5. The computation is as follows. Start with the standard expression for the Solow residual:
∆ ln A = ∆ ln Y − α∆ ln N − (1 − α)∆ ln K, where ∆ here refers to the difference across the two
countries, rather the change in time. Rewrite it as: ∆ ln A = α(∆ ln Y − ∆ ln N ) + (1 − α)(∆ ln Y −
∆ ln K). If labor productivity is the same in both countries, and the share of capital 1 − α is equal
to 0.33, then a 30% difference in the capital output ratio leads to a 10% difference in TFP levels.
6. Another way of asking the same basic question is the following: In trying to compare welfare
rather than just income per capita, what shadow price should we use to weigh leisure? Should we
use the wage, in which case the measure of welfare is roughly similar in Europe than in the U.S,
or should we use a much lower shadow price, in which case Europe remains substantially behind.

Future of Europe

8

force, L (equivalently, one minus the unemployment rate), plus the change in the
ratio of the labor force L to population, P (equivalently the participation rate).
Applying this decomposition to the various European countries yields two main
conclusions:
•

Most of the decrease in hours worked per person has come, in an accounting
sense, from the decrease in hours worked per worker, rather than from
increases in unemployment or decreases in participation rates.
Applying for example this formula to France for the period 1970 to 2000
gives -23%, -7%, and 7% for the three terms on the right. Hours per worker
decreased by 23%, from 1962 hours per year in 1970 to 1550 hours per year
in 2000. The unemployment rate increased by 7 percentage points, from 2%
in 1970 to 9% in 2000. And the participation rate increased by 7%, going
from 0.42 in 1970 to 0.45 in 2000. In this decomposition, France appears
representative of other European countries.

•

Focusing on the decrease in hours worked per worker, most of the decrease
has come from a decrease in hours worked per full time worker, rather
than from an increase in the proportion of part time workers.7 In France,
for example, full time wage earners worked an average of 45.9 hours in
1970; they worked only 39.5 hours in 1999—a 15.0% decrease. Since 1999,
the decrease has been more pronounced, due to the two “35-hour” laws
passed in 1998 (mandating a reduction of the workweek to 35 hours by 2000
for firms with more than 20 employees) and in 2000 (mandating a similar
reduction by 2002 for public sector employees, and for firms with less than
20 employees).8 The latest available number puts the average workweek at

7. The motivation for this further decomposition is that some of the increase in part–time
employment may not have been voluntary. 20% of part time workers in Europe in 2000 said it
was because they could not find full-time jobs. The corresponding number for the U.S. is 8%.
8. Whether the shift to 35 hours should be seen as voluntary is a matter of debate. The promise
to pass such a law was probably the main factor behind the victory of the Socialist government
in 1997. Whether or not voters actually understood the income/leisure trade–off is now hotly
debated.

Future of Europe

9

38.3 hours in 2001, a 18% decline since 1970.9
The facts therefore suggest that much of the decline in hours worked has come
from a decline in hours worked per full time worker. It is reasonable to think
that, over thirty years, one should interpret this choice as voluntary on the part
of workers. But this does not yet settle the issue. This choice may be the result
of the interaction of preferences and an the increase in productivity, or the result
of increasing tax distortions faced by workers. And, indeed, the evidence suggests
that marginal tax rates (constructed by adding marginal income and payroll tax
rates, and consumption tax rates) have increased more in Europe than in the U.S.
(10-15% for most EU countries, relative to about 8% for the U.S.)10
The answer as to how much of the decrease in hours can be attributed to preferences
or changes in tax rates depends on what assumptions one is willing to make about
preferences, and the implied strength of income and substitution effects. In a recent
study, Prescott [2003], using a utility function logarithmic in consumption and
leisure, has argued that all of the decrease in hours in Europe could be attributed
to the increase in taxes. One can object however to his assumptions about utility,
and the large implied elasticity of labor supply. More importantly, within Europe,
the cross–country relation between the decrease in hours and the increase in tax
rates is weak. A revealing example here is that of Ireland. Average hours worked
per worker in Ireland have decreased from 2140 in 1970 to 1670 in 2000, a 25%
decrease over the period, and hours worked by full time workers have decreased
in line with the European average.11 This decline can clearly not be blamed on a
depressed labor market: Ireland has boomed during the period, has seen major inmigration, an increase in participation rates, and unemployment is now very low.
Nor can it be blamed on an increase in tax rates. The increase in the average tax
rate has been small, about 3% compared to the 8% increase in the U.S. Turning
9. Lest one conclude that France is an outlier, it is useful to note that the country with the
lowest number of hours worked per year per worker is Germany, with 1450 hours compared to
France’s 1550.
10. For detailed evidence on marginal tax rates, and their recent evolution, see Joumard [2001].
11. This statement is based on the evolution of hours worked by full time workers in manufacturing, the only series available for the period at hand.

Future of Europe

10

to more formal evidence, econometric estimates based on panel data evidence (see
Nickell [2003] for a recent survey and discussion) typically find a significant, but
more modest role for taxes in explaining the decline in hours per capita. They
imply that the evolution of tax rates may explain about a third of the decrease in
hours per capita in Europe over the period.
To summarize: Most of the decrease in hours per capita over the last 30 years in
Europe reflects a decrease in hours worked per full–time worker, a choice which
is likely to be made voluntarily by workers. The remaining issue is how much of
this choice comes from preferences and increasing income, and how much from
increasing tax distortions. I read the evidence as suggesting an effect of taxes, but
with a large role left for preferences.12

1.3

Evolutions Since the Mid-1990s

Looking at productivity growth since 1970, or at productivity levels today, may
not tell the whole story. Indeed, part of the Euro–pessimism is based on evolutions
since the mid 1990s, and the feeling that the U.S. is again gaining advantage on
Europe.
The basic numbers are given in Table 2, based on the work of Van Ark et al [2002a].
The table gives TFP growth numbers for the U.S., the EU, and France, for the
1980s, for the 1990s, and for each half decade of the 1990s.
The table yields three main conclusions. In the 1980s, European TFP growth was
higher than in the U.S. In the 1990s, it was roughly the same as in the US. And
this was the result of a first half decade with Europe growing faster than the U.S.,
but a second half decade with the U.S. growing faster than Europe.

12. There is plenty of anecdotal evidence that Europeans enjoy their leisure more than their U.S.
counterparts. I have looked for more formal evidence from surveys on happiness and leisure across
countries, but have not been able to find it.

Future of Europe

11

Table 2. Total factor productivity growth: U.S., EU, and France, 19802000. (Percent per year)

1980s
U.S.
EU-15
France

0.91
1.45
1.90

1990s 1990-1995 1995-2000
1.06
1.04
0.68

0.74
1.36
0.89

1.39
0.72
0.38

Van Ark [2002a], Tables 19 and A7.
Reaching conclusions about trend changes in TFP based on just five years of data is
a dangerous exercise.13 Cyclical factors and measurement issues may well dominate
any trend change over a short period. But we also know that the first three years
of this decade have looked very much like the second half of the previous decade,
with very high TFP growth in the U.S. despite a recession, and continuing low
TFP growth in Europe. For this reason, most observers now believe that we have
indeed seen a change in relative trends, starting around 1995.
The nature and the origins of the change have been the subject of a large amount
of recent work. Some have emphasized the role of information technologies (IT),
both in the IT-producing and the IT-using sector. Some have emphasized differences between evolutions in manufacturing and services. For these reasons, Table 3
presents labor productivity growth rates for each half decade of the 1990s, for the
U.S. and the EU (I leave France out, so as not to clutter the table), distinguishing
between IT-producing, IT-using, and non-IT-using sectors and between manufacturing and services. The table is based on the work of Van Ark et al [2002b],
13. The standard deviation of annual productivity growth in the U.S. or Europe is roughly 1%.
Assuming no correlation between the two growth rates, this implies that the differencep
between
five-year average growth rates in Europe and in the U.S. has a standard deviation of ( 2/5) =
0.63.

Future of Europe

12

which pays careful attention to problems of comparability across countries, using
in particular harmonized price deflators for IT (the construction of national price
deflators for IT varies widely across countries, and makes direct comparisons of
national figures unreliable).
Table 3. Labor productivity growth, IT producing/IT using, Manufacturing/services: U.S. and EU, 1990s. (Percent per year)

US
Share 1990-95 1995-2000
Overall
IT producing
Manufacturing
Services
IT using
Manufacturing
Services
Non IT using
Manufacturing
Services

EU
1990-95 1995-2000

1.1

2.5

1.9

1.4

2.6
4.7

15.1
3.1

23.7
1.8

11.1
4.4

13.8
6.5

4.3
26.0

-0.3
1.9

1.2
5.4

3.1
1.1

2.1
1.4

9.3
43.0

3.0
-0.4

1.4
0.4

3.8
0.6

1.5
0.2

“Share” in the first column is the share of the sector in US GDP, in percent. Source:
Van Ark [2002b], Tables 5 and 6.
The table yields the following three main conclusions:
•

Some have argued that the slowdown in productivity growth in Europe since
1995 reflects primarily a slowdown in productivity growth in manufacturing
([Daveri 2003]). The table shows that manufacturing productivity growth
outside the IT producing sector has indeed declined (this decline is present
in all EU countries, except for the Netherlands.) But it has declined to a
rate which is still higher than that of the U.S. This appears more to be

Future of Europe

13

evidence of the end of catch–up growth than of any emerging European
inability to innovate in manufacturing.
•

Some have argued that Europe has missed the IT revolution, in the sense
that IT production, and its associated high productivity growth, has been
more limited in Europe. The table cannot by itself answer the question, as
what is needed in addition to the information in the table is the share of
the IT producing sector in GDP in the U.S. and in European countries.
This share has been indeed slightly smaller in the EU than in the US, 6.0%
versus 7.3%. But this average hides differences across countries. A number
of countries, in particular Ireland and Finland have shares which exceed
10%.

•

Finally, some have argued that the main problem of Europe has been in the
use rather than the production of IT. The evidence is somewhat mixed:
One way to proceed is to look at the contribution of IT capital to growth in
the IT-using sector. This exercise was carried out by Colecchia and Schreyer
[2002] for example, using a growth accounting framework. Their conclusion
is that investment in IT was substantially higher in the U.S. than in Europe
in the second part of the 1990s, and so led to more labor productivity growth
in the IT-using sector in the U.S. than in Europe. However, such a conclusion
is only correct if the assumptions underlying growth accounting are correct,
if, in particular, the investment in IT in the U.S. had an expected rate of
return equal to the user cost of that capital. Many observers doubt that
this was the case, and the evidence on IT investment since 2000 suggests
that there was indeed substantial overinvestment in IT in the second half
of the 1990s.
Another way to proceed is to look directly at changes in labor productivity growth, without trying to separate between the contribution of capital
accumulation and the contribution of TFP growth. This is what is done in
Table 3. The numbers suggest that there was indeed a large difference in
labor productivity growth in the IT-using service sector, 5.4% in the U.S.

Future of Europe

14

versus 1.4% for the EU. This difference is important because the sector accounts for a substantial proportion of GDP, 26% in the U.S., 21% in the
EU.
Can one trace this difference to specific sectors, so as to get a sense of
what the U.S. did right, or Europe did wrong? A more detailed exploration
by Van Ark et al concludes that the difference is nearly fully attributable
to three sectors: retail trade, wholesale trade, and securities. Productivity
growth in this third sector seems largely attributable to the increase in
internet-based and other transactions associated with the bubble economy
of the late 1990s. This leads to a focus on retail and wholesale trade as two
of the main factors behind the difference between the U.S. and the EU in
the late 1990s, a conclusion shared by a number of other studies (McKinsey
[2001] for the U.S., McKinsey [2002] for a comparison of France, Germany,
and the U.S.)
What should one conclude for the broad examination of the facts? Contrary to
widespread perceptions, Europe has done very well over the last 30 years. Indeed,
some European countries, such as France, have a level of productivity roughly equal
to that of the United States. The income level has not caught up with that of the
United States, but only because of a different choice between income and leisure.
In the recent past, the U.S. has clearly done better than Europe. Clearly, Europe
is somewhat behind in IT production. It also has invested less in IT capital, but it
is not clear that this was wrong. Some sectors, trade in particular, have done very
well in the United States; such an increase in productivity growth has not been
visible in Europe; what this means for the future is hard to tell without a closer
look at the trade sector. I shall return to it in the next section.

2

Reforms In the Financial and Product Markets

The last fifteen years have seen dramatic changes in goods and financial markets
in Europe. Most of these changes can be traced to a reform process in which

Future of Europe

15

“Bruxelles” (this is the way Europeans refer to the European Commission, located
in Bruxelles) has played a central role, forcing (or allowing?) national governments
to implement reforms they would probably not have implemented on their own.
2.1

The Role of Bruxelles

A central document here is the “White Paper” written in 1985 by the European
Commission, under the presidency of Jacques Delors. At the time, it was felt that
the European Union needed a new and more ambitious goal, and, in that report,
the Commission laid a plan for achieving a fully integrated European internal
market by 1992.14
The report offered a timetable to achieve the elimination of physical barriers,
of fiscal barriers, and of technical barriers–the different standards for individual
products in place in different countries. Realizing that harmonization of rules and
regulation might be difficult to achieve or even lead to deadlock, the report argued
for using, whenever possible, the more wide–ranging principle of “mutual recognition”: “If a product is lawfully manufactured and marketed in one member state,
there is no reason why it should not be sold freely throughout the community”.
It also emphasized the role of competition policy in achieving and maintaining
competition in the internal market.
At the end of 1992, most of the agenda set out in 1985 was indeed achieved, and, in
a highly symbolic step, border controls for goods were eliminated (Financial market
integration took longer, but has accelerated with the adoption of the Euro in 1999.
The current plan is to have a fully integrated financial market by 2005). The
process of reform continued however, through the implementation of competition
policy. Today, competition policy and fights between the current Commissioner,
Mario Monti, and national governments, often make the news.
European competition policy comes into play only when trade between member
14. Surely by EU standards, but indeed by any standard, this is a remarkably clear document
(Commission of the European Communities [1985]).

Future of Europe

16

states is affected. In practice, given the integration of markets, this still leaves a
very broad scope for Bruxelles to intervene. European competition policy covers
four areas, in which the Commission either can act alone, or shares its powers with
national own competition authorities and law courts:
•

15

The elimination of anti–competition agreements or abuse of dominant position. It can prohibit an agreement, and even impose fines, up to 10% of
the world turnover of the relevant parties. Examples of recent interventions range from a ruling against British Airways in its relations with travel
agents, to a ruling against the use by the Belgian Architect Association of
a minimum fee scale.

•

The liberalization of monopolistic sectors. The Commission can initiate the
opening up of markets. It is a 1996 Commission directive which led for
example to the opening up of the market for mobile telecommunication
services to competition. It also checks that member states, when granting
exclusive rights, comply with the European Union competition rules. In
1997 for example, the Commission ruled that the Spanish state had given
an unfair advantage to the state company in the mobile phone market,
forcing the company to pay back the state for the amount of the implicit
subsidy the state had given the company.

•

The control of mergers between firms (for firms with a turnover in excess
of 250 million euros). Such mergers require prior notification to the Commission, and the Commission has exclusive power to approve or prohibit a
given merger. In November 2003 for example, the Commission rejected a
merger which would have led the French firm Lagardère to dominate the
book distribution network in France; the terms of the merger had to be modified so as to maintain competition in book distribution and thus satisfy the
Commission.

•

The monitoring of state aid. This is another area where the Commission

15. For further description, see European Commission [2000]. For a description of reforms over
time, see the annual reports from the European Commission (for example European Commission
[2002].)

Future of Europe

17

has exclusive power, and an area where it often clashes with governments.
In 2003 for example, the Commission rejected a plan by the French government to rescue the French firm Alstom, provoking widespread criticism
of Bruxelles in France. Not until the plan was modified was it approved
by Bruxelles. Some politically hot sectors, such as agriculture, or coal, or
fisheries, are excluded. But, in general, the rules governing restructuring or
rescue plans are tough: They can only take the form of short–term loans,
at the normal commercial rate, and can only be granted once.
These are considerable powers, and the Commission has not hesitated to use
them.16 This raises two intriguing questions. The first is why this part of the
Commission has been so willing to reform and deregulate, when other parts of the
Commission showed much less commitment to markets.17 The second is why governments have been willing to leave such power in the hands of the Commission.
One hypothesis is that this happened partly by accident, that Bruxelles was able
to use its mandate as defined in the Treaty in a way that national governments had
not anticipated. But this hypothesis is belied by the fact that governments have, at
various times, increased the powers of the Commission in matters of competition
policy. For example, rules on state aid to airline companies were tightened in 1994,
general rules on rescue plans were tightened in 1999. This suggests an alternative
hypothesis, that governments have willingly delegated those powers to Bruxelles,
in order to achieve reforms, while being able to shift the blame to Bruxelles. This
point is important. As I shall argue later, product and market deregulation put
strong pressures on labor market institutions, raising the risk of reversal. The fact
that Bruxelles, rather than national governments, is leading the process decreases
this risk.
Does this mean that all the reforms of product and financial markets have come
from Bruxelles? Obviously not, and an important exception is privatization. But,
16. The Commission publishes an annual “state aid scoreboard”, in order to report progress,
show problems, and put pressure on national governments.
17. This is one of the issues taken up in the parallel article by Alesina and Perotti [2004] in this
issue of the Journal.

Future of Europe

18

there, progress has often been slower, more subject to political ebbs and flows, and
therefore more country specific. The example of France is again revealing here.
Under a socialist government, and bucking a general world trend, France was the
last rich country to nationalize a number of banks and firms in the early 1980s.
The trend then changed in the late 1980s, with a first wave of privatization under a
Gaullist government in 1986-1988, and then more steady privatization since 1993,
under governments both of the right and of the left. Despite this new commitment,
the share of nationalized firms in the business sector remains higher in France than
in other European countries.

2.2

Measuring the Changes in Regulation

How far has deregulation (or, more accurately, better regulation) progressed in Europe? Are there important differences across sectors, across countries? To answer
these questions requires constructing quantitative measures and indexes, and until
recently, such indexes were missing. Two OECD projects have now partially filled
the gap. The first and more ambitious one is aimed at giving a precise characterization of regulation circa 1998; it is based on the answers from national governments
to a questionaire assessing the status of 1300 regulatory provisions. (The data set
and the construction of the indexes are described in Nicoletti et al [1999].) The
second one is more limited in scope but has both a time series and a cross country dimension; it gives the evolution of regulation in seven sectors from 1975 to
1998 (The data set is described in Nicoletti and Scarpetta [2003].) Based on this
second data set, Table 4 gives a sense of the evolutions over time, for the U.S. and
three European countries, of two synthetic indexes, the first called “barriers to
entrepreneurship” (BE), the second “public ownership” (PO). Each index ranges
from 0 (no barriers or no public ownership) to 6.

Future of Europe

19

Table 4. Indexes of regulation: U.S, France, Germany, the Netherlands.
1975-1998.

U.S.
France
Germany
Netherlands

BE
1975 1990 1998
5.5
2.4
1.5
6.0
5.1
3.3
5.3
4.3
1.9
4.4
5.2
2.3

1975
1.7
6.0
4.6
5.6

PO
1990
1.5
5.8
3.9
5.6

1998
1.5
4.9
3.0
4.0

Table 4 yields three conclusions. First, that regulation has steadily decreased in Europe over time, especially in the 1990s, confirming the informal evidence presented
earlier. Second, that Europe is still more regulated than the U.S. Third, (this is
less obvious from the table which gives numbers only for France and Germany,
but is clear when looking at the whole set of countries) that there is substantial
heterogeneity across countries. Regulation is still high in the Netherlands, public
ownership still high in France, for example.
2.3

Assessing Structural Changes

So far, the argument has focused on changes in regulation, not on the economic
outcomes themselves. There is plenty of evidence, however, that these changes in
regulation have transformed goods and financial markets.
Consider first a few macro measures. Prices of specific products or classes of products have shown steady price convergence across countries throughout the 1990s
(European Commission [2002, Annex 1].) . With the introduction of the Euro, exchange rate risk has disappeared, and interest rates on bonds, risk adjusted, have
fully converged. The structure of financial relations has also changed, becoming
more arms’ length. For example, the proportion of bank loans in firms’ financial
liabilities (based on a sample of large firms) has come down from 74% in 1990 to
32% in 2002 in Germany, and from 75% to 53% in Italy (Danthine et al [2000]).

Future of Europe

20

The best way, however, to get a sense of the changes that have taken place is to
look at the evolution of specific sectors. Here, we can rely on a number of studies,
in particular two studies conducted by the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI), in
1997 and 2002. In each of these two studies, MGI assessed the levels of productivity
in specific sectors in the U.S., France, and Germany, and looked for the factors
behind the level and the evolution of productivity in each country. I shall take
three sectors as examples.
•

Road freight was traditionally a highly protected and regulated sector in
Europe. The internal market, the elimination of restrictions on foreign carriers, and other reforms have led to a nearly deregulated market. The OECD
indexes suggest that the levels of regulation in France and Germany are similar today to those in the U.S. (Boylaud [2000].) The MGI study suggests
that labor productivity, which stood in France and Germany at roughly
60% of the U.S. level in 1992, increased to about 85% in 2000. It documents
how changes in regulation have allowed for larger truck sizes and higher
load rates, leading to higher productivity in both European countries.18

•

Uniformization of standards and ownership changes have also transformed
the automotive market, especially in France. The MGI study concludes
that, in the 1990s, France made up much of its productivity gap relative to
the U.S., with productivity growing at 7.8% in France from 1992 to 2000,
compared to 2.2% in the U.S. and Germany. It finds that, in turn, this high
productivity growth can be explained by partial privatization of Renault
and the associated change in governance, and by the lifting of quotas of
Japanese imports to France—a lifting which led first to financial losses and
a crisis at Renault, and then to a successful reorganization.

•

In the light of the results of the previous section that much of the difference in productivity growth between the U.S. and Europe can be traced to
the trade sector, retail trade is particularly interesting (another reason is

18. MGI attributes half of the remaining gap to structural factors (geography, which allows for
longer hauls and faster speeds in the US), and half to more recent and more limited use of IT in
Europe.

Future of Europe

21

that it accounts for a large share of total employment, 8.7% in the U.S.,
6.8% in France.) Partly because regulation largely takes the form of zoning restrictions and these regulations fall outside the Bruxelles mandate,
some countries remain relatively highly regulated. In France, for example,
two laws, the “Loi Royer” and the “Loi Raffarin” (named after its sponsor,
then the minister of commerce, now the current prime minister) give local
incumbents a large say in whether to allow for the opening of new large
stores, with predictable results.
This would seem to give us a potential key for why productivity levels and
recent productivity growth might be lower in France than in the U.S. But
the evidence turns out to be more complex:
The 2002 MGI study finds that labor productivity (measured as gross margins per hour worked) in 2000 was actually higher by about 7% in the retail
food sector in France than in the US.19 Once an adjustment is made for the
truncation effects of the higher minimum wage in France, and for opening
hours, productivity appears roughly similar in the two countries. The conclusion reached by MGI is that regulation in France, which mostly takes
the form of restrictions on new entry of medium sized firms, has led to a
hollowing of the size distribution of retailers, with less medium sized retailers, and both more small size and more large size retailers (hypermarkets).
French small size retailers are less efficient than their U.S. counterparts,
but French large size retailers turn out to be more efficient. Turning to
productivity growth over the 1990s, the MGI study does not find obvious
explanations for the apparently better performance of the US. The degree
of use of IT does not appear radically different; in 1999, spending on IT was
equal to 8% of gross margins in the US, versus 6.3% in France and 6.0% in
Germany.
This leads one groping for an explanation of the apparently different evo19. The 1997 study also constructs measures of TFP. Arguing that large differences in land
prices make construction of comparable capital stocks unreliable, it uses square footage as a
proxy measure for capital. Results are quite similar to those for labor productivity.

Future of Europe

22

lutions of productivity in retail trade in the U.S. and Europe in the 1990s.
A tentative explanation is based on the findings of Foster et al [2002], who
find that, in the U.S., most of the productivity growth in retail trade in
the 1990s can be attributed to composition effects, i.e. the replacement of
less productive by more productive establishments. A similar study does
not exist for France, but the evidence is that regulation has indeed sharply
limited the amount of new permits, especially since the tightening of zoning
restrictions in 1996. Thus, regulation may be limiting productivity growth
by restricting turnover of firms.20 (An argument against this hypothesis is
that it does not obviously extend to other European countries. In particular, productivity growth appears to have been low in retail trade in the UK
in the 1990s (Basu et al [2003]), a country with low regulation of the retail
trade sector.21 )
The MGI studies cover a number of other sectors, from fixed and mobile telecommunications to electricity generation and distribution, to retail banking. In most
of these sectors, deregulation (or appropriate regulation, as in the case of telecommunications) appears to have had important effects on the behavior of firms, the
degree of competition, and the level of productivity. This however brings a puzzle:
Why hasn’t this transformation, so apparent on the ground, led to higher productivity growth in the 1990s? Measurement issues, in particular for price deflators,
the representativeness of the sectors chosen by MGI, may all play a role. I want
to end this section however with another, tentative, hypothesis. Throughout the
1990s, faced with high unemployment and low employment growth, many governments endorsed the idea of “job rich growth”. The idea, a direct descendant of
the lump–of–labor fallacy, was based on the idea that output growth was given,
and so low productivity growth would allow for more employment growth.22 More
20. Bertrand and Kramarz [2002] look at the related question of whether these restrictions have
hindered employment growth, and conclude that they have.
21. Comparisons are plagued by problems of definition and measurement. For example, the estimates of productivity growth in retail from Basu et al are substantially lower than those from
Van Ark, presented in the previous section.
22. A “success story” here is Spain, where, despite moderate output growth, dismal productivity

Future of Europe

23

generally, firms were under considerable pressure to maintain employment. Given
low demand growth, this reduced the incentives of firms to implement innovations
which might lead to layoffs or plant closings. Thus, a tentative hypothesis is that
many innovations were not implemented, leading to lower productivity growth.23 A
weakness of the hypothesis is that the channels through which government pressure
was applied on firms are not easy to identify.24 But, if the hypothesis is partly correct, it is good news for the future, as it suggests that, if output growth increases,
so will implementation, and in turn productivity growth.

3

Implications for Labor Markets.

Jacques Delors wanted the “Single Market” report to include a “social chapter,”
a set of rules for the labor market. He did not succeed. And to a large extent,
reforms in the product and financial markets have shaped labor market changes
and labor market reforms since then. This is the focus of this section, looking both
at past evolutions, and what may lay down the road.
3.1

Deregulation in Goods and Financial Markets, Wages, and
Unemployment

Higher goods market competition increases average real wages, and is likely to
decrease unemployment. Let me briefly go through the argument, following Blanchard and Giavazzi [2003], as it lays the ground for the discussion which follows.25
growth has allowed for a substantial reduction of unemployment.
23. Informal evidence from interviews of firms’ managers suggest that they believe that, absent
political and social constraints, they could and would reduce employment further than they have
so far.
24. One may think of testing this hypothesis by looking across sectors and countries. One should
find that, ceteris paribus, sectors that had higher demand for exogenous reasons also have had
higher productivity growth. I have not explored this.
25. Blanchard and Giavazzi study the effect of different dimensions of product market deregulation in a model with monopolistic competition in the goods market, and different forms of
collective bargaining in the labor market. An extension to include capital accumulation is given

Future of Europe

24

Consider first the case where the wage is allocative, i.e. the case where firms take
the wage as given in setting prices. Then, an increase in competition will lead
firms to choose a lower markup, leading to a decrease in prices given wages. Put
another way, higher competition will lead to a higher real wage at any given level
of employment. Given any positively sloping labor supply or “wage curve”, this
will lead, in turn, to an increase in the real wage and an increase in employment.
Consider instead the case where the wage is distributive, a case known as “efficient
bargaining” in the labor literature. In this case, firms choose prices not based on
the wage but on the reservation wage of workers. The wage itself is then chosen so
as to divide the total rents, according to the relative bargaining power of the firm
and its workers.26
Think now of an increase in competition, which eliminates monopoly power, and
thus eliminates all monopoly rents (the argument holds for a partial reduction of
monopoly power, but is easier to state this way). There are then two effects at
work: As workers, workers lose. But, as consumers, they gain, and they gain more,
so they end up better off. More explicitly:
•

Consider a given firm. The increase in competition leads to lower prices,
eliminating monopoly rents. As part of these rents were accruing to the
workers, this effect makes the workers in this firm worse off.

•

To the extent, however, that the increase in competition affects all firms in
the economy, this means that all prices are now lower, and the rents which
were previously going to firms and workers now go to consumers (in the
form of lower prices). Thus, as consumers, workers gain. And because they

by Spector [2004]. An interesting alternative treatment, which assumes Cournot competition in
the goods market, and firm–level collective bargaining in a search labor market is developed by
Ebell and Haefke [2003].
26. The question of how much of the rents workers appropriate is an old question in labor economics. A study of the relation between wage differentials and the indexes of regulation described
earlier, across European countries and sectors by Nicoletti and Jean [2002] finds a significant
effect on wages in manufacturing, a less significant effect outside of manufacturing. The authors
hypothesize that some of the rents are taken in forms other than wages, such as lower effort and
productivity or restrictions on employment.

Future of Europe

25

now get all the rents, whereas before, as workers, they were only getting a
fraction of them, their real wage is higher, and they are better off.
These conclusions raise an obvious issue: If product market deregulation, and by
implication, higher competition, increases real wages and decreases unemployment,
why do workers so often oppose it? The argument above actually gives us a key:
If the degree of monopoly power is the same to start with, and is uniformly reduced,
then all workers are indeed better off. But, even in this case, the cost to the worker
(the lost portion of rents) is a direct effect, while the benefit (the decrease in prices)
is a general equilibrium effect, which may be much less salient.27
The degree of monopoly power however is not the same across sectors, nor is
deregulation uniform across the board. In this case, it is still true that the average
real wage increases, but some workers lose, while others gain. And, as in the case
of trade liberalization, those who lose know they are losing, while gains are more
diffuse. The implication is straightforward. As rents are reduced in some firms, and
not in others, workers in those firms will lose. Thus, even if the average worker
is better off, product market deregulation is likely to generate strikes and social
tensions. This is where the fact that much of product market deregulation is driven
by Bruxelles is of high relevance. Strikes may lead to disruptions, but are unlikely
to stop the reform process. However, for sectors where deregulation is not driven
by Bruxelles, the outcome is more in doubt. The main example here is the slow
progress of reform in the public sector.28
We have so far focused on product market deregulation. The effects of financial
market deregulation are slightly different. One can think of financial market deregulation as increasing the elasticity of capital to the rate of return—be it to a firm,
to a sector, or to a country. Deregulation may then require a decrease in the real
wage.
27. This argument is close to that developed in Gersbach [2003].
28. An insightful analysis of the problems of reform of the French public sector is given in a study
by the Institut Montaigne [2003].

Future of Europe

26

Think for example of privatization. It is reasonable to think of capital in state–
owned firms as being inelastic: Even if the firm is making losses, the state may often
continue to invest. If the firm is privatized, capital will now require the market rate
of return, and this in turn may require a decrease in the real wage. The same may
hold for a country as a whole. Limits on international capital mobility may allow
labor to extract a higher real wage, and thus a lower return to capital, without
suffering capital flight. Higher financial integration will then require a decrease
in the real wage. If unions do not realize the change in the environment, and do
not change their behavior, then the effect may be lower capital accumulation, and
lower employment for some period of time.
How much of the evolution of wages and unemployment over the recent past can
be explained by deregulation in goods and labor markets is one of my current
topics of research (see for example Blanchard and Philippon [2003]). The tentative
answer is that deregulation may well account for some of the earlier rise, and the
more recent and more limited fall in unemployment in Europe. The focus of this
section is however more on the implications for the labor market in general, and
the behavior of unions and the reform of labor institutions in particular. I now
turn to those issues.
3.2

Weaker and Smarter Unions

Deregulation implies smaller rents. Smaller rents imply smaller benefits for workers
from joining a union. This in turn suggests a decrease in membership, a decrease in
the power of unions. These implications are indeed consistent with the facts. Union
membership has generally declined in Europe, going for example in France from
22% in 1980 to 10% in 1998, and from 36% in 1990 to 26% in 1998 in Germany
(Boeri et al [2001]). This decline in membership is only partly due to the decline
in rents; other factors, such as the decline in manufacturing, the increase in part
time work, have all played a role. But econometric evidence suggests that they
explain only part of the decline: A decline in rents is a plausible candidate for the
residual.

Future of Europe

27

Interestingly, there has been no decline in membership in Scandinavian countries.
Union membership has increased from 78% in 1980 and to 88% in 1998 in Sweden,
from 69% to 79% in Denmark, two countries where unions have traditionally been
less confrontational than in the rest of Europe. This leads to the next point.
To caricature slightly, the rhetoric of European unions traditionally comes in one
of two forms: Some unions speak of the need for a “partnership between labor and
capital.” While fighting for labor, they nevertheless insist on the need to maintain
an adequate rate of return for capital, lest capital move away and employment
suffer.29 Some unions instead have a view much closer to the old “class struggle”
view of relations between capital and labor. They speak as if the fight over the
distribution of income between wages and profits were a fight for rents, with few
implications for employment.
In a world of high rents and low capital mobility, the second view had some justification. But the decline of rents and the increase in the elasticity of the demand
for labor make it a dangerous strategy today. In Blanchard and Philippon [2003],
we argue that, while it took some time, many unions have indeed shifted their
rhetoric and their attitudes—although at different speeds across countries. This is
for example the case for unions in the UK, or for example for the CFDT, one of the
two main unions in France.30 Others however, such as the CGT, the other main
French union, have not changed their rhetoric very much. One interpretation is
that those unions have decided to focus on the public sector, where rent extraction
remains easier than in the private sector. (The membership of the CGT is now
primarily in the public sector). But it is reasonable to conclude that, in general,
unions have become both weaker and smarter.
29. Perhaps the best-known early statement along these lines is by Helmut Schmidt, then the
Social Democratic Chancellor of Germany, in 1976: “The profits of enterprises today are the
investments of tomorrow, and the investments of tomorrow are the jobs of the day after”.
30. An ironic and revealing anecdote: In November 2003, Denis MacShane, Britain’s minister for
Europe and a former senior trade union official, admonished German unions for their opposition
to Chancellor Gerard Schröder’s reform program, “Agenda 2010”, telling them that there were
“out of touch with modernity” (Financial Times, November 19, 2003).

Future of Europe

3.3

28

Reforms of Labor Market Institutions

What have been, and are likely to be, the effects of product and financial market
deregulation on labor market institutions, from unemployment insurance, to the
minimum wage, to employment protection? This is a hard question, and more
theoretical and empirical research needs to be done. But the following approach
seems useful. There are two broad approaches to thinking about the shape of labor
market institutions:
•

The first is that these institutions are yet another way to affect the distribution of rents between firms and workers (or between different groups
of workers, or between workers and non workers).31 In this context, Figure
1, reproduced from Figure 14 in Nicoletti et al [2000], is particularly interesting. It plots the degree of employment protection, as constructed by the
OECD, versus an index of product market regulation, also constructed by
the OECD based on the large regulatory data set described in the previous
section, across most OECD countries in the late 1990s. It shows the strong
positive correlation between product market regulation and employment
protection.

•

The second is that these institutions are put in place to solve a number of
market imperfections, for example the failure of markets to provide adequate
unemployment insurance.

The first approach, on its own, is too cynical. The second, on its own again, is too
naive, and both sets of factors surely play a role. This gives us a way of thinking
about the effects of goods and financial markets deregulation.
Think first in terms of rent distribution. To the extent that rents are now smaller,
labor market institutions, thought of as distorting instruments to extract rents,
are now less attractive (this argument parallels the argument for why union membership is likely to decrease). A particularly egregious example of rent extraction
31. See Saint-Paul [2000] for a development of this approach. See also Bertola and Boeri [2003],
who analyze the effects of product market deregulation in such a context.

Future of Europe

29

in this context is the unemployment insurance system in place in France for people involved in theater, movies, and the performing arts (in French, “intermittents
du spectacle”). Until this year, this unusually generous unemployment insurance
guaranteed up to 12 months of unemployment for anyone who had worked the
equivalent of 3 months in the previous year. Not surprisingly, this system ran a
large deficit. This could be seen as reflecting the often stated commitment of the
French government to help and subsidize culture, except for the fact that the cost
is actually paid by firms, through the financing of the deficit of this fund by the
general insurance fund, itself financed by payroll taxes. Perhaps because of numerous abuses of the system, probably also because of the decrease in rents, in 2003,
firms proposed a reform of the system aimed not at eliminating it, but at mildly
tightening it (through an increase in the number of months needed to qualify, from
3 to 4 months, and a shorter base period over which to compute the number of
hours worked, 11 months rather than 12 months as before). The result was a long
strike in early summer 2003, leading to the cancellation of most festivals in France.
The reform has passed nevertheless, but the episode is a good example of both the
pressure on some institutions, and of likely tensions in the process of reform.
Think next in terms of social insurance. If one thinks of the system as involving
a trade–off between social insurance and economic efficiency, the questions are
whether European countries are on the efficient frontier, and whether deregulation
is putting pressure to get closer to that frontier and reduce efficiency losses.
A tentative answer is that many countries were indeed far from the frontier, and
that they are slowly moving closer to it, providing roughly the same level of social
insurance at a smaller efficiency cost (i.e converging to a more efficient European
model, rather than to the U.S. model). How much of the movement is due to
an increase in efficiency costs coming from higher competition in goods or financial markets, and how much is due to other factors (such as learning from other
countries’ experiments, something which appears important in the case of unemployment insurance, and in the case of negative income taxes) is difficult to assess.

Future of Europe

30

Let me consider different institutions in turn.
•

Since the mid 1980s, the most obvious flaws of the unemployment insurance system have been corrected. In particular, the highest replacement
rates, which often made employment unattractive for low wage workers,
have been reduced (see for example Blanchard and Wolfers [2000]). In the
more recent past, unemployment insurance systems have increasingly moved
towards more active reemployment policies, in which unemployment benefits are sometimes more generous than before, but are terminated if the
unemployed refuse “reasonable job offers”. This, for example, is what underlied the Hartz commission proposals in Germany, now incorporated in
the “Agenda 2010” introduced by Chancellor Schröeder in 2003. Defining
“reasonable job offers,” and providing unemployment agencies with the incentives to implement such policies has proven difficult, but change is visible. There is also some evidence of convergence across countries. Italy, which
had a very low level of state-provided insurance, has increased the level over
time.

•

Changes in employment protection have been more limited, and more ambiguous in their effects.32 Reforms have often taken the form of one or two
steps forward, and one step back.
An interesting statistic can be constructed here based on the information
provided by the Fondazione Rodolfo deBenedetti, which monitors labor
market reforms in a number of European countries (FRDB [2003]).33 After
giving a short description of each reform, it categorizes them as minor or
major, increasing or decreasing employment flexibility. While the categorization is often a bit arbitrary, the evidence, such as it is, is interesting:
Since 1993, Germany shows seven minor reforms increasing flexibility, five
minor reforms decreasing it, one major reform increasing flexibility, and

32. For an interesting theoretical analysis of the effects of trade liberalization on the political
economy of employment protection, see Bruegemann [2003].
33. Another useful source of information is the web site of EIRO, the European foundation for
the improvement of living and working conditions.

Future of Europe

31

one major reform decreasing it. For the group of covered countries as a
whole, the number of reforms increasing flexibility barely exceeds the number of reforms decreasing flexibility. Here, again, there is some evidence of
convergence across countries. Italy, which had one of the highest levels of
employment protection to start, shows the highest number of flexibility–
increasing reforms (The general strike triggered, in 2002, by the attempt
by the Berlusconi government to introduce minor modifications to “Article
18”, the article regulating layoffs in Italy, and the subsequent failure of that
attempt, shows however that reform at this margin is not easy.)
These numbers however hide an important evolution, in which governments
have introduced reforms at the margin, extending the conditions under
which firms can offer temporary contracts to workers. The reason for doing
so was clear, the desire to increase the flexibility of firms, while keeping the
existing level of protection for workers already protected. But this has led to
an increasingly dual labor market structure, with two categories of workers,
those covered by traditional employment protection, and those employed
under temporary contracts. The effects may well be perverse, increasing
the bargaining power of the protected workers. They may also make acrossthe-board reform more, rather than less, difficult in the future.34
•

Finally, many countries have moved away from a focus on the minimum
wage to a focus on a negative income tax as the best instrument to achieve
higher income for low skill workers. The French “prime a l’emploi”, the
Dutch “labour tax credit”, the Belgian “work tax credit”, all recently introduced, resemble in many ways the earned income tax credit in the U.S.

Can European countries maintain the same level of social protection, but do it in
a way which allows them to return to low unemployment? Again, this is a question
which vastly exceeds the bounds of this article. But the evidence from a number
34. See for example the conclusions of the symposium in the Economic Journal, June 2002. See
also Saint Paul [1993] for a theoretical analysis of the political economy of two-tier systems.

Future of Europe

32

of countries that have returned to low unemployment, from the Netherlands to
Sweden, suggest that the answer is positive.

4

Some Conclusions

In this paper, I have argued that Europe has done better than is often perceived;
that there has been and continues to be a steady process of reform in the product
and financial markets, that this process is likely to continue; that it has and will
continue to lead to reforms in the labor market, although not without tensions
along the way.
Is the outlook really so rosy? There are always reasons to worry. I shall mention
three, realizing that each one would deserve a much longer treatment. The first is
the current business cycle slump affecting Europe. As optimistic as I am about the
medium term, I see good reasons to worry about the short term, and about how
and when the European economy returns to the medium run path. The second is
the state of the public sector. As I have argued, pressure for reform is much weaker
there, and the public sector remains inefficient. The third is the state of the higher
education system. The quality of higher education is mediocre in many European
countries. Even if it is difficult to pinpoint the effect on growth, it is clearly likely
to be a handicap for Europe in the future.

Future of Europe

33

References
Alesina, Alberto, and Roberto Perotti, The European Union: A politically incorrect
view, mimeo Harvard University, January 2004.
Basu, Susanto, John Fernald, Nicholas Oulton, and Sylaja Srinivasan. The case of
missing productivity growth; or, does information technology explain why productivity accelerated in the US but not in the UK?, NBER Working Paper, 10010,
October 2003.
Baverez, Nicolas. La France qui tombe; Un constat clinique du déclin Francais,
Perrin, Paris, 2003.
Bertola, Giuseppe and Tito Boeri, Product market integration, institutions, and
the labour markets, mimeo, Bocconi University, September 2003.
Bertrand, Marianne and Francis Kramarz, Does entry regulation hinder job creation? Evidence from the French retail industry, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
117-4: 1369–1413, November 2002.
Blanchard, Olivier and Francesco Giavazzi, Macroeconomic effects of regulation
and deregulation in goods and labor markets, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
118(3): 879–909, August 2003.
Blanchard, Olivier and Thomas Philippon, The decline of rents, and the rise and
fall of European unemployment, mimeo MIT, September 2003.
Blanchard, Olivier and Justin Wolfers, Shocks and institutions and the rise of
European unemployment. The aggregate evidence, Economic Journal, 110-1: 1–
33, March 2000.
Boeri, Tito, Agar Brugiavini and Lars Calmfors, The role of unions in the twentyfirst century, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2001.
Boylaud, Olivier, Regulatory reform in road freight and retail distribution, OECD
Working Paper 28, Economics Department, OECD, August 2000.

Future of Europe

34

Brügemann, Björn, Trade integration and the political support for labor market
rigidity, mimeo MIT, December 2003.
Colecchia, A., and Paul Schreyer, ICT investment and economic growth in the
1990s: Is the U.S. a unique case? A comparative study of nine OECD countries,
Review of Economic Dynamics, 5-2: 408-442, 2002.
Commission of the European Communities, Completing the internal market, Technical report, European Union, Bruxelles, 1985.
Danthine, Jean Pierre, Francesco Giavazzi, and E.L. von Thadden, European financial markets after EMU. A first assessment, NBER Working Paper 8044, December
2000.
De la Dehesa, G., Quo vadis Europe? The persistent economic underperformance
of the European Union relative to the United States, mimeo, Madrid, 2004.
Duhamel, Alain, Le désarroi Francais, Plon, Paris, 2003.
Ebell, Monique and Christian Haefke, Product market deregulation and labor market outcomes, mimeo, Pompeu Fabra, October 2003.
European Commission, Competition policy in Europe and the citizen, Technical
report, European Union, Bruxelles, 2000.
European Commission, Economic reform: Report on the functioning of community product and capital markets, Technical report, European Union, Bruxelles,
December 2002.
Fondazione Rodolfo deBenedetti, Social reforms database, www.frdb.org, 2003.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C.J. Krizan, The link between aggregate
and micro productivity growth: Evidence from retail trade, NBER Working Paper,
9120, August 2002.
Gersbach, Hans, Structural reforms and the macroeconomy: The role of general
equilibrium effects, Invited Lecture, IEA meetings, Lisbon, September 2003.

Future of Europe

35

Gordon, Robert, Two centuries of economic growth; Europe chasing the American
frontier, mimeo, Northwestern University, October 2002.
Institut Montaigne, Comment reformer?, Paris, September 2003.
Joumard, Isabelle, Tax systems in European Union countries, OECD Economics
Department Working Paper 301, June 2001.
McKinsey Global Institute, France and Germany, 1997.
McKinsey Global Institute, U.S. productivity growth, 1995-2000, Washington, October 2001.
McKinsey Global Institute, Reaching high productivity growth in France and Germany, October 2002.
Nickell, Stephen, Employment and taxes, paper prepared for the CESifo conference
on “Tax Policy and Employment”, July 2003.
Nicoletti, Giuseppe, Andrea Bassanini, Ekkehhard Ernst, Sebastien Jean, Paulo
Santiago, and Paul Swaim, Product and labour markets interactions in OECD
countries, Economics Department Working Paper 312, OECD, December 2001.
Nicoletti, Giuseppe, and Sebastien Jean, Product market regulation and wage premia in Europe and North America; An empirical investigation, OECD Economics
Department WP 318, 2002.
Nicoletti, Giuseppe, and Stefano Scarpetta, Regulation, productivity, and growth,
Economic Policy, 36-1: 9-72, April 2003.
Nicoletti, Giuseppe, Stefano Scarpetta, and Olivier Boylaud, Summary indicators
of product market regulation with an extension to employment protection legislation, Economics Department Working Paper 226, OECD, April 2000.
Prescott, Edward, Why do Americans work so much more than Europeans?, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department Staff Report 321, November 2003.

Future of Europe

36

Saint-Paul, Gilles, On the political economy of labor market flexibility, NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, 8: 151–196, 1993.
Saint-Paul, Gilles, The political economy of labor market reforms, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 2000.
Sapir et al, An agenda for a growing Europe: The Sapir Report, forthcoming,
Oxford University Press, 2004.
Siebert, Horst, Why Germany has such a weak growth performance, Kiel Working
Paper, Kiel Institute for Economics, 2003.
Spector, David, Competition and the capital-labor conflict, European Economic
Review, 48-1: 25-38, February 2004.
Turner, Adair, What’s wrong with Europe’s economy?, Lecture at the London
School of Economics, February 2003.
Van Ark, Bart, Johanna Melka, Nanno Mulder, Marcel Timmer and Gerard Ypma,
ICT investment and growth accounts for the European Union, 1980-2000, Report
to the European Commission, September 2002(a).
Van Ark, Bart, Robert Inklaar, and Robert McGuckin, Productivity, ICT investment and service industries: Europe and the United States, Groningen Growth
and Development Centre, Research Memorandum GD-60, December 2002(b)
Williamson, Hugh, German trade unions “out of touch with modernity”, Financial
Times, November 19, 2003.

